44
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-fifth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-fifth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 19.12.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 050
Price : Rs. 83.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2008-09) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 30
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 50
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 51
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 69
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 15.12.2008 .............................................................. 75
II. Analysis of action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)....................................................... 77
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Vacant*
6. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri D. Narbula
10. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
11. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
12. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
15. Shri Sita Ram Singh
16. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
17. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
18. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
19. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
20. Vacant $
21. Vacant
(iii)

Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri B a lihari Babu 
2 3 .  Shr i m a ti T. Ratna Ba i 
24. S h ri  P r a b h a t  J h a  
25. Shri Pyar el al Khan del w al 
26. Dr. Ch andan Mi tra 
2 7 .  Shr i  P . R. Rajan 
28. Shri Bhag wati  S i ngh  
29. Ms. Sushil a  Tir i ya 
30. S h ri ma t i  K a n i m o z h i  
31. V a c a n t  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S .K. Sh arma — Secret ary 
2. Shri P .K. Gr over — Joint S ecre tar y 
3. Shr i m a ti  S u desh  Luth r a  — Direct o r 
4. Shr i A.K. Shah                   — Deputy Secre tary-II 
*Vacancy ca used due t o the resignation g iven b y S hri George F ernandes, MP  f rom th e 
memb ershi p o f Lok  Sa bha and a ccepted by  th e H on’ble Speake r w.e.f. 11 November,  
2008  vide  Bullet in Pa rt-II, Pa ra No. 6205 dated 11  No vemb er, 2008 . 
$Vacancy c aused d ue to c hange o f nomination o f Shri D harmendra Y adav, M P, 
Lok  Sa bha  b y Hon’ ble Speak er f rom Standing  Committee o n Rura l Dev elopment to 
Committee on P ersonne l, P ublic G riev ances , Law &  J ustice w.e.f. 5 Decem ber, 2008 vide 
Bullet in Pa rt-II Pa ra No . 6267  dated 5  December, 2008 . 
 (iv) 

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2008-2009) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Forty-fourth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2007-08) on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Thirty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 April,
2008. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 8 August, 2008.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
15 December, 2008.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee
is given in Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 December, 2008 Chairman,
24 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2008-2009)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Thirty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-
2009) of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 April, 2008.
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 43 recommendations which have been categorised
as follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. : 2.4, 2.18, 2.21, 3.30, 3.33, 3.37, 3.54, 3.55, 3.56,
3.57, 3.58, 3.59, 3.61, 3.70, 3.81, 3.93, 3.110, 3.111, 3.118 and
3.119
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
NIL
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos.: 2.12, 2.13, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 3.18, 3.21, 3.28,
3.71, 3.72, 3.82, 3.94, 3.101 and 3.106
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos.: 3.29, 3.31, 3.36, 3.39, 3.60, 3.83, 3.84 and 3.95
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations at Para Nos. 3.29, 3.31, 3.36, 3.39, 3.60, 3.83, 3.84
and 3.95 for which only interim reply has been furnished by the
Government should be furnished to the Committee within three
months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. OUTLAY VIS-À-VIS REQUIREMENT OF FUNDS
Recommendations (Serial Nos. 2 and 3,
Para Nos. 2.12 and 2.13)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that out of the proposed allocation of
Rs. 3,28,579.72 crore, the approved allocation for the Eleventh
Plan is Rs. 1,94,933.28 crore i.e. 59.31 per cent. Further during the
first two years of the Eleventh Plan i.e. 2007-08 and 2008-09, the
allocation provided is not proportionate to the outlay approved
for the Eleventh Plan. During the first two years of the Eleventh
Plan, Rs. 59,000 crore i.e. just 30.2 per cent of the total approved
outlay of Rs. 1,94,933.28 crore has been allocated, whereas the
proportionate allocation during the first two years should have
been 40 per cent of the total outlay i.e. Rs. 77,973 crore, which
means that Rs. 18,973 crore less have been allocated during the
first two years of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee also note
that the percentage hike in the allocation, as compared to the
previous year’s allocation, provided to the Department is declining
year after year. The increase in the allocation in this regard, which
was 60.30 percent during the year 2005-06, has declined to
14.55 per cent during the year 2007-08. The percentage hike during
the year 2008-09, as compared to the allocation made at Revised
Estimates during the previous year, is just 10.52 per cent. Besides
the hike in the allocation made to the Department is not
proportionate to the hike in gross revenue collection over the
year. During the year 2007-08, whereas the hike in gross tax
revenue collection is 25.12 per cent, the outlay of the Department
during the year 2008-09 has just increased by 10.52 per cent.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.12)
“The Committee, further, find that the Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) has increased during the last three years and the average
growth is 8.8 per cent. The estimates of the growth rate during
the current year, 2008-09, are 8.7 per cent. The Committee
conclude from the aforesaid analysis that adequate allocation is
not being made under the various schemes of the Department of
Rural Development. The scheme-wise analysis has been done in
the subsequent paras of the Report. As agreed to by the Secretary,
during the course of oral evidence, the schemes of the Department
of Rural Development have a major role in the upliftment of
socially and economically backward classes of the country by

3
providing drinking water, housing, employment etc. to the poor
persons, particularly, socially and economically backward classes.
Besides, the schemes of the Department have tremendous impact
on increasing capacity building, improving rural infrastructure,
encouraging group activity etc. In view of this, the Committee
strongly recommend to the Department to provide the allocation
commensurate with the requirements under different schemes as
proposed by the Department with a view to achieve inclusive
growth so that the benefits of the growing economy are shared
by the poorest of the poor in the country.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.13)
6. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has stated as
under:
“It is true that against the approved allocation of Rs.194933.28
crore for the Eleventh Five Year Plan in respect of the Department
of Rural Development, the Budget Estimates (BE) during 2007-08
and 2008-09 has been Rs.59000 crore. However, it may be
mentioned that during 2008-09, the outlay at Revised Estimates
(RE) stage was stepped upto Rs.28500 crore against the BE of
Rs.27500 crore which means an additional outlay of Rs.1000 crore
was provided. Further, for PMGSY , Rs. 4500 crore and Rs.7000
crore were provided through the RIDF Window during 2007-08
and 2008-09 respectively. Any additional requirement of funds
for rural development programmes especially for NREGS during
the year is to be met through the Supplementary Demand for
Grants. Thus, by taking into account, the additional allocation of
Rs.1000 crore provided in 2007-08 and Rs.11500 crore provided
through Roads Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) window,
the allocation during the first two years may work out close to
20 per cent of Eleventh Plan outlay. Moreover, the capacity of
the States to absorb more allocation under the rural development
programmes will be built up during the years and it will be
possible to absorb higher outlays under different programmes.
However, the concerns of the Committee to get higher allocations
are noted and the Department would continue its efforts to get
enhanced allocation from the Gross Budgetary Support available
with the Planning Commission during the remaining three years
of the Eleventh Plan. So far as annual increase in outlay during
2005-06 is concerned, it may be mentioned that the National Food

4
for Work Programme (NFFWP) was launched in 2004-05 and the
allocation was made through the Revised Estimates. For 2005-06,
the allocation under NFFWP of the order of Rs.4500 crore was
made for all the 150 districts, therefore, increase in outlay was
substantial. Similarly in 2006-07, an allocation of Rs.11300 crore
was made for NREGS and represented an increase of more than
30% over the BE of 2005-06 and obviously the increase in outlay
was not of the same order during the subsequent years.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.12)
“The Department of Rural Development will continue its efforts
to get higher allocations for different programmes especially for
poverty alleviation to meet the national goals of inclusive growth
and the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee in this regard
will also be brought to the notice of Planning Commission at the
time of Annual Plan discussions”.
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.13)
7. The Committee have persistently been recommending for
providing adequate allocation for rural development schemes and in
order to discourage demands for increase in outlay at the stage of
supplementary Demands for Grants in the various Reports. Even
then the Department has not taken the matter vigorously with the
Planning commission and Ministry of Finance as indicated in the
action taken reply. On the one hand the Committee have been
assured of taking up the issue with the Planning Commission, on
the other hand the Department has tried to justify the allocation
provided for various schemes. Even for the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) under which jobs to rural
poor have to be provided as a legal right, adequate allocation is not
being made and the outlay is being demanded through
supplementary Demands for Grants. The Committee disapprove the
way the recommendations of the Committee are being addressed by
the Department. While reiterating the earlier recommendation, the
Committee would like the Department to pursue with the Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance so that adequate allocation is
provided in the remaining years of the Eleventh Plan. Besides, as
recommended earlier, the issue of increasing capacity building of
the States should be pursued with the State Governments/UTs so as
to ensure that the allocations made under various rural development
schemes are meaningfully utilised.

5
B. NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT
(NREGA) SCHEME
(i) Creation of Reserve Fund
Recommendations (Serial Nos. 6 and 29,
Para Nos. 3.11 and 3.71)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that NREGA is proposed to be covered in
all the 600 districts with effect from 1 April, 2008, thus raising
the number of districts covered from 330 to about 600. Although
the number of districts covered under NREGA during the year
2008-09 would be almost double than that of districts covered
during the previous year, the allocation has been enhanced by
only Rs. 4,000 crore i.e. 33.33 per cent. Further, the Committee
find that SGRY which was being implemented in the districts
not covered under NREGA during the year 2007-08 would be
subsumed in NREGA. If the allocation made under NREGA and
SGRY taken together during the year 2007-08 is taken into
consideration, the total amount for that year comes to Rs. 15,800 crore.
Thus, the net addition under the Employment Guarantee Scheme
during 2008-09 would be of Rs. 200 crore only. Further, the
Secretary during the course of oral evidence has also emphasized
on the creation of some sort of reserve fund under the National
Employment Guarantee Programme. The Committee fully agree
with the need for a Reserve Fund so that the additional allocation
can be made immediately to the districts affected by the natural
calamities like drought, flood or due to certain exigencies. The
Department, in this regard, had projected the requirement of
Rs. 20,000 crore during the year 2008-09, based on an estimate of
employment demand of 4 crore rural households, which is quite
justified. The Committee do not understand how the Department
are going to meet the financial requirements if all the anticipated
number of 4 crore rural households demand work for the
minimum period of 100 days as stipulated in the Act. In view of
this, the Committee strongly recommend that Rs. 20,000 crore
should be provided under NREGA during the year 2008-09 so
that the Department do not have to depend on the Supplementary
Demands for Grants for implementing such a vital programme.
Besides, an appropriate amount for having a Reserve Fund, as
explained above, should also be allocated in addition to
Rs. 20,000 crore as r equested for by the Department. The concerns

6
of the Committee in this regard should be conveyed to the
Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.11)
“The Committee in an earlier para of the Report have observed
that Rs. 623.40 crore are lying unspent under SGRY in various
States. Since the SGRY has been subsumed with NREGA w.e.f.
1 April, 2008, the arrangement made by the Department with
regard to unspent balances is that the amount of Rs. 623.40 crore
would be transferred to Employment Guarantee Scheme Account.
As stated in the earlier para of the Report, the Secretary during
the course of oral evidence has emphasized on creation of a
Reserve Fund of Rs. 4,000 crore under the NREGA, so that
additional allocation can be made immediately to the districts
affected by the natural calamities like drought, floods or due to
certain exigencies. The Committee recommend that the Reserve
Fund can initially be started with Rs. 623.40 crore, the amount
lying as unspent under SGRY, pending the proposed additional
allocation of Rs. 4,000 crore by the Planning Commission/Ministry
of Finance.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 29, Para No. 3.71)
9. The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:
“NREGA has been extended to rural areas of all the districts in
the country with effect from 1 April, 2008 and SGRY has been
fully merged under NREGA from this date. Instructions have
been issued to all States that un-utilised funds of SGRY shall be
treated as NREGA funds from 1 April, 2008. During 2007-08,
States had Rs. 19305.81 crore as available funds under NREGA.
Out of this amount, States incurred an expenditure of Rs. 15856.88
crore. Thus, as on 1 April, 2008, the States had a balance of
Rs. 3448.92 crores which will be utilized by the States for
implementation of the Act during 2008-09. NREGA is demand
driven. Central Government is committed to release funds to the
States for implementation of the Act. Funds are released to the
districts based on demand raised and their past performance.
Therefore, in case of additional requirements, funds will be
demanded through supplementary grants.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.11)

7
“The closing balance of SGRY as on 31 March, 2008, that is, for
the year 2007-08 is required to be transferred to NREGA account.
A proposal for creation of a Reserve Fund of Rs. 5,000 crore for
NREGA was taken up with the Ministry of Finance. However,
the Ministry of Finance has not agreed to the said proposal.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 29, Para No. 3.71)
10.  The Committee note with dismay that one of the important
recommendations relating to the creation of Reserve Fund under the
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act has not been responded
to in the right perspective. The Department in reply to one
recommendation has stated that the additional requirement of funds
under NREGA would be met through Supplementary Demands for
Grants. However, in response to another recommendation relating to
starting the reserve fund with the unspent amount lying under SGRY,
which has been subsumed with NREGA, the Department has stated
that the proposal for creation of reserve fund of Rs. 5,000 crore was
taken up with the Ministry of Finance. However, the Ministry of
Finance could not agree to the proposal in this regard. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the specific reasons for disagreement
of the Ministry of Finance. Besides the Committee reiterated their
earlier recommendation to provide adequate allocation under NREGA
so that there is no need to demand outlay through Supplementary
Demands for Grants.
(ii) Flawed approach towards the scheme and progress with regard
to 100 days guaranteed employment
Recommendations (Serial Nos. 7 and 8,
Para Nos. 3.12 and 3.13)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find from the data made available by the
Department that during the year 2007-08, 5.98 crore job cards
were issued. Out of these, employment was demanded by
2.61 crore households and employment provided was to 2.57 crore
households. The Committee note that although there is not much
difference between the number of families who demanded
employment and those who were provided employment, there is
a huge difference between the families who have been issued job
cards and families provided employment. In this regard, further
analysis of the data indicates that during the year 2006-07,
3.78 crore job cards were issued and 2.12 crore families demanded

8
employment. During the year 2007-08, while the number of job
cards issued has increased considerably to 5.98 crore, there is not
much enhancement in the number of families, who have
demanded employment. This trend needs to be analysed carefully
by the Department and the required steps taken accordingly. The
Committee would like to have the reaction of the Department in
this regard.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 7, Para No. 3.12)
“While appreciating the fact that NREGA is a demand-driven
scheme and the State Governments are bound to provide
employment to a family who demands employment, the
Committee feels that there may be compelling reasons as to why
people are not demanding work even when the job cards have
been issued. One of the basic reasons in this regard may be
people preferring for wage employment elsewhere, where the
wages may be much more. The Department have to analyse the
reasons State-wise for families not demanding work after getting
the job cards ready. The Committee may be kept apprised about
this. The Committee further note that during the year 2007-08
out of 2.57 crore households who have been provided
employment under NREGA, 9,55,025 families could complete
100 days of employment. In five States viz. Arunachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura, no family could
complete 100 days of employment. In the progressive State like
Kerala where wage rate is Rs. 125 per day, only 959 labourers
could complete 100 days of employment. In Gujarat 1104 persons
could complete 100 days of work. The Committee feel that the
aforesaid data should be carefully analysed to know the State
specific reasons for not demanding/providing 100 days of
employment under NREGA in various States. The Committee
may also be kept apprised about the concrete action taken in
this regard.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 8, Para No. 3.13)
12. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has stated as
under:
“A Job card issued to a household under NREGA is valid for a
period of 5 years. Job card is issued to a household if one or
more adult members of the household apply for it. Mere issuance
of a job card, however, does not entitle the household for
employment under the Act. The adult members of the household

9
who volunteer to do un-skilled manual work have to apply for
work in writing. A job card holder may exercise his or her right
for 100 days of guaranteed employment under NREGA any time
during a financial year. Further, while it is mandatory for a job
seeker under NREGA to have a job card, it is not mandatory for
a job card holder to take up employment under NREGA in a
particular financial year. During 2006-07, though 3.78 crore job
cards were issued, only 2.12 crore households demanded
employment. During 2007-08, 6.47 crore households possessed
the job cards whereas only 3.43 crore households had demanded
employment. Demand for work under NREGA in a particular
area depends on the availability of other employment
opportunities in that area. Employment demand is likely to be
low in districts that are comparatively more developed with
greater opportunities of employment in other avenues both in
agricultural and rural non-farm activities.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 7, Para No. 3.12)
“During 2007-08, 6.47 crore households possessed the job cards
whereas only 3.43 crore households demanded employment. A
total of 3601926 households completed 100 days of employment
during the year. In Arunachal Pradesh, 2020 households; in
Gujarat 11416 households and in Kerala 59443 households
completed 100 days of employment during 2007-08. No household
in Manipur, Mizoram and Nagaland, however, completed 100
days of employment in 2007-08. NREGA provides a legal
guarantee of wage employment for 100 days in a financial year
for doing un-skilled manual work on demand. The workers are
free to take up any other employment in addition to the 100
days of guaranteed employment on demand provided under the
Act. Pace of implementation of NREGA varies from State to State
as it depends on availability of employment in other sectors.
Awareness about NREGA amongst rural masses is being created
through intensive IEC activities through print, electronic and other
media and is a continuous process.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 8, Para No. 3.13)
13.  One of the trend noticed from the data provided by the
Department with regard to implementation of NREGA since inception
has been the huge difference between the number of families to
whom job cards have been issued and the number of families who
have demanded employment. The Committee had earlier

10
recommended to analyse the aforesaid data carefully to find out the
reasons in this regard. Instead of probing the reasons through survey
or State-wise study, the Department in a vague manner has tried to
justify this trend. The Committee again emphasize that there may
be some pertinent reasons in this regard like preferring works in
private employment where the wages may be higher. As such the
Department should take urgent steps to analyse this trend so that
corrective action can be taken and the guaranteed employment of
100 days provided to a family.
The Committee in the earlier recommendations have also
observed that not even a single family could complete 100 days of
employment in some of the States. The Department has not bothered
to find out the reasons in this regard. The Committee express
unhappiness over the way, the Department has addressed the
recommendations and would like a categorical response in this
regard.
(iii) Involvement of Women
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 3.14)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee further note that the overall involvement of
women under NREGA is 42 per cent. During the year 2007-08,
56,29,822 women were provided employment under NREGA. The
Secretary has informed that in Tamil Nadu the percentage of
involvement of women is much higher i.e. 82 per cent whereas
in West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh only 20 per cent women have
been provided employment. In Arunachal Pradesh out of 29,180
households provided employment not even a single woman was
involved. The Committee feel that such a trend of high percentage
of involvement of woman in some States like Tamil Nadu and
very low percentage of involvement in other States like West
Bengal and Uttar Pradesh particularly Arunanchal Pradesh where
not a single woman has opted for employment, should be studied
and the reasons for low participation of women in some of the
States probed. The desired action should be taken accordingly, so
that the target of involvement of at least one-third of the women
beneficiaries is achieved in all the States.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 9, Para No. 3.14)

11
15. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has stated as
under:
“Schedule II of the NREG Act provides that priority shall be given
to women in such a way that at least one-third of the beneficiaries
shall be women who have registered and requested for work under
the Act. However, from the data provided by the various States it
has been found that involvement of women under NREGA at the
national level is 42 per cent which is much higher than the
minimum percentage prescribed under the Act. However,
involvement of women under NREGA varies from State to State.
Para 27 & 28 of Schedule II of NREGA provide for worksite
facilities including crèche so that conducive atmosphere is created
to attract women workers for taking up employment under the
Act.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 9, Para No. 3.14)
16. While noting very low percentage of involvement of women
under NREGA in some of the States like West Bengal, UP and
particularly Arunachal Pradesh where not a single woman opted for
employment, the Committee in the earlier Report had strongly
recommended to take desired action to ensure that the target of
employment of one-third of the women beneficiaries is achieved in
all the States. Instead of finding out the reasons for low involvement
of women in these States, the Department has tried to justify by
quoting the already known National average of involvement of
woman i.e.  42 per cent. The Committee feel that their
recommendation has not been taken in the right perspective and the
Department has tried to side track the issue raised in the
recommendation. The Committee express their unhappiness and
strongly recommend that the Department should take all the
initiatives, so that women in each State/district come forward and
the target of involvement of at least one-third of women beneficiaries
is achieved in each State/district.
(iv) Appropriate publicity for NREGA.
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 3.18)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that NREGA is applicable only in the rural
areas of the country. However, general public are not aware of
this aspect. Even the advertisements in the electronic and print
media do not mention this and give the impression that NREGA

12
is applicable in the whole district, irrespective of urban or rural
area. Rural Areas have been defined under Section 2 (o) of the
aforesaid Act as rural areas in any State except those covered by
any urban local body or a Cantonment Board established or
constituted under any law for the time being in force. There is
a massive campaign by the Department that NREGA is going to
cover the entire country w.e.f. 1 April, 2008. However, the
advertisements are creating more confusion than dispensing
information. The expectations of the people coming across such
advertisements might rise and they would be disappointed when
they come to know that the scheme is not applicable in their
area. The Committee even during their study visits to various
backward districts of the country has come across such
complaints. The Committee desire that proper publicity in this
regard be given to remove confusion among the people about
the applicability of the scheme.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 10, Para No. 3.18)
18. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has stated as
under:
“The title of the Act ‘National Rural Employment Guarantee Act’
itself indicates that it is applicable in rural areas only. In order
to generate awareness about the programme, intensive IEC
activities have been taken up. These include one day orientation
of all Sarpanches at the Block level; convening regular Gram
Sabhas; use of local vernacular newspaper, radio jingles, TV spots,
films and local cultural forums; leaflets, brochures in simple local
language; fixing one day as Rozgar Diwas in a fortnight;
involvement of NGOs/SHGs for awareness generation;
preparation and disbursement of simple primers for workers and
Sarpanches. The Government of India has introduced awards to
be known as Rozgar Jagrookta Puraskar (Employment awareness
awards) to recognize the outstanding contribution by the civil
society organisations for promoting effective implementation of
NREGA in different States of the country.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 10, Para No. 3.18)
19. The Committee during the study visits to various backward
districts of the country have observed that people presume that
NREGA is applicable in the entire district irrespective of urban or
rural area and as such exhorted the Department to rectify the
publicity campaigns through which such confusion has been created.

13
It is disappointing to note that the Department without checking
the language of the publicity campaign has tried to justify that the
title of the Act itself indicates that it is applicable in rural areas
only. The Committee take strong objection to the way their
recommendation has been taken by the Department and emphasize
that it should be made absolutely clear in the publicity campaign
that this scheme is applicable only in rural areas. The action taken
in this regard should be duly communicated to the Committee.
(v) Need for foolproof system of registration of job cards for rooting
out corruption in NREGA at ground level.
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 3.21)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that there is no proper system for
acknowledging the receipt of applications from willing job
applicants under NREGA. The Departments have stated that there
are standardized formats for demanding employment under
NREGA and the Gram Rozgar Sevak at Gram Panchyat level is
responsible for receiving applications and issue of dated receipts.
However, the ground reality is quite different. As reported to the
Committee during their study visits to various backward districts
of the country, some of the Gram Pradhans and the concerned
officers were receiving applications only when work was available
with them. If no work was available, the applicants were turned
away. Even if the applications were received, the Gram Pradhan
or the officers were not indicating the date of receipt on the
applications. Most of the applicants in the rural areas are illiterate
unskilled labourers who are not aware of the prescribed format.
They are even not aware as to whom they should apply. The
Committee express their apprehension that such an attitude on
the part of Gram Pradhans or Officers suppresses the demand
for employment which is not in the spirit of NREGA. People
cannot be denied the right to work under NREGA. Neither can
any constraint of resources be cited by the Government as an
excuse for not providing work under NREGA. The Committee
feel that the existing system of acknowledging applications is
not foolproof. The Department should devise machinery that
ensures transparency and roots out corruption in the receipt of
applications. The Department should look into the possibility of
entrusting the task of receipt of applications also to any other
Department of the State Government or active NGOs of the area

14
who can forward the applications to the concerned Gram
Panchayat or Officers. Besides, massive publicity should be given
to spread awareness among people the provisions of the
programme.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 11, Para No. 3.21)
21. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has stated as
under:
“Issue of a dated receipt to a job card holder who applies for
work under the Act is a statutory obligation on the part of the
Gram Panchayat. Every Gram Panchayat is required to employ
one dedicated Gram Rozgar Sahayak (GRS). Centre provides
financial assistance for deploying a full time dedicated GRS for
each Gram Panchayat. GRS is responsible for registration of
households, issue of job cards, issue of dated receipt against job
application, maintenance of records and documents at the Gram
Panchayat level. Format for dated receipt of work application
has been prescribed in the revised guidelines issued by the
Ministry.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 11, Para No. 3.21)
22. The Committee are aware of the fact that issue of dated
receipt to a job cardholder is a statutory obligation on the part of
the Gram Panchayat. Even then it is a fact that the Gram Pradhans
are not indicating the date of receipt of the application and even
receiving application only when the work is available with them as
noticed by the Committee during study visit. The Committee
understand that the aforesaid tendency on the part of the Gram
Pradhan is to show that cent percent applicants are being provided
jobs. Even when such a grave irregularity was brought to the
knowledge of the Department, no action has been taken/proposed to
be taken in this regard. The Committee express their displeasure in
this regard and would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation
to look into the possibility of entrusting the task of receipt of
application to any other Department of the State Governments or
active NGOs so as to ensure transparency and proper implementation
of NREGA. The Department should also indicate whether the
implementation of the recommendation of the Committee would
involve any amendment to the Guarantee Act. A categorical response
in this regard should be furnished by the Department.

15
(vi)  Pursuing hiking of wage rates in different States with low wages
for making NREGA viable
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 12, Para No. 3.28)
23. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The sub-Committees of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development have undertaken study visits to various backward
districts in the States of Assam, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh,
Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Bihar, Jharkhand and Orissa during the year 2006,
2007 and 2008. During the aforesaid study visits, the Committee
have noted various discrepancies with regard to the system of
wages under NREGA. There is a large-scale disparity in the rate
of wages being paid in various States, which is reflected in the
information furnished by the Department. The lowest wage is
being paid in the State of Gujarat at the rate of Rs. 50 per day
and maximum wage in Kerala at the rate of Rs. 125 per day. The
Committee appreciate the fact that with the implementation of
NREGA, some of the States have revised the minimum wages. It
is a matter of concern that a progressive State like Gujarat has
not so far revised the minimum wage rate, which is being paid
at the lowest rate of Rs. 50 per day. The Committee feel that the
low rate of wages may be the main reason for labourers preferring
to work in private works where the wage rate may be much
higher. Perhaps this may be the main reason for the difference
between the job cards issued and the employment provided.
While acknowledging the fact that the minimum wages are fixed
by the various State Governments under the Minimum Wages
Act, 1948 for agricultural labourers, which are at present
applicable in the case of NREGA, the Committee would like to
recommend that the State Governments which are paying very
low wages, particularly, Gujarat, which has the lowest wage rate
of Rs. 50 should be persuaded to increase the wage rate.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 12, Para No. 3.28)
24. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has stated as
under:
“Section 6(2) of the NREGA provides that until such time as a
wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in respect of any
area in a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State Government
under section 3 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 for agricultural

16
labourers, shall be considered as the wage rate applicable to that
area. Central Government has so far not fixed wages under the
Act in respect of any of the States. Therefore, wages are being
paid under NREGA in accordance with the minimum wage fixed
by the State Governments under section 3 of the Minimum Wages
Act, 1948 for agricultural labour.
Wage rate fixed by the State Government of Gujarat under the
provisions of this Act is Rs. 50 per day at present. Enhancement
of the wage rate is under consideration of the State Government.
The Ministry does not support the recommendation of the
Committee regarding pursuing the State Government for
enhancing the wage rate as fixation of wages under Minimum
Wages Act 1984 is the prerogative of the concerned State.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 12, Para No. 3.28)
25. On the issue of persuading State Governments with lower
wage rates for its upward revision, the Committee find from the
action taken reply that the Department is not inclined to support
the recommendation of the Committee on the pretext that fixation
of wages is the prerogative of the respective State Government. The
Committee feel that there is no bar as such nor any hindrance for
the Ministry to persuade State Governments to enhance their wage
rate. In view of the foregoing, the Committee reiterate that the
Department should persuade the State Governments to enhance the
wage rate if it is in the interest of viability of NREGA scheme in
the State.
C. SWARANJAYANTI GRAM SWAROZGAR YOJANA (SGSY)
Creation of National Marketing Agency
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 23 & 24,
Para Nos. 3.57 and 3.58)
26. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that the Ministry have created marketing
infrastructure at Pragati Maidan, Rajiv Gandhi Handicrafts Bhavan
and Dilli Hatt at Pitam Pura in Delhi in order to assist the BPL
Swarozgaris to showcase and market their products. While
examining the Demands for Grants of the previous year, the
Committee in the 29th Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08
had recommended for the creation of a dedicated National

17
Marketing Agency for providing professional marketing support
to the products of Self Help Groups and act as a facilitator. In
this regard, the Department have sent the proposal to the Ministry
of Finance for approval. The Committee had desired the
Department to pursue further with the Ministry of Finance so
that the dedicated National Marketing Agency is set up
expeditiously.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 23, Para No. 3.57)
“The Department in the action taken reply on the aforesaid
recommendation have stated that the permanent marketing
infrastructure facilities had been sanctioned for 10 States as Special
Projects under SGSY. Besides the proposals from four more States
are under consideration for sanction of permanent marketing
infrastructure. The Department have also informed that the
Hon’ble Minister had requested the remaining 19 States/UTs
where such facilities are not available to provide land free of
cost and send proposals for financial assistance for creation of
permanent marketing infrastructure. The Committee would like
the Department to pursue further with the State Governments so
that the marketing infrastructure is set up expeditiously in all
the State headquarters, which can further be extended to cover
all the district in a time bound manner.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 24, Para No. 3.58)
27. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has stated as
under:
“After submission of the report by the Sixth Central Pay
Commission, Ministry of Finance has returned the proposal for
creation of National Rural Products Marketing Agency (NRPMA)
back to the Ministry for revising the pay scales of the posts to
be created in NRPMA. The proposal has been re-submitted to
Ministry of Finance for their approval.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 23, Paragraph No. 3.57)
“To make uniformity in the marketing centers created in the States
by the Ministry, it has been decided to evolve a standard design
and a sustainable business model for ownership, maintenance,
operation of such marketing complexes safeguarding therein the
interest/stake of the targeted rural BPL SHG beneficiaries.
Ministry is in the process of identifying a Consultant to devise

18
the model. The proposals received from the State Governments
and which are likely to be received will be considered for sanction
based on the model devised.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No 24, Paragraph No. 3.58)
28. The Committee find that the proposal for creation of National
Rural Products Marketing Agency (NRPMA) was submitted by the
Department of Rural Development to the Ministry of Finance for
approval. However, the Ministry of Finance has returned the same
to the Department for revision of pay scales for different posts to
be created under the proposed NRPMA consequent upon submission
of Report of the Sixth Central Pay Commission. As regards the
creation of permanent marketing infrastructure facilities in different
States, the Ministry is in the process of identifying a consultant to
devise the model, based on which the proposals received from the
States would be sanctioned. In view of the foregoing, the Committee
recommend that the matter should be expedited so that proper
marketing facilities are provided for the products of SHGs under
SGSY.
D. Part payment of wages in the form of foodgrains
Recommendation (Serial No. 30, Para No. 3.72)
29. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee further note that under SGRY foodgrains are to
be given as part of wages at the rate of 5 Kg per manday. Should
a State Government wish to give more than 5 Kg of foodgrains
per manday, it might do so within the existing State allocation
(subject to a minimum of 25 per cent of the wages being paid
in cash). In the event of non-availability/inadequate availability
of foodgrains, wages in kind might be less than 5 Kg of
foodgrains per manday and the remaining portion might be given
in cash. In the reverse case of less availability of cash, the wages
in cash might be less than 25 per cent and the remaining portion
might be given in kind as foodgrains. However, the norm of
minimum 5 Kg of foodgrains and minimum of 25 per cent wages
in cash is to be maintained as far as possible. The Ministry of
Rural Development release funds for the foodgrains directly to
the FCI at the economic cost and FCI is required to send bills
which are being reimbursed by the Ministry of Rural
Development. Now, SGRY has been subsumed with NREGA.
Further, as per Schedule II of NREGA, the wages may be paid
either wholly in cash or in kind, provided that at least one-
fourth of the wages shall be in cash only. The Committee find

19
that no State is paying wages in the form of foodgrains. With
the recent unprecedented hike in the prices of foodgrains, the
poorest of the poor are the worst affected. SGRY was providing
some sort of food security to the poor. Since no State Government
is actually paying wages in kind, inspite of there being a provision
under NREGA to pay wages in kind, the Committee feel that
the Government have to think of making some sort of provision
on the lines of SGRY so that some kind of food security can be
ensured under NREGA.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 30, Para No. 3.72)
30. The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:
“Experience in the implementation of SGRY shows  that, i t is
difficult to ensure timely supply of foodgrains for timely payment
of wages for various logistic reasons. In accordance with the
provisions of the NREGA, the workers are entitled to be paid on
a weekly basis, and in any case within a fortnight of the date on
which work was done. In the event of any delay in wage
payments, workers are entitled to compensation as per the
provisions of the Payment of Wages Act, 1935. The cost of
compensation is to be borne by the State Government”.
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 30, Paragraph No. 3.72)
31. The Committee had earlier recommended to provide
foodgrains as part of the wages under NREGA on the lines of the
practice being followed under SGRY particularly when the specific
provision in this regard has been made under the Guarantee Act
itself. The Department instead of taking action in this regard has
conveyed the practical difficulties being faced under SGRY. It has
been stated that it was difficult to ensure timely supply of foodgrains
or timely payment of wages due to various logistic reasons. The
Committee disapprove the way such an important recommendation
has been treated by the Department. The Department either should
have taken the remedial actions with regard to practical difficulties
being faced under SGRY or a review in this regard should have
been made before making the specific provision under NREGA. In
view of this, the Committee would like to reiterate the earlier
recommendation to implement the specific provision made in this
regard for payment of part wages by way of foodgrains particularly
in the circumstances when there is unprecedented hike in the prices
of foodgrains and the poor are the worst affected. Concrete action
taken in this regard should be communicated to the Committee.

20
E. RURAL HOUSING (INDIRA AWAAS YOJANA)
Recommendation (Serial No. 32, Para No. 3.82)
32. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee appreciate that with the continuous pursuance
of the issue by this Committee, the Government have finally
increased the per unit assistance under IAY from Rs. 25,000 to
Rs. 35,000 in plain areas and from Rs. 27,500 to Rs. 38,500 in
hilly & difficult areas. Besides, the subsidy for upgradation of
houses has been increased from Rs. 12,500 to Rs. 15,000. The
Committee further find that the allocation under Indira Awaas
Yojana has been increased from Rs. 4,040 crore during 2007-08 to
Rs. 5,400 crore during 2008-09. The Secretary during the course
of oral evidence has, however, expressed concern that the
Government have to reduce targets under IAY due to non-
provision of allocation commensurate with the per unit
enhancement of the subsidy. The Department had proposed
Rs. 8,000 crore for the year 2008-09. The Committee strongly
recommend that sufficient allocation should be provided under
Indira Awaas Yojana so that the physical targets are not reduced
& the targets fixed under Bharat Nirman are achieved.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 32, Para No. 3.82)
33. The Department in their Action Taken Replies have stated
as under:
“In the Eleventh Plan proposal, 30 lakh houses were proposed to
be constructed every year, the remaining shortage being met in
the Twelfth Plan period. The Draft 11th Plan proposed
construction of 159.5 lakh houses during the Eleventh Plan period
which are to cover poorest among the BPL families. Considering
that 21.27 lakh houses were targeted for construction during
2007-08, the remaining 138.23 lakh houses are required to be
constructed during the remaining four years of Eleventh Plan
period @34.56 lakh houses every year. With enhanced unit
assistance the central funds of Rs. 31695.89 crore required for
construction of 138.23 lakh houses in the next four years of the
Eleventh Plan period. In addition, about Rs. 30.00 crore would
be required for other smaller schemes such as Innovative Stream
of Rural Housing and Habitat Development and Rural Building
Centre, IEC, administrative expenditure, etc. After adding this
amount, the total Central share required for construction of

21
138.23 lakh houses would be Rs. 31695.89 crore for the next four
years and Rs. 7923.97 crore for the year 2008-09. However, the
funds provided for the year 2008-09 is Rs. 5645.77 crore.
Recommendation has been forwarded to Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission to take necessary action.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 32, Paragraph No. 3.82)
34. The Committee note from the action taken reply furnished
by the Department that about 138.23 lakh houses are to be constructed
during the remaining 4 years of the Eleventh Plan at the rate of
about 34.56 lakh houses per year. The total Central share required
for construction of 138.23 lakh houses would be Rs. 31,695.89 crore
for the next four years and Rs. 7,293.97 crore for the year 2008-09 for
construction of 34.56 lakh houses. However the funds provided for
the year 2008-09 are only Rs. 5,645.77 crore which means that
Rs. 1648.2 crore less have been provided. The Department in the
action taken reply has further stated that the recommendation of the
Committee for enhancement of allocation under IAY has been
forwarded to the Ministry of Finance for necessary action. The
Committee observe that the Department has not clarified as to how
they would meet the shortage of funds to construct the targeted
number of houses especially when they have been provided only
Rs. 5,645.77 crore against the demand of Rs. 7,923.97 crore to build
34.56 lakh houses during 2008-09. The Committee note that the
demand for houses is increasing year after year and despite this
fact, the Department is not getting enhanced allocation under IAY
even when the cost per unit assistance under IAY has been increased
by the Government. The Committee once again recommend the
Department to pursue vigorously with the Ministry of Finance/
Planning Commission for getting the enhanced allocation under IAY
to meet the housing shortage in the rural areas. The concern
expressed by the Committee in this regard should be communicated
to the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission.
F. PRADHAN MANTRI GRAM SADAK YOJANA (PMGSY)
(i) Mismatch between physical and financial achievement
Recommendation (Serial No. 36, Para No. 3.94)
35. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note from the replies furnished by the
Department that the physical achievements under Phase V , VI

22
and VII of PMGSY is even below 35 per cent while the financial
achievement during Phase V and Phase VI has been 97.89 per
cent and 91.20 per cent respectively. The Committee fail to
understand as to how the physical achievement has been very
poor while the financial achievement during the same period
has been very good. There is a mismatch between the physical
and financial achievement projected by the Department. The
Committee would like a clarification from the Department in
this regard.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 36, Para No. 3.94)
36. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has stated as
under:
“Under PMGSY, project proposals are cleared in batches at any
given point of time. The works are in different stages of execution.
Also all States do not come for project approval of the same
phase at the same point of time. The completed length of the
road is reported when work in all the layers is completed and
connectivity to habitation is reported when the entire length of
the road leading to eligible habitation is completed. During the
last two years, in order to meet the enhanced requirements of
Bharat Nirman, project proposals for 1,43,534 Km for Rs. 42,242 crores
have been cleared. The larger expenditure with reference to the
physical progress indicates that very large number of works is in
progress and are at different stages. The Physical & Financial
Progress of phase V , VI & VII as on March, 2008 is as below:
%Length Completed %Expenditure
incurred to value
cleared
Phase V 49.53 51.43
Phase VI 26.88 24.95
Phase VII 0.07 12.08
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 36, Paragraph No. 3.94)
37. The Committee find from the action taken reply furnished
by the Department that the implementation of PMGSY in the Phase
V, VI and VII of the programme is very slow. The Committee in
their earlier recommendation have expressed serious concern over
the mismatch between the physical and financial achievements

23
indicated by the Department. The Department in its justification
has stated that under PMGSY, project proposals are cleared in batches
at any given point of time. The works are in different stages of
execution. Also all States do not come for project approval of the
same phase at the same point of time. The completed length of the
road is reported when work in all the layers is completed and
connectivity to habitation is reported when the entire length of the
road leading to eligible habitation is completed. The Committee feel
that the procedure adopted for clearing projects and reporting of
completed works is very confusing and misleading due to which
there appears to be a mismatch between the physical and financial
achievements during the given period of time. The Committee are
aware that PMGSY road works should be completed and reported
within a maximum period of 18 months from the date of award of
road contract. Thus the Department should maintain a separate phase-
wise data with regard to unfinished road works that could not be
completed within the stipulated period of 18 months from the date
of award of the actual contract, so as to get the true picture of the
pace of implementation of PMGSY. The desired information should
be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of the Report.
(ii) The post-contractual period maintenance of PMGSY roads
Recommendation (Serial No. 38, Para No. 3.101)
38. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that all PMGSY roads are covered by five
year maintenance contracts. However, the Committee are more
concerned about the maintenance of PMGSY roads after the
completion of five years of the contractual period. The Committee
note that in the absence of a mechanism for the maintenance of
PMGSY roads after the completion of the contractual period, the
PMGSY roads are getting into bad shape. There is a provision
that the State Governments are required to make the necessary
budget provision and place the funds to service the zonal
maintenance contracts at the disposal of the State Rural Roads
Development Agencies in the Maintenance Account. Further, State
Governments are required to take steps to build up capacity in
the District Panchayats and endeavor to devolve the funds and
functionaries into these Panchayats in order to enable them to
manage maintenance contracts for rural roads. The Committee
however have their apprehensions as to how this is going to be
achieved especially when the State Governments and the District

24
Panchayats are often short of funds and most States and District
Panchayats are lacking in building their contracting capacity
demand. In this regard, the Committee would like to recommend
that there should be financial allocation from the Union
Government for the maintenance of roads after the contractual
period of five years is over, so that the huge outlay spent on the
construction of road under PMGSY is not wasted due to the lack
of maintenance. Besides, there is an urgent need to closely monitor
the maintenance of PMGSY roads during the period of contract.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 38, Paragraph No. 3.101)
39. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has stated as
under:
“All PMGSY roads are now covered with 5 years maintenance
contract to be entered into along with the construction contract
with the same contractor. State Governments have been advised
to put proper institutional arrangements and place adequate funds
for maintenance of rural roads including PMGSY roads. State
Governments have also been requested to take advantage of
12th Finance Commission grant.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 38, Paragraph No. 3.101)
40. The Committee recall that provision of separate allocation
for post contractual maintenance of PMGSY roads has been one of
the repeated recommendations of the Committee. In the action taken
reply the Committee find that the Department has not replied to the
recommendation in categorical terms and left the responsibility for
maintenance of PMGSY roads after the completion of the contractual
period on the State Governments by operationalising institutional
arrangements with the help of Twelfth Finance Commission Grants.
The Committee do not appreciate the stand taken by the
Department and reiterate their recommendation that a separate
allocation be made for post contractual maintenance of PMGSY roads
as financial health of all the State Governments is not strong enough
to shoulder this responsibility.
G. VIGILANCE AND MONITORING COMMITTEE (V&MC)
Recommendation (Serial No. 39, Para No. 3.106)
41. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that the objective of constituting the
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (V&MC) is to maintain

25
effective monitoring and execution of various schemes and to
ensure quality expenditure so that the benefit of various schemes
reaches the poor in full measure. However, the committee are
concerned with the way the V&MCs are functioning. Shockingly,
only one district in the country has held the V&MC meeting as
per the norm of holding of one meeting every quarter. Further,
in 127 districts, and in the States of Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, J&K, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Orissa and Tripura not even
a single V&MC meeting has been held. In order to streamline
the District level V&MC, the Department had imposed the
condition that the second instalment would be released only after
getting confirmation of holding at least one meeting at State and
district level. The Utilisation Certificates were also modified to
this effect. However, even after this relaxation, most of the district
level V&MCs could not hold the meeting. The Committee note
that in order to avoid penalizing the beneficiaries for no fault of
theirs, funds were released to the implementing agencies in these
States or districts.
The Committee further note that the elected representatives have
been assigned a central role in the V&MCs. All Members of
Parliament are either Chairman or co-Chairman of the District
level V&MCs and an officer not below the rank of District
Collector is the Member-Secretary to the V&MC who is
accountable for holding the V&MCs at regular intervals. However,
the Committee feel that the role and powers of Members of
Parliament have not been clearly defined in the constitution of
V&MCs. Further, the Committee have not been informed whether
any action has been taken against the Member-Secretary of the
127 districts who could not conduct even a single V&MC meeting
particularly when they have been made accountable for not
holding V&MC meetings regularly. The Committee recommend
that the role and powers of the Members of Parliament and
other functionaries of the V&MCs may be clearly defined in
guidelines so that they can discharge their duties effectively. The
Committee would further like to recommend that the minutes of
the V&MC meetings held at State/District level and duly signed
by the Member of Parliament, who is the Chairman/co-Chairman
should be sent to the Union Ministry of Rural Development on
a regular basis. Besides, the Union Ministry of Rural Development
should monitor the action taken on the decision taken during
the meeting. A mechanism in the Ministry should be evolved
whereby the officials of the Ministry should also pay random
visits to the districts to know the functioning of the Vigilance
and Monitoring Committees.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 39, Para No. 3.106)

26
42. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has stated as
under:
“For effective Monitoring of the implementation of the
programmes of the Ministry, Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees at State/UT and District level have been constituted
for each State/UT/District. The major objective of Vigilance and
Monitoring Committees includes providing of a crucial role to
the Members of Parliament and elected representatives of the
people in State Legislatures and the Panchayati Raj Institutions
for the implementation of the Rural Development programmes
and to put in place a mechanism to monitor the execution of the
programmes, so that the fruits of the programme may flow to
the rural poor in full measure. It is envisaged that these
committees would keep a close watch over the implementation
as per the programme guidelines.
During the year 2007-08 as per updated reports/records available,
35 State level V&MC have been conducted in 23 States/UTs and
888 District level V&MC meetings have taken place in
561 Districts respectively. 39 districts have not conducted even a
single meeting.
Meetings of the Vigilance and Monitoring Committees at State
and District level are to be held at every quarter. In spite of the
guidelines, the meetings are not being held regularly. The Ministry
has asked the Member Secretary for clarifications and also
organizing the meeting at the earliest. In addition, the Minister
of Rural Development has sent a letter on February, 2008 to the
Chief Ministers of States, who have not held State Level V&MC
meetings during 2007-08 to organize these meetings as early as
possible. Last year as well, the Union Minister had written to
the Chief Ministers concerned in this regard. Minister has again
written to all the Chief Ministers about the observation and
feelings of the Members of the Standing Committee.
In order to streamline holding District Level V&MCs meetings,
the Ministry had also imposed a condition on 10 August 2006
that the 2nd instalment of the funds for the programmes would
be released only after getting confirmation of holding of at least
one V&MC meeting. There has been considerable progress.
However, few districts still did not conduct at least one meeting
in spite of this condition. The Ministry had to waive this condition
in some cases keeping in view that on account of non-holding of

27
meetings, the beneficiaries should not be penalized or denied
funds. Further, the Ministry also issued a circular on 23 January
2007 for holding Special Meetings in case regular District Level
V&MC meetings are not being held or are frequently being
postponed due to various factors.
In September, 2007, Hon’ble Union Minister of Rural Development
while having interactive sessions with the Members of Parliament
from various States, emphasized the need to hold regular meetings
of the V&MCs at State as well as District level in terms of
stipulations in the guidelines. The Minister has again written to
the Chief Ministers of the States to hold four meetings of the
V&MC during 2008-09.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 39, Paragraph No. 3.106)
43. While expressing concerns over the way the Vigilance and
Monitoring Committees are functioning in various States/districts,
the Committee had raised a series of issues and made certain
recommendations as given under:—
(i) The action taken against the Member-Secretary of
127 districts who could not conduct even a single V&MC
meeting should be communicated;
(ii) The role and powers of the Members of Parliament and
other functionaries of the V&MC may be clearly defined
in the guidelines;
(iii) Minutes of V&MC meeting held at State/district level
should be duly signed by the Member of Parliament who
is the Chairman/co-Chairman and should be sent to the
Union Ministry of Rural Development on a regular basis;
(iv) Union Ministry of Rural Development should monitor the
action taken on the decisions taken during the meeting;
(v) A mechanism in the Ministry should be evolved whereby
the officials of the Ministry should also pay random visits
to the districts to know the functioning of V&MCs.
Action taken reply does not address the aforesaid issues. The
Committee desire a categorical response on each of the issues raised
above.

28
H. EXPEDITIOUS FINALISATION OF BPL LIST
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 42 and 43,
Para Nos. 3.118 and 3.119)
44. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee are concerned to note that the BPL List based
on 2002 Census has been delayed for a long time. The Committee
in their earlier reports have been repeatedly emphasizing for
speedy Finalization of BPL List. However, as on date, only
21 States and Union Territories have reported to have finalized
the BPL List after getting it approved by the Gram Sabhas, which
is mandatory as per guidelines of BPL Census, 2002. The States
like Bihar, Haryana, J&K, Kerala, Manipur, Meghalaya, Orissa,
Sikkim, Tripura, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and
Puducherry are yet to get the mandatory approval from the Gram
Sabhas. The Committee again emphasize for early finalization of
BPL results based on BPL Census, 2002, so that the benefits under
different schemes reach to the targeted persons.”
(Recommendation Serial No.42, Para No. 3.118)
“The Committee further note that BPL Census is conducted in
the beginning of a Five Year Plan. The BPL Census 2002 was
conducted to finalize the BPL List for the Tenth Five Year Plan.
Even when the Tenth Plan is over and one year of the Eleventh
Plan has already passed, BPL List is yet to be finalized in many
States. The Committee also note that a decision has been taken
by the Planning Commission to set up an Expert Group to
recommend a more suitable methodology to conduct the next
BPL Census to identify the BPL households. The Committee note
that huge amount of funds are being allocated by the Central
Government through various welfare schemes meant for the
poorest of the poor. The intended beneficiaries for the schemes
are selected on the basis of the BPL List. Unless the BPL List is
updated periodically, the benefits intended under various schemes
cannot reach the genuine beneficiaries. The Committee strongly
recommend that the Expert Group to suggest suitable
methodology to conduct the next BPL Census should be set up
expeditiously. The recommendations made by the Committee in
various reports as given in Appendix-VIII should be taken into
consideration while finalizing methodology.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 43, Para No. 3.119)

29
45. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has stated as
under:—
“The Department has been regularly taking up the matter with
all the States at different levels emphasizing the urgency to finalise
the BPL list based on BPL Census 2002. The Hon’ble Minister of
Rural Development has also taken up the matter with the Chief
Ministers of the respective States. Now the Government of
Haryana and Dadra & Nagar Haveli have also furnished the
BPL list. In case of Bihar, the State Government has determined
the cut off score as 13. The total number of BPL households
worked out on this basis exceeds substantially over the prescribed
limit. The matter is being pursued with the remaining States and
UTs to get the BPL list finalized at the earliest.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 42, Para No. 3.118)
“The observation of the Committee to expedite the setting up of
an Expert Group by the Planning Commission to suggest the
suitable methodology for the next BPL Census is noted and the
matter has already been taken up with the Planning Commission.
The Ministry has assured all possible assistance to the Planning
Commission to get this exercise completed.”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 43, Para No. 3.119)
46. The Committee note the efforts made by the Department for
expediting the BPL List based on BPL Census 2002. The Department
has informed that the Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has
taken up the matter with the defaulting States for expediting the
BPL List. Subsequently, few States/UTs viz. Haryana, Bihar and Dadra
& Nagar Haveli have finalised the BPL List. Besides, the Department
has also taken up the issue of setting up of an Expert Group for
suggesting a suitable methodology for the next BPL Census with
the Planning Commission. With these measures, the Committee expect
that the BPL list would be finalised at the earliest in the remaining
States/UTs and also the new methodology suggested by the Expert
Group of the Planning Commission would further help in identifying
genuine BPL families.

30
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee note that direction 73A of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha is not being followed in the right spirit. This is
evident from the considerable delay in making the statement by the
Minister on various reports of the Committee. As per the direction,
the Minister should make the statement within six months of
presentation of the Report to Parliament, which has not been done.
The statements have been made after 10 to 21 months of the
presentation of the concerned Reports. While the Committee agree that
the information for furnishing the statement has to be collected from
various Departments and States, at the same time they feel that, the
period of six months is not a short time and the collection of
information should be completed within that time period. The
Committee desire that, in future, the statement under direction 73A
should be made within the prescribed time limit.
Reply of the Government
Suggestion has been noted for compliance.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.18)
The Committee have repeatedly been expressing concern over huge
unspent balances under various schemes of the Department. As per
the information provided by the Department, Rs. 11,430.78 crore is
lying unspent under different schemes as on 31 December 2007, which
if compared to the allocation made to the Department in the year
2007-08 comes to approximately 40 per cent of the outlay. The
Committee understand that unspent balances are the accumulated
unspent amount with various implementing agencies under different

31
schemes. The argument advanced by the Secretary, during the course
of oral evidence, is that half of the unspent balances are under National
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA). The unspent amount
under NREGA has further been justified by the Department by stating
that if the overall unspent amount is spread over 330 districts, it comes
to Rs. 15-16 crores per district. The Committee wish to emphasis that
even Rs. 15-16 crores lying as unspent amount with each district is
not a small amount. Besides, unspent balances are also lying with the
other schemes of the Department. As regards the State-wise position
of total unspent balances they are maximum in Bihar followed by
West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh. Under National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act, the maximum unspent balances are with
Madhya Pradesh followed by West Bengal, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh and
Uttar Pradesh. The Committee while expressing serious concern over
the trend of huge unspent balances would like to strongly recommend
that the Government should analyse the position State-wise and take
the corrective action accordingly. Besides, focused attention need to be
given to the backward States like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh
where the huge unspent balances are a recurring feature. The
Committee may also be kept apprised of the follow-up action taken in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
As per the available progress reports from the State Governments
and Union Territory Administration for the year 2007-08, the utilization
of funds under NREGA is Rs. 15856.89 crore against the available
fund of Rs. 19305.81 crore which is 82.14%. Under SGRY the utilization
is Rs. 2235.73 crore against the available funds of Rs. 2748.31 crore
which is 81.35%. Under SGSY the utilization is Rs. 1951.19 crore against
the available fund of Rs. 2427.64, which is 80.37%. Under Indira Awaas
Yojana, the utilization is reported to Rs. 5458.01 crore against the
available funds of Rs. 6526.20 crore which is 83.63% and under Pradhan
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana the utilization is Rs. 10632.67 crore against
the available funds of Rs. 12140.00 crore which is 87.58%. Total unspent
amount under these schemes is Rs. 7013.47 crore, which is 16.25% of
the available funds during 2007-08.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

32
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.21)
The Committee note that the monthly expenditure plan (2007-08)
of the Department has not been followed. As per the monthly
expenditure plan, as on January 2008, the expenditure on various
schemes excluding NREGA should have been Rs. 14,053.04 crore while
it is only Rs. 12,728.52 crore, thus implying a shortfall of 9.2 per cent.
The Department have also tried to justify the under expenditure by
stating that the actual releases to the implementing agencies are
dependent on the proposals received from them. The Committee feel
that there is an urgent need for strengthening the expenditure
monitoring machinery with the latest technology so that the expenditure
progress reports and the proposals are received from the implementing
agencies in time. While it might be true that the actual releases to the
implementing agencies are dependent on the proposals received by
them, the Department should try to stick to the monthly expenditure
plan in order to avoid huge expenditure at the fag end of the financial
year.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development has developed a comprehensive
system of monitoring the expenditure incurred under each of the
programmes through Periodical Progress Reports, Performance Review
Committee meetings, Area Officer’s Scheme, Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees at the State/District Level, with greater involvement of
Members of Parliament, District Level monitoring and National Level
Monitors. The Ministry has also emphasized the State Government to
furnish the monthly and quarterly progress reports through on-line
system, so that it may not take time to receive the latest position of
utilization of funds. The Ministry is also receiving monthly reports in
hard and soft form through State Nodal Officers to minimize the time
lag.
Besides, the State Governments have also been advised to adopt a
five-pronged strategy consisting of (i) creation of awareness,
(ii) transparency, (iii) People’s participation, (iv) accountability, social
audit, and (v) strict vigilance and monitoring at all levels. These
measures are quite helpful to adhere to the norms of monthly
expenditure under rural development schemes.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

33
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 3.30)
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department for
payment of wages either through Banks or Post Offices. The Committee
are happy to note that in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Bihar, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Madhya
Pradesh wages are being paid either through Bank or Post Offices.
This system is more transparent and less prone to corruption. The
Committee desire that similar steps be taken-up in other States for
payment of wages through Post Offices or Banks. However, the
Department should take up the matter with Banks and Post Offices
for ensuring that wages are paid on weekly basis as provided in the
Act.
Reply of the Government
All States/Union Territories have been requested to pay wages to
the NREGA workers through their accounts in Post Offices/Banks. So
far 2,28,96,158 accounts of NREGA workers in Post Offices/Banks have
been opened in 21 States. Remaining States are also taking necessary
action in this regard.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 3.33)
The representatives of the Department during the course of
evidence stated that the 60:40 wages & material ratio has to be
maintained at district level and not at individual level. The Committee
are of the view that the people at the ground level may not be aware
of the aforesaid provision. In view of this, the Committee recommend
that the implementing agencies at the district level and Panchayati Raj
institutions involved in the implementation of works should be properly
informed about this provision.
Reply of the Government
In the Operational Guidelines prepared and revised by the Ministry
from time to time, it has been clearly stated that the ratio of wage
costs to material costs should be no less than the minimum norm of
60:40 stipulated in the Act and should be applied preferably at the
Gram Panchayat, Block and District levels. Copies of the guidelines

34
have been provided to States for distribution to all the implementing
agencies since the launch of the Act. These have also been put on the
website www. nrega.nic.in.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 3.37)
The Committee feel that one of the reasons for the inability to
provide employment to the applicants in the aforesaid cases may be
due to the non-availability of works in that area. The Committee note
that the major works being undertaken under NREGA are the works
related to water conservation and road works. Such type of works
requires huge area to dig the earth and prepare for the water
conservation and ponds etc. Such works may not be available in all
areas, keeping in view the topography of that particular area. Besides,
after deepening of few water bodies and construction of kutcha
roadwork the saturation point may be reached in that area. Further,
the Committee have their apprehension that these works may not
provide 100 days of employment to a family in a year. The Committee
feel that the Department have to give a re-look at the list of works
and take decision on allowing certain other works which at present
are not permissible under NREGA. Besides, some sort of flexibility
should be provided to the State Governments to identify works, keeping
in view the geographical conditions of that area. In this regard, the
Committee would also like to recommend that the State Governments
should be ready with Scheme Bank so that works are always available
when the demand for employment comes.
Reply of the Government
Section 16(3) & (4) of NREGA states that every Gram Panchayat
shall prepare a development plan and maintain a shelf of works and
forward it to the Programme officer for scrutiny and preliminary
approval prior to the commencement of the year in which it is
proposed. Development plan is an Annual Work Plan that should
comprise a shelf of projects for each village with administrative and
technical approvals so that works can be started as soon as there is a
demand for work. As regards the permissible activities of works,
para 1(iv) of Schedule I of the Act has been amended to allow provision
of irrigation facility, horticulture plantation and land development
facilities on land owned by households belonging to the Scheduled Castes

35
and Scheduled Tribes or to Below Poverty Line families or to
beneficiaries of land reforms or to the beneficiaries under Indira Awas
Yojana of the Government of India. Para 1(ix) of Schedule I of NREGA
contains a provision for any other work which may be notified by the
Central Government in consultation with the State Govt. Any proposal
of a State Govt. for taking up work which does not fall in the category
of permissible works as given in Schedule I may be examined by the
Central Govt. on merits and work may be notified as a permissible
activity in that particular area. Operational guidelines of NREGA
provide for preparation of a District Perspective Plan (DPP). The DPP
is intended to facilitate advance planning and to provide a development
perspective for the district. The aim is to identify the types of NREGS
works that should be encouraged in the district and the potential
linkages between these works and long-term employment generation
and sustained development.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 3.54)
The Committee are perturbed to note that only fifty per cent of
the credit targets under SGSY have been achieved during the year
2007-08. During the year 2006-07, 79.86 per cent of the targets for
credit disbursement could be achieved. Further during the year
2007-08, as on January 2008, the credit disbursement in 14 States/UTs
viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, West Bengal, A&N Islands, Daman & Diu,
D&N Haveli, Lakshadweep and Pondichery was less than even
25 percent. In Nagaland, Manipur, A&N Islands, Daman & Diu, D&N
Haveli, the achievement was ‘Nil‘. During the year 2006-07, the credit
disbursement in nine States/UTs viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, A&N Islands, Daman & Diu, D&N
Haveli and Lakshadweep was below 40 percent. In two Union
Territories viz. A&N Islands and Daman & Diu, the achievement was
‘Nil‘.
The Department have requested the Ministry of Finance and the
Reserve Bank of India to take immediate remedial action to improve
the flow of credit under SGSY. The Ministry of Finance have also
taken up the matter of slow progress of Banks in achieving the credit
targets under SGSY with the Chairman and Managing Directors of all
Commercial Banks. The Department have also fixed quarterly targets

36
for all the States who are further required to fix quarterly targets for
the Banks, which are being monitored regularly. Besides, the Ministry
of Finance have also advised the State Governments to monitor and
review the performance of the Bank Branches more closely in the
meetings of State Level Bankers Committee. Despite all these efforts,
the improvement in the flow of credit under SGSY has been very
slow. The Committee find that the shortfall in the achievement of
credit targets under SGSY are attributed to many reasons which include
lack of sufficient Bank Branches and manpower in rural areas and the
improper attitude of Bank officials working in the rural areas.
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need for the expansion
of rural Branch network of Commercial and rural Banks. There is also
a need to enhance the staff strength of rural Bank Branches, especially
those with professional and technical skills, who can take up project
appraisal and provide technical guidance to the beneficiaries under
SGSY very effectively. There is also a need for proper training of Bank
officials posted in the rural areas to change their mindset towards
illiterate rural people. The Banking procedures and formats also need
to be simplified for the convenience of the people. The Committee
desire that their concerns be communicated to the Ministry of Finance
and the Reserve Bank of India for taking immediate remedial action.
Reply of the Government
SGSY is a credit-linked programme where credit is the key element
and subsidy is only a minor enabling component. The major part of
the investment consists of bank credit from financial institutions
comprising commercial banks, co-operative banks and regional rural
banks. The credit targets under SGSY have never been achieved by
the banks since inception of the programme (1.4.1999). The credit
disbursal against the credit targets under SGSY in the last three years
is as under:—
Financial  Credit Targets  Credit Disbursal %of credit
year (Rs. in crores) (Rs. in crores) disbursal
2005-06 2515.65 1823.16 72.47
2006-07 2869.12 2291.21 79.86
2007-08 3743.55 2752.87 73.54
During 2007-08, the credit disbursement was less than 25% in six
States/ UTs viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland and West Bengal whereas the achievement was ‘Nil’ in A&N
Islands, Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli. During 2006-07,
the credit disbursement was below 40% in the States/UTs of

37
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
West Bengal, D&N Haveli and Lakshadweep.
There is inadequate physical outreach of banks in rural areas.
Ministry of Rural Development has been regularly monitoring credit
mobilization under SGSY through meetings of Performance Review
Committee (PRC), Central Level Coordination Committee (CLCC) and
meetings of the Nodal Officers. The 11th meeting of Central Level
Coordination Committee (CLCC) was held on 8th February, 2008
attended by State Secretaries of Rural Development, senior officers
from Ministry of Finance, RBI, NABARD, senior representatives of
Public Sector Banks. The meeting, inter-alia, discussed the issues of
unbanked blocks in the country, disbursement of credit and sanctioning
of pending loan applications, poor performance of bank branches in
credit delivery, and high interest rates charged by the banks under
SGSY.
As a follow up of the meeting, Ministry of Rural Development
has written to Banking Division, Ministry of Finance to take up issues
related to credit that require immediate remedial action on the part of
Ministry of Finance such as Credit mobilization, poor performance of
branches in credit delivery, pendency of loan applications, issues
regarding high interest rates and inadequate physical outreach of
banking system. Minister of Rural Development had also requested
Finance Minister to personally intervene in the case of non-achievement
of credit targets by banks, high interest rates being charged by different
bank branches, inadequate physical outreach of banking system in rural
areas. Ministry of Finance has informed that most of the banks
including SBI, Central Bank of India, PNB etc. have responded in the
matter stating that a nodal officer has been appointed to monitor the
progress of SGSY programme. A high level Committee on “Credit
related issues under SGSY” has been constituted under the
chairmanship of Dr. R. Radhakrishna, Professor, Centre for Economic
and Social Studies, Hyderabad to examine the constraints in the
adequate flow of credit to Self Help Groups of SGSY and to suggest
measures and strategy for effective credit linkage to Self Help Groups.
Senior officers from Ministry of Finance, RBI, NABARD, SBI, National
Institute of Rural Development and selected State Secretaries of Rural
Development are the members of the Committee.
The observation of the Standing Committee has been communicated
to RBI and Ministry of Finance for taking appropriate action.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

38
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 3.55)
The Committee also feel that the credit disbursement rate is also
affected due to the lack of coordination by DRDAs and blocks with
Bankers at block and district level. There is an urgent need to have
some sort of coordinating mechanism in this regard. The Committee
recommend that the Department should take the issue with DRDAs
and Bankers. The Committee may also be kept apprised about the
concrete action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
SGSY is implemented by District Rural Development Agencies
(DRDAs) through the Panchayat Samitis and with the active
involvement of other Panchayati Raj Institutions, the banks, the line
departments and the NGOs. A close coordination mechanism between
different agencies responsible for implementation of SGSY has been
evolved by forming Block Level, District Level, State Level and Central
Level SGSY Committees. The State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC)
has the mandate to approve the bank credit plan and review the credit
trend in the State. Considering the significance of these committees,
all the State Governments are instructed to conduct meetings of these
committees as per the schedule prescribed in the SGSY guidelines for
effective implementation of the scheme.
The observation of the Standing Committee has been communicated
to all the State Governments, Ministry of Finance and RBI for taking
appropriate action.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 3.56)
While analyzing the data furnished by the Department with regard
to credit disbursement during the year 2007-08, the Committee note
that there is gross mis-match between physical and financial
achievement. During 2006-07, 155.07 percent of the physical targets
could be achieved with 82.58% of the utilization of the outlay. The
Department have informed that the main reason for the aforesaid mis-
match is due to under-financing by the Banking sector due to which
the per capita subsidy flow to Swarozgaries is less than the stipulated
amount. The Committee find that under financing of the Swarozgaris

39
render various economic activities being undertaken by SHGs as non-
viable and lead to use of subsidy for non-economic purposes. The
Committee recommend that the Department should take up the matter
urgently with the Banks and take the concrete action in this regard.
The Committee may also be kept apprised in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As per information available with the Ministry during 2006-07,
155.07 percent of the physical target was achieved with 82.58%
utilization of total funds available and during 2007-08, 125.22 percent
of the physical target was achieved with 80.37% utilization of the total
funds available. The issue of mis-match between physical and financial
achievements was taken up in the PRC meetings held on 17-18 January,
2008 and 13-14 April, 2008 with the State representatives and the Bank
officials present in the meetings and were instructed to take immediate
action in this regard.
The observation of the Standing Committee has been communicated
to Ministry of Finance, State Governments and RBI, for taking
appropriate action.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 3.57)
The Committee note that the Ministry have created marketing
infrastructure at Pragati Maidan, Rajiv Gandhi Handicrafts Bhavan and
Dilli Hatt at Pitam Pura in Delhi in order to assist the BPL Swarozgaris
to showcase and market their products. While examining the Demands
for Grants of the previous year, the Committee in the 29th Report on
Demands for Grants 2007-08 had recommended for the creation of a
dedicated National Marketing Agency for providing professional
marketing support to the products of Self Help Groups and act as a
facilitator. In this regard, the Department have sent the proposal to
the Ministry of Finance for approval. The Committee had desired the
Department to pursue further with the Ministry of Finance so that the
dedicated National Marketing Agency is set up expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
After submission of the report by the Sixth Central Pay
Commission, Ministry of Finance has returned the proposal for creation
of National Rural Products Marketing Agency (NRPMA) back to the

40
Ministry for revising the pay scales of the posts to be created in
NRPMA. The proposal has been re-submitted to Ministry of Finance
for their approval.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(please see paragraph No. 28 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 3.58)
The Department in the action taken reply on the aforesaid
recommendation have stated that the permanent marketing
infrastructure facilities had been sanctioned for 10 States as Special
Projects under SGSY. Besides the proposals from four more States are
under consideration for sanction of permanent marketing infrastructure.
The Department have also informed that the Hon’ble Minister had
requested the remaining 19 States/UTs where such facilities are not
available to provide land free of cost and send proposals for financial
assistance for creation of permanent marketing infrastructure. The
Committee would like the Department to pursue further with the State
Governments so that the marketing infrastructure is set up expeditiously
in all the State headquarters, which can further be extended to cover
all the district in a time bound manner.
Reply of the Government
To make uniformity in the marketing centers created in the States
by the Ministry, it has been decided to evolve a standard design and
a sustainable business model for ownership, maintenance, operation of
such marketing complexes safeguarding therein the interest/stake of
the targeted rural BPL SHG beneficiaries. Ministry is in the process of
identifying a Consultant to devise the model. The proposals received
from the State Governments and which are likely to be received will
be considered for sanction based on the model devised.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 28 of Chapter-I of the Report)

41
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 3.59)
The Committee appreciate the laudable initiative taken by the
Department for launching a pilot project viz. ‘Placement Based skill
Development’ whereby beneficiaries are provided training in the skills
required in the various high rise sectors with the rapid growth
momentum in the Indian Economy. After the skill development of the
trainee, he is also provided placement. The results of the pilot projects
had been encouraging and the Ministry are currently implementing
9 placement based skill development projects with a total cost of
Rs. 115 crore covering 2.33 lakh beneficiaries across the country. The
Committee further note that so far 21,800 beneficiaries have been
trained and 16,400 have also been provided placement. The Committee
while noting the high rate of placement of the skilled persons would
like to recommend to extend the scheme country-wide so that the BPL
youths could be provided training in various skills which can enable
them to earn a decent livelihood.
Reply of the Government
12 Placement based Skill Development Projects with country-wide
coverage have so far been sanctioned by the Ministry of Rural
Development. These projects together have a total cost Rs. 149 crore
and target for coverage of about 2.80 lakh rural beneficiaries. Over
36,000 candidates have been trained and more than 27,000 candidates
provided placements through these projects so far.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 3.61)
The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech has indicated that Banks
would be encouraged to embrace the concept of total financial inclusion
and the Government would request all scheduled Commercial Banks
to follow the example set by public sector Banks and meet the entire
credit requirements of Self Help Groups members, namely, (a) income
generation activities, (b) social needs like housing, education, marriages
etc. and (c) debt swapping. The Committee find that SGSY is being
implemented through Banks. Besides under NREGA also the Banks
have been involved in the disbursement of wages to labourers. In
addition, Post Offices have also been involved for the purpose of
disbursement of wages to labourers under NREGA. There is an urgent

42
need to encourage Banks/Post Offices for total financial inclusion in
the areas where they are involved in the aforesaid Schemes. Besides as
stated by the Finance Minister, the Commercial Banks need to be
persuaded to fulfill the social commitment and play a pro-active role
not only by meeting the credit requirement of Self Help Groups but
also by providing forward and backward linkages and taking care of
their social needs. Such pro-active measures would not only help the
poorest of the poor but also would result in a good recovery rate of
the loans advanced by Banks under SGSY and other schemes.
Reply of the Government
SGSY is a credit-linked programme where credit is the key element
and subsidy is only a minor enabling component. The major part of
the investment consists of bank credit from financial institutions
comprising commercial banks, co-operative banks and regional rural
banks. The Ministry has been regularly monitoring credit mobilization
under SGSY through meetings of Performance Review Committee
(PRC), Central Level Coordination Committee and meetings of the
Nodal Officers. Minister of Rural Development had also requested
Finance Minister to personally intervene in cases of non-achievement
of credit targets by banks, high interest rates being charged by different
bank branches, inadequate physical outreach of banking system in rural
areas. Ministry of Finance has informed that most of banks have
appointed Nodal Officers to monitor the progress of SGSY programme.
The State Governments, Ministry of Finance and RBI have been
communicated to take appropriate action.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 3.70)
The Committee note that while 84.60 per cent of the physical targets
under SGRY were achieved during the year 2006-07, only 47.78 per
cent targets were achieved during the year 2007-08. Similarly, the
financial achievement during 2006-07 and 2007-08 was 115.57 per cent
and 66.29 per cent respectively. The Department have indicated that
SGRY is a self targeting programme as such targets are only indicative
and not specific. The Committee note that SGRY would be subsumed
into NREGA with effect from 1 April 2008. As regards the committed
liability with regard to the ongoing works under SGRY , the Department
have informed that the works permissible under NREGA can be taken

43
up as new projects. As regards the projects which are not permissible
under NREGA, the State Governments may fund such programmes
from other available sources of State and Central Government
programmes. Further, if State Governments sanction any works under
SGRY beyond 31 March, 2008, they would bear the entire cost of the
works. While noting the aforesaid arrangement with regard to the
committed liability under SGRY, the Committee recommend that the
Department should monitor the implementation of the ongoing projects
closely so that the money spent on these projects, particularly the
projects which are not admissible under NREGA is not wasted.
Reply of the Government
The financial and physical progress reported for 2007-08 have
undergone a change.  As per latest reported figures from States, 96.4%
of allocated funds were released and 56% of indicative target of
mandays generation achieved. With the launch of NREGA, the SGRY
programme has been subsumed in NREGA in different phases. The
NREGA is operational in the entire country with effect from 1st April,
2008. The Ministry of Rural Development has issued instructions from
time to time for completion of SGRY works through specified process.
However, to take stock of current situation of completion of SGRY
works which remained incomplete on the cut off dates, this Ministry
has requested the States/UTs to provide requisite information.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 29, Para No. 3.71)
The Committee in an earlier para of the Report have observed
that Rs. 623.40 crore are lying unspent under SGRY in various States.
Since the SGRY has been subsumed with NREGA w.e.f. 1 April, 2008,
the arrangement made by the Department with regard to unspent
balances is that the amount of Rs. 623.40 crore would be transferred
to Employment Guarantee Scheme Account. As stated in the earlier
para of the Report, the Secretary during the course of oral evidence
has emphasized on creation of a Reserve Fund of Rs. 4.000 crore under
the NREGA, so that additional allocation can be made immediately to
the districts affected by the natural calamities like drought, floods or
due to certain exigencies. The Committee recommend that the Reserve
Fund can initially be started with Rs. 623.40 crore, the amount lying
as unspent under SGRY, pending the proposed additional allocation of
Rs. 4000 crore by the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.

44
Reply of the Government
The closing balance of SGRY as on 31.3.2008, that is, for the year
2007-08 is required to be transferred to NREGA account. A proposal
for creation of a Reserve Fund of Rs. 5000 crore for NREGA was
taken up with the Ministry of Finance. However, the Ministry of
Finance has not agreed to the said proposal.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 31, Para No. 3.81)
The Committee have presented 22nd Report on the subject ‘Rural
Housing’ to Parliament on 3 August, 2006. The Committee had
recommended in the aforesaid Report (Refer Paragraph 2.14) that while
formulating the Policy, the Department should ensure that the role of
the Government is not limited to grant of schemes & the Policy
addresses the needs & aspirations of all sections of the society in rural
areas in the country. The various areas which need to be addressed in
the Policy have been examined in detail in the aforesaid Report. The
Department during the course of examination of Demands for Grants
have informed that ‘The National Rural Housing & Habitat Policy’
has been recently formulated & circulated to all the stakeholders for
their comments. The Committee would like to be apprised whether
the various areas recommended by the Committee to be incorporated
in the Policy in their earlier Report have been taken care of by the
Department. The information recommendation-wise may be furnished
for the information of the Committee.
Reply of the Government
In 22nd Report to Parliament on the subject ‘Rural Housing,
Committee had recommended that role of Government should be
expanded to all sections of the society; issue of infrastructure
development in rural areas be addressed by integrating Housing with
habitat development; allocation to rural housing be stepped up; access
to finance through lending or otherwise etc. be improved.
All these suggestions/recommendations of the Committee have
been incorporated in the draft of the ‘National Rural Habitat Policy’.
[O. M. No. H – 11020/5/2008 – GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

45
Recommendations (Serial No. 35, Para No.  3.93)
The Committee note that ‘rural roads’ is one of the six components
of Bharat Nirman. The focus of Bharat Nirman is to provide
connectivity to all habitations with a population of 1000 persons and
above in normal areas and 500 persons and above in hilly or tribal
areas. Bharat Nirman envisages to provide new connectivity to 66, 802
habitations involving the construction of 1,46,185 Kilometers of rural
roads by the year 2009. In addition to new connectivity, Bharat Nirman
envisages upgradation/renewal of 1,94,130 kilometers of existing rural
roads which comprises 60 per cent upgradation and 40 per cent renewal
of surface coat. The Committee are perturbed to note that out of the
total 66,802 habitations targeted for providing connectivity, only 17,319
habitations have been provided connectivity till date which means that
only 25 per cent of the targets fixed for Bharat Nirman have been
achieved. The targets under Bharat Nirman have to be achieved before
March 2009. The Committee do not understand how at this pace the
Department are going to achieve the targets before March 2009. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the reasons for the very
slow progress on Bharat Nirman and how the targets set under Bharat
Nirman would be achieved.
Reply of the Government
A total of 66,802 habitations was proposed to be covered under
rural roads component of Bharat Nirman by 2009. Subsequently, based
on ground verification by States, 62,957 habitations were found eligible
to be connected under the programme, out of which 3421 habitations
have been connected under other schemes. Thus, the revised target is
to connect 59,536 habitations. It is targeted to construct 1,46,185 Km
rural roads and upgrade 194130 Km of existing rural roads under
rural roads component of Bharat Nirman. Upto end of March, 2008,
20871 habitations have been connected under Bharat Nirman which
constitutes nearly 35% of the targets. The reasons for the slow progress
are : (i) Availability of land, (ii) Clearance from Forest Department,
(iii) Severe climatic condition in hill States, (iv) Inadequate capacity of
PIU, & executing agencies, (v) Shortage of contracting capacity,
(vi) Escalation in cost of basic materials vis-a-vis fixed price contracts.
A number of measures have been taken to enhance the absorption
capacity of various States and speed up implementation of the
programme. Some of the measures taken are:—
(a) States with large new connectivity backlog (e.g. Assam,
Jharkhand, Uttaranchal, Bihar & West Bengal) have been

46
advised to deploy adequate number of dedicated PIUs.
Central Agencies have been deployed in States with weak
institutional capacity (Bihar, Tripura & Jharkhand). Support
has been provided to States for outsourcing project
preparation and construction supervision. Standard Bidding
Document has been amended to provide flexibility in
package sizes, joint ventures, reduction in upfront security
deposit, performance incentive for timely completion. Onsite
training has been arranged to contractors, engineers and
workmen for faster project execution and quality assurance.
(b) Ensuring timely availability of land:-
The PMGSY Programme Guidelines envisage ‘transact walk’
involving major stakeholders for selection of proper road
alignment and also for developing community ownership
so that affected private landholders are motivated to donate
land for the project voluntarily. States in densely populated
areas may use good offices of Gram Panchayats and local
revenue functionaries to advise people to donate their lands,
In order to ensure that forest clearance is available by the
time projects are ready for execution, States have been
advised to initiate pro-active upfront action for seeking forest
clearances as soon as survey commences for preparation of
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs).
(c) Availability of construction material and royalty charges:—
There is a shortage of stone aggregates in some areas of
Bihar, Assam, Tripura, West Bengal and Orissa. States may
augment supplies through better utilization of existing
sources and tapping of new sources; procedures for issue
of permit may be simplified and streamlined to ensure
timely and adequate availability, rationalization of high
royalty charges (Assam, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Haryana
and Orissa).
The above measures have started yielding results. The
expenditure during the year 2004-05 was Rs. 3077.45 crore
which has risen by more than 300% to Rs. 10, 618.69 crore
during 2007-08. With this trend of increase in the absorption
capacity States, it is expected that Bharat Nirman targets
would be achieved by March, 2010.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

47
Recommendation (Serial No. 38, Para No. 3.101)
The Committee note that all PMGSY roads are covered by five
year maintenance contracts. However, the Committee are more
concerned about the maintenance of PMGSY roads after the completion
of five years of the contractual period. The Committee note that in the
absence of a mechanism for the maintenance of PMGSY roads after
the completion of the contractual period, the PMGSY roads are getting
into bad shape. There is a provision that the State Governments are
required to make the necessary budget provision and place the funds
to service the zonal maintenance contracts at the disposal of the State
Rural Roads Development Agencies in the Maintenance Account.
Further, State Governments are required to take steps to build up
capacity in the District Panchayats and endeavor to devolve the funds
and functionaries into these Panchayats in order to enable them to
manage maintenance contracts for rural roads. The Committee however
have their apprehensions as to how this is going to be achieved
especially when the State Governments and the District Panchayats
are often short of funds and most States and District Panchayats are
lacking in building their contracting capacity demand. In this regard,
the Committee would like to recommend that there should be financial
allocation from the Union Government for the maintenance of roads
after the contractual period of five years is over, so that the huge
outlay spent on the construction of road under PMGSY is not wasted
due to the lack of maintenance. Besides, there is an urgent need to
closely monitor the maintenance of PMGSY roads during the period
of contract.
Reply of the Government
All PMGSY roads are now covered with 5 years maintenance
contract to be entered into along with the construction contract with
the same contractor. State Governments have been advised to put
proper institutional arrangements and place adequate funds for
maintenance of rural roads including PMGSY roads. State Governments
have also been requested to take advantage of 12th Finance Commission
grant.
[O. M. No. H – 11020/5/2008 – GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 40 of Chapter I of the Report)

48
Recommendation (Serial No. 40, Para No. 3.110)
The Committee appreciate the efforts of the department for
disclosing as much information as possible on their website. However,
the Committee are more concerned about the various tools being
provided to the public to lodge complaint through these user friendly
websites. The Committee observe that although all important activities
and programmes of the Ministry are provided on the website, they
are of very little use to the rural public who are generally innocent
and illiterate and not aware as to how to lodge the complaint. The
Committee recommend that the vital information about the right of
the people under the RTI Act and the name, designation, telephone
number, responsibilities etc. of the various functionaries responsible
for the execution of the rural development schemes should also be
indicated in brief on the Job Card.
Reply of the Government
Mechanism for grievance redressal has been laid down in chapter
11 of the revised Operational Guidelines of NREGA. Copies of these
guidelines are available with all the implementing agencies and have
also been put on the NREGA website. It has been clearly stated in
para 11.7(ii) that appeal against the Gram Panchayat will be to the
Programme Officer(PO), against the PO will be to the District
Programme Coordinator(DPC) and against DPC to an appropriate
authority designated by the State Government. Name and address of
the petitioner, nature and date of the petition are to be entered in a
register which is to be uploaded on to the Internet on a weekly basis.
The petitioner is given a receipt with number and date to enable him
to follow up his complaint from the office of PO and also over the
Internet using the receipt number.
As regards indication of the name, designation and responsibilities
of various functionaries responsible for the execution of NREGA on
the Job Card, format of the Job Card has been provided in the
Guidelines. It has been clearly indicated that no photograph, name or
details of any person other than that of the registered adult members
of the household to whom that Job Card belongs shall be affixed or
recorded in the Job Card. The Ministry has also issued a Notification
No. J-11013/1/2008-NREGA dated 2.4.2008 in this regard.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

49
Recommendation (Serial No. 41, Para No. 3.111)
The Committee in their earlier reports had also recommended for
issue of unique complaint number for each scheme so that complainants
can lodge their complaints on the official website. Besides, such
complaints should be disposed of in a time-bound manner and the
complainants are informed accordingly. In this regard while reiterating
their earlier recommendation, the Committee desire that the website
of the Department being maintained for various schemes should have
a feature whereby the public can lodge a complaint and get a complaint
number. Further there should be a provision to know the status of the
complaint on the website.
Reply of the Government
Feedback option is there on the Rural portal through which a
citizen can give his feedback on site. The moderator of site sends the
feedback to the concerned division for appropriate action. For NREGA,
there is separate public grievance redressal system also in addition to
feedback option.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

50
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

51
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note that out of the proposed allocation of
Rs. 3,28,579.72 crore, the approved allocation for the Eleventh Plan is
Rs. 1,94,933.28 crore i.e. 59.31 per cent. Further during the first two
years of the Eleventh Plan i.e. 2007-08 and 2008-09, the allocation
provided is not proportionate to the outlay approved for the Eleventh
Plan. During the first two years of the Eleventh Plan, Rs. 59,000 crore
i.e. just 30.2 per cent of the total approved outlay of Rs. 1,94,933.28 crore
has been allocated, whereas the proportionate allocation during the
first two years should have been 40 per cent of the total outlay i.e.
Rs. 77,973 crore, which means that Rs. 18,973 crore less have been
allocated during the first two years of the Eleventh Plan. The
Committee also note that the percentage hike in the allocation, as
compared to the previous year’s allocation, provided to the Department
is declining year after year. The increase in the allocation in this regard,
which was 60.30 percent during the year 2005-06, has declined to 14.55
per cent during the year 2007-08. The percentage hike during the year
2008-09, as compared to the allocation made at Revised Estimates
during the previous year, is just 10.52 per cent. Besides the hike in the
allocation made to the Department is not proportionate to the hike in
gross revenue collection over the year. During the year 2007-08, whereas
the hike in gross tax revenue collection is 25.12 per cent, the outlay of
the Department during the year 2008-09 has just increased by 10.52
per cent.
Reply of the Government
It is true that against the approved allocation of Rs. 194933.28 crore
for the Eleventh Five Year Plan in respect of the Department of Rural
Development, the Budget Estimates (BE) during 2007-08 and 2008-09
has been Rs. 59000 crore. However, it may be mentioned that during
2008-09, the outlay at Revised Estimates (RE) stage was stepped upto
Rs. 28500 crore against the BE of Rs. 27500 crore which means an
additional outlay of Rs. 1000 crore was provided. Further, for PMGSY,
Rs. 4500 crore and Rs. 7000 crore were provided through the RIDF

52
Window during 2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively. Any additional
requirement of funds for rural development programmes especially
for NREGS during the year is to be met through the Supplementary
Demand for Grants. Thus, by taking into account, the additional
allocation of Rs. 1000 crore provided in 2007-08 and Rs. 11500 crore
provided through Roads Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF)
window, the allocation during the first two years may work out close
to 20 per cent of Eleventh Plan outlay. Moreover, the capacity of the
States to absorb more allocation under the rural development
programmes will be built up during the years and it will be possible
to absorb higher outlays under different programmes. However, the
concerns of the Committee to get higher allocations are noted and the
Department would continue its efforts to get enhanced allocation from
the Gross Budgetary Support available with the Planning Commission
during the remaining three years of the Eleventh Plan. So far as annual
increase in outlay during 2005-06 is concerned, it may be mentioned
that the National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP) was launched
in 2004-05 and the allocation was made through the Revised Estimates.
For 2005-06, the allocation under NFFWP of the order of Rs. 4500 crore
was made for all the 150 districts, therefore, increase in outlay was
substantial. Similarly in 2006-07, an allocation of Rs. 11300 crore was
made for NREGS and represented an increase of more than 30% over
the BE of 2005-06 and obviously the increase in outlay was not of the
same order during the subsequent years.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee, further, find that the Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) has increased during the last three years and the average growth
is 8.8 per cent. The estimates of the growth rate during the current
year, 2008-09, are 8.7 per cent. The Committee conclude from the
aforesaid analysis that adequate allocation is not being made under
the various schemes of the Department of Rural Development. The
scheme-wise analysis has been done in the subsequent paras of the
Report. As agreed to by the Secretary, during the course of oral
evidence, the schemes of the Department of Rural Development have

53
a major role in the upliftment of socially and economically backward
classes of the country by providing drinking water, housing,
employment etc. to the poor persons, particularly, socially and
economically backward classes. Besides, the schemes of the Department
have tremendous impact on increasing capacity building, improving
rural infrastructure, encouraging group activity etc. In view of this,
the Committee strongly recommend to the Department to provide the
allocation commensurate with the requirements under different schemes
as proposed by the Department with a view to achieve inclusive growth
so that the benefits of the growing economy are shared by the poorest
of the poor in the country.
Reply of the Government
The Department of Rural Development will continue its efforts to
get higher allocations for different programmes especially for poverty
alleviation to meet the national goals of inclusive growth and the
recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee in this regard will also be
brought to the notice of Planning Commission at the time of Annual
Plan discussions.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.11)
The Committee note that NREGA is proposed to be covered in all
the 600 districts with effect from 1 April, 2008, thus raising the number
of districts covered from 330 to about 600. Although the number of
districts covered under NREGA during the year 2008-09 would be
almost double than that of districts covered during the previous year,
the allocation has been enhanced by only Rs. 4,000 crore i.e. 33.33 per
cent. Further, the Committee find that SGRY which was being
implemented in the districts not covered under NREGA during the
year 2007-08 would be subsumed in NREGA. If the allocation made
under NREGA and SGRY taken together during the year 2007-08 is
taken into consideration, the total amount for that year comes to
Rs. 15,800 crore. Thus, the net addition under the Employment
Guarantee Scheme during 2008-09 would be of Rs. 200 crore only.

54
Further, the Secretary during the course of oral evidence has also
emphasized on the creation of some sort of reserve fund under the
National Employment Guarantee Programme. The Committee fully
agree with the need for a Reserve Fund so that the additional allocation
can be made immediately to the districts affected by the natural
calamities like drought, flood or due to certain exigencies. The
Department, in this regard, had projected the requirement of Rs. 20,000 crore
during the year 2008-09, based on an estimate of employment demand
of 4 crore rural households, which is quite justified. The Committee
do not understand how the Department are going to meet the financial
requirements if all the anticipated number of 4 crore rural households
demand work for the minimum period of 100 days as stipulated in
the Act. In view of this, the Committee strongly recommend that
Rs. 20,000 crore should be provided under NREGA during the year
2008-09 so that the Department do not have to depend on the
Supplementary Demands for Grants for implementing such a vital
programme. Besides, an appropriate amount for having a Reserve fund,
as explained above, should also be allocated in addition to Rs. 20,000 crore
as requested for by the Department. The concerns of the Committee in
this regard should be conveyed to the Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission.
Reply of the Government
NREGA has been extended to rural areas of all the districts in the
country with effect from 1 April 2008 and SGRY has been fully merged
under NREGA from this date. Instructions have been issued to all
States that un-utilised funds of SGRY shall be treated as NREGA funds
from 1 April 2008. During 2007-08, States had Rs. 19305.81 crore as
available funds under NREGA. Out of this amount, States incurred an
expenditure of Rs. 15856.88 crore. Thus, as on 1 April 2008, the States
had a balance of Rs. 3448.92 crores which will be utilized by the
States for implementation of the Act during 2008-09. NREGA is demand
driven. Central Government is committed to release funds to the States
for implementation of the Act. Funds are released to the districts based
on demand raised and their past performance. Therefore, in case of
additional requirements, funds will be demanded through
supplementary grants.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)

55
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 3.12)
The Committee find from the data made available by the
Department that during the year 2007-08, 5.98 crore job cards were
issued. Out of these, employment was demanded by 2.61 crore
households and employment provided was to 2.57 crore households.
The Committee note that although there is not much difference between
the number of families who demanded employment and those who
were provided employment, there is a huge difference between the
families who have been issued job cards and families provided
employment. In this regard, further analysis of the data indicates that
during the year 2006-07, 3.78 crore job cards were issued and 2.12
crore families demanded employment. During the year 2007-08, while
the number of job cards issued has increased considerably to 5.98
crore, there is not much enhancement in the number of families, who
have demanded employment. This trend needs to be analysed carefully
by the Department and the required steps taken accordingly. The
Committee would like to have the reaction of the Department in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
A Job card issued to a household under NREGA is valid for a
period of 5 years. Job card is issued to a household if one or more
adult members of the household apply for it. Mere issuance of a job
card, however, does not entitle the household for employment under
the Act. The adult members of the household who volunteer to do
un-skilled manual work have to apply for work in writing. A job card
holder may exercise his or her right for 100 days of guaranteed
employment under NREGA any time during a financial year. Further,
while it is mandatory for a job seeker under NREGA to have a job
card, it is not mandatory for a job card holder to take up employment
under NREGA in a particular financial year. During 2006-07, though
3.78 crore job cards were issued, only 2.12 crore households demanded
employment. During 2007-08, 6.47 crore households possessed the job
cards whereas only 3.43 crore households had demanded employment.
Demand for work under NREGA in a particular area depends on the
availability of other employment opportunities in that area. Employment
demand is likely to be low in districts that are comparatively more
developed with greater opportunities of employment in other avenues
both in agricultural and rural non-farm activities.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

56
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Serial No. 8, Para No. 3.13)
While appreciating the fact that NREGA is a demand-driven scheme
and the State Governments are bound to provide employment to a
family who demands employment, the Committee feels that there may
be compelling reasons as to why people are not demanding work
even when the job cards have been issued. One of the basic reasons
in this regard may be people preferring for wage employment
elsewhere, where the wages may be much more. The Department have
to analyse the reasons State-wise for families not demanding work
after getting the job cards ready. The Committee may be kept apprised
about this. The Committee further note that during the year 2007-08
out of 2.57 crore households who have been provided employment
under NREGA, 9,55,025 families could complete 100 days of
employment. In five States viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram,
Nagaland and Tripura, no family could complete 100 days of
employment. In the progressive State like Kerala where wage rate is
Rs. 125 per day, only 959 labourers could complete 100 days of
employment. In Gujarat 1104 persons could complete 100 days of work.
The Committee feel that the aforesaid data should be carefully analysed
to know the State specific reasons for not demanding/providing
100 days of employment under NREGA in various States. The
Committee may also be kept apprised about the concrete action taken
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
During 2007-08, 6.47 crore households possessed the job cards
whereas only 3.43 crore households demanded employment. A total of
3601926 households completed 100 days of employment during the
year. In Arunachal Pradesh, 2020 households; in Gujarat 11416
households and in Kerala 59443 households completed 100 days of
employment during 2007-08. No household in Manipur, Mizoram and
Nagaland, however, completed 100 days of employment in 2007-08.
NREGA provides a legal guarantee of wage employment for 100 days
in a financial year for doing un-skilled manual work on demand. The
workers are free to take up any other employment in addition to the
100 days of guaranteed employment on demand provided under the
Act. Pace of implementation of NREGA varies from State to State as
it depends on availability of employment in other sectors. Awareness
about NREGA amongst rural masses is being created through intensive

57
IEC activities through print, electronic and other media and is a
continuous process.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 3.14)
The Committee further note that the overall involvement of women
under NREGA is 42 per cent. During the year 2007-08, 56,29,822 women
were provided employment under NREGA. The Secretary has informed
that in Tamil Nadu the percentage of involvement of women is much
higher i.e. 82 percent whereas in West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh only
20 per cent women have been provided employment. In Arunachal
Pradesh out of 29,180 households provided employment not even a
single woman was involved. The Committee feel that such a trend of
high percentage of involvement of women in some States like Tamil
Nadu and very low percentage of involvement in other States like
West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh particularly Arunachal Pradesh where
not a single women has opted for employment, should be studied and
the reasons for low participation of women in some of the States
probed. The desired action should be taken accordingly, so that the
target of involvement of at least one-third of the women beneficiaries
is achieved in all the States.
Reply of the Government
Schedule II of the NREG Act provides that priority shall be given
to women in such a way that at least one-third of the beneficiaries
shall be women who have registered and requested for work under
the Act. However, from the data provided by the various States it has
been found that involvement of women under NREGA at the national
level is 42 per cent which is much higher than the minimum percentage
prescribed under the Act. However, involvement of women under
NREGA varies from State to State. Para 27 & 28 of Schedule II of
NREGA provide for worksite facilities including crèche so that
conducive atmosphere is created to attract women workers for taking
up employment under the Act.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

58
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 3.18)
The Committee note that NREGA is applicable only in the rural
areas of the country. However, general public are not aware of this
aspect. Even the advertisements in the electronic and print media do
not mention this and give the impression that NREGA is applicable in
the whole district, irrespective of urban or rural area. Rural Areas
have been defined under Section 2 (o) of the aforesaid Act as rural
areas in any State except those covered by any urban local body or a
Cantonment Board established or constituted under any law for the
time being in force. There is a massive campaign by the Department
that NREGA is going to cover the entire country w.e.f. 1 April, 2008.
However, the advertisements are creating more confusion than
dispensing information. The expectations of the people coming across
such advertisements might rise and they would be disappointed when
they come to know that the scheme is not applicable in their area.
The Committee even during their study visits to various backward
districts of the country has come across such complaints. The
Committee desire that proper publicity in this regard be given to
remove confusion among the people about the applicability of the
scheme.
Reply of the Government
The title of the Act ‘National Rural Employment Guarantee Act’
itself indicates that it is applicable in rural areas only. In order to
generate awareness about the programme, intensive IEC activities have
been taken up. These include one day orientation of all Sarpanches at
the Block level; convening regular Gram Sabhas; use of local vernacular
newspaper, radio jingles, TV spots, films and local cultural forums;
leaflets, brochures in simple local language; fixing one day as Rozgar
Diwas in a fortnight; involvement of NGOs/SHGs for awareness
generation; preparation and disbursement of simple primers for workers
and Sarpanches. The Government of India has introduced awards to
be known as Rozgar Jagrookta Puraskar (Employment awareness
awards) to recognize the outstanding contribution by the civil society
organisations for promoting effective implementation of NREGA in
different States of the country.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

59
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 3.21)
The Committee note that there is no proper system for
acknowledging the receipt of applications from willing job applicants
under NREGA. The Departments have stated that there are
standardized formats for demanding employment under NREGA and
the Gram Rozgar Sevak at Gram Panchyat level is responsible for
receiving applications and issue of dated receipts. However, the ground
reality is quite different. As reported to the Committee during their
study visits to various backward districts of the country, some of the
Gram Pradhans and the concerned officers were receiving applications
only when work was available with them. If no work was available,
the applicants were turned away. Even if the applications were received,
the Gram Pradhan or the officers were not indicating the date of
receipt on the applications. Most of the applicants in the rural areas
are illiterate unskilled labourers who are not aware of the prescribed
format. They are even not aware as to whom they should apply. The
Committee express their apprehension that such an attitude on the
part of Gram Pradhans or Officers suppresses the demand for
employment which is not in the spirit of NREGA. People cannot be
denied the right to work under NREGA. Neither can any constraint of
resources be cited by the Government as an excuse for not providing
work under NREGA. The Committee feel that the existing system of
acknowledging applications is not foolproof. The Department should
devise machinery that ensures transparency and roots out corruption
in the receipt of applications. The Department should look into the
possibility of entrusting the task of receipt of applications also to any
other Department of the State Government or active NGOs of the area
who can forward the applications to the concerned Gram Panchayat
or Officers. Besides, massive publicity should be given to spread
awareness among people the provisions of the programme.
Reply of the Government
Issue of a dated receipt to a job card holder who applies for work
under the Act is a statutory obligation on the part of the Gram
Panchayat. Every Gram Panchayat is required to employ one dedicated
Gram Rozgar Sahayak (GRS). Centre provides financial assistance for
deploying a full time dedicated GRS for each Gram Panchayat. GRS
is responsible for registration of households, issue of job cards, issue
of dated receipt against job application, maintenance of records and

60
documents at the Gram Panchayat level. Format for dated receipt of
work application has been prescribed in the revised guidelines issued
by the Ministry.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 3.28)
The sub-Committees of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development have undertaken study visits to various backward districts
in the States of Assam, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Bihar,
Jharkhand and Orissa during the year 2006, 2007 and 2008. During
the aforesaid study visits, the Committee have noted various
discrepancies with regard to the system of wages under NREGA. There
is a large-scale disparity in the rate of wages being paid in various
States, which is reflected in the information furnished by the
Department. The lowest wage is being paid in the State Gujarat at the
rate of Rs. 50 per day and maximum wage in Kerala at the rate of
Rs. 125 per day. The Committee appreciate the fact that with the
implementation of NREGA, some of the States have revised the
minimum wages. It is a matter of concern that a progressive State like
Gujarat has not so far revised the minimum wage rate, which is being
paid at the lowest rate of Rs. 50 per day. The Committee feel that the
low rate of wages may be the main reason for labourers preferring to
work in private works where the wage rate may be much higher.
Perhaps this may be the main reason for the difference between the
job cards issued and the employment provided. While acknowledging
the fact that the minimum wages are fixed by the various State
Governments under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 for agricultural
labourers, which are at present applicable in the case of NREGA, the
Committee would like to recommend that the State Governments which
are paying very low wages, particularly, Gujarat, which has the lowest
wage rate of Rs. 50 should be persuaded to increase the wage rate.
Reply of the Government
Section 6(2) of the NREGA provides that until such time as a
wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in respect of any area

61
in a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State Government under
section 3 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 for agricultural labourers,
shall be considered as the wage rate applicable to that area. Central
Government has so far not fixed wages under the Act in respect of
any of the States. Therefore, wages are being paid under NREGA in
accordance with the minimum wage fixed by the State Governments
under section 3 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 for agricultural
labour.
Wage rate fixed by the State Government of Gujarat under the
provisions of this Act is Rs. 50 per day at present. Enhancement of the
wage rate is under consideration of the State Government. The Ministry
does not support the recommendation of the Committee regarding
pursuing the State Government for enhancing the wage rate as fixation
of wages under Minimum Wages Act, 1984 is the prerogative of the
concerned State.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 30, Para No. 3.72)
The Committee further note that under SGRY foodgrains are to be
given as part of wages at the rate of 5 Kg per manday. Should a State
Government wish to give more than 5 Kg of foodgrains per manday,
it might do so within the existing State allocation (subject to a minimum
of 25 per cent of the wages being paid in cash). In the event of non-
availability/inadequate availability of foodgrains, wages in kind might
be less than 5 Kg of foodgrains per manday and the remaining portion
might be given in cash. In the reverse case of less availability of cash,
the wages in cash might be less than 25 per cent and the remaining
portion might be given in kind as foodgrains. However, the norm of
minimum 5 Kg of foodgrains and minimum of 25 per cent wages in
cash is to be maintained as far as possible. The Ministry of Rural
Development release funds for the foodgrains directly to the FCI at
the economic cost and FCI is required to send bills which are being
reimbursed by the Ministry of Rural Development. Now, SGRY has
been subsumed with NREGA. Further, as per Schedule II of NREGA,
the wages may be paid either wholly in cash or in kind, provided

62
that at least one-fourth of the wages shall be in cash only. The
Committee find that no State is paying wages in the form of foodgrains.
With the recent unprecedented hike in the prices of foodgrains, the
poorest of the poor are the worst affected. SGRY was providing some
sort of food security to the poor. Since no State Government is actually
paying wages in kind, inspite of there being a provision under NREGA
to pay wages in kind, the Committee feel that the Government have
to think of making some sort of provision on the lines of SGRY so
that some kind of food security can be ensured under NREGA.
Reply of the Government
Experience in the implementation of SGRY shows  that, it is difficult
to ensure timely supply of foodgrains for timely payment of wages
for various logistic reasons. In accordance with the provisions of the
NREGA, the workers are entitled to be paid on a weekly basis, and
in any case within a fortnight of the date on which work was done.
In the event of any delay in wage payments, workers are entitled to
compensation as per the provisions of the Payment of Wages Act,
1935. The cost of compensation is to be borne by the State Government.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 31 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 32, Para No. 3.82)
The Committee appreciate that with the continuous pursuance of
the issue by this Committee, the Government have finally increased
the per unit assistance under IAY from Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 35,000 in
plain areas and from Rs. 27,500 to Rs. 38,500 in hilly and difficult
areas. Besides, the subsidy for upgradation of houses has been increased
from Rs. 12,500 to Rs. 15,000. The Committee further find that the
allocation under Indira Awaas Yojana has been increased from
Rs. 4,040 crore during 2007-08 to Rs. 5,400 crore during 2008-09. The
Secretary during the course of oral evidence has, however, expressed
concern that the Government have to reduce targets under IA Y due to
non-provision of allocation commensurate with the per unit enhancement
of the subsidy. The Department had proposed Rs. 8,000 crore for the
year 2008-09. The Committee strongly recommend that sufficient

63
allocation should be provided under Indira Awaas Yojana so that the
physical targets are not reduced and the targets fixed under Bharat
Nirman are achieved.
Reply of the Government
In the Eleventh Plan proposal, 30 lakh houses were proposed to
be constructed every year, the remaining shortage being met in the
Twelfth Plan period. The Draft 11th Plan proposed construction of
159.5 lakh houses during the Eleventh Plan period which are to cover
poorest among the BPL families. Considering that 21.27 lakh houses
were targeted for construction during 2007-08, the remaining 138.23 lakh
houses are required to be constructed during the remaining four years
of Eleventh Plan period @34.56 lakh houses every year. With enhanced
unit assistance the central funds of Rs. 31695.89 crore required for
construction of 138.23 lakh houses in the next four years of the Eleventh
Plan period. In addition, about Rs. 30.00 crore would be required for
other smaller schemes such as Innovative Stream of Rural Housing
and Habitat Development and Rural Building Centre, IEC,
administrative expenditure, etc. After adding this amount, the total
Central share required for construction of 138.23 lakh houses would
be Rs. 31695.89 crore for the next four years and Rs. 7923.97 crore for
the year 2008-09. However, the funds provided for the year 2008-09 is
Rs. 5645.77 crore.
Recommendation has been forwarded to Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission to take necessary action.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 34 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 36, Para No. 3.94)
“The Committee note from the replies furnished by the Department
that the physical achievements under Phases V , VI and VII of PMGSY
is even below 35 per cent while the financial achievement during
Phase V and Phase VI has been 97.89 per cent and 91.20 per cent
respectively. The Committee fail to understand as to how the physical
achievement has been very poor while the financial achievement during
the same period has been very good. There is a mismatch between the

64
physical and financial achievement projected by the Department. The
Committee would like a clarification from the Department in this
regard.”
Reply of the Government
“Under PMGSY, project proposals are cleared in batches at any
given point of time. The works are in different stages of execution.
Also all States do not come for project approval of the same phase at
the same point of time. The completed length of the road is reported
when work in all the layers is completed and connectivity to habitation
is reported when the entire length of the road leading to eligible
habitation is completed. During the last two years, in order to meet
the enhanced requirements of Bharat Nirman, project proposals for
1,43,534 Km for Rs. 42,242 crores have been cleared. The larger
expenditure with reference to the physical progress indicates that very
large number of works is in progress and are at different stages. The
Physical & Financial Progress of phases V , VI & VII as on March, 2008
is as below:
%Length %Expenditure
Completed incurred to value
cleared
Phase V 49.53 51.43
Phase VI 26.88 24.95
Phase VII 0.07 12.08
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 37 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 39, Para No. 3.106)
The Committee note that the objective of constituting the Vigilance
and Monitoring Committees (V&MC) is to maintain effective monitoring
and execution of various schemes and to ensure quality expenditure
so that the benefit of various schemes reaches the poor in full measure.
However, the Committee are concerned with the way the V&MCs are
functioning. Shockingly, only one district in the country has held the

65
V&MC meeting as per the norm of holding of one meeting every
quarter. Further, in 127 districts, and in the States of Gujarat, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Orisa and Tripura not
even a single V&MC meeting has been held. In order to streamline
the District level V&MC, the Department had imposed the condition
that the second instalment would be released only after getting
confirmation of holding at least one meeting at State and district level.
The Utilisation Certificates were also modified to this effect. However,
even after this relaxation, most of the district level V&MCs could not
hold the meeting. The Committee note that in order to avoid penalizing
the beneficiaries for no fault of theirs, funds were released to the
implementing agencies in these States or districts.
The Committee further note that the elected representatives have
been assigned a central role in the V&MCs. All Members of Parliament
are either Chairman or co-Chairman of the District level V&MCs and
an officer not below the rank of District Collector is the Member-
Secretary to the V&MC who is accountable for holding the V&MCs at
regular intervals. However, the Committee feel that the role and powers
of Members of Parliament have not been clearly defined in the
constitution of V&MCs. Further, the Committee have not been informed
whether any action has been taken against the Member-Secretary of
the 127 districts who could not conduct even a single V&MC meeting
particularly when they have been made accountable for not holding
V&MC meetings regularly. The Committee recommend that the role
and powers of the Members of Parliament and other functionaries of
the V&MCs may be clearly defined in guidelines so that they can
discharge their duties effectively. The Committee would further like to
recommend that the minutes of the V&MC meetings held at State/
District level and duly signed by the Member of Parliament, who is
the Chairman/co-Chairman should be sent to the Union Ministry of
Rural Development on a regular basis. Besides, the Union Ministry of
Rural Development should monitor the action taken on the decision
taken during the meeting. A mechanism in the Ministry should be
evolved whereby the officials of the Ministry should also pay random
visits to the districts to know the functioning of the Vigilance and
Monitoring Committees.
Reply of the Government
For effective Monitoring of the implementation of the programmes
of the Ministry, Vigilance and Monitoring Committees at State/UT and
District level have been constituted for each State/UT/District. The
major objective of Vigilance and Monitoring Committees includes
providing of a crucial role to the Members of Parliament and elected
representatives of the people in State Legislatures and the Panchayati
Raj Institutions for the implementation of the Rural Development
programmes and to put in place a mechanism to monitor the execution

66
of the programmes, so that the fruits of the programme may flow to
the rural poor in full measure. It is envisaged that these committees
would keep a close watch over the implementation as per the
programme guidelines.
During the year 2007-08 as per updated reports/records available,
35 State level V&MC have been conducted in 23 States/UTs and 888
District level V&MC meetings have taken place in 561 Districts
respectively. 39 districts have not conducted even a single meeting.
Meetings of the Vigilance and Monitoring Committees at State and
District level are to be held at every quarter. In spite of the guidelines,
the meetings are not being held regularly. The Ministry has asked the
Member Secretary for clarifications and also organizing the meeting at
the earliest. In addition, the Minister of Rural Development has sent
a letter on February, 2008 to the Chief Ministers of States, who have
not held State Level V&MC meetings during 2007-08 to organize these
meetings as early as possible. Last year as well, the Union Minister
had written to the Chief Ministers concerned in this regard. Minister
has again written to all the Chief Ministers about the observation and
feelings of the Members of the Standing Committee.
In order to streamline holding District Level V&MCs meetings, the
Ministry had also imposed a condition on 10 August 2006 that the
2nd instalment of the funds for the programmes would be released
only after getting confirmation of holding of at least one V&MC
meeting. There has been considerable progress. However, few districts
still did not conduct at least one meeting in spite of this condition.
The Ministry had to waive this condition in some cases keeping in
view that on account of non-holding of meetings, the beneficiaries
should not be penalized or denied funds. Further, the Ministry also
issued a circular on 23 January 2007 for holding Special Meetings in
case regular District Level V&MC meetings are not being held or are
frequently being postponed due to various factors.
In September, 2007, Hon’ble Union Minister of Rural Development
while having interactive sessions with the Members of Parliament from
various States, emphasized the need to hold regular meetings of the
V&MCs at State as well as District level in terms of stipulations in the
guidelines. The Minister has again written to the Chief Ministers of
the States to hold four meetings of the V&MC during 2008-09.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 43 of Chapter-I of the Report)

67
 Recommendation (Serial No. 42, Para No. 3.118)
The Committee are concerned to note that the BPL List based on
2002 Census has been delayed for a long time. The Committee in their
earlier reports have been repeatedly emphasizing for speedy Finalization
of BPL List. However, as on date, only 21 States and Union Territories
have reported to have finalized the BPL List after getting it approved
by the Gram Sabhas, which is mandatory as per guidelines of BPL
Census, 2002. The States like Bihar, Haryana, J&K, Kerala, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Orissa, Sikkim, Tripura, Dadra & Nagar Haveli,
Lakshadweep and Puducherry are yet to get the mandatory approval
from the Gram Sabhas. The Committee again emphasize for early
finalization of BPL results based on BPL Census, 2002, so that the
benefits under different schemes reach to the targeted persons.
Reply of the Government
The Department has been regularly taking up the matter with all
the States at different levels emphasizing the urgency to finalise the
BPL list based on BPL Census 2002. The Hon’ble Minister of Rural
Development has also taken up the matter with the Chief Ministers of
the respective States. Now the Government of Haryana and Dadra &
Nagar Haveli have also furnished the BPL list. In case of Bihar, the
State Government has determined the cut off score as 13. The total
number of BPL households worked out on this basis exceeds
substantially over the prescribed limit. The matter is being pursued
with the remaining States and UTs to get the BPL list finalized at the
earliest.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 46 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 43, Para No. 3.119)
The Committee further note that BPL Census is conducted in the
beginning of a Five Year Plan. The BPL Census, 2002 was conducted
to finalize the BPL List for the Tenth Five Year Plan. Even when the
Tenth Plan is over and one year of the Eleventh Plan has already
passed, BPL List is yet to be finalized in many States. The Committee

68
also note that a decision has been taken by the Planning Commission
to set up an Expert Group to recommend a more suitable methodology
to conduct the next BPL Census to identify the BPL households. The
Committee note that huge amount of funds are being allocated by the
Central Government through various welfare schemes meant for the
poorest of the poor. The intended beneficiaries for the schemes are
selected on the basis of the BPL List. Unless the BPL List is updated
periodically, the benefits intended under various schemes cannot reach
the genuine beneficiaries. The Committee strongly recommend that the
Expert Group to suggest suitable methodology to conduct the next
BPL Census should be set up expeditiously. The recommendations made
by the Committee in various reports as given in Appendix-VIII should
be taken into consideration while finalizing methodology.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee to expedite the setting up of an
Expert Group by the Planning Commission to suggest the suitable
methodology for the next BPL Census is noted and the matter has
already been taken up with the Planning Commission. The Ministry
has assured all possible assistance to the Planning Commission to get
this exercise completed.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 46 of Chapter-I of the Report)

69
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 3.29)
The Committee, further note that as per the schedule I, wages
under NREGA can be paid either on the basis of a person working
for 7 hours or on the quantity of work according to the schedule of
rates fixed by the State Government for different types of work every
year in consultation with the State Council. The Committee during the
study visits have noted that at some of the places both the criteria  i.e.
time rate and task rate are being followed. Further, the labourers are
getting lesser than minimum wages where the task rate criteria is
being adopted. The Committee would like that the department should
undertake an independent study to find out the problems being faced
in different States particularly with regard to payment of wages.
Besides, the discrepancies noted by the Sub-committees of the
Committee as pointed out above should be taken up with the concerned
State Governments and the Committee apprised about the action taken
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Wages can either be paid on time rate basis or task rate basis .
Both the criteria cannot be applied simultaneously. Under NREGA,
wages are being paid on task rate basis. The out turn of a worker is
measured and wages are paid in accordance with the Schedule of
Rates fixed by the States. With a view to study the diversifications in
the SoRs of different States, Ministry has commissioned V .V . Giri
National Labour Institute to conduct a National level study. The
Institute is likely to give its report in three months time.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 3.31)
The Committee find that the Ministry are commissioning a
professional study on the issue of Schedule of Rates in order to arrive

70
at a fair and reasonable system of assessment of works under NREGA
taking into account diverse factors such as age, sex, health profile of
workers, type of work and geomorphological conditions that affects
the productivity of the worker. The aforesaid study should be
commissioned expeditiously. The various discrepancies as noted during
the study visits undertaken by the sub-Committees, the details of which
are given above should be considered carefully and included in terms
and reference of the aforesaid study. The Committee further find that
six States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Bihar, Gujarat, Orissa and
West Bengal have already undertaken time and motion studies. The
outcome of these studies should be analysed carefully so as to arrive
at scientific system for calculation of wages. The Committee may also
be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
With a view to study the diversifications in the SoRs of different
States, Ministry has commissioned V .V . Giri National Labour Institute
to conduct a National level study. The Institute is likely to give its
report in three months time.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 3.36)
The Committee find that as per the reports available with the
Department, unemployment allowance has been provided to 1574
applicants by the Government of Madhya Pradesh. Besides, the
Government of Orissa has also paid unemployment allowance in
various districts. While appreciating the fact that some of the State
Governments have provided unemployment allowance to the labourers,
who could not be provided employment within 15 days of the
application, the Committee would like to be apprised about the specific
reasons for such State Governments for not being able to provide
employment on demand so as to take corrective measures in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
Information is being collected from the concerned State
Governments.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

71
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 3.39)
The Committee further find that the main works being undertaken
under NREGA are water conservation works like construction and
deepening of ponds and kutcha road works. In the States like Bihar,
such works are washed away every year due to frequent floods. While
appreciating the fact that the main objective of NREGA is to provide
employment, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to ensure
that the assets created under the Act are durable. The Government
have to think over this aspect. The works being done under NREGA
can be dovetailed with some other schemes for instance, kutcha road
works being undertaken under NREGA can be dovetailed with Central/
State Schemes for making it durable. In this regard, the sub-Committee
of the Committee during the study visits have found that there was
resistance from the officials in dovetailing kutcha roads being
constructed under NREGA with PMGSY for making the roads durable.
The Committee, however, feel that there is an urgent need to evolve
some sort of mechanism whereby the works created under NREGA
can be made durable. As such, the matter regarding dovetailing of
NREGA works with other Central/State works should be considered
in consultation with the State Governments. The Committee should be
apprised about any concrete action taken in this regard. The
Department should take action on the suggested lines and inform the
Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
A Task Force has been constituted in the Ministry to examine the
issue of convergence of NREGA with other Schemes.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 3.60)
The Committee further note that so far overall 35,000 Self Help
Groups have been covered under the Janashree Bima Yojana of LIC.
The Finance Minister in his speech on Budget 2008-09 has proposed to
contribute Rs. 500 crore to the corpus of the fund with the assurance
that annual contributions will be made as the scheme is scaled up.
The Finance Minister has also stressed to give special attention to Self
Help Groups considering the fact that there are over 30 lakh Self Help
Groups credit linked to Banks. The Committee would like to be

72
informed about the number of Self Help Groups under SGSY who
have so far been under the aforesaid Bima Yojana and the roadmap to
cover all the Self Help Groups by the aforesaid insurance scheme. The
Committee further note that there is an urgent need to find out and
resolve the problems being faced by the poor in getting the claims
from insurance companies particularly those who have been provided
insurance cover under Janashree Bima Yojana. In this regard, the
Committee desires that the Department should review the position in
regard to settlement of claims of the Self Help Groups who have been
provided insurance under the aforesaid Bima Yojana so as to
understand the actual position and comment further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
On the basis of information available with the Ministry, 28.35 lakh
Self Help Groups have been formed since inception (1.4.1999) under
SGSY programme. There is a provision of Group Insurance Scheme
for the SGSY beneficiaries under the SGSY guidelines.
The issues raised by the Standing Committee regarding coverage
of SHGs under Bima Yojana; roadmap to cover all SHGs under Bima
Yojana and the latest status of settlement of claims of the Self Help
Groups who have been provided insurance under the insurance cover
have been noted and the same have been communicated to all the
States for taking necessary action. The information on the above
mentioned issues will be provided as soon as it is received from the
States.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 33, Para No. 3.83)
The Committee further note that Finance Minister in his Budget
speech on Budget (2008-09) has announced that the public sector Banks
will be advised to include IAY houses under the Differential Rate of
Interest (DRI) Scheme for lending up to Rs. 20,000 per unit at an
interest rate of 4 per cent. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the status of the implementation in this regard. The Committee
would also like to recommend that the Department should take up
the matter with the Reserve Bank/Ministry of Finance and the
Commercial Banks, seeking their cooperation in lending up to Rs. 20,000
per unit at the Differential Rate of Interest (DRI). The Committee would

73
also like the Department to clarify how the Government propose to
bear the subsidy on the rate of interest in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of financial services have already written to Reserve Bank
of India to include IAY houses under the differential rate of interest
(DRI) scheme for lending upto Rs. 20,000 per unit at interest rate of
4%.
As far as the issue of bearing subsidy expenditure is concerned,
recommendation has been forwarded to Ministry of Finance for
comments.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 34, Para No. 3.84)
The Committee in their report on the subject ‘Rural Housing’ had
recommended either to extend the activities of National Housing Bank
in the rural sector or to set up a separate National Housing Bank for
the rural areas. In this context, the Finance Minister in his Budget
Speech (2008-09) has stated that it is proposed to create a fund of
Rs. 1,200 crore in NHB to enhance its refinancing operations in the
rural housing sector. The Committee appreciate that their
recommendations have been agreed to by the Government. The
Committee hope & trust that with the setting up of a corpus of Rs.
1200 crore in NHB, the lending for rural housing sector would get a
focused attention.
Reply of the Government
The comments have been forwarded to Ministry of Finance.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 37, Para No. 3.95)
The Committee note the several measures being taken to increase
the contracting capacity in various States which include relaxing the

74
terms and conditions in the standard bidding document and inducing
joint ventures between big and small contractors. The Committee also
note that for mobilizing resources, assistance from World Bank has
been taken for rural road projects in Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Himachal
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh and from Asian Development Bank (ADB)
for rural road works in Assam, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa
and West Bengal. The Committee further note that duty exemptions
on construction machineries are available under World Bank and ADB
assisted rural road projects. These duty exemptions have effectively
helped the States in building up ‘Contractor’s capacity’, which have
subsequently helped in scaling up the physical and financial progress
under rural roads component of Bharat Nirman in the States where
World Bank and ADB assisted projects are being implemented. The
Committee feel that there is a need to extend the facility of duty
exemptions available under World Bank and ADB assisted rural road
projects to the entire rural road projects taken up under Bharat Nirman.
This would boost the contracting capacity in the deficient States and
help in achieving the targets under PMGSY. The Committee would
like the Department to take the desired action in this regard and inform
the Committee accordingly.
Reply of Government
The recommendations of the Committee has been forwarded to
Ministry of Finance for consideration.
[O. M. No. H—11020/5/2008—GC (P)
Dated: 8 August, 2008,
Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 December, 2008 Chairman,
24 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

75
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 15 DECEMBER, 2008
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Balihari Babu
8. Smt. T. Ratna Bai
9. Shri Prabhat Jha
10. Dr. Chandan Mitra
11. Shri P .R. Rajan
12. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Vinod Gupta — Under Secretary

76
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption
of three draft action taken reports on Demands for Grants (2008-2009)
of the Department of Land Resources, Drinking Water Supply and
Rural Development of the Ministry of Rural Development.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the
Memorandum Nos. 2, 3 and 4 regarding draft reports on action taken
by the Government on recommendations/observations contained in
Thirty sixth, Thirty-seventh and Thirty-fifth Reports of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) in respect of Departments of Land
Resources, Drinking Water Supply and Rural Development under the
Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee after deliberations
adopted the aforesaid draft action taken Reports with a slight
modification in the draft action taken Report of the Department of
Rural Development.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft action taken Reports on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Department/Ministry and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

77
APPENDIX II
(vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY
SIXTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (14TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 43
II. Recommendations which have been accepted 20
by the Government:
Para Nos.: 2.4, 2.18, 2.21, 3.30, 3.33, 3.37, 3.54,
3.55, 3.56, 3.57, 3.58, 3.59, 3.61, 3.70, 3.71, 3.81,
3.93, 3.101, 3.110 and 3.111
Percentage to the total recommendations 46.51 %
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not NIL
desire to pursue in view of Government’s
replies:
Para No.: Nil
Percentage to the total recommendations NIL
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies 15
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Para Nos.: 2.12, 2.13, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14,
3.18, 3.21, 3.28, 3.72, 3.82, 3.94, 3.106, 3.118
and 3.119
Percentage to the total recommendations 34.08%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final 8
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para No.: 3.29, 3.31, 3.36, 3.39, 3.60, 3.83,
3.84 and 3.95
Percentage to the total recommendations 18.60%