25
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Eighteenth Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Eighteenth Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.3.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 16.3.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 31
Price : Rs. 100.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2006-2007) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government .......................................................... 37
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ............................................................................ 59
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ...................................................... 60
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ....... 82
APPENDICES
I. Progress of implementation of National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act..................................... 83
II. Names of districts under first phase of NREGA
which are wholly or partly included in Schedule
V & VI of the Constitution ..................................... 85
III. Statement indicating the release of funds during
2005-06 under PURA ................................................. 88
IV . Statement indicating the status of implementation
of PURA Scheme ........................................................ 89
V. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee
held on 1 March, 2007 ............................................. 91
VI. Analysis of Action taken by the Government
on the recommendation contained in the
Eighteenth Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha) ........................................................ 95
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shrimati Susmita Bauri
3. Shri Mani Charenamei
4. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri George Fernandes
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
9. Shri Hannan Mollah
10. Shri D. Narbula
11. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
12. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
13. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
16. Shri Sita Ram Singh
17. Shri D.C. Srikantappa *
18. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri D.C. Srikantappa, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Urban Development to Committee on Rural Development vice
the vacancy caused due to change of nomination of Shri Shrichand Kriplani MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Rural Development to Standing Committee on Chemical
and Fertilizers vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 2847 dated August 31, 2006.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Shri P .R. Rajan
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh
29. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri G.C. Prasad — Committee Officer

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2006-2007) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Twenty-Fifth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Eighteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2005-2006) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 May,
2006. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 20 September, 2006.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
1 March, 2007.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report of the Committee
is given in Appendix VI .
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 March, 2007 Chairman,
24 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2006-2007)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-
2007) of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 May, 2006.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 43 recommendations which have been categorised
as follows:—
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.6, 2.34, 2.36, 2.47, 2.56, 3.36, 3.37, 3.39, 3.55,
3.58, 3.63, 3.65, 3.69, 3.70, 3.80, 3.88, 3.106, 3.127, 3.137, 3.138,
3.150, 3.163 and 3.164.
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Nil
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.14, 2.15, 2.16, 2.21, 2.22, 2.33, 2.35, 2.46, 2.53,
2.54, 3.20, 3.21, 3.38, 3.61, 3.67, 3.105, 3.116, 3.117 and 3.120
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para No. 3.90
3. The Committee desire that final reply in respect of the
recommendations at Para No. 3.90 for which only interim reply has
been given by the Government should be furnished to the Committee
within three months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Comparative Position of Allocation made for Rural Development
under different Plans
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 2, 3 and 4,
Para Nos. 2.14, 2.15 and 2.16)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note with concern that although our neighbouring
countries could improve the human development index, India
has remained static at 127th position for the last three years.
Since out of three parameters for determining human development
index, one parameter i.e. employment is the mandate of the
Department of Rural Development, the Department has, therefore,
a key role in improving the human development index. The
Committee would like to point out that employment being the
basic parameter to improve the economic and social status of a
person, once an individual gets employment, the other issues
like education and basic health services are taken care of. There
is a co-relation between the status of employment of an individual
and his social and economic status.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14)
“From the status of allocation of outlay as indicated above, the
Committee note that although there may be some enhancement
of outlay in each plan as compared to the previous plans, the
percentage increase in outlay when compared to the overall outlay
of the Government of India do not indicate any substantial
enhancement in rural development sector. There was marginal
increase in allocation of resources for rural development for each
of the plan as compared to the previous plan upto 9th Plans.
However, during 10th Plan, when the targets for GDP growth
are being set at 8.1 per cent and the Indian economy has been
acknowledged as booming economy worldwide, the percentage
distribution of allocation has decreased from 8.7 percent to 8
percent.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
“The Committee further note that some of the States such as
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh are not
doing well. The scheme-wise position has been reviewed in the
subsequent chapters of the report. In view of this scenario, the
Committee recommend the Government to enhance the allocation
for rural development adequately so that the benefit of the
booming economy reach the poorest of the poor in the country.
Further, there is an urgent need to ensure even development of
different States in the country. The Committee would like to

3
strongly recommend to the Department to review the position of
implementation of schemes State-wise and after addressing the
shortcomings, suggest some remedial measures and inform the
Committee accordingly.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
6. The Department has stated as under:
“It is a fact that regular employment of an individual helps in
generating income and improving his living standards. The
Ministry of Rural Development stands committed to develop rural
areas through creation of more employment opportunities for
weaker sections, women, physically challenged people of society
through self and wage employment schemes namely
Swaranjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY), Sampoorna
Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) & National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (NREGA). The other schemes like Indira Awaas
Yojana (IAY), Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY),
Drought Prone Areas Programmes (DPAP), Desert Development
Programme (DDP) and Integrated Wastelands Programme (IWDP)
are also providing employment to the rural poor of the country.
With a view to improve the present position of Human
Development Index, basic amenities like housing, drinking water,
sanitation, rural road and rural infrastructure are being constantly
developed and upgraded in rural areas through implementation
of rural development programmes.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No.2.14)
“The GDP growth is not directly correlated with the allocation
of funds to the rural development programmes. The GDP growth
is calculated on various parameters and the figure of 8.1 percent
is estimated. It may be observed that the allocation of the Ministry
of Rural Development has been progressively increasing over the
years/plans, which may be seen from the following data:
S.No.  Year Amount Growth in Growth in GDP
(Rs. in crore) RE (Current Prices)
(RE)
 1. 2002-03  18376.00  -  7.5
 2. 2003-04  19200.00  4.48  12.8 (P)
 3. 2004-05  18216.40 (-) 5.12  11.8 (P)
 4. 2005-06  27490.00  50.91  12.5 (P)
 5. 2006-07 (BE)  31443.62  14.38  -
 P—Provisional
Reply to Recommendation (Para No.2.15)

4
“According to the progress reports submitted by the State
Governments of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar
Pradesh, the utilization of funds with respect to the available
funds during the year 2005-06 is as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
S.No. Name of the Total available Utilisation %Utilisation
State funds
1. Bihar 3706.38  1692.40 45.69
2. Madhya Pradesh 1927.22  1368.85 71.03
3. Rajasthan 1759.11  1024.05 58.21
4. Uttar Pradesh  316.81  220.03 69.45
 The Ministry of Rural Development make efforts at all levels
for enhanced allocation of funds for extending benefits to more
target households of rural areas. It may be seen from the previous
Table that allocation in 2006-07 is Rs. 31,443 crore as against
Rs. 18,376 crore in 2002-03  i.e. 71% increase in allocation.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
7. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had expressed
concern over the decreasing percentage of allocation of resources for
rural development during Tenth Plan as compared to Ninth Plan,
particularly when the Indian economy has been acknowledged as
the booming economy worldwide and strongly recommended for
enhancement of allocation adequately so that the poorest of the poor
could share the benefit of the developing economy. While the
Department agrees with the observation of the Committee that regular
employment of a person helps in generating income and improving
his living standard, the concerns of the Committee in respect of
decreasing share of resources for rural development have not been
addressed in the right perspective. The already known data which
shows the enhancement of resources during Tenth Plan as well as
the parameters to calculate GDP have been indicated for the
information of the Committee.
The Committee’s observation was based on the percentage of
allocation of total resources for rural development which has
decreased from 8.7 per cent in the Ninth Plan to 8 per cent during
Tenth Plan and not on cumulative data of Tenth Plan. The Committee
note that rural development is vital sector of Indian economy as

5
major population of the country lives in villages. Unless the problem
areas in this sector are addressed to, growth in GDP will only be
deceptive and unrealistic. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
top priority should be accorded to the rural development sector while
allocating funds for the rural development schemes so as to attain
a positive growth in GDP .
The Committee are further perturbed to note the under utilization
of funds in the BIMARU States. The Committee are of the opinion
that this is one of the main reasons for the BIMARU States not
faring well in the Human Development Index when compared to
the other States. The Committee reiterate their recommendation that
the Department should review the position of implementation of
schemes State-wise and address its shortcomings while focusing more
on BIMARU States.
B. Comparative Position of Outlay made available during 2006-2007
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.21)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee observe that while requirement of funds for
foodgrains component and special component is an important
feature, the funds are being made available only at the
Supplementary Grants or RE stage. The Committee have
repeatedly been recommending in this regard in their respective
reports. Inspite of that the practice of allocating funds for
foodgrains component at Supplementary Grants stage still
continue. The Committee are of the opinion that demanding huge
allocation at Supplementary Grants stage is not a healthy practice
of Budgeting. It does not give an idea about the allocation made
under a scheme in different districts. The implementing agencies
should be well aware of the provisions made under a scheme
well in time i.e. in the beginning of the financial year. In view
of this, the Committee strongly recommend that the practice of
allocating funds at RE stage for a component which is certain
and for which estimates are available at BE stage should be
dispensed with and funds should be made available at the BE
stage itself. The Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance should
be apprised of the concerns of the Committee in this regard.”
9. The Department has stated as under:
“The Ministry of Rural Development includes the cost of
foodgrains also at the time of preparation of Annual Plan of the

6
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) and National Food
for Work Programme (NFFWP). However, the Planning
Commission allocates the resources on the basis of the available
Gross Budgetary Support since the allocation of foodgrains
requires inter-Ministerial consultation and also the availability of
foodgrains stock. Therefore, no commitment is made at the time
of Annual Plan discussion. It is under these circumstances that
additional resources are made available at the stage of
Supplementary Demands for Grants of the Ministry to reimburse
the cost of foodgrains to the Food Corporation of India. The
recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee is appreciated and it
will be conveyed to the Planning Commission and the Ministry
of Finance before the next year’s Annual Plan discussions.”
10. The Committee have been pursuing the matter with regard
to allocating outlay for foodgrains component under SGRY or NFFWP ,
which is certain at the Budget Estimates stage itself and discontinuing
the practice of allocating huge resources in this regard at
Supplementary Grants stage. In response, the Department has stated
that inter-ministerial consultations are required to assess the allocation
of resources for foodgrains component of SGRY and NFFWP due to
which commitment is not made at the Annual Plan discussion stage.
On the one hand the existing position is justified by the Department,
on the other hand, the Committee have been assured that their
concerns would be duly communicated at the Annual Plan
discussions. The Committee feel that the exercise of inter-ministerial
consultations can be undertaken well in advance before discussion
for the resources at Budget Estimate stage so that the desired
allocation for these well established programmes can be made at
Budget Estimate stage. The Committee would like to point out that
the allocation of foodgrains was reduced from 50 lakh tonnes to
35.52 lakh tonnes in 2005-2006 under SGRY due to limited stock of
foodgrains as stated by the Department in action taken reply in
response to recommendation at Para No. 3.20 of 18th Report.
Compensation in cash for reduced quantity of foodgrains was also
not given which also adversely affected the generation of mandays
under the programme. In view of this situation, the Committee have
been emphasizing again and again for allocation of funds under
foodgrains component at the BE stage itself so that the scheme is
not adversely affected when allocations are reduced. The Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation and hope that Budget Estimate
2007-2008 would contain adequate resources to meet the foodgrains
component also.

7
C. Providing Outlay under a Scheme at the Cost of Other Schemes
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.22)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find from the data indicated above that there is
enhancement of only Rs. 2691.62 crore in B.E. 2006-07 as compared
to R.E. 2005-06, although Rs. 11,300 crore have been allocated for
the ambitious programme ‘National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme’. Not only that, ambitious targets have also been fixed
for Rural Housing. The comparative position of outlay schemes-
wise has been analyzed in the subsequent Chapters of the Report.
Here the Committee feel that the enhancement of outlay in one
programme may be due to the decrease in outlay in some other
scheme. The Committee disapprove of this tendency of the
Government. The Committee strongly recommend that adequate
outlay under different schemes should be provided to achieve
the laudable objectives. Besides, the enhancement of outlay for
the ambitious programme i.e. NREGA should not be at the cost
of the established programmes of the Department.”
12. The Department has stated as under:
“Although the net enhancement in the outlay in the Budget
Estimates of 2006-07 is Rs. 3953.60 crore as compared to RE for
the year 2005-06. This allocation only represents the cash
component (excludes foodgrains component) and the SGRY will
not be implemented in 200 districts where NREGA is in operation.
Therefore, the allocation under SGRY is only for 386 districts.”
13. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had expressed
concern over providing outlay for the implementation of National
Rural Employment Guarantee Act by decreasing outlay for the
various established schemes/programmes of the Department relating
to self employment, housing, roads etc. The concern of the Committee
have not been understood in the right perspective. The reason for
reduction in outlay under SGRY has been stated that it will be
implemented in the districts where NREGA would be applicable
now. The allocation for NREGA during 2006-2007 was for Rs. 11,300
crore. However, the net enhancement in allocation during 2006-2007
as compared to the previous year was for Rs. 2691.62 crore which
clearly indicates that the allocation for NREGA was made at the
cost of other programmes. Instead of doing the detailed analysis
and taking the matter at the highest level, the Department has tried

8
to justify the position. The Committee disapprove the way the
recommendation on such a serious issue has been addressed and
would like the Department to ensure that there is no reduction in
resources for the established schemes during the year 2007-2008.
D.  Speedy finalisation of Below Poverty Line (BPL) list
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.33)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that the results of the BPL Census 2002
have inordinately been delayed. BPL Census is conducted at the
beginning of each Five Year Plan so as to identify the households
living Below Poverty Line (BPL) who could be benefited by the
different schemes of the Ministry. Although the Tenth Five Year
Plan is coming to an end, the results of the BPL Census conducted
for the said Five Year Plan are yet to be finalized. While noting
the fact that the results were delayed due to the stay imposed
by the Supreme Court in this matter, the Committee have
repeatedly been recommending to the Department in the
respective reports to direct the State Governments to complete
the exercise and be ready with the provisional results pending
decision of the Supreme Court. Even when the announcement
regarding the vacation of the stay by the Supreme Court has
been made by Hon’ble Minister in Lok Sabha on 10th March,
2006, the results are yet to be finalized. As stated by the Secretary,
Department of Rural Development, it will take two or three
months to finalise the results. While expressing the concern over
the inordinate delay in finalization of the BPL List, the Committee
would like to recommend for finalization of the BPL list without
any further delay.”
15. The Department has stated as under:
“While the concern expressed by the Committee is acknowledged,
however, the results of BPL Census 2002 have been delayed
because the matter was subjudice. Immediately after the vacation
of the stay by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the matter is being
pursued with the State Governments. In order to ensure the
transparency in finalizing the new BPL list, it has been prescribed
to take the approval of Gram Sabhas and also introduced a two
stage appeal mechanism to redress the grievances of the rural
poor, if any, with regard to their status in the BPL list. State
Governments have been asked to follow this procedure to finalise
the BPL list, which has taken little more time.”

9
16. The Committee express concern over the delay in finalisation
of BPL lists by various State Governments. The Ministry of Rural
Development has been borrowing time for finalisation of BPL list
but without any fruitful results. While noting that the fact that the
results of the BPL Survey were delayed partly due to the stay
imposed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the Committee are perturbed
to note that the State Governments were not ready with the
provisional results when the stay was vacated. This is inspite of the
fact that the Committee have repeatedly been recommending to the
Department to direct the State Governments to complete the exercise
and be ready with the provisional results pending decisions of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court. The Secretary during the course of
examination of Demands for Grants 2006-2007 had submitted before
the Committee that it would take two or three months to finalise
the results of BPL survey. Now when almost one year has passed
and the next Demands for Grants are likely to be tabled in the
Parliament shortly, still more time is required to finalise the BPL
List. BPL Census to identify the rural poor house holds is conducted
in the beginning of the Five Year Plan and the BPL Census 2002
was done by various State Governments for the Tenth Plan. The
Committee do not understand the rationale of finalisation of BPL
List based on the survey done by various States in the year 2002
since the ground situation would have been changed by now after
the passage of almost five years when the Tenth Plan has already
completed. The Committee deplore the way BPL Census is being
carried on. The Committee note that BPL Census data is the basic
data to identify the poorest of the poor persons for whom crores of
rupees are being allocated under different poverty alleviation
schemes/programmes. In the absence of such a crucial data, the
benefit of the schemes cannot reach to the intended beneficiaries.
In view of the aforesaid position, the Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to initiate all the desired measures
to ensure that BPL survey for the Eleventh Plan do not meet the
fate of the BPL Census 2002 which was done for the Tenth Plan.
Since 2007-2008 will be the first year of Eleventh Plan, the results of
BPL survey for the Eleventh Plan should be made available
immediately.
E. Arbitrary cut imposed by Planning Commission on the number
of BPL families
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.35)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee in their earlier reports have repeatedly been
expressing their unhappiness over the decision of the Government

10
according to which the number of BPL persons estimated should
not exceed those identified as per 1999-2000 survey. The
Committee find that the concerns of the Committee have been
conveyed to Planning Commission and it has responded that
since the cap on the total number of BPL families to be identified
was recommended by the Expert Committee, the issue may be
looked into in detail by the Expert Committee to be constituted
for the BPL census to be conducted for Eleventh Five Year Plan.
The Committee feel that such an arbitrary limit on BPL persons
to be identified will do a great injustice to the genuine BPL
persons who could be debarred from certain benefits. Not only
that, such limitations can provide unreasonable authority to the
agencies involved thereby inviting corruption and malpractice.
Therefore, the Committee would like the Department to pursue
the matter with Planning Commission so that such limitations
are not imposed while finalizing the number of BPL persons
during latest survey.”
18. The Department has stated as under:
“While the concern of the Committee is acknowledged, however,
it is mentioned that the cap on the total number of BPL
households to be identified under BPL Census 2002 was
prescribed on the recommendations of the Expert Group with
the objective to ensure that the limited resources available under
the various programmes of this Ministry are not distributed thinly
and at the same time the poorest of the poor should get the
preference in getting these benefits. Further, it may also be
clarified that under the guidelines of BPL Census 2002, the States
were given the option to identify the number of BPL households
which may be equal to the Poverty Estimates of Planning
Commission for the year 1999-2000 or the Adjusted Share
whichever is higher. The Adjusted Share figures computed by
the Planning Commission were very close to the Poverty Estimates
of 1993-94. In addition to above, the States were also given the
flexibility of another 10% to account for the transient poor.
Therefore, the instructions of this Ministry did not restrict the
State Governments to identify the BPL households equal to the
Poverty Estimates of 1999-2000 of Planning Commission.”
19. The Committee have repeatedly been expressing the strongest
concern over the decision of the Government regarding cap on the
total number of BPL families according to which the number of BPL
persons estimated should not exceed those identified as per

11
1999-2000 survey and desired that such limitations should not be
imposed while finalizing the number of BPL persons for Eleventh
Plan. The Committee find from the reply furnished by the
Department that efforts are being made to justify the aforesaid cut
off limit. Various reasons in this regard have been given such as the
limited resources available under various programmes are not
distributed thinly etc. The Committee reiterate that such limitations
would provide undue authority to the agencies involved in
identification of BPL persons leading to corruption and malpractice
and as such the genuine poorest of the poor would be debarred
from the intended benefits from the various schemes/programmes.
The Committee deplore the way the Department is trying to justify
such limitations even when the Committee has repeatedly been
expressing strong concern over it. Besides, the Committee fail to
understand how the Department can convince the Planning
Commission or other authorities concerned on the matter when it
itself supports the aforesaid cap on BPL families. The Committee
while reiterating their earlier recommendation would like the
Department to convey the concerns of the Committee to the Cabinet
Secretariat with the strongest feelings, the concerns have been
expressed so that such limilations are not imposed while finalizing
the BPL data for Eleventh Plan.
F. Monitoring Mechanism
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.46)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that even though the Department has a
detailed monitoring mechanism to oversee the implementation of
various schemes/programmes meant for the upliftment of rural
masses, much needs to be done to improve the delivery
mechanism of the schemes/programmes. Huge unspent balances
amounting to Rs. 9,162 crore lying with the State Governments
is certainly an area of concern. The Committee further feel that
more than putting in place different monitoring mechanisms, there
is an urgent need to see that the system works effectively. The
working of the district and State level Vigilance and Monitoring
committees speaks volume about the ineffective state of
monitoring mechanism put in place by the Ministry of Rural
Development. Although there is a provision to hold at least one
meeting in each quarter, most of the District and Vigilance
Committees could succeed in holding barely one meeting during
the year 2005. If this is the state of affairs of the committees,

12
which are to be appointed by the Department of Rural
Development, the status of other monitoring mechanisms can be
well imagined. Further, although the Department has claimed
that there has been an increase in monitoring and Vigilance of
rural development programmes at all levels particularly at the
grass-root level, no information has been furnished by the
Department to substantiate the aforesaid claim. In view of the
aforesaid scenario, the Committee hold the opinion that there is
an urgent need to implement the best of the systems evolved for
monitoring of schemes. The Committee hope that with the
implementation of the Right to Information Act, there will be a
check on the proper implementation of various programmes and
schemes. Further dissemination of information as required under
the provisions of the Act would make the public aware about
the various schemes and programmes, which automatically would
put a pressure on the implementing agencies to perform better
and deliver results.”
21. The Department has stated as under:
“The Chairman of the district level Vigilance & Monitoring
Committee (V&MCs) is the Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha)
from the district concerned and wherever no meeting of District
V&MC has been held even once, the Chairmen of these
Committees have been requested to hold meetings of these
Committees. State Govternments have been requested from time
to time to organize meetings of the State level and District level
V&MCs at least once every quarter. As per information received
from the States/Districts, as on 15 July 2006, 374 districts have
organized meetings of the District V&MCs at least once and
18 States have organized meeting of the State level V&MCs at
least once since their reconstitution in October, 2004. States and
Districts have been informed that the District Collector/Deputy
Commissioner/District Magistrate concerned, being the Member
Secretary of the District V&MC, is responsible for conducting the
meetings of District V&MC regularly and in case where the
Chairman of the Committee is pre-occupied and has not indicated
any dates for convening such meetings, the Member Secretary
should ensure, in consultation with the Co-Chairman, that these
meetings are convened within fifteen days of the end of each
quarter under intimation to Chairman/Co-Chairman and all other
members.”

13
22. The Committee find from the reply furnished by the Ministry
that as on 15 July 2006, only 374 districts have organized meetings
of the District Vigilance and Monitoring Committees(V&MC) at least
once while they should be meeting atleast four times annually. This
reveals a very sorry state of affairs as there appears to be no proper
monitoring mechanism in place that can work. The Committee in
their earlier recommendation have emphasized that there was a need
to put in place a system that works instead of different monitoring
mechanisms that do not work. The Department has intimated that
the District Collector/Deputy Commissioner/ District Magistrate being
the Member Secretary are responsible for conducting the regular
meetings of the District V&MCs. The Committee are of the view
that for the success of any programme, the monitoring mechanism
at the grass root level has to be effective. Therefore, there is an
urgent need for strengthening the District V&MCs which should
meet more frequently and the Member Secretary should be held
responsible for not conducting the same at regular intervals. The
Committee also recommend that reporting format of Utilisation
Certificate should also include the number of meetings of the
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (M&MCs) held in each quarter
of the year. State level V&MC should also meet at appropriate
intervals to evaluate the performance and reports of the District
V&MCs. Besides, the Committee also reiterate their earlier
recommendation that dissemination of information is the best way
to put desirable checks on various programmes of the Government.
Public pressure on the implementing agencies would enable them
to perform better and deliver results.
G. Gender Budgeting
Recommendation (Serial No. 13 and 14,
Para Nos. 2.53 and 2.54)
23. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee appreciate the concept of Gender Budgeting
covering as many as 24 Demands for Grants in 18 Ministries/
Departments and five Union territories and schemes with an
outlay of Rs. 28,737 crore. The noble objective of Gender
Budgeting is to remove the disparity between the two genders
by giving more and more benefits to women in all the schemes
of the Government. The Committee would like to emphasize that
by mere constitution of Gender Budget Cell, the objectives behind
Gender Budgeting would not be achieved. The Committee are

14
concerned to find that although under the different schemes of
the Department of Rural Development, particularly under IAY,
SGSY and SGRY, specific provisions for women have been made
in the guidelines, the implementation of the said provisions is
far from satisfactorily. As reported in various Budget documents
like Economic Survey and Mid-Term Appraisal document the
targeted benefits are not reaching the female beneficiaries.”
Recommendation (Para No.2.53)
“The Committee therefore desire that the Government should
seriously try to achieve the targets specified for women
beneficiaries in the guidelines of each scheme so that the gap in
terms of employment, housing, wages etc. between men and
women is bridged to a great extent. Further, survey at regular
intervals be undertaken by independent research agencies to
evaluate the effects of Gender Budgeting.”
Recommendation (Para No.2.54)
24. The Department has stated as under:
“The concern of the Committee regarding ensuring the flow of
benefits to the female beneficiaries is acknowledged. Three
programmes of the Ministry, namely, IAY, SGSY and SGRY have
been short listed for gender budgeting. The implementation of
these programmes will be monitored accordingly.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No.2.53)
“The evaluation of implementation of Gender Budgeting by the
independent agency can be undertaken at an appropriate time
on a regular basis.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No.2.54)
25.  The Committee in the earlier recommendations had
emphasized on effectiveness of the gender budgeting exercise. Besides
monitoring the data in this regard, there is an urgent need to take
specific measures to achieve the targets for women under specific
schemes. The action taken reply do not mention any of the measures
taken/ proposed to be taken in this regard. It has simply been
indicated that the gender budgeting has been done on three schemes
of the Ministry of Rural Development viz. IAY, SGSY and SGRY.
The Committee reiterate that the percentage of female beneficiaries

15
under these schemes is still below the target. Nearly half of the
country’s population constitutes women. Therefore, there is an urgent
need that Gender budgeting is effective which should ensure that
the benefits of various rural development schemes reach the targeted
female population. The required measures in this regard should be
taken and the Committee should be apprised accordingly.
The Committee are also of the view that data in this regard
should be maintained separately by the Ministry so as to have an
assessment whether the benefits are reaching the targeted population.
Further, the Committee would also like to be apprised whether any
independent agency has been entrusted with the task of evaluating
the implementation of Gender budgeting.
H. Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY)
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 3.20)
26. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that the physical and financial performance
under the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) is very
poor. As on 31 January, 2006, the Government could utilise only
54.57 per cent of allocated outlay for SGRY. Even in regard to
physical achievements, the Government could complete only 55.70
per cent of the works undertaken. Further, it could only generate
66.21 crore mandays whereas the target was 86.11 crore mandays.
The quarter-wise achievements in terms of mandays generated
further indicate shortfall of around 50 per cent during the first
quarter and around 40 per cent during the third quarter. The
Committee are not inclined to accept the reasons put forth by
the Department that utilization status always runs behind
schedule particularly when there is shortfall in expenditure during
2004-05 when the financial achievement was 83.42 per cent. Not
only that, 11 States/Union territories could utilize less than
75 per cent of the outlay. There are huge unspent balances to the
tune of Rs.2,764.36 crore lying with the respective States/Union
territory Governments. Around 20 per cent of the works
undertaken during 2004-05 are still incomplete. Besides, the
Committee feel that the plea of late receipt of Utilization
Certificates cannot be accepted in this era of technological
advancement. The Committee would like to know the State-wise
reasons for under-performance. Besides, the State/Union
Territories and implementing agencies should be impressed upon
to furnish the timely Utilization Certificates. There should also

16
be physical inspection by Senior Officers of the Ministry to check
whether the works shown by the States in their records, have
actually been done/completed in that particular year. The
shortcomings reflected by the Area Officer during their visits
and the corrective action taken by the Department should be
reflected in the Budget documents.”
27. The Department has stated as under:
“The requisite information was submitted based on the Monthly
Progress Report received from States/UTs by that time. Out of
33 States/UTs, 8 States/UTs are yet to submit their progress report
for the month of March, 2006. As reported by the State
Governments/ Union Territory Administrations as on 20.7.2006,
they have utilized 82.11% of available funds and generated 80.58
crore mandays during the year 2005-06 which will certainly
improve on receipt of progress reports from remaining States/
UTs. Due to limited stock of foodgrains, the allocation of
foodgrains was reduced from 50 lakh tonnes to 35.52 lakh tonnes
in 2005-2006 under SGRY. No compensation in cash for reduced
quantity of foodgrains has been given. The less availability has
adversely affected generation of mandays under the programme.
As regard incomplete works in 2004-05, it is submitted that SGRY
is an on-going programme. According to SGRY Guidelines, while
preparing the Annual Action Plan, Panchayats are to give priority
to the incomplete works in comparison to taking up of new
works. Thus, the incomplete works as on 31 March 2005 are
required to be included in the Annual Action Plan of Panchayats
for the year 2005-06 with a view to attending to these works
during the year on priority.
SGRY is a programme being implemented by Panchayats at
village, block and district levels. Progress Reports of Village
Panchayats are collected and compiled at Block level. Thereafter,
Intermediate Panchayats consolidate Reports of Village Panchayats
including their own progress report and send it to District
Panchayat. District Panchayat compile all reports received from
Intermediate Panchayats alongwith their own progress report and
send it to State Headquarter who in turn compile all the reports
received from districts and forward a consolidated Progress Report
to the Ministry. This whole process takes at least two to three
months depending upon number of Panchayats. As the
Panchayats at grassroot level do not have proper facilities nor

17
have fully trained personnel, they are finding it difficult to make
use of and handle advanced technology. However, State
Governments and Union territory Administrations are urged
regularly for timely submission of their Monthly Progress Report
for SGRY.
State Governments and Union territories have been requested to
intimate the reasons for their poor performance for the year 2004-
05. In pursuance of it, some States have furnished their revised
progress reports. As now reported by States/UTs, out of total
available funds of Rs.7214.84 crores, an amount of Rs.6080.13
crores has been spent in 2004-05. Thus, the carry over balance as
on 31 March 2005 was Rs.1134.71 crore, which is 15.73 per cent
of total available funds as against permissible limit of 15 per
cent.
Under Area Officers’ Scheme of this Ministry, senior officers of
this Ministry do visit districts allotted to them for inspection of
Rural Development Programmes being implemented in a district.
Area Officers inspect works undertaken under the programme
on sample basis in 2-3 villages and submit their reports. The
reports of some Area Officers in 2005-2006 did not bring adverse
report on the works implemented under SGRY in respect of works
visited by them. However in some cases the reports did mention
that the expenditure on SC/ST component was below the required
norm, availability of foodgrains was inadequate, delay in
finalization of Annual Action Plan at Panchayats level etc. and
also reported about quality of works undertaken/completed under
the programme. In case of any adverse reporting, the issues are
brought out to the notice of the State Governments as well as
district authority for taking corrective action immediately.”
28. When the attention of the Department was drawn towards
the sorry state of affairs of SGRY, where there is underutilization of
resources, piling of incomplete works, the Department has tried to
justify the position by stating that the States give the progress reports
very late. No clarification has been submitted with regard to the
observation of the Committee in respect of the final data of the year
2004-2005 whereby 2,764.36 crore was indicated as lying unspent with
the respective States/Union Territory Administrations. As regards the
issue of late receipt of utilization certificates, a complex system has
been held responsible whereby the Panchayat’s data is consolidated
at Block level then Block level data at District level and District
level data at State level, which finally report to the Union

18
Government. The allocation of outlay under SGRY is directly made
to DRDAs/ZPs as per the guidelines. In this situation, the Committee
fail to understand the whole complex process which unduly delays
the utilization certificates. When the Department has yet to get the
updated figures for the year 2005-2006, it is not understandable how
the further releases are being made.
As regards, the issue of capacity building of Panchayats to enable
these institutions to handle the responsibility, the Committee would
like that the issue should be taken up with the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj, which is the nodal Ministry to deal with the various
issues related to empowerment of Panchayats. The Panchayats need
to be equipped with the computers and latest technology so that the
consolidation of data at district level take no time and the utilization
certificates are timely received. As regards, the issue of incomplete
works, no satisfactory reply has been furnished by the Department.
There is an urgent need to look into the matter seriously. There may
be tendency to start more new works to add up the data of works.
While allocating funds, it should be analysed as to how many
incomplete works were given priority and completed during the year.
Perhaps, there is an urgent need to pay much more attention to the
quality of infrastructure created under SGRY because besides creating
employment, one of the objective is to improve the infrastructure of
the villages. The Committee while reiterating their earlier
recommendation would like the Department to monitor the data with
regard to incomplete works regularly so that more stress is given to
the completion of work. The Department should initiate action on
the suggested lines and the Committee be apprised accordingly.
Besides the aforesaid observations, the Committee note from the
replies that due to limited stock of foodgrains, the allocation of
foodgrains was reduced from 50 lakh tonnes to 35.52 lakh tonnes in
2005-2006 under SGRY. No compensation in cash for reduced quantity
of foodgrains has been given and the less availability has adversely
affected generation of mandays under the programme. When the
Committee had raised the issue of reduction in outlay under some
of the schemes which include SGRY (refer para 3.20 of 18th Report),
the Department in the action taken reply has tried to justify the
position by stating that SGRY is not applicable in the States where
NREGA is applicable. Now, when the attention has been drawn
towards decline in generation of mandays and underutilization, the
Department has indicated that the less availability of resources has
adversely affected the programme. Perhaps, there is no clarity in the
stand of the Department. Besides, as emphasized earlier, there is an

19
urgent need to indicate the outlay required for payment to be made
with regard to foodgrains component which can indicate the clear
picture of the overall allocation under SGRY. The Committee would
like to Department to take up the matter urgently with the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance in the light of the aforesaid
observations so that adequate outlay is provided under SGRY.
I. Implementation of Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) in
North-Eastern States
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 3.21)
29. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee further find that 10 per cent of allocation under
different schemes is exclusively earmarked for North-Eastern
Region. The data with regard to physical and financial
achievement under SGRY since 2002-03 indicate that although
the position is improving year after year, still there is huge gap
between the total available funds and the expenditure reported.
Around 40 per cent of the funds are still lying unspent. The
position of mandays generated improved during 2003-04, but there
is huge decline in the mandays generated during 2004-05 and
2005-06. While 1464.60 lakh mandays were generated during 2003-
04, the achievement declined to 823.53 lakh during 2004-05 and
further to 785.91 lakh during 2005-06. Further the expenditure
position during 2004-05 is also worse as compared to the previous
year. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons
for shortfall in physical and financial achievement during 2004-
05 and 2005-06 in North-Eastern region. The Committee urge the
Department to take necessary corrective action so as to ensure
meaningful utilization of the exclusive outlay made for these
States.”
30. The Department has stated as under:
“As regards higher mandays generated during the year 2003-04,
it has been checked up from the record that the State of Nagaland
had reported wrongly number of mandays generated due to
which number of mandays was shown so high. The State
Government has been requested to intimate the correct figure,
which is awaited.
Due to climatic condition such as heavy rainfall, snowfall etc.
the working season in the North-East is limited. Further, because

20
of inadequate infrastructure North-Eastern States are facing great
difficulties in movement of foodgrains to collect from FCI depots
to the remote areas. In spite of these problems, during the year
2004-05, Tripura was able to spent 96.11 per cent of total available
funds followed by Sikkim 85.38 per cent. Meghalaya and Manipur
have reported utilization more than 81% of the total available
funds. The State of Arunachal Pradesh having large snow bound
areas and Assam with heaviest rainfall and flood in each year
could spend less funds in percentage terms in comparison with
other North-Eastern States. The Government of Mizoram has
informed that they have utilized 85 per cent of available funds
during 2004-05. Reply from Nagaland is awaited. However, these
States have been advised to take corrective action to ensure
satisfactory implementation of SGRY. Besides, Hon’ble Minister
(RD) also review the performance of the States with the Chief
Ministers/Ministers and other senior officers in the State and
advise the States, wherever necessary, to take corrective actions
to ensure proper utilisation of SGRY funds.
Keeping in view the problems of North-Eastern States in collecting
foodgrains from FCI Depots to remote areas of their States, these
States are allowed to charge transportation cost of foodgrains
from the SGRY funds. Arunachal Pradesh is exempted from
compulsory distribution of foodgrains under SGRY.”
31. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had pointed
out the declining trend of the position of mandays generated. During
2003-2004, 1464.60 lakh mandays were generated which declined to
823.53 lakh during 2004-2005 and further to 785.91 lakh during 2005-
2006. The Department has stated that the State of Nagaland had
reported wrong number of mandays generated thereby inflating the
data of mandays during the year 2003-2004. It has been stated that
the State Government has been requested to give the correct figure.
The Committee fail to understand how an unusual data of the State
of Nagaland was not detected by the Department. Even when the
Committee highlighted the declining trend of mandays generated,
the Department could not get the correct data from the State of
Nagaland. No reasons have been indicated with regard to the lower
mandays generated during 2005-2006 as compared to the year 2004-
2005.
As regards the unsatisfactory financial achievement, the status
of only three States viz. Tripura, Meghalaya and Manipur has been
given where the performance is stated to be satisfactory. The

21
Committee are not satisfied with the replies furnished by the
Department and would like to reiterate to take up the issue with
individual State/Union territories in North-Eastern region and take
the corrective action. The Committee should also be kept apprised.
J. National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP)
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 3.38)
32. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee further find that during 2005-06 at the Budget
Estimates stage, Rs. 6,000 crore was provided under National
Food for Work Programme. At Revised Estimates Stage, a cut of
Rs. 1,500/- crore was imposed thereby reducing the allocation to
Rs. 4,500 crore. They also find from the position indicated by the
Department that Rs.1,500 were transferred from NFFWP to SGRY
to maintain at least the previous SGRY allocation. Further the
Department has also acknowledged that the revised allocation
was sufficient to meet NFFWP requirement. The Committee are
surprised at the statement given by the Department whereby the
estimated outlay indicated at the Budget Estimates stage when
reduced substantially has been found to be sufficient to meet the
requirement of a programme. The Committee, therefore, conclude
that the implementation of the programme was very poor
whereby the part of the allocation made under NFFWP was
transferred to another programme. What is worse, even the
reduced allocation could not be utilized and the implementation
of the programme was quite poor during the year 2005-06 as
indicated in the preceding paras of the Report. The Committee
deplore the tendency of the Government whereby the allocation
made under the programme at Budget Estimates stage is
transferred to another scheme at Revised Estimates stage. The
Committee therefore, strongly recommend that efforts should be
made for meaningful utilization of the allocated resources in a
year.”
33. The Department has stated as under:
“In the financial year 2005-06, the B.E. for SGRY and NFFWP
were kept at Rs. 4000 and 6000 crores respectively . This Committee
has recommended that allocation of SGRY should not be reduced.
Therefore, it was necessary to re-adjust the allocation between
SGRY and NFFWP . However, based on the request of this Ministry
the R.E. for SGRY and NFFWP were revised as Rs. 5500 and

22
4500 crores respectively. Under NFFWP , there was an unutilized
balance of Rs. 1280.27 crores from the previous years allocation.
This amount was also available for utilization under the
programme during the year 2005-06. As indicated in reply to
para 3.36 , the percentage utilization of funds under NFFWP
during the year 2005-06 was 70.3 percent which may be termed
as satisfactory keeping in view the fact that the programme was
launched in November, 2004 only.”
34. The Committee fail to understand the logic put forth by the
Ministry regarding re-adjustment of allocation between two schemes
viz. NFFWP and SGRY. NFFWP at the BE stage was allocated Rs.
6,000 crore which was drastically reduced to Rs. 4,500 crore at RE
stage. The Committee do not understand how funds when reduced
by 25 percent under NFFWP were still sufficient to meet the
requirements of the scheme. Moreover, the Department could utilize
only 70.3 percent of this reduced fund. Further disturbing is the fact
that according to the Department, 70.3 per cent of utilization is
satisfactory. The Committee denounce this tendency of the
Department whereby funds allocated for one scheme are transferred
to another. Not only that the Department has tried to justify all the
wrong practices on one or the other pretext. The Department should
therefore make a realistic projection of its Budget Estimates so that
meaningful utilization of the allocated resources are made.
K. National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA)
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 24 and 27,
Para Nos. 3.61 and 3.67)
35. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee are concerned to note the vague reply of the
Department on such a serious issue of preparation of action plan
to cover all the districts under the provision of NREGA. Instead
of taking immediate action in this regard, it has been stated that
the performance of the Act would be watched. The Committee
note that the guarantee of 100 days of wage employment to each
household in rural areas in the country has been provided under
the enactment and further under the provisions of the Act it has
been specifically mentioned that the guarantee shall be applicable
to the whole of the rural areas in the country within a period of
five years from the date of enactment of the Act and as such
there is no scope for delaying the implementation of the Act.
The Committee are of the firm opinion that an action plan for

23
coverage should be prepared by the Department and transparency
in this regard should be maintained so that the part of the country
where the Guarantee Scheme at present is not applicable can be
reassured about the applicability of the legislation in the near
future”.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.61)
“The Committee find from the reply of the Department that no
attention has been paid to ensure the distribution of foodgrains
under the Guarantee Scheme whereas 75 per cent of the wages
under the scheme can be paid by way of foodgrains. It has simply
been stated that only cash resources would be provided to the
State Governments. The Committee would like the Department
to clarify further whether the procurement and distribution of
foodgrains will be the sole responsibility of the State Governments
and what will be role of the undertakings involved in foodgrains
like Food corporation of India (FCI) so as to enable the Committee
to recommend further in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.67)
36. The Department has stated as under:
“Proviso to Section 1(3) of the NREG Act provides that the Act
shall be made applicable to the whole country within a period
of 5 years. The very purpose of implementing the Act in phases
is to watch the progress of the Act and pattern of expenditure in
few districts in the beginning and based on the experience so
gained, carry out modifications/improvements in preparation
before extending it to more areas. Progress of the Schemes varies
from State to State due to various reasons. It would be in the
interest of the programme that its expansion is based on the
insight gained through the experience of the first phase of
implementation. The Ministry is monitoring the implementation
of NREGA in these districts and there is a need to continue with
this process of interaction and feedback from them so that an
action plan for extending the Act can then be formulated.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.61)
“Under the existing provisions of NREG Act, the Central
assistance will be paid only in cash. No foodgrains are to be
supplied by the Centre under the Act. However, if the State
Governments feel that foodgrains should be paid as part of wages,

24
they can do so and procure the foodgrains on their own. They
may also purchase foodgrains from FCI. However, distribution
of foodgrains as part of wages is likely to create several problems
in meeting the legal obligation to pay wages within a prescribed
time frame.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.67)
37. The Committee note that the Ministry is watching the progress
of NREGA in the 200 districts where the Act is under
implementation. However, the legal provision in the Act itself
provides that the Act shall be made applicable to the whole country
within a period of 5 years. The Ministry should, therefore, start
considering the preparation of action plan keeping in view that the
resources will have to be correspondingly increased if the number
of districts are to increase in the coming financial year. Though, the
inputs gained by watching the progress of NREGA would be useful
in carrying out desirable modifications/improvements in the scheme,
the same should not desist them from preparation of the action plan
and implementation of the Act in the remaining districts. The
Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation that
transparency should be maintained in preparation of action plan so
that the areas where the Guarantee Scheme at present is not
applicable are assured about the applicability of the legislation in
near future.
On the issue of foodgrains as part of wages under NREGA, the
Committee fail to understand as to why the provision for distribution
of foodgrains as part of wages was made when it was likely to
create several problems in meeting the legal obligation to pay wages
within a prescribed time frame. The Committee would like the
comments of the Department on this aspect so that the issue is
reexamined and suggestions made in this regard.
L. Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 30 and 31,
Para Nos. 3.80 and 3.88)
38. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee are perturbed to note the poor lending rate by
Banks. During 2004-05, applications at the rate of four out of
every ten applicant were rejected. The rejection rate has further
increased to about five persons out of every ten applicants. This

25
inter-alia means that over fifty percent of the needy are unable to
take benefit under SGSY due to some reason or other. The
Committee observe that this is a disturbing trend and would
ultimately lead to collapse of the scheme. The Department cannot
wash away its hands simply by shifting its responsibility on
Reserve Bank of India, which is entrusted with the responsibility
to coordinate and motivate Banks on the issues relating to SGSY.
The Department needs to resolve all the issues pertaining to poor
lending rate by taking the matter at the highest level in the
Reserve Bank of India, Finance Ministry and the Chief of leading
Banks. The Committee are of the view that applicant approach
the Banks with great hope and expectations and they feel let
down when their applications are rejected on flimsy grounds or
due to cumbersome procedure. The Committee, therefore, suggest
that the procedure for lending under SGSY be simplified and
paper work should be reduced so that people are not
unnecessarily harassed. Help counters may be opened either at
the Bank or DRDA Office to assist the illiterate applicant in filling
up the forms, explaining them the highlights of the scheme, the
liability of the applicant, the procedure for taking the benefit
under the scheme etc. Further, the role of DRDAs and Panchayati
Raj Institutions (PRIs) should be strengthened for effective
coordination between them and the Banks so that the needy
applicants are not unnecessarily turned away by Banks.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.80)
“The Committee are concerned to note that the physical targets
meant for disadvantaged groups like SC/ST and handicap
category have not been met satisfactorily. While some States have
fared well, the figures indicate that the SC/ST Swarozgaris
assisted in more than 13 States and Union Territories are less
than fifty per cent. Further, the statement indicates that except in
Tamil Nadu and Manipur the percentage of handicap Swarozgaris
assisted is less than the three per cent target. On an average, by
the end of February 2006, only 43.13 percent of the targeted
Swarozgaris could be assisted which also highlights the poor
performance of the scheme. Further, the Committee note that the
utilization of funds by many States is very poor. While more
than 13 States have disbursed less than 50 per cent of the credit
marked for them, the Committee note that the overall percentage
of credit disbursed is only 36.02 per cent. The Committee observe
that the poor performance could be attributed to the slack
attention paid by the Government. Something is lacking due to

26
which the Government has failed to attract the targeted number
of Swarozgaris. The DRDAs/Zilla Parishads are also not trained
enough to meet their objectives. As revealed by the Concurrent
Evaluation, the scheme is facing a lot of problems, which include
indifferent attitude of Banks, inadequate infrastructure, problems
in identifying projects etc. There is an urgent need to address all
these issues to ensure the success of the programme. The
Committee would like the Department to look into the matter
and take remedial action in consultation with State Governments,
Banks, DRDAs and all other concerned.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.88)
39. The Department has stated as under:
“The Ministry has already taken steps to improve poor lending
by Banks through frequent interaction with the various agencies
involved viz; Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Commercial, Private
and Cooperative Banks, Ministry of Finance etc. The issue has
also been taken up by with the Ministry of Finance which in
turn advised the State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) in various
States to achieve the credit mobilization targets in order to
improve lending by banks. The Ministry of Finance has also
issued directions to the Banks to take stern action against the
officers who failed to achieve the targets under SGSY. The
Governor, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has also been apprised of
the situation and requested to take up the matter with the Chief
Executives of the concerned Banks to take urgent remedial action
in this regard. The Secretaries in charge of Rural Development in
all States/UTs have also been asked to furnish the details of
poor performing Bank Branches and to accelerate the pace of
credit flow under the scheme. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
and Ministry of Finance have also been informed for close
monitoring to ensure distribution of loans to achieve the targets
set under the SGSY scheme. As the rate of interest charged by
the banks on loans under SGSY is very high compared to other
sectors, the Ministry of Finance is requested to advise Banks to
keep interest rate at 9% for Rural and Agricultural loans and
adhere to RBI Guidelines in this regard.
As regards high rate of rejection of applications by banks, the
matter has been taken up for discussion in the next Central Level
Coordination Committee Meeting scheduled to be held.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.80)

27
“As per the information available with this Ministry for the year
2005-06, there are eight States who have disbursed less than 50
per cent of the credit targets while twenty three UTs have
achieved more than 50 per cent of the credit targets under the
scheme. Three UTs have not furnished their reports yet. The
overall credit achievement under the scheme has improved to
72.37 per cent during the year 2005-06.
The Government has already taken various steps to improve the
performance of credit disbursal under SGSY in coordination with
the various agencies involved viz; Reserve Bank of India (RBI),
Commercial and Cooperative Banks, Ministry of Finance etc.. In
this regard the Ministry has called for information of poor
performing Bank Branches under SGSY from various State
Governments/UTs and took this matter with the Ministry of
Finance, which in turn advised the State Level Bankers Committee
(SLBC) in various States to achieve the credit mobilization targets.
The Ministry of Finance has also issued directions to the CMDs
of Banks to take stern action against the officers who failed to
achieve the targets under SGSY.
During 2005-06, The Ministry has also fixed and communicated
quarterly credit mobilization targets for better monitoring of the
credit targets under SGSY throughout the year. The Governor,
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has also been apprised of the poor
lending by Banks and requested to take up the matter with the
Chief Executives of the concerned Banks to take urgent remedial
action in this regard and to convene a special meeting of all
Chairmen and Managing Directors of the Commercial Banks in
Mumbai to discuss issues like flow of credit under SGSY and
poor lending by various Bank Branches.
The Secretaries in charge of Rural Development in all States/UTs
have also been asked to furnish the details of poor performing
Bank Branches and to accelerate the pace of credit flow under
the scheme. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and Ministry of
Finance have also been informed for close monitoring to ensure
distribution of loans to achieve the targets set under the SGSY
scheme. As the rate of interest charged by the banks on loans
under SGSY is very high compared to other sectors, the Ministry
of Finance is requested to advise banks to keep interest rate at
9 per cent for Rural and Agricultural loans and adhere to RBI
Guidelines in this regard.

28
In addition to above, a meeting was held on 19 April, 2005 in
Mumbai under the Chairmanship of Deputy Governor, RBI with
CMDs of Commercial Banks where performance of banks involved
under SGSY was evaluated. The issue was also discussed during
the Ninth Meeting of the Central Level Coordination Committee
held on 28 June, 2006 which was attended by representatives of
State Governments and Banks.
The SGSY guidelines provide that the officials and staff of DRDAs
should be constantly trained in the general field of management
of rural areas and poverty. The personnel to be posted in the
DRDAs should be given a pre-service training to orient them
suitably to their tasks. Further there should also be a system of
an annual in-service where the officers could be given the updates
about the relevant fields and which would also afford an
opportunity of exchanging their experiences. The Ministry has
also impressed upon the State Governments/UTs to effectively
implement these guidelines. In addition, the Ministry also assists
the State Governments for organizing training courses under SGSY
for RD functionaries of State/District/Block/Panchayat level,
elected representatives from State/District/Block/Panchayat level
or Bankers, Facilitators, SHPIs, NGOs etc. at recognized training
institutes in the State.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.88)
40. The Committee observe that the poor lending rate by Banks
is due to various reasons like lack of training among staff in general
field of management of rural areas and poverty, high rate of interest
on loan disbursed, lack of reorientation programmes, high rate of
rejection of application by Banks etc.. The Committee also note the
various measures taken by the Ministry at various levels to improve
the credit targets under the scheme. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the outcome of the discussion proposed to be held
in the Central Level Coordination Committee Meeting regarding the
high rate of rejection of application by banks. The Committee would
also like to be apprised about the outcome of the meeting held by
Chairmen and MDs of all Commercial Banks and the meeting of
the CMDs of Commercial Banks with the Deputy Governor, Reserve
Bank of India to improve the credit mobilization and lending rate
of Banks. Besides, the Committee would also like to hear more on
the action taken by the Ministry as provided in SGSY guidelines
regarding training of officers/staff implementing the scheme.

29
The Committee find that although much has been done at higher
level to improve the disbursement of loan, very little has been done
at the grass root level i.e. at the Bank level where people normally
approach for loan under the scheme. Most of the applications
received are rejected at the preliminary stage itself on flimsy grounds
due to lack of awareness among the people. Most of the people
approaching the Bank are also illiterate who may not be aware of
the formalities and paper work involved. The Committee have been
emphasizing again and again on this issue that the procedures and
formats for disbursement of loans be simplified and preferably ‘help
counters’ be opened to help the applicants. With these measures, the
Committee hope that the credit targets can be effectively achieved.
M. Rural Housing (Indira Awaas Yojana)
Recommendation (Serial No. 33, Para No. 3.105)
41. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that the data with regard to physical targets
fixed during each year of Tenth Plan indicates that although the
targets made during 2006-07, are 92,237 higher than the targets
fixed during 2005-06 but are lesser by 28,858 houses, if compared
to the year 2004-05. In view of this position the Committee note
that although ambitious commitments are being made with
regard to providing housing under IA Y, there is no such
enhancement of targets and outlay to meet such commitments.
Not only that the resources made available are not being utilized
fully. The information provided above indicates that in most of
the States less than 50 per cent of physical and financial targets
could be achieved. The Committee observe that as per the
Government’s own data the housing shortage in rural areas is
148 lakh. The said shortages will increase by shortage of 9 lakh
houses annually due to various reasons. The annual target fixed
under Bharat Nirman are over 15 lakh houses. Around 60 lakh
houses would be constructed by the year 2009. The net shortage
of houses by the year 2009 as per the Government’s own estimate
would be 184 lakh (148 lakh + 36 lakh) houses. Even if 60 lakh
houses are provided by 2009, there would be shortage of
124 lakh houses by 2009. The Committee have selected the subject
‘Rural Housing’ for examination and report and different issues
in this regard would be examined in detail during the course of
examination of the subject. Here the Committee would like to
recommend that besides augmenting the resources, there is an

30
urgent need to ensure that the targets fixed are met and every
paise earmarked for the scheme meant for rural masses is
meaningfully utilized. Further, to augment the resources for rural
housing, there is an urgent need to expand institutional credit.”
42. The Department has stated as under:
“The physical targets during 2004-05 were fixed with 80 per cent
of the allocation for new houses and 20 per cent allocation for
upgradation of kutcha houses. The grant for upgradation is
Rs. 12,500 per house and is lower than that for a new IAY house.
From 2005-06 onwards, the physical targets are being fixed on
the basis of “new houses” only, for the entire allocation. Therefore,
the physical targets have come down correspondingly , despite
increase in outlay. However, States have the flexibility to utilize
upto 20 per cent of their allocation for upgradation. Under Bharat
Nirman, the Government has committed to construct at least
15 lakh houses per year from 2005-06 onwards and in 2006-07,
15.33 lakh houses are targeted to be built.
As regards the extent of housing shortage and the rate of house
construction observed by the Committee, the Ministry has been
pursuing with the Planning Commission to significantly enhance
the annual allocation so that rural shelterlessness can be
eliminated by 2009.
The recommendations with regard to proper utilization of funds
with fruitful results, made by the Committee have been noted
for perusal.”
43. The Committee do not agree with the view of the Ministry
that housing shortage would be reduced with enhanced allocation
by the Planning Commission. The Committee note that the targets
under Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) have not been attained not due to
under allocation of funds but due to other reasons. Huge amounts
of funds meant for IAY are lying unspent while the physical targets
are not met with. The housing shortage in rural areas by the year
2009 is estimated to be 124 lakhs. Further, under Bharat Nirman, the
Government has committed to construct at least 15 lakh houses per
year from 2005-2006 onwards and in 2006-2007, 15.33 lakh houses are
targeted to be built, but given the pace of physical progress under
IAY, the Committee express their apprehension that the targets under
Bharat Nirman would not be achieved. Therefore, mere enhancement
of funds by the Planning Commission will not solve the problem of
housing shortage. The Committee reiterate their earlier

31
recommendation that the Ministry should ensure that the targets
fixed are met and every paise earmarked for the scheme are
meaningfully utilized so that the housing shortage in the rural areas
is atleast reduced to a certain extent.
N. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 35, 36 and 37,
Para Nos. 3.116, 3.117 and 3.120)
44. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee observe that Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
is a very laudable programe initiated by the Government with
the objective to provide connectivity by road to all the
unconnected habitations in rural areas in the country. From the
information provided by the Department, it seems that the
progress is not very encouraging. Initially, at the launch of the
programme, the objective was set to provide connectivity to all
unconnected habitations having a population of 500 and above
(250 and above in hill States, tribal and desert areas) by the end
of Tenth Plan  i.e. 2006-07. The targets have now been spilled
over. The Government now target to connect all the habitations
having a population of 1000 and above (500 in case of hilly
States, tribal and desert areas) by the year 2009. The Committee
apprehend that it would be difficult to achieve even the spilled
over targets with the existing pace of implementation of the
programme, whereby even the roads started in Phase I and Phase
II during the years 2000-01 and 2002-03 are lying incomplete.
The Committee find that as per stipulated parameters set by the
Department, the roads should be ready within 12 months in
normal and within 18 months in hilly areas after award of work.
Even after the lapse of five or six years, a number of roads
started are incomplete which is a major area of concern. Many
reasons such as availability of land, forest clearance, programme
management & provision, contracting capacity of States,
institutional arrangement, training etc. have been cited as the
reasons for such a state of affairs of the programme.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.116)
“The Committee also find that one of the reasons for these
bottlenecks being faced in the implementation of the programme
is very old and outdated enactment “Land Acquisition Act, 1894”.
The said enactment is under the administrative control of the

32
Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee have repeatedly
been recommending to the Ministry to amend the out dated
provisions made under the Act. But the same has not been done
so far. Even though the Government has found the ways and
means to provide the required allocation of Rs. 48,000 crore by
the year 2009 to complete the uphill task of providing connectivity
to all the habitations of population of 1000 and above, the
Committee are of the opinion that the targets cannot be achieved
unless the problem areas are addressed urgently. The Department
has to work on a mission-mode. There is an urgent need to
enhance the capacity of the State Government/implementing
agencies to absorb the enhanced resources. Besides, various
bottlenecks found in the implementation of the programme as
noted above need to be discussed at various meetings held with
the State Government. Frequent Central interventions are required
to motivate the State Government to take the challenge of
providing connectivity by the target date. Further, the old and
out dated laws like “Land Acquisition Act, 1894” need to be
amended expeditiously which would solve the major problems
like acquisition of land for construction of roads etc. The
Committee should be kept informed about the action taken in
this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.117)
“The Committee are perturbed to note that most of the works
under PMGSY are being sublet to contractors by the principal
contractors. Further the Committee express their apprehension
on the quality of roads built under PMGSY. Despite deploying
monitors at various levels, the quality of roads at the field level
is very poor. Many roads would have vanished in single rain.
Some would have vanished after few months of their construction
and in other areas, where the roads do exist the same are very
poorly maintained. This is a vital area which needs to be
addressed by the Government on top priority otherwise the work
done under PMGSY will bear no result and the connected
habitations would again revert to unconnected status. The
Committee recommend that to address this situation and to
improve the quality of roads, the Government should make the
monitors more accountable. If roads are found to be bad and of
poor quality, further work to the concerned contractors should
not be awarded. Besides, a notice board at the entrance and at
prominent milestones of every road constructed under PMGSY,
should be erected indicating that the road is constructed under

33
PMGSY, the month and year of its construction, the month and
year till the road is expected to be maintained by the contractor
as per the agreement and the name, designation, phone number
of the officers whom the people can contact in case the quality
of road is not up to the mark or is maintained poorly. The status
of roads should also be accessible on the website and people
should be able to put their complaints on the website so that
Senior Officers of the State/Union Government are able to monitor
the status of roads. The accountability of monitors who inspect
the roads should also be increased so that they are brought to
book in the event of non-performance. Another area of concern,
which the Committee would like the Ministry to address is to
impress upon a separate fund for the maintenance of roads. The
Committee would like to hear further in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.120)
45. The Department has stated as under:
“474 road works of phase-I and 999 road works of phase-II are
still pending. The maximum shortfall for phase II is in the States
of Bihar, Goa, Jammu & Kashmir and Tripura. The reasons for
non completion remain non-availability of land, delay in forest
clearances, deficiencies in programme management and
institutional arrangements. The concerned State governments are
being requested from time to time, at all levels, to expedite the
implementation of the programme. Minister of Rural Development
has been holding meetings with States which are found lagging
in implementation. The last meeting was held on 26 May 2006,
in which 16 States were requested to participate. So far as forest
clearance is concerned, the Ministry has requested the Ministry
of Environment and Forests to delegate powers to Regional Offices
for issuing clearance for road works involving upto 20 hectares
of forest land. The issue has been taken up at the level of PMO
also. States are being advised time and again to dedicate enough
engineers for implementing this programme. 5000 engineers of
the States have already been trained and further training of more
engineers of the implementing agencies as well as of the
contractors has been envisaged. The Ministry has also been
organizing workshops in different States to sensitise and re-orient
the engineers associated with the programme. The issues and
concerns are discussed in the Regional Review Meetings and also
in the Meetings taken by the Minister of Rural Development.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.116)

34
“For PMGSY Programme, land acquisition is generally not being
resorted to as additional land is being made available through
people’s participation. A Cabinet Note alongwith Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2004 was submitted to the Cabinet Secretary
for consideration. The Cabinet Secretariat returned the Bill with
the direction that a fresh proposal, after completing fresh
inter-Ministerial consultations, may be submitted after formation
of the new Government. In pursuance of the direction of the
Cabinet Secretariat, the Department circulated the Land
Acquisition(Amendment)Bill, to the concerned Ministries/
Departments for their comments. The comments from most of
the Ministries/Departments have since been received.
Meanwhile, it was decided in the Ministry, with the approval of
Minister (RD), that a copy of the Land Acquisition(Amendment)
Bill,2004 may also be circulated to the State governments for
their comments/suggestions. Accordingly, a copy of the Bill was
circulated to States/UTs for their views. So far, comments from
23 States/UTs have been received. The remaining 12 States/UTs
are being pursued to expedite their comments. The proposed
Amendment to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 was also discussed
in the Conference of the Revenue Secretaries of States/UTs held
on 7th June,2006 wherein States were requested to submit the
comments expeditiously to this Department. The amendment of
LA Act is also being considered by Group of Secretaries appointed
to look into National Rehabilitation Policy.
Action Taken for addressing the other important issues raised by
the Committee has already been reported in the Action Taken on
para 3.116.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.117)
“The Standard Bidding Document, presented for PMGSY and
adopted by States for PMGSY works, does allow the contractors
to sub contract the work, subject to the value of sub contracts
not exceeding 25 per cent of the total value of the work. This
would enable expeditious completion of the work.
The guidelines of PMGSY stipulate that within 15 days of the
date of Work Order, signboards along with the Logo of the
PMGSY should be erected at the site of road works. The
signboards should indicate the name of the Programme (PMGSY),
name of the road, its length, estimated cost, date of
commencement and due date of completion of construction and
name of the executing contractor.

35
The details of every road constructed under the programme,
together with status, are expected to be provided by the District
Programme Implementing Agencies on the web site
www.pmgsyonline.nic.in. Any person can access this web site and
can also make comments, register complaints or ask queries on
the Feedback link provided on the web site.
The quality of road works is being monitored by independent
quality monitors at national level. The observations of the National
Quality Monitors are sent to State governments for appropriate
action and action taken reports are received in NRRDA. Based
on the results of independent quality monitoring, it clearly
emerges that the quality of works at the field level is not very
poor. Improvement in quality of road works is a continuous
process. As an endeavor to continuously update and achieve the
targets to the best of quality, the three tiers of quality mechanism
is being revisited. It is proposed that:
Under the first tier of quality mechanism, the frequency of tests
may be rationalized and concept of stage passing may be
introduced to ensure clear accountability of the various
functionaries of the implementing agency.
Under the second tier of quality mechanism, reporting formats
and detailed guidelines would be developed and made mandatory
for States. Hitherto, States were supposed to develop their own
mechanism of State level independent quality mechanism.
Under the third tier of quality mechanism, with a view to
ensuring more accountability of independent monitors, the process
of selection of NQMs has been made independent, the guidelines
and reporting format for inspection of works are being revised
and the process of continuous performance evaluation of National
Quality Monitors by way of periodic review of reports and field
verification by reputed institutions is envisaged.“
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.120)
46. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had made a
series of observations with regard to implementation of PMGSY and
made various suggestions for its effective implementation. The
Department’s note indicates the efforts made in this regard include
higher level interventions, training of engineers, holding workshops
etc. Inspite of all these efforts, the fact remains that 474 road works
of Phase I and 999 road works of Phase II are still pending even

36
after passage of five to seven years. As per the stipulated parameters,
the roads should be ready within 12 months in normal and within
18 months in hilly areas after award of work. Since the penalty
clause for delay of works has been included under PMGSY, the
Committee fail to understand how such a large number of road
works could remain incomplete. The Committee would like the
comments of the Department in the light of the penalty provision
so that the issue of incomplete road can further be taken up while
examining next Demands for Grants.
As regards the various bottlenecks responsible for not so
satisfactory implementation of PMGSY, the Committee find that the
Department on the one hand has submitted that land acquisition is
the major hindrance on the other hand when the concern were
expressed over the delay in amendments to old and outdated Land
Acquisition Act, the Department has stated that land acquisition is
generally not being resorted to as additional land is being made
available through people’s participation. In this situation, the
Committee feel that perhaps the Department itself is not clear about
the reasons responsible for slack implementation of PMGSY. The
Committee feel that land acquisition is the major issue and various
areas need to be addressed through amendment of Land Acquisition
Act. The amendments to Act are being inordinately delayed. Since
inter-ministerial consultations are over and most of the States have
furnished their comments, the amendments to the Act should be
expedited so that the process of acquisition of land may be smoother
and the interests of the persons whose land is acquired are protected.
On the issue of monitoring the quality of road works, the
Committee find that three tiers of quality mechanisms are proposed
which may further rationalize the frequency of tests, ensure clear
accountability of various functionaries of the implementing agencies
and independent monitors and would ensure proper review and field
verification by reputed institutes. The said proposed mechanism
should be finalized and implemented so as to ensure better
monitoring the quality of road works. Further, the Department has
not addressed to the recommendation of the Committee for having
a separate fund under PMGSY to address to the issue of maintenance
of roads after the contractual period of five years is over. The
Committee would like the detailed comments of the Department in
this regard.

37
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee note that the primary objective of inserting direction
73A in the Directions by the Speaker was to make the Government
more accountable for implementation of the various recommendations
of the Committee. The Committee are concerned to note that even
after a lapse of around six months when the statement on Ninth Report
had fallen due and about three months when the Ministry was
requested for making the revised statement in respect of Third Report,
the statements are yet to be tabled by the Hon’ble Minister. The
Committee also find that the Department is taking a desired action to
make the statements in the Second part of the Seventh Session as
stated by the Secretary during the course of oral evidence. The
Committee would like the Government to ensure that that the
statements are made at the earliest during the Second part of the
Seventh Session. They further strongly recommend that in future, the
Department should ensure that the statements on each of the reports
are mandatorily made within the specified period i.e. six months after
the presentation of the Report to Parliament as per direction 73A of
the Directions by the Speaker.
Reply of the Government
The revised statement in respect of 3rd Report was made by
Hon’ble Minister (RD) in the second part of the Seventh Session on
23.5.2006 whereas the statement in respect of Ninth Report was made
in both the Houses of Parliament in the Eighth Session. In future all
efforts will be made to ensure that the statements on each of the
reports are made within the specified period.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.34)
The Committee further note that the next official estimates of
poverty incidence based on NSSO (61st) round of Sample Survey

38
conducted in 2004-05 are expected by 2006. The Committee hope that
the result would be made available during the year 2006 so that the
genuine beneficiaries i.e. below poverty line persons could be provided
assistance under the different schemes of the Government. Till the
results of the latest survey are made available, the Census report 2002,
the results of which are still to be finalized, could be used for the
purpose of different schemes of the Government.
Reply of the Government
The official estimates of incidence of poverty in the country are
released by the Planning Commission based on the Sample Survey of
Consumption Expenditure carried out by the NSSO on a quinquennial
basis. The poverty estimates based on the 61st Round of Sample Survey
conducted by the NSSO for the year 2004-05 will only indicate the
incidence of poverty in each State. However, the BPL Census conducted
by the Ministry of Rural Development through the States and UTs for
the rural areas aims at identifying the individual rural households
who are below poverty line. Therefore, the results of the BPL Census
2002 will continue to be used till the new BPL list is prepared on the
basis of fresh BPL Census.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.36)
The Committee further note that as reported in the Economic
Survey, the extent of the actual decline in the proportion of BPL
between 1993-99 and 1999-2000 has been a subject of an intense debate
by academicians because of change in the methodology for collection
of basic data in 1999-2000 and possible non-comparability with earlier
rounds of consumer expenditure surveys. The Committee would like
to be informed about the details of the methodology adopted during
the latest survey being conducted for Eleventh Plan. They would also
like to be informed whether the results of the BPL Census 2002 and
2006 would be comparable keeping in view the specific methodologies
adopted during these two surveys.
Reply of the Government
The Poverty Estimates in the country are brought out by the
Planning Commission on the basis of Sample Survey of Consumption
Expenditure carried out by the NSSO. The new Poverty Estimates in
the country are to be released by the Planning Commission based on

39
the 61st Round of Sample Survey conducted in the year 2004-05. The
Ministry conducts the BPL Census in the rural areas to identify the
BPL households through the State Governments and UT
Administrations. For BPL Census 2002, methodology based on Score
Based Ranking of the rural households was adopted for which 13
socio-economic parameters were used. The methodology for the BPL
Census for the 11th Five Year Plan will have to be decided in
consultation with the Experts, State Governments and other
stakeholders. The comparability of the results of BPL Census 2002
with that of new BPL Census will depend upon the methodology
used for the respective Census.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.47)
The Committee further find that a laudable initiative has been
taken by the Department to prepare a permanent Indira Awaas Yojana
wait list. The Committee would like that similar initiatives may be
taken for other schemes of the Department. Besides, it would be
desirable to put the BPL list of each district on the website so as to
ensure fair and transparent selection of beneficiaries under different
schemes. The Committee would also like the Government to pursue
further with the State Governments so that the direction issued by the
Department are really complied with. The Committee may also be
kept informed in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has already issued detailed guidelines to ensure
transparency in preparing the new BPL list. Apart from getting it
approved from the Gram Sabhas, the States have been instructed to
display these lists with the respective scores at a prominent place
within the village so that people can file objections if any regarding
their status in the list. Further, instructions have also been issued to
provide the photocopy of the score sheet on demand to file such
objections. Once the new BPL list is finalized, instructions have been
issued to keep the printed copies of the BPL list at the Panchayat HQ
and also to display on the website of the district so that public can
have an easy access to this information.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]

40
Recommendation Serial No. 15 (Para No. 2.56)
The Committee note that preparations for Eleventh Five Year Plan
(2007-2012) are being made and priorities are being finalized. The
Committee urge that the plan proposals should be finalized
expeditiously well before the start of the Plan. Besides, the Committee
would also like that the State Governments should be consulted before
finalizing the plan proposals. The various recommendations made by
the Committee in their respective reports should also be considered in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
The exercise of preparation of 11th Five Year Plan (2007-12) has
been undertaken by the Planning Commission. The Draft Approach
Paper to the 11th Plan has been circulated by the Planning Commission
to the Central Ministries and consultation process with the State
Governments on the Draft Approach Paper to the 11th Plan is already
in progress. The 11th Plan proposals in respect of this Ministry will be
prepared when the priorities for the next Five Year Plan are finalized
and approved by the National Development Council (NDC).
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 3.36)
The Committee are concerned to note the poor performance of a
very important programme of the Department i.e. ‘National Food for
Work Programme’ which has now been converted into ‘National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme’. Not only that, the utilization of outlay
is dismal i.e. 28.21 per cent during 2004-05 and 32.21 per cent during
2005-06 (as on 31 January, 2006). Even if the latest data is taken into
account, the percentage of expenditure to total available funds is almost
one-third. Out of total available funds of Rs. 5,800 crore, expenditure
reported as on February, 2006 is Rs. 1,944.31 crore. Not only that a
large number of works taken up under the programme are still to be
completed. In this scenario, the Committee express their apprehension
about the success of the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
which is the top most priority programme of the Government. The
Committee strongly recommend to the Government to plug the
loopholes which resulted into poor implementation of National Food
for Work Programme and take stringent measures to ensure that the
objectives of National Rural Employment Guarantee Act are met.

41
Reply of the Government
NFFWP was launched in November, 2004 as a prelude to NREGA
pending enactment of an Act to provide legal Guarantee of wage
employment to the Rural poor. During the Financial year 2004-05,
Rs. 2019.45 crores along with 20 lakh Metric tons of food grains were
released under the programme. A token release of Rs. 2.00 crore per
district was made of SGRY funds in November, 2004 since there was
no budget provision under NFFWP . The remaining funds were released
in February and March, 2005 after the supplementary budget was
passed. During 2005-06 Rs. 4500.00 crores had been allocated for the
programme. Against this allocation, Rs. 2083.28 crores were released
under NFFWP . In the meantime, NREG Act was passed in Monsoon
session of Parliament in 2005. Rs. 2367.57 crores were released under
NREGA which was launched in 200 identified districts on 2.2.2006.
There was an unspent balance of Rs. 1280.27 crores under NFFWP
from the previous year as the programme started late in 2004-2005.
Thus, during the financial year 2005-06 the total funds available for
NFFWP were Rs.3401.76 crores. An expenditure of Rs. 2412.90 crores
has been reported under NFFWP . Thus, the percentage of expenditure
under NFFWP during 2005-06 is over 70 per cent.
As regards the number of works taken up under the programme,
the State Governments have been directed to complete ongoing works
under NFFWP upto 30th June, 2006. Guidelines of NREGA have been
issued after wide consultation with State Governments, Members of
Parliament, experts and general public and are very comprehensive.
Further, instructions are issued from time to time for proper
implementation of the Act.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 3.37)
The Committee further find that National Food for Work
Programme initially started in 150 districts has now been subsumed
into National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme. They also note
that during 2004-05 out of 73,183 number of total works undertaken,
18,130 works could actually be completed. Similarly, during 2005-06
out of total works of 1,80,396, actually 1,03,625 works were completed.
Besides as on 31 December, 2005, an amount of Rs. 1,910.73 crore was
lying as unspent balances under the programme. The Committee also
note that as per the information provided by the Department, State
Governments have been directed to complete all ongoing works under

42
NFFWP latest by 30 June, 2006. Instructions have also been issued
whereby the works can be completed under NREGA. The Committee
feel that there is an urgent need to monitor the status of the incomplete
works taken under NFFWP . Besides the monitoring of the position of
utilization of huge unspent balances is urgently required. The
Committee would like the Department to pursue with the State/UT
Governments and a strict monitoring of the programme should be
done. The Committee should also be kept apprised in this regard.
Reply of the Government
NREGA was launched in 200 identified districts including the 150
NFFWP districts with effect from 2nd February 2006 and hence the
focus shifted from NFFWP to NREGA. Part of funds earlier allocated
under NFFWP were utilized for implementation of the Act. Rs. 2367.57
crores were released under NREGA in the year 2005-06. Under NFFWP ,
144329 works were completed in 2005-06 and 87641 works were in
progress as on March 2006. Works started under NFFWP are being
monitored on a monthly basis. A detailed monitoring system is being
followed for monitoring of NREGA. An MIS has been devised by this
Ministry and provided to all the States. State Governments have been
asked to give monthly information regarding implementation of the
Act. NLMs and NQMs have been appointed by the Ministry who are
being sent for field visits. The observations made by them are being
conveyed to the States regularly with a view to get the discrepancies
in the implementation process rectified by the State Governments.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 3.39)
The Committee further find that in the districts not covered by
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, the employment
generation scheme SGRY would be applicable till the Guarantee Scheme
is made applicable in all the districts in the country. In view of this
position, the Committee would like that adequate allocation under
SGRY should be made so that the districts were NREGA Scheme is
not being applicable are not deprived of the allocation made under an
old programme of employment generation i.e. SGRY.
Reply of the Government
The districts which are not under NREGA have been allotted
Rs.3000.00 crores against Rs.2836.32 crores allocated last year. Thus,
the recommendation of the Committee has been implemented.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]

43
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 3.55)
The Committee reiterate the importance of the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Legislation as indicated in their Thirteenth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) whereby it had been observed that the
National Rural Employment Guarantee legislation is one of the most
important legislations introduced in Parliament after Independence and
it is the first step of the Government towards ensuring some sort of
economic and social Security by way of guaranteed wage employment
to the millions of poor in rural areas in the country. The Committee,
while noting that only two months have passed since the legislation
was enacted, feel that it is too early to draw any conclusions about
the success of the Guarantee Scheme. The initial date of implementation
provided by the Department indicate that whereas in some of the
States viz, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujrat, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan
and West Bengal, a good number of applications have been received,
in Haryana and Karnataka, the number of applications received is
quite less. The Committee also find that the number of applications
received is quite dismal with reference to the number of districts
covered in a particular State. The highest number of districts covered
are in Bihar i.e. 23, followed by Uttar Pradesh i.e. 22. The data with
regard to applications as received in both the States is quite comparable.
Performance-wise, Andhra Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh which have
13 and 18 districts respectively covered under the scheme have
comparatively received almost three times the applications as received
by Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee would like the department
to find out the reasons why lesser number of applications have been
received in these States where the poverty index may be quite high as
compared to Andhra Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh and apprise the
Committee accordingly. Further, the Committee note that there is vast
difference between applications registered, job cards issued and
employment offered. Out of 2.24 crore applications received, job cards
have been issued to around 83 lakhs applicants. Further there is a
huge gap between job cards issued and employment demand and
employment offered. Out of 82 lakh job cards issued, employment
was offered to only 6,14,838 workers which is a very sorry state of
affairs. The Committee would like to urge the Department to analyze
the aforesaid data critically and take corrective action, so that the
ambitious programme is implemented with full vigor and the benefits
reach to the intended beneficiaries. For this, the government has to
undertake effective long term planning, provide the necessary ground
training to implementing agencies, identify the work timely, create the
necessary demand for work and ensure timely employment to the job
seekers for the specified period. Since the legal responsibility of

44
providing employment rests primarily with the State Governments and
the responsibility of providing commensurate funds rests primarily
with the Central Government, the Government should ensure that the
NREGA does not become a liability if it is unable to generate adequate
employment commensurate to the demand. The Department should
maintain the district-wise data with regard to implementation of
NREGA and it should be put on the website so that public can have
access to the data and be aware of the implementation status.
Reply of the Government
Progress report of NREGA is at Appendix-I. In Bihar, the progress
in the beginning had been slow due to the State Assembly Elections.
The State of Uttar Pradesh has assured that they are taking effective
steps to implement the Act. The figures indicate improvement in
performance in U.P .
As regards the gap between applications, received and job cards
issued, the job cards are issued after scrutinizing the applications for
which 15 days time has been prescribed under the guidelines. As per
the latest available data, the gap has reduced considerably. However,
some gap is inevitable since sometimes more than one member of a
family file an application while only one card for household with
names of all members willing to work is issued. Similarly, employment
is to be provided within 15 days of the receipt of demand. Thus, there
is always a gap between these two figures. The issue of job cards
does not automatically lead to offering employment under NREGA.
Employment is offered only if a job card holder demands it. Therefore,
the number of job cards issued is not a measure of the efficiency of
offering employment. As per the latest status, 7149252 people have
demanded employment and 6584259 workers have been provided
employment, which is 92.10 %. State wise and district wise data
regarding implementation of NREGA has been put on the website of
Ministry of Rural Development as recommended by the Committee.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 3.58)
The Committee find that the provision of unemployment allowance
under the Guarantee Scheme is the legal right of a person who has
been issued a job card. The huge difference between the employment
demand and employment offered is a matter of concern. Besides the
expenditure with regard to unemployment allowance has to be borne

45
by the State Governments as per the provisions made under the
legislation. In view of this scenario, it will be a huge burden on the
State exchequer if the job opportunities are not created by way of
initiating the admissible projects/schemes in a specific area. The
Committee would like to strongly recommend to the Government to
keep a watch on the data and take the necessary action to bridge the
gap between the job cards issued, demand for employment and
employment offered so as to avoid unnecessary litigation.
Reply of the Government
Unemployment allowance is admissible in case a job seeker is not
provided employment within 15 days of demanding work. Mere issue
of a job card to a rural household does not entitle it for the
unemployment allowance. The State Governments are aware of their
liabilities regarding expenditure on unemployment allowance. So far
this Ministry has not received information regarding payment of
unemployment allowance to workers from any of the States.  The gap
between employment demanded and employment offered has already
been explained in reply to para 3.55.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 3.63)
The Committee find that in the absence of information with regard
to total area (districts/blocks) falling under Schedule fifth and Schedule
Sixth areas in the country, it is difficult to draw any conclusion on the
issue of according priority to such areas in the country. In view of the
aforesaid position, the Committee would like to be apprised of the
total area (districts/blocks) in each State in Schedule Fifth and schedule
Sixth areas and the areas covered by the NREGA so far as to draw
any meaningful conclusion and recommend further in this regard. The
Committee would like that the information in this regard should be
furnished separately for Schedule Fifth and Schedule Sixth areas.
Reply of the Government
A statement indicating the areas (district/block-wise) of a State
falling under Schedule V and VI of the Constitution and covered under
NREGA is at Appendix II.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]

46
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 3.65)
The Committee note that handling of such a voluminous work
related to implementation of 50 per cent of the Employment Guarantee
Scheme by Panchayati Raj Institutions is a huge challenge. The capacity
building of the Panchayats by way of empowering these institutions
through funds and functionaries is the prerequisite to ensure the success
of the programme. Conducting a few programmes by NIRD is not
sufficient. The Committee strongly recommend to the Government to
take the desired action in coordination with the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj for empowering the Panchayats so as to enable these institutions
to take the responsibility of implementation of a scheme of this level.
Reply of the Government
The State Governments have been advised to provide additional
staff to the implementing agencies for effective implementation of the
Act. Salary of such staff is chargeable to the administrative expenditure
subject to the prescribed ceiling. At present 2% of the total cost of
implementation of the Act is being provided towards administrative
expenses. This Ministry has also written to Ministry of Panchayati Raj
for capacity building of the Panchayats. In the last financial year (2005-
06), Rs. 74 lakhs had been released to the States for conducting training
courses. This is in addition to the two TOT programmes organized by
NIRD. During the current financial year also funds have been released
to few states for taking up training activities for officials/non officials
involved in implementation of NREGA. The State Governments have
been asked to indicate their further requirements of funds in this regard.
The Ministry is monitoring training of PRIs in NREGA districts in a
time bound manner.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 28, Para No. 3.69)
The Committee while noting that only seven States only have so
far notified Guarantee Scheme under NREGA, urge the Department to
pursue with the State Governments for an early notification of the
Scheme.
Reply of the Government
State Governments are required to formulate their State schemes
within a period of six months from the date of issue of notification by

47
the Centre. The State Governments have been instructed to follow the
provisions of the Act and frame their schemes within the prescribed
time frame.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 29, Para No. 3.70)
Further, the Committee find that a detailed implementing and
monitoring mechanism as proposed under the provision of the Act
has to be created to ensure the successful implementation of the
Guarantee Scheme. The Committee note with concern that State
Government have not yet initiated action in this regard. In view of
this scenario, the Committee strongly recommend to the department
to pursue with the State Governments for appointment of different
agencies to ensure the success of the programme. In the absence of
the desired mechanism as provided in the provision made under the
Act, the Committee have their apprehensions that the Guarantee
Scheme may meet the fate of the other Centrally Sponsored Schemes
of the Department.
Reply of the Government
An exhaustive monitoring system is being followed for monitoring
of NREGA. A computerised MIS has been devised by this Ministry
and provided to all the States. NLMs have been appointed by the
Ministry who are being sent regularly to their respective areas for
field visits. Reputed national organizations have been commissioned
to undertake concurrent evaluation of NREGA in selected States. The
observations made by them are being conveyed to the States regularly
with a view to get the discrepancies in the implementation process
rectified by the State Governments. States are being constantly pursued
to operationalise the MIS, send progress reports regularly and monitor
the implementation of the Act.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
 Recommendation (Serial No. 30, Para No. 3.80)
The Committee are perturbed to note the poor lending rate by
Banks. During 2004-05, applications at the rate of four out of every
ten applicant were rejected. The rejection rate has further increased to
about five persons out of every ten applicants. This inter-alia means

48
that over fifty percent of the needy are unable to take benefit under
SGSY due to some reason or other. The Committee observe that this
is a disturbing trend and would ultimately lead to collapse of the
scheme. The Department cannot wash away its hands simply by
shifting its responsibility on Reserve Bank of India, which is entrusted
with the responsibility to coordinate and motivate Banks on the issues
relating to SGSY. The Department needs to resolve all the issues
pertaining to poor lending rate by taking the matter at the highest
level in the Reserve Bank of India, Finance Ministry and the Chief of
leading Banks. The Committee are of the view that applicant approach
the Banks with great hope and expectations and they feel let down
when their applications are rejected on flimsy grounds or due to
cumbersome procedure. The Committee, therefore, suggest that the
procedure for lending under SGSY be simplified and paper work
should be reduced so that people are not unnecessarily harassed. Help
counters may be opened either at the Bank or DRDA Office to assist
the illiterate applicant in filling up the forms, explaining them the
highlights of the scheme, the liability of the applicant, the procedure
for taking the benefit under the scheme etc. Further, the role of DRDAs
and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) should be strengthened for
effective coordination between them and the Banks so that the needy
applicants are not unnecessarily turned away by Banks.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has already taken steps to improve poor lending by
Banks through frequent interaction with the various agencies involved
viz; Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Commercial, Private and Cooperative
Banks, Ministry of Finance etc. The issue has also been taken up by
with the Ministry of Finance which in turn advised the State Level
Bankers Committee (SLBC) in various States to achieve the credit
mobilization targets in order to improve lending by banks. The Ministry
of Finance has also issued directions to the banks to take stern action
against the officers who failed to achieve the targets under SGSY. The
Governor, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has also been apprised of the
situation and requested to take up the matter with the Chief Executives
of the concerned banks to take urgent remedial action in this regard.
The Secretaries in charge of Rural Development in all States/UTs have
also been asked to furnish the details of poor performing bank branches
and to accelerate the pace of credit flow under the scheme. The Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) and Ministry of Finance have also been informed
for close monitoring to ensure distribution of loans to achieve the
targets set under the SGSY scheme. As the rate of interest charged by
the banks on loans under SGSY is very high compared to other sectors,

49
the Ministry of Finance is requested to advise banks to keep interest
rate at 9% for Rural and Agricultural loans and adhere to RBI
Guidelines in this regard.
As regards high rate of rejection of applications by banks, the
matter has been taken up for discussion in the next Central Level
Coordination Committee Meeting scheduled to be held.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 40 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 31, Para No. 3.88)
The Committee are concerned to note that the physical targets
meant for disadvantaged groups like SC/ST and handicap category
have not been met satisfactorily. While some States have fared well,
the figures indicate that the SC/ST Swarozgaris assisted in more than
13 States and Union Territories are less than fifty per cent. Further, the
statement indicates that except in Tamil Nadu and Manipur the
percentage of handicap Swarozgaris assisted is less than the three per
cent target. On an average, by the end of February 2006, only
43.13 percent of the targeted Swarozgaris could be assisted which also
highlights the poor performance of the scheme. Further, the Committee
note that the utilization of funds by many States is very poor. While
more than 13 States have disbursed less than 50 per cent of the credit
marked for them, the Committee note that the overall percentage of
credit disbursed is only 36.02 per cent. The Committee observe that
the poor performance could be attributed to the slack attention paid
by the Government. Something is lacking due to which the Government
has failed to attract the targeted number of Swarozgaris. The DRDAs/
Zilla Parishads are also not trained enough to meet their objectives.
As revealed by the Concurrent Evaluation, the scheme is facing a lot
of problems, which include indifferent attitude of Banks, inadequate
infrastructure, problems in identifying projects etc. There is an urgent
need to address all these issues to ensure the success of the programme.
The Committee would like the Department to look into the matter
and take remedial action in consultation with State Governments, Banks,
DRDAs and all other concerned.
Reply of the Government
As per the information available with this Ministry for the year
2005-06, there are eight States who have disbursed less than 50 % of

50
the credit targets while twenty three UTs have achieved more than
50 % of the credit targets under the scheme. Three UTs have not
furnished their reports yet. The overall credit achievement under the
scheme has improved to 72.37 % during the year 2005-06.
The Government has already taken various steps to improve the
performance of credit disbursal under SGSY in coordination with the
various agencies involved viz; Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Commercial
and Cooperative Banks, Ministry of Finance etc.. In this regard the
Ministry has called for information of poor performing bank branches
under SGSY from various State Governments/UTs and took this matter
with the Ministry of Finance, which in turn advised the State Level
Bankers Committee (SLBC) in various States to achieve the credit
mobilization targets. The Ministry of Finance has also issued directions
to the CMDs of banks to take stern action against the officers who
failed to achieve the targets under SGSY.
During 2005-06, The Ministry has also fixed and communicated
quarterly credit mobilization targets for better monitoring of the credit
targets under SGSY throughout the year. The Governor, Reserve Bank
of India (RBI) has also been apprised of the poor lending by banks
and requested to take up the matter with the Chief Executives of the
concerned banks to take urgent remedial action in this regard and to
convene a special meeting of all Chairmen and Managing Directors of
the Commercial Banks in Mumbai to discuss issues like flow of credit
under SGSY and poor lending by various bank branches.
The Secretaries in charge of Rural Development in all States/UTs
have also been asked to furnish the details of poor performing bank
branches and to accelerate the pace of credit flow under the scheme.
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and Ministry of Finance have also
been informed for close monitoring to ensure distribution of loans to
achieve the targets set under the SGSY scheme. As the rate of interest
charged by the banks on loans under SGSY is very high compared to
other sectors, the Ministry of Finance is requested to advise banks to
keep interest rate at 9% for Rural and Agricultural loans and adhere
to RBI Guidelines in this regard.
In addition to above, a meeting was held on 19th April, 2005 in
Mumbai under the Chairmanship of Dy. Governor, RBI with CMDs of
Commercial Banks where performance of banks involved under SGSY
was evaluated. The issue was also discussed during the Ninth Meeting
of the Central Level Coordination Committee held on 28th June, 2006
which was attended by representatives of State Governments and
Banks.

51
The SGSY guidelines provide that the officials and staff of DRDAs
should be constantly trained in the general field of management of
rural areas and poverty. The personnel to be posted in the DRDAs
should be given a pre-service training to orient them suitably to their
tasks. Further there should also be a system of an annual in-service
where the officers could be given the updates about the relevant fields
and which would also afford an opportunity of exchanging their
experiences. The Ministry has also impressed upon the State
Governments/UTs to effectively implement these guidelines. In
addition, the Ministry also assists the State Governments for organizing
training courses under SGSY for RD functionaries of State/District/
Block/Panchayat level, elected representatives from State/District/
Block/Panchayat level or Bankers, Facilitators, SHPIs, NGOs etc.) at
recognized training institutes in the State.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para no. 40 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 34, Para No. 3.106)
As already indicated in the preceding para of the report, the
Committee appreciate the initiatives of the Department to instruct the
State Governments to prepare the wait list for IAY as per the ranking
in the BPL list and display it at the prominent places. The Committee
would like the Government to ensure that the instructions issued by
the State Government are complied with. Further, similar initiatives
are required in other Schemes of the Department. The Committee would
like the Department to take action in this regard and inform the
Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
A close watch is being kept on States/UTs to ensure compliance
in respect of the Ministry’s instructions to prepare the permanent IAY
waitlist. This measure, which is intended to ensure greater transparency
in the implementation mechanism of IAY is a priority area for the
Ministry.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]

52
Recommendation (Serial No. 38, Para No. 3.127)
The Committee observe that the Steering Committee on Provision
of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA) in its first meeting held on
11th January, 2005 had decided that each cluster would be financed to
the tune of Rs. 4-5 crore over a period of three years in the initial
pilot phase. After a gap of two months, the decision of this meeting
was implemented and Rs. 10 crores were released to provide physical
or road connectivity in selected clusters during March 2005. Thereafter
upto 31 January, 2006, no further funds have been released. The
Committee conclude that during 2005-06 no progress seems to have
been made in the selected PURA clusters as no funds have been
released even after a span of more than one year. The Committee
while noting the slow pace of work, express their apprehension that
it would take a long time to get the results from the pilot clusters and
thereafter launch the scheme nation-wide. The Committee find that a
visionary programme to bridge the gap between urban and rural divide
has been proposed by Hon’ble President. There is an urgent need to
translate the visionary idea into a reality. For this the pilot project
should be completed expeditiously so that the programme can be
launched nation-wide.
Reply of the Government
Subsequent to the decision of the Steering Committee in its meeting
on 11th January 2005, Rs. 10 crores were released to States for identified
clusters in March, 2005. As such, the States utilized these funds in the
year 2005-06. One of the conditions for further release of funds was
60% utilization of funds already released. Based on utilization reports
from States in this regard, release of funds against the budget provision
for the year 2005 -06 was considered by the Steering Committee in its
meetings on 18th January 2006 and 10th March 2006. Funds, as per
enclosed statement (Appendix-III), were consequently released to States.
A Statement (Appendix-IV) of physical & financial progress report for
the year 2005-2006 is enclosed.
As per the implementation schedule approved by the Cabinet in
its meeting on 16.03.2006, the scheme is to be implemented on a pilot
basis for three years. A Note for consideration of the COS regarding
full-fledged PURA Scheme is to be initiated and thereafter Cabinet
approval is to be obtained on the restructured Scheme. The ministry
is actively engaged in this exercise.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]

53
Recommendation (Serial No. 39, Para No. 3.137)
The Committee observe that DRDA is an important district level
agency for implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes. As per
the Guidelines, 25 per cent of the funds are to be allocated and released
by the State Governments. However, the Performance Budget of the
Department does not monitor the progress of State’s share of funds.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should
invariably monitor the State’s share of funds and reflect the same in
the Performance Budget of the Department.
Reply of the Government
Generally, there is no problem in release of State’s Share and only
in some cases, few States release their share sometimes late. The Central
Government has a system of effective monitoring through quarterly
reports, audit reports, etc. As per DRDA Administration Guidelines,
the 2nd instalment shall be released subject to inter-alia condition that
the State Government should have released its contribution during the
previous year. Deficiency in release of State’s share will be deducted
from the second instalment. As suggested by the Committee, progress
of State’s share of funds will also be reflected in the Performance
Budget of the Department.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 40, Para No. 3.138)
The Committee further find from the information furnished by the
Department that seven utilisation certificates amounting to Rs.125.21
crore were due with regard to the funds released by 31 March, 2004.
The Committee observe that DRDA is the main agency through which
funds for different schemes of the Department are allocated to the
States/implementing agencies. The non-furnishing of utilisation
certificate by a Government agency, which is responsible for effective
management of rural development programmes at district Panchayat
level is really a matter of concern. The Committee would like the
Department to explain the reasons for non-furnishing of utilisation
certificates by DRDA. Besides, the other issues which need to be
addressed are training of the officers and other administrative initiatives
relating to service matters to improve the efficiency and accountability
of officers involved in manning DRDAs.

54
Reply of the Government
The instances of non-furnishing of utilization certificate in the
Report are based on the information as on 31st December, 2004.
However, subsequently, concerned DRDA had furnished the utilization
certificate. Guidelines for ‘DRDA Administration’ envisage that release
of second instalment shall be subject to the condition that utilization
certificate for the previous year is furnished. It is also mentioned that
in order to make DRDA a provisional body, emphasis is given for
getting the officers and staff of DRDA constantly trained in the general
field of management of rural areas. Various State Institutes of rural
Development (SIRDs) and National Institute of Rural Development
(NIRD) design suitable training programmes for DRDA officials.
Ministry of Rural Development has also taken steps to strengthen the
DRDA and it has made amendments in DRDA Administration
guidelines enabling the State governments to hire qualified and
experienced persons on contract basis to fill up the vacant sanctioned
posts in DRDA in Group ‘A’, ‘B’& ‘C’ as per their Recruitment Rules.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 41, Para No. 3.150)
The Committee find from the information given above that the
performance of CAPART has deteriorated over the years. CAPART
came into existence in 1986 with the principal objective to involve the
people in the implementation of development programmes and promote
need based, innovative projects through non-governmental voluntary
organizations. The great shortfall in achievement of targets during 2005-
2006 are indicated in the Budget documents speaks volumes about the
inefficiency of CAPART. Further, the report of the Estimates Committee
highlights the collapse of the CAPART. Even the DG, CAPART has
admitted this during the course of oral evidence. In view of this
scenario, the Committee strongly recommend the Department to look
in to the matter seriously in the light of the poor performance of
CAPART and make all out efforts to review/restructure the functioning
of CAPART. The Committee would like to be apprised further in the
regard.
Reply of the Government
CAPART has taken/propose to take several steps for improving
its performance, as mentioned below:—
i. Special efforts are being made by redressing the weakness
in the internal system by weekly review of pendency and

55
a special drive for closure of completed files. 413 files have
been closed during the period from 1.3.2006 to 31.5.2006
alone.
ii. Internal financial systems are being strengthened.
iii. Workshops will be conducted to sensitize the NGOs for
formulation of viable project proposals keeping in view the
needs of the area.
iv. An effective monitoring system has been introduced by
switching over to Institutional monitors from individual
monitors.
v. Streamlining and introducing stringent computerization
monitoring systems to shorten the project approval cycle
and to introduce transparency.
vi. The new project proposals will be received by 31st October
only and the period form November to March every year
will be devoted for processing and disposal of pending
proposals and issue of sanction orders.
vii. A panel of experts for various activities has been drawn.
Subject matter specialists of programme contents will be
invited in all the Regional Committee meetings to give the
committee the benefit of their knowledge and experience.
viii. The unit cost of various activities within a project as well
as unit costs of stereotype projects are being standardized.
Standardized unit cost of Rain Water rooftop harvesting and
for Disability programmes has already been drawn.
ix. An interactive meeting on ”The Future Role of CAPART”
and on Rural Technology for development was convened
for holding National Consultation with members of
Executive Committee, General Body, and National Standing
Committees and Technology Resource Centre of CAPART.
Leading NGOs from different States were also invited for
the meeting. An Action Plan, based on the consultation has
been drawn up.
x. It has been decided to nominate a lead NGO in each State
and possibly District to ensure that CAPART’s programmes
in Rural Technology, Livelihood Generation, Roof Water
Harvesting and Sanitation are followed up in a focused
manner. The lead NGOs will also be required to facilitate
project and NGO mapping and create a database of grassroot
NGOs in each State. The objective is to reach the unserved,

56
under-served and unreached areas through targeted project
mode. The lead NGOs would be credible, well-established
VOs with sufficient infrastructure. Identification of lead
NGOs and formulation of State plans of action in
consultation with State Governments is in progress.
xi. A cadre of Young Professionals at the village will be created
with required life skills and income generating skills. The
rural YPs would be friend, facilitator and guide to the village
community and will act as an intermediary with the
Government and as representatives of grassroot NGOs. The
rural YPs would be trained in marketable economic skills
and life skills. They would also be provided knowledge of
Government schemes, basic computer knowledge and legal
issues.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 42, Para No. 3.163)
The Committee find that capacity building of the implementing
agencies are the major input for the successful implementation of rural
development programmes for which crores of rupees are annually being
allocated. Besides, with the decentralization of responsibilities in
pursuance of article 243G of the Constitution of India, there is a great
responsibility to equip Panchayats to take the huge responsibility. With
the introduction of ‘National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme’,
the responsibilities of Panchayats would increase manifold. The
Committee further find that NIRD at the Central level, SIRD at the
State level and ETCs at the district/block level are the premier
institutions involved for imparting training and capacity building of
Panchayats and other functionaries involved with the implementation
of various programme/scheme meant for upliftment of rural masses.
The shortfall in achievement of targets by these institutions is a matter
of great concern. Out of 21 research studies, NIRD could undertake
only one study. There is huge shortfall in achievement with regard to
training programmes of SIRD/ETCs during the first three quarters
during 2005-06. The Committee while expressing their unhappiness
over the shortfall in achievement of targets during 2005-2006, would
like the Department to explain the reasons and to take the corrective
actions. The Committee should be kept informed in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) has conducted
230 training programmes against the target of 201 training programmes

57
and trained 6453 participants in 2005-2006. The NIRD also completed
19 research studies in 2005-06. The NIRD has also organized 6 training
programmes for PR functionaries who are involved in the
implementation of various developmental programmes aimed for
upliftment of rural masses. As per latest reports received from SIRDs/
ETCs, the progress of training programmes conducted during each
quarter of 2005-2006 is as under:-
1st Quarter 2nd Quarter 3rd Quarter 4th Quarter
Target Training Target Training Target Training Target Training
programme programme programme programme
conducted conducted conducted conducted
1000 1343 1800 2122 1800 1584 1400 3908
In all, 9070 training programmes were conducted in 2005-06 against
the target of 6,000 training programmes with the participation of
5.09 lakh persons.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Recommendation (Serial No. 43, Para No. 3.164)
 The Committee further note that with the added responsibilities
as stated above, the challenge of imparting training to Panchayats and
other implementing agencies cannot be met only by these Government
agencies.
There is an urgent need to train some of the NGOs as the mother
trainers who can impart training to PRIs and others involved in
implementation of rural development schemes. Besides, the possibilities
of taking the benefit of other local institutions can also be explored.
The allocation for training needs to be enhanced substantially. The
Committee urge the Department to take all possible measures so that
the objectives set under the laudable schemes/programmes are met.
The Committee may also be informed of the further action taken by
the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Realizing the fact that the existing capacity of RD institutions
especially at State and Sub-state level is not able to cope with the
entire training load on their own, the Ministry has requested State
Governments and State Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs) to

58
draw up State specific training action plans for imparting training to
the functionaries of RD and PR institutions and elected members of
PRIs. In this exercise, the possibility of developing networking with
some of the reputed training institutions and NGOs is being explored
with a view to expand the reach of training. Proposal for adequate
funds for implementing these Action Plans will be included in the
requirements of funds by this Ministry during the 11th Plan.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]

59
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
—NIL—

60
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee note with concern that although our neighbouring
countries could improve the human development index, India has
remained static at 127th position for the last three years. Since out of
three parameters for determining human development index, one
parameter i.e. employment is the mandate of the Department of Rural
Development, the Department has, therefore, a key role in improving
the human development index. The Committee would like to point
out that employment being the basic parameter to improve the
economic and social status of a person, once an individual gets
employment, the other issues like education and basic health services
are taken care of. There is a co-relation between the status of
employment of an individual and his social and economic status.
Reply of the Government
It is a fact that regular employment of an individual helps in
generating income and improving his living standards. The Ministry
of Rural Development stands committed to develop rural areas through
creation of more employment opportunities for weaker sections, women,
physically challenged people of society through self and wage
employment schemes namely Swaranjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana
(SGSY), Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) & National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act, NREGA. The other schemes like Indira
Awaas Yojana (IAY), Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY),
Drought Prone Areas Programmes (DPAP), Desert Development
Programme (DDP) and Integrated Wastelands Programme (IWDP) are
also providing employment to the rural poor of the country. With a
view to improve the present position of Human Development Index,
basic amenities like housing, drinking water, sanitation, rural road and
rural infrastructure are being constantly developed and upgraded in
rural areas through implementation of rural development programmes.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]

61
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.15)
From the status of allocation of outlay as indicated above, the
Committee note that although there may be some enhancement of
outlay in each Plan as compared to the previous Plans, the percentage
increase in outlay when compared to the overall outlay of the
Government of India do not indicate any substantial enhancement in
rural development sector. There was marginal increase in allocation of
resources for rural development for each of the Plan as compared to
the previous Plan upto 9th Plan. However, during 10th Plan, when
the targets for GDP growth are being set at 8.1 per cent and the
Indian economy has been acknowledged as booming economy
worldwide, the percentage distribution of allocation has decreased from
8.7 percent to 8 percent.
Reply of the Government
The GDP growth is not directly correlated with the allocation of
funds to the rural development programmes. The GDP growth is
calculated on various parameters and the figure of 8.1 percent is
estimated. It may be observed that the allocation of the Ministry of
Rural Development has been progressively increasing over the years/
Plans, which may be seen from the following data:
S.No.  Year Amount Growth Growth in
(Rs. in crore) in RE GDP
(RE) (Current Prices)
 1. 2002-03  18376.00  -  7.5
 2. 2003-04  19200.00  4.48  12.8 (P)
 3. 2004-05  18216.40 (-) 5.12  11.8 (P)
 4. 2005-06  27490.00  50.91  12.5 (P)
 5. 2006-07 (BE)  31443.62  14.38  -
P- Provisional
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]

62
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.16)
The Committee further note that some of the States such as Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh are not doing well.
The scheme-wise position has been reviewed in the subsequent chapters
of the report. In view of this scenario, the Committee recommend the
Government to enhance the allocation for rural development adequately
so that the benefit of the booming economy reach the poorest of the
poor in the country. Further, there is an urgent need to ensure even
development of different States in the country. The Committee would
like to strongly recommend to the Department to review the position
of implementation of schemes State-wise and after addressing the
shortcomings, suggest some remedial measures and inform the
Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
According to the progress reports submitted by the State
Governments of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh,
the utilization of funds with respect to the available funds during the
year 2005-06 is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
S.No. Name of the Total available Utilisation % Utilisation
State funds
1. Bihar 3706.38  1692.40 45.69
2. Madhya Pradesh 1927.22  1368.85 71.03
3. Rajasthan 1759.11  1024.05 58.21
4. Uttar Pradesh  316.81  220.03 69.45
The Ministry of Rural Development make efforts at all levels for
enhanced allocation of funds for extending benefits to more target
households of rural areas. It may be seen from the previous Table that
allocation in 2006-07 is Rs. 31,443 crore as against Rs. 18,376 crore in
2002-03 i.e. 71% increase in allocation.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)

63
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.21)
The Committee observe that while requirement of funds for
foodgrains component and special component is an important feature,
the funds are being made available only at the Supplementary Grants
or RE stage. The Committee have repeatedly been recommending in
this regard in their respective reports. In spite of that the practice of
allocating funds for foodgrains component at Supplementary Grants
stage still continue. The Committee are of the opinion that demanding
huge allocation at Supplementary Grants stage is not a healthy practice
of Budgeting. It does not give an idea about the allocation made under
a scheme in different districts. The implementing agencies should be
well aware of the provisions made under a scheme well in time i.e.
in the beginning of the financial year. In view of this, the Committee
strongly recommend that the practice of allocating funds at RE stage
for a component which is certain and for which estimates are available
at BE stage should be dispensed with and funds should be made
available at the BE stage itself. The Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance should be apprised of the concerns of the Committee in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
 The Ministry of Rural Development includes the cost of foodgrains
also at the time of preparation of Annual Plan of the Sampoorna
Gramin Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) and National Food for Work Programme
(NFFWP). However, the Planning Commission allocates the resources
on the basis of the available Gross Budgetary Support since the
allocation of foodgrains requires inter-Ministerial consultation and also
the availability of foodgrains stock. Therefore, no commitment is made
at the time of Annual Plan discussion. It is under these circumstances
that additional resources are made available at the stage of
Supplementary Demands for Grants of the Ministry to reimburse the
cost of foodgrains to the Food Corporation of India. The
recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee is appreciated and it will
be conveyed to the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance
before the next year’s Annual Plan discussions.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)

64
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No.2.22)
The Committee find from the data indicated above that there is
enhancement of only Rs. 2691. 62 crore in B.E. 2006-07 as compared to
R.E. 2005-06, although Rs. 11,300 crore have been allocated for the
ambitious programme ‘National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme’.
Not only that, ambitious targets have also been fixed for Rural Housing.
The comparative position of outlay schemes-wise has been analyzed
in the subsequent Chapters of the Report. Here the Committee feel
that the enhancement of outlay in one programme may be due to the
decrease in outlay in some other scheme. The Committee disapprove
of this tendency of the Government. The Committee strongly
recommend that adequate outlay under different schemes should be
provided to achieve the laudable objectives. Besides, the enhancement
of outlay for the ambitious programme i.e. NREGA should not be at
the cost of the established programmes of the Department.
Reply of the Government
Although the net enhancement in the outlay in the Budget
Estimates of 2006-07 is Rs. 3953.60 crore as compared to RE for the
year 2005-06. This allocation only represents the cash component
(excludes foodgrains component) and the SGRY will not be
implemented in 200 districts where NREGA is in operation. Therefore,
the allocation under SGRY is only for 386 districts.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para no. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No.2.33)
The Committee find that the results of the BPL Census 2002 have
inordinately been delayed. BPL Census is conducted at the beginning
of each Five Year Plan so as to identify the households living Below
Poverty Line (BPL) who could be benefited by the different schemes
of the Ministry. Although the Tenth Five Year Plan is coming to an
end, the results of the BPL Census conducted for the said Five Year
Plan are yet to be finalized. While noting the fact that the results were
delayed due to the stay imposed by the Supreme Court in this matter,
the Committee have repeatedly been recommending to the Department
in the respective reports to direct the State Governments to complete

65
the exercise and be ready with the provisional results pending decision
of the Supreme Court. Even when the announcement regarding the
vacation of the stay by the Supreme Court has been made by Hon’ble
Minister in Lok Sabha on 10th March, 2006, the results are yet to be
finalized. As stated by the Secretary, Department of Rural Development,
it will take two or three months to finalise the results. While expressing
the concern over the inordinate delay in finalization of the BPL List,
the Committee would like to recommend for finalization of the BPL
list without any further delay.
Reply of the Government
While the concern expressed by the Committee is acknowledged,
however, the results of BPL Census 2002 have been delayed because
the matter was subjudice. Immediately after the vacation of the stay
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the matter is being pursued with the
State Governments. In order to ensure the transparency in finalizing
the new BPL list, it has been prescribed to take the approval of Gram
Sabhas and also introduced a two stage appeal mechanism to redress
the grievances of the rural poor, if any , with regard to their status in
the BPL list. State Governments have been asked to follow this
procedure to finalise the BPL list, which has taken little more time.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para no. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No.2.35)
The Committee in their earlier reports have repeatedly been
expressing their unhappiness over the decision of the Government
according to which the number of BPL persons estimated should not
exceed those identified as per 1999-2000 survey. The Committee find
that the concerns of the Committee have been conveyed to Planning
Commission and it has responded that since the cap on the total
number of BPL families to be identified was recommended by the
Expert Committee, the issue may be looked into in detail by the Expert
Committee to be constituted for the BPL census to be conducted for
Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Committee feel that such an arbitrary
limit on BPL persons to be identified will do a great injustice to the
genuine BPL persons who could be debarred from certain benefits.
Not only that, such limitations can provide unreasonable authority to

66
the agencies involved thereby inviting corruption and malpractice.
Therefore, the Committee would like the Department to pursue the
matter with Planning Commission so that such limitations are not
imposed while finalizing the number of BPL persons during latest
survey.
Reply of the Government
While the concern of the Committee is acknowledged, however, it
is mentioned that the cap on the total number of BPL households to
be identified under BPL Census 2002 was prescribed on the
recommendations of the Expert Group with the objective to ensure
that the limited resources available under the various programmes of
this Ministry are not distributed thinly and at the same time the poorest
of the poor should get the preference in getting these benefits. Further,
it may also be clarified that under the guidelines of BPL Census 2002,
the States were given the option to identify the number of BPL
households which may be equal to the Poverty Estimates of Planning
Commission for the year 1999-2000 or the Adjusted Share whichever
is higher. The Adjusted Share figures computed by the Planning
Commission were very close to the Poverty Estimates of 1993-94. In
addition to above, the States were also given the flexibility of another
10% to account for the transient poor. Therefore, the instructions of
this Ministry did not restrict the State Governments to identify the
BPL households equal to the Poverty Estimates of 1999-2000 of Planning
Commission.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.H-11020/5/2006-GC(P), dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para no. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No.2.46)
The Committee find that even though the Department has a
detailed monitoring mechanism to oversee the implementation of
various schemes/programmes meant for the upliftment of rural masses,
much needs to be done to improve the delivery mechanism of the
schemes/programmes. Huge unspent balances amounting to Rs. 9,162
crore lying with the State Governments is certainly an area of concern.
The Committee further feel that more than putting in place different
monitoring mechanisms, there is an urgent need to see that the system
works effectively. The working of the district and State level Vigilance

67
and Monitoring committees speaks volume about the ineffective state
of monitoring mechanism put in place by the Ministry of Rural
Development. Although there is a provision to hold at least one meeting
in each quarter, most of the District and Vigilance Committees could
succeed in holding barely one meeting during the year 2005. If this is
the state of affairs of the committees, which are to be appointed by
the Department of Rural Development, the status of other monitoring
mechanisms can be well imagined. Further, although the Department
has claimed that there has been an increase in monitoring and Vigilance
of rural development programmes at all levels particularly at the grass-
root level, no information has been furnished by the Department to
substantiate the aforesaid claim. In view of the aforesaid scenario, the
Committee hold the opinion that there is an urgent need to implement
the best of the systems evolved for monitoring of schemes. The
Committee hope that with the implementation of the Right to
Information Act, there will be a check on the proper implementation
of various programmes and schemes. Further dissemination of
information as required under the provisions of the Act would make
the public aware about the various schemes and programmes, which
automatically would put a pressure on the implementing agencies to
perform better and deliver results.
Reply of the Government
The Chairman of the district level Vigilance & Monitoring
Committee (V&MCs) is the Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) from
the district concerned and wherever no meeting of District V&MC has
been held even once, the Chairmen of these Committees have been
requested to hold meetings of these Committees. State Govts. have
been requested from time to time to organize meetings of the State
level and District level V&MCs at least once every quarter. As per
information received from the States/Districts, as on 15.07.2006, 374
districts have organized meetings of the District V&MCs at least once
and 18 States have organized meeting of the State level V&MCs at
least once since their reconstitution in October, 2004. States and Districts
have been informed that the District Collector/Dy. Commissioner/
District Magistrate concerned, being the Member Secretary of the
District V&MC, is responsible for conducting the meetings of District
V&MC regularly and in case where the Chairman of the Committee is
pre-occupied and has not indicated any dates for convening such
meetings, the Member Secretary should ensure, in consultation with
the Co-Chairman, that these meetings are convened within fifteen days
of the end of each quarter under intimation to Chairman/Co-Chairman
and all other members.

68
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.53)
The Committee appreciate the concept of Gender Budgeting
covering as many as 24 demands for Grants in 18 Ministries/
Departments and five Union territories and schemes with an outlay of
Rs. 28,737 crore. The noble objective of Gender Budgeting is to remove
the disparity between the two genders by giving more and more
benefits to women in all the schemes of the Government. The
Committee would like to emphasize that by mere constitution of
Gender Budget Cell, the objectives behind Gender Budgeting would
not be achieved. The Committee are concerned to find that although
under the different schemes of the Department of Rural Development,
particularly under IAY, SGSY and SGRY, specific provisions for women
have been made in the guidelines, the implementation of the said
provisions is far from satisfactorily. As reported in various Budget
documents like Economic Survey and Mid-Term Appraisal document
the targeted benefits are not reaching the female beneficiaries.
Reply of the Government
The concern of the Committee regarding ensuring the flow of
benefits to the female beneficiaries is acknowledged. Three programmes
of the Ministry, namely, IA Y, SGSY and SGRY have been short listed
for gender budgeting. The implementation of these programmes will
be monitored accordingly.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.54)
The Committee therefore desire that the Government should
seriously try to achieve the targets specified for women beneficiaries
in the guidelines of each scheme so that the gap in terms of
employment, housing, wages etc. between men and women is bridged

69
to a great extent. Further, survey at regular intervals be undertaken by
independent research agencies to evaluate the effects of Gender
Budgeting.
Reply of the Government
The evaluation of implementation of Gender Budgeting by the
independent agency can be undertaken at an appropriate time on a
regular basis.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 3.20)
The Committee note that the physical and financial performance
under the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) is very poor.
As on 31 January, 2006, the Government could utilise only 54.57 percent
of allocated outlay for SGRY. Even in regard to physical achievements,
the Government could complete only 55.70 per cent of the works
undertaken. Further, it could only generate 66.21 crore mandays
whereas the target was 86.11 crore mandays. The quarter-wise
achievements in terms of mandays generated further indicate shortfall
of around 50 per cent during the first quarter and around 40 per cent
during the third quarter. The Committee are not inclined to accept the
reasons put forth by the Department that utilization status always
runs behind schedule particularly when there is shortfall in expenditure
during 2004-05 when the financial achievement was 83.42 per cent.
Not only that, 11 States/Union Territories could utilize less than
75 per cent of the outlay. There are huge unspent balances to the tune
of Rs. 2,764.36 crore lying with the respective States/Union Territory
Governments. Around 20 per cent of the works undertaken during
2004-05 are still incomplete. Besides, the Committee feel that the plea
of late receipt of Utilization Certificates cannot be accepted in this era
of technological advancement. The Committee would like to know the
State-wise reasons for under-performance. Besides, the State/Union
Territories and implementing agencies should be impressed upon to
furnish the timely Utilization Certificates. There should also be physical
inspection by Senior Officers of the Ministry to check whether the
works shown by the States in their records, have actually been done/
completed in that particular year. The shortcomings reflected by the

70
Area Officer during their visits and the corrective action taken by the
Department should be reflected in the Budget documents.
Reply of the Government
The requisite information was submitted based on the Monthly
Progress Report received from States/UTs by that time. Out of 33
States/UTs, 8 States/UTs are yet to submit their progress report for
the month of March, 2006. As reported by the State Governments/
Union Territory Administrations as on 20.7.2006, they have utilized
82.11% of available funds and generated 80.58 crore mandays during
the year 2005-06 which will certainly improve on receipt of progress
reports from remaining States/UTs. Due to limited stock of foodgrains,
the allocation of foodgrains was reduced from 50 lakh tonnes to 35.52
lakh tonnes in 2005-2006 under SGRY. No compensation in cash for
reduced quantity of foodgrains has been given. The less availability
has adversely affected generation of mandays under the programme.
As regard incomplete works in 2004-05, it is submitted that SGRY
is an on-going programme. According to SGRY Guidelines, while
preparing the Annual Action Plan, Panchayats are to give priority to
the incomplete works in comparison to taking up of new works. Thus,
the incomplete works as on 31.3.2005 are required to be included in
the Annual Action Plan of Panchayats for the year 2005-06 with a
view to attending to these works during the year on priority.
SGRY is a programme being implemented by Panchayats at village,
block and district levels. Progress Reports of Village Panchayats are
collected and compiled at Block level. Thereafter, Intermediate
Panchayats consolidate Reports of Village Panchayats including their
own progress report and send it to District Panchayat. District
Panchayat compile all reports received from Intermediate Panchayats
alongwith their own progress report and send it to State Headquarter
who in turn compile all the reports received from districts and forward
a consolidated Progress Report to the Ministry . This whole process
takes at least two to three months depending upon number of
Panchayats. As the Panchayats at grass root level do not have proper
facilities nor have fully trained personnel, they are finding it difficult
to make use of and handle advanced technology. However, State
Governments and Union Territory Administrations are urged regularly
for timely submission of their Monthly Progress Report for SGRY.
State Governments and Union Territories have been requested to
intimate the reasons for their poor performance for the year 2004-05.
In pursuance of it, some States have furnished their revised progress

71
reports. As now reported by States/UTs, out of total available funds
of Rs. 7214.84 crores, an amount of Rs. 6080.13 crores has been spent
in 2004-05. Thus, the carry over balance as on 31.3.2005 was Rs. 1134.71
crores, which is 15.73% of total available funds as against permissible
limit of 15%.
Under Areas Officers’ Scheme of this Ministry, senior officers of
this Ministry do visit districts allotted to them for inspection of Rural
Development Programmes being implemented in a district. Area
Officers inspect works undertaken under the programme on sample
basis in 2-3 villages and submit their reports. The reports of some
Area Officers in 2005-2006 did not bring adverse report on the works
implemented under SGRY in respect of works visited by them.
However in some cases the reports did mention that the expenditure
on SC/ST component was below the required norm, availability of
foodgrains was inadequate, delay in finalization of Annual Action Plan
at Panchayats level etc. and also reported about quality of works
undertaken/completed under the programme. In case of any adverse
reporting, the issues are brought out to the notice of the State
Governments as well as district authority for taking corrective action
immediately.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 3.21)
The Committee further find that 10 per cent of allocation under
different schemes is exclusively earmarked for North-Eastern Region.
The data with regard to physical and financial achievement under
SGRY since 2002-03 indicate that although the position is improving
year after year, still there is huge gap between the total available
funds and the expenditure reported. Around 40 per cent of the funds
are still lying unspent. The position of mandays generated improved
during 2003-04, but there is huge decline in the mandays generated
during 2004-05 and 2005-06. While 1464.60 lakh mandays were
generated during 2003-04, the achievement declined to 823.53 lakh
during 2004-05 and further to 785.91 lakh during 2005-06. Further the
expenditure position during 2004-05 is also worse as compared to the
previous year. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons
for shortfall in physical and financial achievement during 2004-05 and

72
2005-06 in North-Eastern Region. The Committee urge the Department
to take necessary corrective action so as to ensure meaningful utilization
of the exclusive outlay made for these States.
Reply of the Government
 As regard higher mandays generated during the year 2003-04, it
has been checked up from the record that the State of Nagaland had
reported wrongly number of mandays generated due to which number
of mandays was shown so high. The State Government has been
requested to intimate the correct figure, which is awaited.
Due to climatic condition such as heavy rainfall, snowfall etc. the
working season in the North East is limited. Further, because of
inadequate infrastructure NE States are facing great difficulties in
movement of foodgrains to collect from FCI depots to the remote
areas. In spite of these problems, during the year 2004-05, Tripura was
able to spent 96.11% of total available funds followed by Sikkim 85.38%.
Meghalaya and Manipur have reported utilization more than 81% of
the total available funds. The State of Arunachal Pradesh having large
snow bound areas and Assam with heaviest rainfall and flood in each
year could spend less funds in percentage terms in comparison with
other NE States. The Government of Mizoram has informed that they
have utilized 85% of available funds during 2004-05. Reply from
Nagaland is awaited. However, these States have been advised to take
corrective action to ensure satisfactory implementation of SGRY. Besides,
Hon’ble Minister (RD) also review the performance of the States with
the Chief Ministers/Ministers and other senior officers in the State
and advise the States, wherever necessary, to take corrective actions to
ensure proper utilisation of SGRY funds.
Keeping in view the problems of North Eastern States in collecting
foodgrains from FCI Depots to remote areas of their States, these States
are allowed to charge transportation cost of foodgrains from the SGRY
funds. Arunachal Pradesh is exempted from compulsory distribution
of foodgrains under SGRY.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para no. 31 of Chapter I of the Report)

73
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 3.38)
The Committee further find that during 2005-06 at the Budget
Estimates stage, Rs. 6,000 crore was provided under National Food for
Work Programme. At Revised Estimates Stage, a cut of Rs. 1,500/-
crore was imposed they by reducing the allocation to Rs. 4,500 crore.
They also find from the position indicated by the Department that
Rs.1,500 were transferred from NFFWP to SGRY to maintain at least
the previous SGRY allocation. Further the Department has also
acknowledged that the revised allocation was sufficient to meet NFFWP
requirement. The Committee are surprised at the statement given by
the Department whereby the estimated outlay indicated at the Budget
Estimates stage when reduced substantially has been found to be
sufficient to meet the requirement of a programme. The Committee,
therefore, conclude that the implementation of the programme was
very poor whereby the part of the allocation made under NFFWP was
transferred to another programme. What is worse, even the reduced
allocation could not be utilized and the implementation of the
programme was quite poor during the year 2005-06 as indicated in
the preceding paras of the Report. The Committee deplore the tendency
of the Government whereby the allocation made under the programme
at Budget Estimates stage is transferred to another scheme at Revised
Estimates stage. The Committee therefore strongly recommend that
efforts should be made for meaningful utilization of the allocated
resources in a year.
Reply of the Government
In the financial year 2005-06, the B.E for SGRY and NFFWP were
kept at Rs. 4000/- and 6000/- crores respectively. This Committee has
recommended that allocation of SGRY should not be reduced. Therefore,
it was necessary to re-adjust the allocation between SGRY and NFFWP .
However, based on the request of this Ministry the R.E. for SGRY and
NFFWP were revised as Rs. 5500 and 4500 crores respectively. Under
NFFWP , there was an unutilized balance of Rs. 1280.27 crores from
the previous years allocation. This amount was also available for
utilization under the programme during the year 2005-06. As indicated
in reply to para 3.36 , the percentage utilization of funds under NFFWP
during the year 2005-06 was 70.3 percent which may be termed as
satisfactory keeping in view the fact that the programme was launched
in November, 2004 only.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.H-11020/5/2006-GC(P), dated: 20.9.06]

74
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para no. 34 of Chapter I of the Report)
 Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 3.61)
The Committee are concerned to note the vague reply of the
Department on such a serious issue of preparation of action plan to
cover all the districts under the provision of NREGA. Instead of taking
immediate action in this regard, it has been stated that the performance
of the Act would be watched. The Committee note that the guarantee
of 100 days of wage employment to each household in rural areas in
the country has been provided under the enactment and further under
the provisions of the Act it has been specifically mentioned that the
guarantee shall be applicable to the whole of the rural areas in the
country within a period of five years from the date of enactment of
the Act and as such there is no scope for delaying the implementation
of the Act. The Committee are of the firm opinion that an action plan
for coverage should be prepared by the Department and transparency
in this regard should be maintained so that the part of the country
where the Guarantee Scheme at present is not applicable can be
reassured about the applicability of the legislation in the near future.
Reply of the Government
Proviso to Section 1(3) of the NREG Act provides that the Act
shall be made applicable to the whole country within a period of 5
years. The very purpose of implementing the Act in phases is to watch
the progress of the Act and pattern of expenditure in few districts in
the beginning and based on the experience so gained, carry out
modifications/improvements in preparation before extending it to more
areas. Progress of the Schemes varies from State to State due to various
reasons. It would be in the interest of the programme that its expansion
is based on the insight gained through the experience of the first
phase of implementation. The Ministry is monitoring the
implementation of NREGA in these districts and there is a need to
continue with this process of interaction and feedback from them so
that an action plan for extending the Act can then be formulated.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para no. 37 of Chapter I of the Report)

75
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 3.67)
The Committee find from the reply of the Department that no
attention has been paid to ensure the distribution of foodgrains under
the Guarantee Scheme whereas 75 per cent of the wages under the
scheme can be paid by way of foodgrains. It has simply been stated
that only cash resources would be provided to the State Governments.
The Committee would like the Department to clarify further whether
the procurement and distribution of foodgrains will be the sole
responsibility of the State Governments and what will be role of the
undertakings involved in foodgrains like Food corporation of India
(FCI) so as to enable the Committee to recommend further in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
Under the existing provisions of NREG Act, the Central assistance
will be paid only in cash. No foodgrains are to be supplied by the
Centre under the Act. However, if the State Governments feel that
foodgrains should be paid as part of wages, they can do so and procure
the foodgrains on their own. They may also purchase foodgrains from
FCI. However, distribution of foodgrains as part of wages is likely to
create several problems in meeting the legal obligation to pay wages
within a prescribed time frame.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para no. 37 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 33, Para No. 3.105)
The Committee find that the data with regard to physical targets
fixed during each year of Tenth Plan indicate that although the targets
made during 2006-07, are 92,237 higher than the targets fixed during
2005-06 but are lesser by 28,858 houses, if compared to the year
2004-05. In view of this position the Committee note that although
ambitious commitments are being made with regard to providing
housing under IAY, there is no such enhancement of targets and outlay
to meet such commitments. Not only that the resources made available
are not being utilized fully. The information provided above indicates
that in most of the States less than 50 per cent of physical and financial
targets could be achieved. The Committee observe that as per the

76
Government’s own data the housing shortage in rural areas is 148
lakh. The said shortages will increase by shortage of 9 lakh houses
annually due to various reasons. The annual target fixed under Bharat
Nirman are over 15 lakh houses. Around 60 lakh houses would be
constructed by the year 2009. The net shortage of houses by the year
2009 as per the Government’s own estimate would be 184 lakh (148
lakh + 36 lakh) houses. Even if 60 lakh houses are provided by 2009,
there would be shortage of 124 lakh houses by 2009. The Committee
have selected the subject ‘Rural Housing’ for examination and report
and different issues in this regard would be examined in detail during
the course of examination of the subject. Here the Committee would
like to recommend that besides augmenting the resources, there is an
urgent need to ensure that the targets fixed are met and every paise
earmarked for the scheme meant for rural masses is meaningfully
utilized. Further, to augment the resources for rural housing, there is
an urgent need to expand institutional credit.
Reply of the Government
The physical targets during 2004-05 were fixed with 80% of the
allocation for new houses and 20% allocation for upgradation of kutcha
houses. The grant for upgradation is Rs. 12,500/- per house and is
lower than that for a new IAY house. From 2005-06 onwards, the
physical targets are being fixed on the basis of “new houses” only, for
the entire allocation. Therefore, the physical targets have come down
correspondingly, despite increase in outlay . However, States have the
flexibility to utilize upto 20% of their allocation for upgradation. Under
Bharat Nirman, the Government has committed to construct at least
15 lakh houses per year from 2005-06 onwards and in 2006-07, 15.33
lakh houses are targeted to be built.
As regards the extent of housing shortage and the rate of house
construction observed by the Committee, the Ministry has been
pursuing with the Planning Commission to significantly enhance the
annual allocation so that rural shelterlessness can be eliminated by
2009.
The recommendations with regard to proper utilization of funds
with fruitful results, made by the Committee have been noted for
perusal.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]

77
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 43 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 35, Para No.3.116)
The Committee observe that Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
is a very laudable programe initiated by the Government with the
objective to provide connectivity by road to all the unconnected
habitations in rural areas in the country. From the information provided
by the Department, it seems that the progress is not very encouraging.
Initially, at the launch of the programme, the objective was set to
provide connectivity to all unconnected habitations having a population
of 500 and above (250 and above in hill States, tribal and desert areas)
by the end of Tenth Plan i.e. 2006-07. The targets have now been
spilled over. The Government now target to connect all the habitations
having a population of 1000 and above (500 in case of hilly States,
tribal and desert areas) by the year 2009. The Committee apprehend
that it would be difficult to achieve even the spilled over targets with
the existing pace of implementation of the programme, whereby even
the roads started in Phase-I and Phase-II during the years 2000-01 and
2002-03 are lying incomplete. The Committee find that as per stipulated
parameters set by the Department, the roads should be ready within
12 months in normal and within 18 months in hilly areas after award
of work. Even after the lapse of five or six years, a number of roads
started are incomplete which is a major area of concern. Many reasons
such as availability of land, forest clearance, programme management
& provision, contracting capacity of States, institutional arrangement,
training etc. have been cited as the reasons for such a state of affairs
of the programme.
Reply of the Government
474 road works of phase-I and 999 road works of phase-II are still
pending. The maximum shortfall for phase II is in the States of Bihar,
Goa, Jammu & Kashmir and Tripura. The reasons for non completion
remain non-availability of land, delay in forest clearances, deficiencies
in programme management and institutional arrangements. The
concerned State governments are being requested from time-to-time, at
all levels, to expedite the implementation of the programme. Minister
of Rural Development has been holding meetings with States which
are found lagging in implementation. The last meeting was held on
26.5.2006, in which 16 States were requested to participate. So far as
forest clearance is concerned, the Ministry has requested the Ministry
of Environment and Forests to delegate powers to Regional Offices for

78
issuing clearance for road works involving upto 20 hectares of forest
land. The issue has been taken up at the level of PMO also. States are
being advised time and again to dedicate enough engineers for
implementing this programme. 5000 engineers of the States have already
been trained and further training of more engineers of the
implementing agencies as well as of the contractors has been envisaged.
The Ministry has also been organizing Workshops in different States
to sensitise and re-orient the engineers associated with the programme.
The issues and concerns are discussed in the Regional Review Meetings
and also in the Meetings taken by the Minister of Rural Development.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 46 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 36, Para No.3.117)
The Committee also find that one of the reasons for these
bottlenecks being faced in the implementation of the programme is
very old and out dated enactment “ Land Acquisition Act, 1894”. The
said enactment is under the administrative control of the Ministry of
Rural Development. The Committee have repeatedly been
recommending to the Ministry to amend the outdated provisions made
under the Act. But the same has not been done so far. Even though
the Government has found the ways and means to provide the required
allocation of Rs. 48,000 crore by the year 2009 to complete the uphill
task of providing connectivity to all the habitations of population of
1000 and above, the Committee are of the opinion that the targets
cannot be achieved unless the problem areas are addressed urgently.
The Department has to work on a mission-mode. There is an urgent
need to enhance the capacity of the State Government/implementing
agencies to absorb the enhanced resources. Besides, various bottlenecks
found in the implementation of the programme as noted above need
to be discussed at various meetings held with the State Government.
Frequent Central interventions are required to motivate the State
Government to take the challenge of providing connectivity by the
target date. Further, the old and outdated laws like “Land Acquisition
Act, 1894” need to be amended expeditiously which would solve the
major problems like acquisition of land for construction of roads etc.
The Committee should be kept informed about the action taken in
this regard.

79
Reply of the Government
For PMGSY Programme, land acquisition is generally not being
resorted to as additional land is being made available through people’s
participation. A Cabinet Note alongwith Land Acquisition (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 was submitted to the Cabinet Secretary for consideration.
The Cabinet Secretariat returned the Bill with the direction that a fresh
proposal, after completing fresh inter-Ministerial consultations, may be
submitted after formation of the new Government. In pursuance of
the direction of the Cabinet Secretariat, the Department circulated the
Land Acquisition(Amendment)Bill, to the concerned Ministries/
Departments for their comments. The comments from most of the
Ministries/Departments have since been received.
Meanwhile, it was decided in the Ministry, with the approval of
Minister (RD), that a copy of the Land Acquisition(Amendment)
Bill,2004 may also be circulated to the State Governments for their
comments/suggestions. Accordingly, a copy of the Bill was circulated
to States/UTs for their views. So far, comments from 23 States/UTs
have been received. The remaining 12 States/UTs are being pursued
to expedite their comments. The proposed Amendment to the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 was also discussed in the Conference of the
Revenue Secretaries of States/UTs held on 7th June,2006 wherein States
were requested to submit the comments expeditiously to this
Department. The amendment of LA act is also being considered by
Group of Secretaries appointed to look into National Rehabilitation
Policy.
Action Taken for addressing the other important issues raised by
the Committee has already been reported in the Action Taken on para
3.116.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 46 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 37, Para No. 3.120)
The Committee are perturbed to note that most of the works under
PMGSY are being sublet to contractors by the principal contractors.
Further the Committee express their apprehension on the quality of
roads built under PMGSY. Despite deploying monitors at various levels,

80
the quality of roads at the field level is very poor. Many roads would
have vanished in single rain. Some would have vanished after few
months of their construction and in other areas, where the roads do
exist the same are very poorly maintained. This is a vital area which
needs to be addressed by the Government on top priority otherwise
the work done under PMGSY will bear no result and the connected
habitations would again revert to unconnected status. The Committee
recommend that to address this situation and to improve the quality
of roads, the Government should make the monitors more accountable.
If roads are found to be bad and of poor quality, further work to the
concerned contractors should not be awarded. Besides, a notice board
at the entrance and at prominent milestones of every road constructed
under PMGSY, should be erected indicating that the road is constructed
under PMGSY, the month and year of its construction, the month and
year till the road is expected to be maintained by the contractor as
per the agreement and the name, designation, phone number of the
officers whom the people can contact in case the quality of road is not
up to the mark or is maintained poorly. The status of roads should
also be accessible on the website and people should be able to put
their complaints on the website so that Senior Officers of the State/
Union Government are able to monitor the status of roads. The
accountability of monitors who inspect the roads should also be
increased so that they are brought to book in the event of non-
performance. Another area of concern, which the Committee would
like the Ministry to address is to impress upon a separate fund for the
maintenance of roads. The Committee would like to hear further in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Standard Bidding Document, presented for PMGSY and
adopted by States for PMGSY works, does allow the contractors to
sub contract the work, subject to the value of sub contracts not
exceeding 25% of the total value of the work. This would enable
expeditious completion of the work.
The Guidelines of PMGSY stipulate that within 15 days of the
date of Work Order, signboards along with the Logo of the PMGSY
should be erected at the site of road works. The Signboards should
indicate the name of the Programme (PMGSY), name of the road, its
length, estimated cost, date of commencement and due date of
completion of construction and name of the executing contractor.
The details of every road constructed under the programme,
together with status, are expected to be provided by the District

81
Programme Implementing Agencies on the web site
www.pmgsyonline.nic.in. Any person can access this web site and can
also make comments, register complaints or ask queries on the
Feedback link provided on the web site.
The quality of road works is being monitored by independent
quality monitors at national level. The observations of the National
Quality Monitors are sent to State governments for appropriate action
and action taken reports are received in NRRDA. Based on the results
of independent quality monitoring, it clearly emerges that the quality
of works at the field level is not very poor. Improvement in quality
of road works is a continuous process. As an endeavor to continuously
update and achieve the targets to the best of quality, the three tiers of
quality mechanism is being revisited. It is proposed that:
Under the first tier of quality mechanism, the frequency of tests
may be rationalized and concept of stage passing may be introduced
to ensure clear accountability of the various functionaries of the
implementing agency.
Under the second tier of quality mechanism, reporting formats
and detailed guidelines would be developed and made mandatory for
States. Hitherto, States were supposed to develop their own mechanism
of State level independent quality mechanism.
Under the third tier of quality mechanism, with a view to ensuring
more accountability of independent monitors, the process of selection
of NQMs has been made independent, the guidelines and reporting
format for inspection of works are being revised and the process of
continuous performance evaluation of National Quality Monitors by
way of periodic review of reports and field verification by reputed
institutions is envisaged.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 46 of Chapter I of the Report)

82
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 32, Para No. 3.90)
The Committee note that in addition to the Public Sector
Commercial Banks, Cooperative Banks, Regional Rural Banks, some
Private Sector Banks are also being involved in the implementation of
SGSY. The Committee would, therefore, like to know the performance
of various Private Sector Banks vis-a-vis the Public Sector Banks,
Cooperative Banks and Regional Rural Banks in term of the credit
target vis-a-vis achievement in each year since these Banks were
involved to analyse the role of Private Sector Banks critically and
comment further in this regard. The information with regard to total
number of beneficiaries assisted and the total credit made available in
each year, and the average benefit made available to each beneficiary
in each case of Commercial Banks, Cooperative Banks, Regional Rural
Banks and Private Sector Banks may be provided for the information
of the Committee.
Reply of the Government
It is a fact  that in addition to the Public Sector Commercial Banks,
Cooperative Banks, Regional Rural Banks, some Private Sector Banks
are also being involved in the implementation of SGSY. In this regard,
it is submitted that the information is not readily available with the
Ministry. As desired by the Committee, the Reserve Bank of India has
been asked to furnish the details showing progress made by the Private
Sector Banks vis-a-vis Commercial banks, RRBs & Cooperative Banks
in the implementation of SGSY.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/5/2006-GC(P) dated: 20.9.06]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 March, 2007 Chairman,
24 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

83
APPENDIX I
PROGRESS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL RURAL
EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT
Sl. State Districts Applications Job cards Employment Employment No. of Funds Expenditure
No. received issued demanded provided works released
for (No. of (No. of taken up
registration persons) persons)
12 345 6 78 9 1 0
1. Andhra Pradesh 13 3954522 3954522 721868 704101 22063 20000 8304.25
2. Arunachal Pradesh 1 45070 17480 272.85
3. Assam 7 160897 104383 11205 6990 534 13970.8 155.8
4. Bihar 23 2401836 1071522 533009 505281 17619 40503.4 5171.194
5. Chattisgarh 11 1696860 1534636 165245 162480 9671 17321.7 9834.02
6. Gujarat 6 604695 597028 73791 73791 1716 4113.94 819.03
7. Haryana 2 81489 76421 20261 15573 288 913.39 188.95
8. Himachal Pradesh 2 70084 62408 29080 24848 2249 683.64 339.27
9. Jammu & Kashmir 3 169038 65531 4127 4127 283 986.365
10. Jharkhand 20 1755005 1171831 496725 467832 9451 37618.6
11. Karanataka 5 572892 315412 118810 66530 3678 6329.69 909.28
12. Kerala 2 225133 2179.51
13. Madhya Pradesh 18 4281258 4144413 1913133 1804953 69783 109384 40380.9
14. Maharashtra 12 4139778 1094659 192867 183075 6152 17961.6 4441.42
15. Manipur 1 45172 17880 570.89
16. Meghalaya 2 2064.68
17. Mizoram 2 41808 29016 14508 298.9 23.6
18. Nagaland 1 430.11
19. Orissa 19 2702290 1900553 577814 563681 23559 31516.6 8494.48
20. Punjab 1 39318 33375 21284 976 755.75 451.97

84
12 345 6 78 9 1 0
21. Rajasthan 6 1443720 1423013 853061 846263 13809 64100 22266.39
22. Sikkim 1 4696 4696 451.5
23. Tamil Nadu 6 541568 535519 86625 82009 668 9889.21 429.41
24. Tripura 1 62736 58114 20148 16218 327 1456.66 276.834
25. Uttar Pradesh 22 1977488 1662768 657041 528552 16293 33498.7 3700.97
26. Uttaranchal 3 233019 187029 13522 11178 2221 1910.6 145.7
27. West Bengal 10 3322241 1149145 646412 495493 3305 18358.8 1622.08
TOTAL
200 30572613 21211354 7149252 6584259 204645 437542 107955.55
Blank spaces in the table denote information not received from States.
Applications are the number of applications for registration of households.
Funds released and expenditure pertain to 2006-07 [in lakh Rs.].
Progress Report is based on reports received from States upto 19th July, 2006.

85
APPENDIX II
NAMES OF DISTRICTS UNDER FIRST PHASE OF NREGA
WHICH ARE WHOLLY OR PARTLY INCLUDED IN
SCHEDULE V & VI OF THE CONSTITUTION.
Name of the State Name of Districts Name of Districts
Vth Schedule VIth Schedule
    1 2 3
Andhra Pradesh  1. Vizianagaram (part), Nil
 2. Adilabad (part),
 3. Warangal (part),
 4. Khammam (part),
 5. Mahabubnagar (part).
Assam Nil 1.Kokrajhar,
2.K. Anglong
3. N.C. Hills
Jharkhand  1. Ranchi,
 2.  West Singhbhum,
 3.  Saraikela,
 4.  Kharsawan,
 5. Gumla,
 6. Lohardaga,
 7.  Dumka,
 8.  Sahebganj,
 9.  Pakur,
10.  Jamtara,
11. Simdega,
12.  Latehar,
13.  Godda (2 blocks)
14.  Garhwa (1 block).
Orissa 1. Gajapati (5 blocks) Nil
2. Kalahandi (2 blocks)

86
    1 2 3
 3. Keonjhar (10 blocks),
 4.  Koraput (14 blocks),
 5.  Malkangiri (7 blocks),
 6.  Mayurbhanj (26 blocks),
 7.  Nabarangpur (10 blocks),
 8.  Phulbani (12 blocks),
 9.  Rayagada (11 blocks),
10.  Sambalpur (3 blocks),
11. Sundargarh (17 blocks).
Rajasthan 1. Banswara, Nil
2. Dungarpur,
3. Sirohi (Abu Road block
of Abu Road Tehsil)
4. Udaipur (Entire
Tehsils of Phalasiya,
Kherwara, Koda,
Sarada, Salumpur and
Lasadia and 81
villages of Girwa Tehsil).
Tripura Nil Dhalai (Part)
Himachal Pradesh 1. Chamba (Tribal Sub-division
of Pangi & Bharmour) Nil
Manipur 1. Tamenlong
Meghalaya Nil 1. South Garo Hills
2. West Garo Hills
Mizoram Nil 1. Lawngtlai
2. Saiha
Gujarat 1. Dang, Nil
2. Narmada (Bedipara,
Sagbara and Nandob blocks)
3. Panchmahal
4. Dahod
5. Sabarkantha

87
    1 2 3
Madhya Pradesh  1. Jhabua,       Nil
 2. Mandla,
 3. Dindori,
 4. Barwani,
 5. Dhar(Dhar,Sardarpur,Kuachi,
Dharampuri,Gandhwani
and Manawar Tehsils),
 6. Khargone(Khargone, Bhagwanpura,
Sengaon, Bhikmangaon Jhiranya
and Maheswar Tehsils),
 7. Khandwa(Halwa block under
Harswod tehsils),
 8. Betul (Bhainsdehi and Shahpur
tehsils, Betul Tehsil (except
Betul block)),
 9. Seoni (Lakhnadaun, Ghansaur
and Kurai Tehsil),
10. Balaghat (Behar Tehsil),
11. Shahdol (Jaitpur, Sohagpurand
Jai Singh Nagar tehsils),
12. Umaria (Pali block of Pahi
Tehsil),
13. Sidhi(Kusmi block of Kusmi
Tehsil),
14. Sheopur (Karahal block of
Karahal Tehsil).

88
APPENDIX III
STATEMENT INDICATING THE RELEASE OF FUNDS
DURING 2005-06 UNDER PURA
(Rs. in lakhs)
Sl. State Road Market Drinkign Education/ Total
No. connectivity/ Water Health
Employment
generation
1. Andhra Pradesh 43.80 5.00 30.00 — 78.80
2. Assam - 86.00 — 50.00 136.00
3. Bihar 100.00 50.00 — — 150.00
4. Maharashtra 30.50 78.88 37.92 — 147.30
5. Orissa 100.00 100.00 — — 200.00
6. Rajasthan 100.00 — — 30.00 130.00
7. Uttar Pradesh 100.00 07.90 — 50.00 157.90
474.30 327.78 67.92 130.00 1000.00

89
APPENDIX IV
STATEMENT INDICATING THE STATUS OF
IMPLEMENTATION OF PURA SCHEME
Sl. State Name of Amount Expenditure % of Physical
No. Govts. the released reported expenditure achievement
cluster during during
and 2004-05 2005-06**
district (March-2005)
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Assam Gohpur Rs. 1.5 crore Rs. 139.73 lakh 93.15% It has been reported
Distt. that a total of 73
Sonitpur numbers of works
under road
connectivity were
sanctioned out of
which 45 numbers of
works relate to road
improvement whereby
small existing roads
have been broadened,
raised and extended
by earth-work. Twenty
five numbers of R.C.C.
culverts have been
constructed at vantage
points to ensure water
drainage throughout
the year. Three
numbers of works are
for Road Black
Topping.
2. Andhra Rayadurg Rs. 1.5 crore Rs. 103.18 lakhs 68.78% 6 works have been
Pradesh Dist. identified under
Annatpur Scheme. It has been
reported that targets
have been achieved.

90
12 3 4 5 6 7
3. Bihar Motipur Rs. 1.5 crore Rs. 126.958 lakh 84.6% It has been reported
Dist: that 144.156 road
Muzzafarpur schemes* were taken
up under PURA out
of which 104.030 have
been completed.
4. Maharashtra Basmath Rs. 1.0 crore Rs. 79.00 lakh 79% Out of 14 sanctioned
Dist: works, all are in
Hingoli progress.
5. Orissa Kujanga Rs. 1.5 crore Rs. 112.92 lakh 75.28% Base work of all black
Dist: Jagat top and cement
Singhpur concrete roads has
been completed.
6. Rajasthan Shahpura Rs. 1.5 crore Rs. 98.40 lakh 65.6% Works for 12.26 KM.
Dist: r eported to be in
Bhilwara progress.
7. Uttar Bharthana Rs. 1.5 crore Rs. 120.913 lakh 80.60% Work for 47.10 KM. of
Pradesh Dist: Kharanja & sewer
Etawah r eported to be
progress.
Total Rs. 10.00 crore Rs. 781.101 lakhs 78.11%
*W e have sought clarification from the State Government to the figures of physical
progress, quoted by them.
** Achievements reported so far are presumably with reference to funds released in
2004-05 since funds for the year 2004-05 were released in March 2005.

91
APPENDIX V
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY THE 1 MARCH, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hannan Mollah — in the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
5. Shri Sita Ram Singh
6. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Jayantilal Barot
8. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
9. Shri P .R. Rajan
10. Ms.Sushila Tiriya
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary Grade I
4. Shri A. K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade II
2. In the absence of Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Hannan
Mollah, M.P . to act as Chairman for the sitting under Rule 258(3) of
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.

92
3. The Committee took up for consideration Memorandum No. 4
regarding draft Action Taken Report on Eighteenth Report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development). The Committee
after deliberations adopted the draft report with slight modifications
as shown at Annexure.
4. *** *** ***
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft Action Taken Reports on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Department/Ministry and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

93
ANNEXURE
MODIFICATIONS TO DRAFT ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON
DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2006-07) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
Sl.No. Page No. Para Modifications/Additions
12 3 4
1. 9 16 (10th line After the word ‘ results’ add the
from below) sentence ‘ ‘ While noting that the
results of the BPL Survey were
delayed partly due to the stay
imposed by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court, the Committee
are perturbed to note that the
State Governments were not
ready with the provisional
results when the stay was
vacated. This is inspite of the
fact that the Committee have
repeatedly been recommending
to the Department to direct the
State Governments to complete
the exercise and be ready with
the provisional results pending
decision of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court’.
1. 14 22 (6th line) After the word  ‘District V&MC’
add the following sentence.
‘The Committee also
recommend that reporting
format of Utilisation Certificate
should also include the number
of meetings of the Vigilance
and Monitoring Committees
(V&MCs) held in each quarter
of the year’.

94
2. 25 37 (2nd line The words  ‘and the provisions
from below) of foodgrain component in the
Act is dispensed with if it is
likely to cause any delay in
enactment of the Act or
meeting the legal obligation of
payment of wages within the
prescribed time frame’ may be
substituted by the word  ‘and
suggestions made in this
regard’
3. 38 46 (2nd line add the words ‘after the
from below) contractual period of five years
is over’ after the words  ‘issue of
maintenance of roads’.
12 3 4

95
APPENDIX VI
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTEENTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL
DEVELOPMENT (14TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 43
II. Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government 23
Para Nos. 2.6, 2.34, 2.36, 2.47, 2.56, 3.36,
3.37, 3.39, 3.55, 3.58, 3.63, 3.65, 3.69,
3.70, 3.80, 3.88, 3.106, 3.127, 3.137,
3.138, 3.150, 3.163 and 3.164
Percentage to the Total recommendations (53.48%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies Nil
Percentage to Total recommendations Nil
IV . Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee 19
Para Nos. 2.14, 2.15, 2.16, 2.21, 2.22, 2.33,
2.35, 2.46, 2.53, 2.54, 3.20, 3.21, 3.38, 3.61,
3.67, 3.105, 3.116, 3.117 and 3.120
Percentage to Total recommendations (44.18%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still 1
awaited
Para No. 3.90
Percentage to Total recommendation (2.32%)