STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                     (2009-2010) 
 
          
 
       FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
             MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
              DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]  
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
13 


THIRTEENTH REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2009-2010) 
 
       (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.07.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.07.2010 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2010/Sravana, 1932 (Saka) 
  


CRD No. 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
© 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha   

CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) ......................................  (iii)   
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................  (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................  1  
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................  14 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply .............................................................................  28 
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee .....................................................  29 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited .....   32 
  
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee  
held on 7 July, 2010………………………………… 34 
 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the  
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of  
the Committee (15th Lok Sabha)............................ 36 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
   Members 
Lok  Sabha  
1. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
2. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
5. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
6. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
7. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
8. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
9. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
10. Shri Rakesh Pandey 
11. Shri P.L. Punia 
12. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
13. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
14. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu 
15. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
16. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
17. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
18. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh 
19. Shrimati Usha Verma 
20. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
Rajya  Sabha 
21. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar* 
22. Shri Ganga Charan 
23. Shri Silvius Condpan** 
24. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
25. Dr. Ram Prakash 
26. Shri P.R. Rajan 
27. Shri Arjun Singh 
28. Vacant@ 
29. Shrimati Maya Singh 
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.R. Ramesh  - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Shah  - Additional Director 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
*    w.e.f. 15 April, 2010 
**    Re-nominated w.e.f. 3 May, 2010 
@  Consequent upon retirement of Shri Bhagwati Singh, MP, Rajya Sabha from membership of  Rajya Sabha w.e.f.  4 July, 2010.  
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development 
(2009-2010) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Repor t on 
their behalf, present the Thirteenth Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development    (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  
 
2.  The Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on              
17 December, 2010. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 16th March,2010. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the draft Report was 
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 7th July, 2010. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report o f the Committee (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;     SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
20 July, 2010                  Chairperson, 
29 Asadha, 1932 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 

1 
 
 
 
        
        CHAPTER - I 
 
          REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2009 -10) deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their Fourth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the Minist ry of Panchayati Raj which was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 17 December, 2009. 
 
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 31 
recommendations which have been categorised as follows: 
 
(i) Chapter II   Recommendations which ha ve been accepted by the 
Government : 
Para Nos.: 2.3, 2.4, 3.7, 3.9, 3.10, 3.14, 3.15, 3.18, 4.10, 
4.11, 4.16, 4.30, 4.34, 4.37, 4.40, 4.52, 4.61, 4.65, 
4.68, 4.69, 4.80, 4.87, 5.7 and 5.15 
(ii) Chapter III   Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to  
pursue in view of Government‟s replies : 
Para No. 4.6 
(iii) Chapter IV  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government  have not been accepted by the Committee :  
Para Nos.: 3.8, 4.23 and 4.24 
(iv) Chapter V   Recommendations in respect of which fin al replies of the 
Government are still awaited : 
Para Nos. : 4.15, 4.47 and 5.11 
 
3. The Committee desire that final reply in respect of recommendations (paragraph 
nos. 4.15, 4.47 and 5.11) for which only interim reply has been given by the Government 
should be furnished within three months of the presentation of the Report.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
these recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  

2 
 
 
 
A. INCREASE IN ALLOCATION OF FUNDS TO MINISTRY OF PANCHAYAT I RAJ TO 
MEET THE NEED OF INFRASTRUCTURE FOR PANCHAYATS  
[Recommendation Serial No.4 (Para No. 3.8)] 
5. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“The Committee‟s examination has revealed that the Ministry is getting 
flow of funds under two categories - one under Backward Region Grant 
Funds (BRGF) and the Other Schemes like Rashtriya Gram Swaraj 
Yojana (RGSY), e -Panchayats etc. The Committee also find that actual 
flow of funds for Panchayats in the country started at the end of the Tenth 
Plan with the arrival of Backward Region Grant Scheme in 2006-2007 with 
an outlay of Rs.1925 crore (RE) that has risen to the present level (2007 -
2008 onwards) of Rs.4670 crore. Excluding this amount a small allocation 
of Rs.110 crore for Other Schemes is being made available t o Ministry to 
take care of 24 lakh of Panchayats. In Committee‟s view the total amount 
of Rs.4780 crore provided during 2009 -2010 is inadequate for the 
Panchayats in the country from any yardstick let alone their upliftment in 
view of emerging demands. Sin ce Panchayats are being given more 
power, more funds need to be released for infrastructural purposes. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that sufficient funds commensurate 
with the task involved should be made available.”  
          
6. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“Ministry of Panchayati Raj have been regularly pursuing with the Planning 
Commission to provide adequate funds for the various schemes of 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.” 
     
 
7. The Committee in their earlier recommend ation had called for more 
allocation of funds to the Panchayats for utilization in infrastructural purposes 
keeping in view the responsibilities and power s being given to them. The 
Committee had felt that allocation of Rs.4780 crore during 2009 -10 is gross ly 
inadequate for upliftment of Panchayats. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their 
action taken reply has stated that they have been regularly pursuing the Planning 
Commission to provide adequate funds for the various schemes of Ministry . The 
Committee re commend to the Planning Commission to adequately increase the 
allocation to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj so that it could fulfill its 
responsibilities to provide necessary  infrastructure to Panchayats.  
 

3 
 
 
 
B. LOW UTILISATION OF AVAILABLE FUNDS IN THE ELEVENT H FIVE YEAR PLAN 
BY THE MINISTRY 
[Recommendation Serial No. 5(Para No. 3.9)] 
8. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“While the funds being made available to the Ministry are not adequate in 
the opinion of the Committee, the trend so far during Eleventh Plan shows 
that the utilization of even these funds has not been encouraging as 
compared to Tenth Plan (2002 -2007). The Committee find that as against 
the total allocation of Rs.24,226.37 crore the actual expenditure during 
first two years of the Plan viz. 2007-2008 and 2008 -2009 is Rs.7680.81 
crore only. The Committee apprehend that with the present rate of 
utilization the Eleventh Plan outlay may not be utilized fully. They, 
therefore, recommend that all efforts need to be made to utilize at least 
the available funds fully. “  
       
9. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“Ministry of Panchayati Raj will make all efforts to utilize the funds 
allocated during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan.”   
  
10. The Committee had pointed out the trend o f low utilization of available 
funds during the first two years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan and recommended 
that all necessary efforts be made to utilise the available funds fully. The Ministry 
in their action-taken reply have stated that they will make all efforts to utilise the 
funds allocated during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj have not spelt out the specific steps taken or proposed to be taken to ensure 
full utilization of funds allocated to the Ministry. The Committee would await 
information in this regard.  
 
C. LONG TERM PERSPECTIVE PLAN FOR THE PANCHAYATS 
[Recommendation Serial No. 6 (Para No. 3.10)] 
11. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“The Committee have been informed that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
now propos es to have the allocation for three big schemes of BRGF, 

4 
 
 
 
RGSY and e -governance enhanced in a big way for the remaining years 
of the Eleventh Plan and beyond. For instance for BRGF quantum of 
funds is proposed to be hiked from present level of Rs.4670 crore  in 2009 
to Rs.7300 crore in 2010-2011 and Rs.9300 crore in 2011-2012. Similarly, 
for RGSY the Ministry is planning to have the existing allocation of Rs.40 
crore increased to Rs.1000 crore during 2010 -2011 and doubling the 
same in 2011 -2012. Likewise for e-governance the Ministry has a 
proposal to increase the present allocation of Rs.24 crore in 2009 -2010 to 
Rs.1000 crore in 2010 -2011 and Rs.1500 crore by 2011 -2012.  The 
Committee feel that aforesaid enhancement of funds for one -two years in 
major schemes  of the Panchayats is not going to comprehensively 
address the requirements of Panchayats in the country. The utilization of 
available funds purposefully is most essential. The Committee also desire 
that a long term perspective plan for Panchayats in the c ountry be drawn 
up bringing out clearly the present state of Panchayats and their likely rol e 
and responsibilities by 2020.” 
        
 
12. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“Recommendation of the Committee is accepted.”  
      
 
13. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had felt that purposeful 
utilization of available funds is more necessary than the proposal for 
enhancement of funds for a few years in the current five year plan as it is not 
going to address the requirement of Pa nchayats in the country comprehensively. 
The Committee had also desired the Ministry to draw up a long term perspective 
plan in this regard . The Ministry in their action-taken repl y have stated that the 
recommendation of the Committee is accepted. The  Ministry’s reply is, however, 
silent as to whether any action has been initiated to draw up the perspective plan. 
The Committee  feel that the Ministry ought to be p ro-active in implementing 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee. They would like the Mi nistry 
to initiate necessary action to prepare a long term perspective plan under 
intimation to the Committee.  

5 
 
 
 
 
D. REDUCTION OF ALLOCATION UNDER BRGF SCHEME 
[Recommendation Serial Nos. 7 & 8 (Para Nos. 3.14 and 3.15)] 
14. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“While examining the requirement of funds during the previous two years 
viz. 2007-2008 and 2008 -2009 of the Ministry , the Committee are 
constrained to note that funds available under BRGF have been 
significantly lowered at RE stage from Rs.4670 crore to Rs.3597.50 crore 
during 2007-2008 and from Rs.4670 crore to Rs.3890 crore during 2008 -
2009. Non -receipt of enough proposals for claiming BRGF funds from 
State Governments and delay in constitution of District Planning 
Committees (DPCs), a pre -requisite for claiming BRGF funds in different 
States like U.P, Gujarat, Maharashtra etc. have been attributed as 
reasons for drastic reduction of funds at Revised Estimates stage. 
Besides, non -submission of district plans by various States like Sikkim, 
Tamil Nadu, J&K  etc. in 2007 -2008 and failure to claim grants in 2008 -
2009 by the States of Karnataka, Kerala and Mizoram have been the 
reasons advanced by the Ministry for lowering of funds.”  
 
“The Committee feel that the aforesaid reasons of non -receipt of 
proposals/non-submission of district plans were very well within the 
domain of the Ministry. In their opinion being the nodal Ministry it is 
incumbent upon the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to have track on above 
issues with the States. The Committee, therefore, conclud e that had the 
Ministry taken timely interventions, aforesaid reduction could have been 
avoided. The Committee, therefore, feel that a mechanism be evolved for 
taking care of these issues so that no reduction of budgeted amount is 
required to be made at re vised estimates in future. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that such issues should be vigorously 
pursued with the State Governments. The concrete action taken in this 
regard should be communicated to the Committee.”  
       
15. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“The Ministry in the current financial year actively pursued with the States 
to get the district plans approved and submit their proposals by the mid of 
second quarter. As a result the Ministry achieved substanti ally high 
expenditure level in the third quarter. By December 31, 2009, the Ministry 
has achieved the expenditure level of Rs.3240 crore which is 
approximately 69 per cent of the BE allocations for 2009-10. 
The Ministry has advised and pursued with the Sta tes to complete 
their district plan process for 2010 -11 by January 31, 2010 and expedite 
implementation of the programme, so that funds could be released in first 
and second quarters of the 2010-11. 

6 
 
 
 
 
16. The Committee in their  earlier re commendation had voiced  concern 
regarding lowering of funds available under BRGF at RE stage during 2007 -08 
and 2008 -09. They were not satisfied with the reasons put forwarded by th e 
Ministry like non-receipt and late submission of proposals of district plans by the 
States etc. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to devise a mechanism 
so that no reduction of budgeted amount is required to be made at revised 
estimate in future. The Ministry in their action-taken reply have stated that matter 
has been pursued with the State Governments to get their district plans approved 
and submit their proposal. The Ministry claimed that due to its efforts it has been 
able to achieve expenditure level of 69 per cent of the BE allocation for 2009 -10 
by 31 st December, 2009. The Ministry has also stated that it has advised the 
States to complete preparation of district plans for 2010 -11 by January 31, 2010, 
so that funds could be released in first and second quarter of 2010 -11. The 
Committee find that the Ministry has not mentioned about any e ffort made on its 
part for constitution of District Planning Committees in different States  as 
recommended. The Ministry has also failed to evolve a mechanism for time bound 
action in case States failed to follow all requisite steps to claim funds under 
BRGF. The Committee would like the Ministry to take all efforts to fully utilise 
available funds to avoid reduction of funds at RE stage.   
 
E. ADEQUATE ALLOCATION TO THE MINISTRY FOR INCLUSIVE GROWTH 
[Recommendation Serial No. 9 (Para No. 3.18)] 
17. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“As regards availability of funds before the Ministry during the current year 
2009-2010, the Committee are constrained to note that an amount of 
Rs.6720 crore as proposed by the Ministry has been drastically reduced to 
Rs.4780 b y the Planning Commission. The Committee after perusing 
scheme-wise proposed vis-à-vis agreed amount, are constrained to note 
that for BRGF as against the proposed amount of Rs.6000 crore only 
Rs.4670 crore have been approved. Similarly, for other schemes as 
against the proposed amount of Rs.720 crore only Rs.110 crore has been 
approved. The scheme of the Department have tremendous impact on 
increasing capacity building thereby improving rural infrastructure. The 

7 
 
 
 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to the Department to take up 
the matter with the Planning Commission for providing adequate allocation 
commensurate with the requirements with a view to achieve inclusive 
growth so that the benefit are shared  by the poorest of poor in the 
country.” 
       
 
18. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“Ministry of Panchayati Raj is regularly pursuing Planning Commission at 
the highest level to allocate requisite funds to achieve the desired goals of 
„inclusive growth by strengthening Panchayati Raj Institutions‟.” 
  
19. The Committee in their earlier recommendation on enhanced allocation for 
BRGF scheme has recommended the Ministry to take the matter with the 
Planning Commission so that it could get more fund s. The Ministry in their 
action-taken reply have stated that it is regularly pursuing Planning Commission 
at the highest level to allocate requisite funds to achieve the desired goal. The 
Committee had noted that the Ministry has not been able to get adequate 
enhancement of funds under BRGF sch eme in 2010-11 budget. The Committee 
recommend the Planning Commission to enhance the allocation to the Ministry 
under BRGF scheme so that  there are enough funds available for the 
development of backward regions of the country. 
  
F. ABSENCE OF PROPER TECHNICA L KNOWHOW AND PERSONNEL IN 
PANCHAYATS 
[Recommendation Serial No. 11 (Para No. 4.10)] 
20. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“The Committee are constrained to note that in the absence of proper 
technical knowhow and personnel the Sarpanchs in different S tates are 
facing difficulties in running the different rural development programmes 
like NREGA and that in many cases the Panchayat Secretary generally 
does not guide the Gram Sabha properly. Not only this the expected 
cooperation from Government functionaries like BDOs/Junior Engineers is 
also not forthcoming owing to large responsibility of covering more than 
one Gram Sabhas given to these Government officers. All these 

8 
 
 
 
revelations have been candidly admitted before the Committee by the 
Secretary, Panchayati Raj while assuring necessary remedial steps. The 
Committee trust that these issues will be taken care of by the nodal 
Ministry for appropriate action. They would like to be informed of the 
precise remedial steps taken in this regard.”  
  
 
21. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“Ministry of Panchayati Raj is of the firm view that until requisite 
infrastructure and manpower is provided to the Gram Panchayats, they 
may not be able to function as local self government. Though, State 
Governments are required to provide infrastructure and manpower to 
Panchayats, but due to lack of resources, the requirement of the 
Panchayats are being met partially. In view of this, Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj have already issued instructions to the Stat e Government to construct 
Panchayat Ghar with adequate space by dovetailing funds from NREGA, 
BRGF and other Schemes of the Central/State Governments. Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj is also preparing a proposal to provide assistance to the 
State Governments fo r providing Panchayat infrastructure and required 
manpower.”      
22. The Committee in their earlier  Report has recommended that necessary 
steps should be taken to remove the problems of technical knowledge and 
personnel faced by the elected representatives in  PRIs for implementation of 
various schemes for rural development. The Ministry in their action -taken reply 
have stated that they  have issued instructions to the State Government to use 
the funds available under Centrally Sponsored Schemes like NREGA, BRG F etc. 
for this purpose. They have also informed that they are preparing a proposal to 
provide assistance to the State Governments in this regard. The Committee 
would like to know how soon the proposal will be prepared. The Committee would 
also like to be apprised of the salient features of the proposal. 
 
 
 

9 
 
 
 
G. CAPACITY BUILDING OF PANCHAYATS 
[Recommendation Serial Nos. 15 & 16 (Para Nos. 4.23 and 4.24) 
23. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry of Panchay ati 
Raj does not even have the basic data about the number of elected 
representatives of Panchayats trained in different States. In Committee‟s 
opinion a sorry state of affairs is currently prevailing over this vital aspect 
relating to training of Panchaya t functionaries in the country. The 
Committee find from the State -wise details made available to them that in 
almost all the States figures are not available with the Ministry. In the 
absence of necessary data, the Committee would wonder how the claims 
of the Ministry that out of 28.8 lakh elected representatives a total of 11.95 
lakh elected representatives have been trained can be relied upon. The 
Committee expressed there concern over the under achievement of 
targets with regard to the training of electe d representatives. The 
Committee, strongly recommend that all initiatives should be taken to 
ensure that fixed targets for training of Panchayat functionaries in the 
country are achieved and make the training programme more effective.”  
      
 “In view of the foregoing the Committee feel that business like approach 
is essential on the issue of training of elected representatives in different 
States. The Committee are also of the view that Ministry‟s claim that within 
one year the remaining elected represent atives would be trained provided 
the enhanced funds of Rs.1000 crore are made available under RGSY is 
also not based on any assessment particularly when everything is vague 
and inconclusive on the issue of training in different States. The 
Committee, therefore, feel that before asking for higher funds, the Ministry 
has to put its own house in order to take care of higher funds in future. 
They, therefore, desire that the Ministry should without any delay make 
realistic assessment of the elected representativ es in PRIs who are yet to 
be trained so that it can gear itself to the task accordingly. According to 
the Ministry it has advised the Planning Commission to introduce 
integrated district planning through Centrally Sponsored Schemes/State 
Sector Schemes. Pl anning Commission is stated to have proposed a 
scheme for planning units at State and District level is for which the inter 
Ministerial consultations are in progress. They recall that more or less a 
similar scheme was also floated by the Ministry last year  but it could not 
see the light of the day. The Committee, therefore, feel that instead of 
charting out a flip -flop approach, a time bound programme for training of 
PRI functionaries on the pattern of „Bharat Nirman‟ should be prepared so 
that Panchayats i n the country can work as a unit of self Governments in 
the real sense.” 
        

10 
 
 
 
 
24. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“The Ministry has collected information from all the States and UTs 
regarding the number of elected representat ives, the number of trained 
under different programmes, etc. This information has been placed on the 
website of Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
All the States and UTs have been advised to prepare and implement 
the training programme for the elected representat ives and functionaries 
of the Panchayati Raj Institutions as per the National Capacity Building 
Framework (NCBF). More details in this regard may please be seen in 
reply to para 4.24. 
(a)   The Ministry has adopted the National Capability Building Framewor k 
(NCBF) as the framework for undertaking the Capacity Building & Training 
activities for the Elected Representatives and Functionaries of PRIs. 
(b)  In order to take -up the Capacity Building and Training activities as per 
the NCBF in a Mission Mode,  the Ministry visualized holding of three 
Regional Workshops. Accordingly three Regional Workshops were 
organized in September, 2009 at Gangtok, Goa and Shimla covering all 
the States and UTs. The States were impressed to give thrust to the 
CB&T activities thro ugh preparation of integrated Perspective Plans for 
CB&T covering BRGF, RGSY as well as other schemes, for the current 
year and the next year. 11 States have already finalized their Perspective 
Plans while other States are in the process of doing so. The W orkshops 
also provided a platform for States to come together, exchange ideas, 
communicate their success stories as well as difficulties and deliberate on 
issues of common concern.   
(c)  The Ministry has also taken a new initiative for Public Private 
Partnership in CB&T where in the services of NGOs, Private 
Organisations as well as Academic Institutions are sought to be utilised for 
CB&T activities. The Ministry had organised a PRIs CB&T Business Meet 
on 07 -01-2010 at New Delhi where well over 100 organis ations 
participated. The process is being carried forward in consultation with the 
State Governments/ UTs. 
(d)  The Ministry expects that these initiatives will help in bringing CB&T of 
PRIs in focus at the State level leading to better coverage and 
improvement in the quality of trainings. During the last five years, over 28 
lakh Elected Representatives/Functionaries of PRIs have been provided 
training. With the new initiatives, the situation should improve further.”  
  
 
 
 
 

11 
 
 
 
25. The Committee  has recommended the  Ministry to prepare a time boun d 
programme for training of PRI  functionaries on the pattern of ‘Bharat Nirman’ to 
achieve targets for training of elected representatives and also to make training 
more effective.  The Ministry in their action-taken reply have stated that they have 
collected the information regarding number of trained elected representatives. 
According to the Ministry , they are working in mission mode adopting National 
Capacity Building Framework (NCBF)  and they have organized three regional  
workshops in which  States were impressed upon the  preparation of integrated 
perspective plan for capacity building and training  and also for taking initiative 
for public private partnership in capacity building and training. The Committee 
are dismayed to note that the Ministry has furnished most of the already known 
information and it is yet to take  any concrete step to streamline training 
programme in the whole country.  The Committee, therefore, feel that the Ministry 
is not serious in implementing the recommendation of the Committee on capacity 
building and it must come up with specific time bound training programme for 
Panchayats functionaries so that they can understand Government machinery, 
programmes and its process to achieve the aim of inclusive go vernance as 
recommended by them earlier.  
 
H. CONSTRUCTION OF PANCHAYAT BUILDINGS  
[Recommendation Serial No. 21 (Para No. 4.47)] 
26. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“The Committee are unhappy to note that even after five years of creation of 
the Minist ry there are as many as 68000 Panchayats without their own 
Panchayat Buildings and another 58,000 Panchayat Bhavans across the 
country require major repairs. The Ministry is stated to have come up with a 
three years plan to build Panchayat Bhavans with inc reased funds. 
Simultaneously the Ministry has been impressing upon the States to utilise the 
BRGF funds first for building Panchayat Ghars. As recommended by the 
Committee in a previous chapter, a holistic and long term plan is necessary for 
solving this problem related with infrastructure of the Panchayats in the country. 
The Committee desire that the construction of Panchayat buildings in all the 
68,000 Panchayats which do not have a building should be taken up in the right 
earnest so that each Panchayat in the country has a building of its own within 
the next three years. The Committee have also been informed assigning the 
Panchayats an exclusive role to handle the NREGA scheme is being 

12 
 
 
 
contemplated. The Committee welcome this development and desire that 
further details in this regard be furnished to them.”    
27. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“BRGF funds which are substantially untied are being used for building 
Panchayat Ghars.  During 2008 -09 & 2009-10 more than 5000 Panchay at 
Ghars were sanctioned.  Under RGSY which has a small component of 
Infrastructure Development, 1016 Panchayat Ghars have been sanctioned 
from 2006 -07 to till date in various States.  Enhanced allocation for the 
component has been requested next year.” 
   
28. The Committee in their earlier Report had recommended the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj to take the initiative to complete the construction of Panchayat 
buildings in next three years  keeping in view the slow pace of construction of 
Panchayat buildings in the  country. The Ministry in their action-taken reply have 
stated that 6,016 Panchayat Ghars ha ve been sanctioned in various States till 
date. They note that the Ministry of Rural Development has come up with Bharat 
Nirman Rajiv Gandhi Sewa Kendra to construc t a office complex including a 
meeting hall and two room at the Gram Panchayat level as infrastructure support 
to Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme 
(MGNREGP) in all the Panchayats within the next three years. It shows that the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj is not very serious towards recommendation of the 
Committee and it is still going slow in this matter  while other Ministry is taking 
the initiative.  They note similar facilities can be constructed in the BRGF districts 
numbering 250 and also in the remaining RGSY districts. Thus, there is need  and 
willingness on the part of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to dovetail the funds in 
this regard. The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation would 
like expeditious complet ion of rest of Panchayat buildings in all Panchayats of 
the country within next three years.  

13 
 
 
 
I. SURVEILLANCE OF BRGF SCHEME 
[Recommendation Serial No.  30 (Para No. 5.11)] 
29. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“The Committee‟s examination has revealed th at even the achievement of 
major BRGF objective of removal of imbalances is in doubt. The Ministry 
has concurred with the Committee‟s view that for proper implementation of 
BRGF scheme at Gram Sabha level certain degree of surveillance from 
the Ministry is  needed. In this connection the Committee have been 
informed that a Committee viz. Ramachandran Committee is already 
looking into various aspects of BRGF including the issue of its 
restructuring. The Committee have been informed that by December, 
2009 the Committee was likely to submit its Report. The Committee would 
like to be informed of the findings of the Ramchandran Committee. They 
also desire that expeditious action on these findings should be taken 
including restructuring of BRGF, so that the various  difficulties being faced 
in the implementation of the programme can be removed.” 
30. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“The report of the National Advisory and Review Committee on BRGF, 
Ramachandran Committee, is yet to be submitted.” 
 
31. The Committee while examining  the performance of the implementation of 
the BRGF scheme had felt that certain degree of surveillance is required to 
achieve the target of the removal of imbalances in the country.  The Committee 
were informed in this c onnection that Ramchandran Committee which was 
already looking into various aspects of BRFG scheme was likely to submit the 
Report by December, 2009. The Ministry in their action-taken reply in March, 2010 
have stated that the Ramachandran Committee is yet to submit its Report. It is 
not clear whether the Ramchandran Committee has  been given extension of time 
for submission of its Report .  The Committee would like the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj to impress upon the Ramchandran Committee to complete its task 
expeditiously and present its Report within its extended timeframe.    

14 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 1 and 2, Para Nos. 2.3 and 2.4) 
The Committee are glad to note that the Statement by t he Minister under 
Direction 73A of „Directions by the Speaker‟ showing the status of implementation of 
recommendations of the Standing Committee on Rural Development contained in the 
Thirty Eighth Report has been made within the stipulated period. The Comm ittee trust 
that in future also the Ministry would be abiding by the above Direction by the Speaker.  
The Committee have been informed that the recommendations of the Committee 
are reviewed from time to time with the intent to ensure their implementation i n review 
meetings as also in Quarterly Review Meetings (QRMs) with State Panchayati Raj 
Departments. The Committee, are, however constrained to find that in the case of 
majority of the recommendations, the Statement has merely reproduced from the action 
taken replies submitted three months after presentation of the Report. The Committee 
feel that this defeats the very purpose of the Statement which should depict the 
progress made in the implementation of the recommendations of the Committee. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that in future instead of repeating the action taken replies 
in the Minister‟s Statement, the precise status of implementation of the 
recommendations should be indicated in the Statement made under Direction 73 A.  
This will enable the Co mmittee to understand the progress of work done in a more 
focused manner.  
 Reply of the Government   
    
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. Action Taken on the 
Recommendations of the Committee was reviewed in the meeting of Secretaries of 
State Governments.  
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 3.7) 
The Committee are constrained to note that the important Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj that has been assigned the pioneering role of looking after all the responsibilities of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) throughout the country covering around 24 lakh 
Panchayats with 2.8 million elected Panchayati Raj representatives has not been 
receiving necessary funds since its inceptio n in 2004 commensurate with the task and 
challenges before the Ministry. They find that an amount of Rs.4780 crore has been 
made available during 2009 -2010 to the Ministry even after the two historic legislations 
of 73 rd Constitution (Amendment) Act of 199 2 and the Panchayats (Extension to 
Scheduled Areas) Act (PESA) of 1996 have come into operation in the country. The 

15 
 
 
 
Committee observe that during the Tenth Plan (2002-2007) the total funds to the tune of 
Rs.2080 crore were available to the Ministry. These have gone up to Rs. 24,226.37 
crore during Eleventh Plan period (2007 -2012). The Committee recommend that 
keeping in view the stupendous task and responsibilities of over 2.8 million elected 
representatives in the country a countrywide study is necessary f or making the Ministry 
more purposeful and action oriented.  
Reply of the Government  
Ministry of Panchayati Raj have already awarded a country-wide study to reputed 
organization i.e. Institute of Rural Management Anand (IRMA). The Report of the study 
is expected by the end of March, 2010.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 3.9) 
While the funds being made available to the Ministry are not adequate in the 
opinion of the Committee, the trend so far during Eleventh Plan shows that the 
utilization of even  these funds has not been encouraging as compared to Tenth Plan 
(2002-2007). The Committee find that as against the total allocation of Rs.24,226.37 
crore the actual expenditure during first two years of the Plan viz. 2007-2008 and 2008-
2009 is Rs.7680.81 crore only. The Committee apprehend that with the present rate of 
utilization the Eleventh Plan outlay may not be utilized fully. They, therefore, 
recommend that all efforts need to be made to utilize at least the available funds fully.   
Reply of the Government  
Ministry of Panchayati Raj will make all efforts to utilize the funds allocated during 
the Eleventh Five-Year Plan.   
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.10) 
The Committee have been informed that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj now 
proposes to have the allocation for three big schemes of BRGF, RGSY and e -
governance enhanced in a big way for the remaining years of the Eleventh Plan and 
beyond. For instance for BRGF quantum of funds is proposed to be hiked from present 
level of Rs.4670 crore in 2009 to Rs.7300 crore in 2010 -2011 and Rs.9300 crore in 
2011-2012. Similarly, for RGSY the Ministry is planning to have the existing allocation of 
Rs.40 crore increased to Rs.1000 crore during 2010 -2011 and doubling the same in 
2011-2012. Likewise for e -governance the Ministry has a proposal to increase the 
present allocation of Rs.24 crore in 2009 -2010 t o Rs.1000 crore in 2010 -2011 and 
Rs.1500 crore by 2011-2012.  The Committee feel that aforesaid enhancement of funds 

16 
 
 
 
for one-two years in major schemes of the Panchayats is not going to comprehensively 
address the requirements of Panchayats in the country.  The utilization of available 
funds purposefully is most essential. The Committee also desire that a long term 
perspective plan for Panchayats in the country be drawn up bringing out clearly the 
present state of Panchayats and their likely role and responsibilities by 2020.  
Reply of the Government  
Recommendation of the Committee is accepted.  
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 7 and 8, Para Nos. 3.14 and 3.15) 
While examining the requirement of funds during the previous two years viz. 
2007-2008 and 2008 -2009 of the Ministry the Committee are constrained to note that 
funds available under BRGF have been signif icantly lowered at RE stage from Rs.4670 
crore to Rs.3597.50 crore during 2007 -2008 and from Rs.4670 crore to Rs.3890 crore 
during 2008-2009. Non-receipt of enough proposals for claiming BRGF funds from State 
Governments and delay in constitution of Distri ct Planning Committees (DPCs), a pre -
requisite for claiming BRGF funds in different States like U.P, Gujarat, Maharashtra etc. 
have been attributed as reasons for drastic reduction of funds at Revised Estimates 
stage. Besides, non -submission of district pl ans by various States like Sikkim, Tamil 
Nadu, J&K etc. in 2007 -2008 and failure to claim grants in 2008 -2009 by the States of 
Karnataka, Kerala and Mizoram have been the reasons advanced by the Ministry for 
lowering of funds.  
The Committee feel that the aforesaid reasons of non -receipt of proposals/non -
submission of district plans were very well within the domain of the Ministry. In their 
opinion being the nodal Ministry it is incumbent upon the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to 
have track on above issues wit h the States. The Committee, therefore, conclude that 
had the Ministry taken timely interventions, aforesaid reduction could have been 
avoided. The Committee, therefore, feel that a mechanism be evolved for taking care of 
these issues so that no reduction of budgeted amount is required to be made at revised 
estimates in future. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that such issues 
should be vigorously pursued with the State Governments. The concrete action taken in 
this regard should be communicated to the Committee.  
 
 
 

17 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
  
The Ministry in the current financial year actively pursued with the States to get 
the district plans approved and submit their proposals by the mid of second quarter. As 
a result the Ministry achieved substantially high expenditure level in the third quarter. By 
December 31, 2009, the Ministry has achieved the expenditure level of Rs.3240 crore 
which is approximately 69 per cent of the BE allocations for 2009-10. 
 The Ministry has advised and pursued with t he States to complete their district 
plan process for 2010 -11 by January 31, 2010 and expedite implementation of the 
programme, so that funds could be released in first and second quarters of the 2010-11. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 3.18) 
 As regards availability of funds before the Ministry during the current year 2009 -
2010, the Committee ar e constrained to note that an amount of Rs.6720 crore as 
proposed by the Ministry has been drastically reduced to Rs.4780 by the Planning 
Commission. The Committee after perusing scheme -wise proposed vis-à-vis agreed 
amount, are constrained to note that fo r BRGF as against the proposed amount of 
Rs.6000 crore only Rs.4670 crore have been approved. Similarly, for other schemes as 
against the proposed amount of Rs.720 crore only Rs.110 crore has been approved. 
The scheme of the Department have tremendous impact on increasing capacity building 
thereby improving rural infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
to the Department to take up the matter with the Planning Commission for providing 
adequate allocation commensurate with the requirement s with a view to achieve 
inclusive growth so that the benefit are shared  by the poorest of poor in the country. 
Reply of the Government  
Ministry of Panchayati Raj is regularly pursuing Planning Commission at the 
highest level to allocate requisite funds to achieve the desired goals of „inclusive growth 
by strengthening Panchayati Raj Institutions‟. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

18 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 4.10) 
The Committee are constrained to note that in the absence of proper technical 
knowhow and personnel the Sarpanchs in different States are facing difficulties in 
running the different rural development programmes like NREGA and that in many 
cases the Panchayat Secretary generally does not guide the Gram Sabha properly. Not 
only this the expected cooperation from Government functionaries like BDOs/Junior 
Engineers is also not forthcoming owing to large responsibilit y of covering more than 
one Gram Sabhas given to these Government officers. All these revelations have been 
candidly admitted before the Committee by the Secretary, Panchayati Raj while 
assuring necessary remedial steps. The Committee trust that these issu es will be taken 
care of by the nodal Ministry for appropriate action. They would like to be informed of 
the precise remedial steps taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government  
Ministry of Panchayati Raj is of the firm view that until requisite infrastr ucture and 
manpower is provided to the Gram Panchayats, they may not be able to function as 
local self government. Though, State Governments are required to provide 
infrastructure and manpower to Panchayats, but due to lack of resources, the 
requirement of  the Panchayats are being met partially. In view of this, Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj have already issued instructions to the State Government to construct 
Panchayat Ghar with adequate space by dovetailing funds from NREGA, BRGF and 
other Schemes of the Cen tral/State Governments. Ministry of Panchayati Raj is also 
preparing a proposal to provide assistance to the State Governments for providing 
Panchayat infrastructure and required manpower.  
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 4.11) 
On the issue of making available technical support to Panchayats the Committee 
have been informed that based on the fin dings of World Bank team in eight States with 
problem large BRGF districts, a view has come up that Panchayats can perform better 
independently without Governments‟ support or other technical support. In Committee‟s 
opinion the findings of the World Bank t eam may hold good for selective areas only. 
Considering dismal infrastructure available with Panchayats in general in the country, 
the Committee feel that desired technical knowhow and personnel be made available to 
Panchayats so that these can function in a vibrant manner.  
 

19 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The Ministry is releasing funds under the capacity building component of BRGF 
and Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY) for facilitating training and capacity building 
programmes for elected representatives and functionaries of Panchayats. The 
programme guidelines of the BRGF provide a Capability Building Fund of Rs.250 crore 
per annum ( i.e. Rs.1 crore for each of the 250 BRGF districts per annum) which will be 
used primarily to build capacity of local bodies. A lso 5% of the development grant 
component of BRGF money can be earmarked by the States for augmenting staff for 
the PRIs. However, this provision is not being utilized in many of the States. The matter 
is, however being pursued with the States. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 4.16) 
Another related issue that came up before the Committee is of filling up of large 
number of vacancies of Panchayat Secretary and Gram Sewaks in Panc hayats. The 
Committee feel that this issue can be suitably addressed by the nodal Ministry itself by 
taking up the matter with the State Governments. They would, therefore, like that the 
Ministry to take desired action in this regard.  
Reply of the Government  
 Letters have been sent on 5 th January, 2010 to the Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries, Panchayati Raj Departments of all States requesting them to 
furnish information regarding vacancies of Panchayat Secretary and Gram Sewaks in 
Panchayats and to draw up an action plan for filling these vacancies. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Recommendation (Serial  No. 17,  Para No. 4.30) 
The Committee regret to note that the important aspect of training of elected 
representatives of PRIs is beset with various constraints like non -submission or delay in 
submission of capacity building plans, late arrival of funds at nodal agency level etc. 
Besides the noble programme of „National Capacity Building Framework‟ (NCBF) has 
also not come up to the expectations. The Committee have also been informed that in 
order to accomplish the task, faster training would be done through private partnership 
basis. The experience of States like West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh on the training 
aspect have been forwarded to other States for their benefit. The Committee appreciate 
the good work done by these States. They, however, desire that nodal Ministry should 
first of all address all constraints coming in the way of training and utilise the NCBF fo r 
the above purpose of capacity building. The Committee also recommend that a follow 
up from different States be obtained on the extent to which they have adopted the 
approach of West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh which has been circulated by the 
Ministry. The Committee may also be apprised of the same.  

20 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
(a) The Ministry has already requested the States for a follow up on the extent to which 
they have adopted the approach of West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh. The committee 
would be apprised of the responses in due course.  
(b) Unlike in the previous years, during the current year the Ministry has already 
achieved the expenditure levels prescribed under Cash Management System till 
December, 2009 under the Capacity Building component of BRGF and RGSY. 
(c) The Elections of PRIs in various States are held in different years. The Training 
activities for ERs of PRIs are generally related to the Election cycle, receiving thrust 
immediately after elections and tapering off around six months before the next elections. 
The data for number of ERs of PRIs trained during the last five years (enclosed as 
Annex) shows that a total of 28 lakh ERs/Functionaries have been provided training 
under various schemes. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 4.34) 
The Committee are constrained to note that expected progress has not been 
made on the issue of simplification of decentralized planning under BRGF through 
introduction of the software „ Plan Plus‟. In this connection the Committee are 
constrained to note that only 70,000 planning units in 250 BRGF have adopted the 
software in three years period from 2007 -2008 to 2009 -2010. The Committee have 
been informed that full potential of the softwa re will be realized once all sectoral 
schemes are routed through it. The Committee feel that the initiative is quite good 
however its coverage is far from satisfactory. They desire that the matter of routing all 
the schemes through the software be taken up  expeditiously with all concerned for its 
optimal utilization.       
     Reply of the Government  
The Ministry has persuaded the States to ensure that all the local plans and the 
district plans under the BRGF are uploaded and approved through the Plan Plu s 
software.  The NIC on the request of the Ministry conducted various State level 
workshops for building the capacities of the implementation authorities in use of the 
software.  The Ministry has also requested the States to conduct district level 
workshops with the trained persons (in State level workshops) functioning as resource 
persons.     The use of PlanPlus software in BRGF is showing an upward trand.  The 
Ministry has taken up with Planning Commission to route all Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes through the PlanPlus software.    
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
 

21 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 4.37) 
On the issue of training of increased number of women elected representatives in 
Panchayats in the country, i f the legislation relating to 50% reservation for women in 
PRIs is enacted, the Committee have been informed that the increased number of 
women members will be taken care of jointly under „National Capacity Building 
Framework‟ (NCBF) and Panchayat Mahila S hakti Abhiyan. The Committee find that as 
admitted by the Secretary, Panchayati Raj the task is mammoth. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a study/survey be undertaken in advance to identify the 
correct number of women representatives of PRIs in dif ferent States who would be 
required to be trained as there is complete absence of data in this regard. 
Reply of the Government  
  The Bill to increase the reservation for women in PRIs from 30% to 50% is under 
reference to the Standing Committee on Parliam ent of Rural Development.  When the 
Legislation is finally enacted, there will be a substantial increase in the number of 
women representatives in PRIs and there will be need of augmenting facilities/ 
additional efforts for the capacity building of such El ected Women Representatives 
(EWRs).  This Ministry has called for a meeting of the Nodal Officers/ representatives of 
State Panchayati Raj Departments etc. concerned with the implementation of the 
PMEYSA at New Delhi on 10.3.2010 in which, inter-alia, the issues relating to the status 
of training and sensitizing the EWRs will be discussed.  The exact modalities in which 
these EWRs could be trained can be worked out in this meeting. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 4.40) 
  The Committee appreciate the idea of setting up a National Institute for 
Panchayati Raj for imparting training of PRI functionaries across the country instead of 
individual efforts of different SIRDs in this reg ard. The Committee recommend that in 
order to have a coordinated approach on training of PRI functionaries as well as officials 
involved in the implementation of all rural development schemes, this kind of national 
level institute be set up expeditiously a s currently National Institute of Rural 
Development (NIRD) is already pre occupied with other works relating to rural 
development. 
Reply of the Government  
 The Ministry has taken action to prepare the Detailed Project Report for setting 
up a National Resource Centre for Panchayati Raj. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
 
 

22 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 4.52) 
The Committee are constrained to note that on the issue of Centrality of PRIs in 
Centrally Sponsored Sc hemes not much progress has been made over the years. In this 
connection, the Committee find that on 19 January, 2009 a circular has been issued by the 
Ministry to different Ministries urging them to give Central role to Panchayats in their 
different schem es run by these Ministries. In this connection the Committee have been 
informed by Secretary, Panchayati Raj that desirable headway has not been made on this 
issue. The Committee recommend that a task force under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
Panchayati Raj be set up on the issue of giving central role to Panchayats in the different 
schemes run by the Ministries. The Committee may hold inter -Ministerial consultations with 
different Ministries as also with Planning Commission and should submit their findings  
within three months time suggesting specific action required on the part of all the 
authorities/agencies involved in order to achieve this objective of strengthening the 
Panchayats. 
Reply of the Government  
 Ministry of Panchayati Raj has written to the C abinet Secretariat requesting that the 
Committee to review the modifications to be made in the existing Guidelines of CSSs to 
identity a domain for the PRIs may be revived and a review undertaken of the action taken 
by various Ministries on the Committee‟s recommendations. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ) 
  
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 4.61) 
The Committee are constrained to note that the two issues of devolution of functions, 
functionaries and finances from d ifferent States to Panchayats and Activity Mapping which 
have been outlined by the Ministry as major areas during Eleventh Plan have not 
progressed on expected lines as mandated by the Constitution and as recommended by the 
Committee from time to time.  Th e Committee have analysed the position with regard to 
devolution in their earlier reports and expressed serious concern on the slow pace of 
devolution in the country. The analysis of the aforesaid data reveals that no significant 
improvement has taken plac e and status quo has been maintained for most of the States.  
The Committee are dismayed to note that the progress on exercise of Activity Mapping 
which started way back in 2005 in 24 different States could not progress well during the last 
four years. For instance it has been completed in only 6 States of Kerala, Karnataka, West 
Bengal, Sikkim, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh. Further in another 12 States of Assam, 
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Chhatisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa 
and Punj ab it is partially completed. In remaining 5 States of Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, 
Maharashtra, Manipur and Goa it is at interim stage. In this connection the Committee have 
been informed by the Secretary, Panchayati Raj that for necessary devolution of 3 Fs t o 
Panchayats two things are essentially required one every State has to open a Panchayat 
window in their budget and second the Planning Commission should link a portion of their 
central assistance to State plans. In Committee‟s opinion the views expressed by the 
Secretary, Panchayati Raj are relevant and the matter should be taken up with Planning 
Commission and with State Governments earnestly and effectively in order to achieve 
devolution in remaining period of the Eleventh Plan.  

23 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 The issue is being taken up by Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
 Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 4.65) 
The Committee are constrained to note that the Panchayat Empowerment and 
Accountability Scheme that envisages incentivizing States for empowering PRIs based 
on devolution index has also not progressed well. For instance only ten States of 
Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Sikkim, Himachal 
Pradesh, Haryan a, Chhattisgarh and Assam could get the benefit of this scheme, 
whereas the remaining States are far behind. The Committee feel that in many States 
the nodal agencies might not conceptually clear about the scheme. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that all necessary steps should be taken to encourage the States 
to take benefits of the scheme. This would also help in quickening the pace of 
devolution.   
Reply of the Government  
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Government of India has engaged Indian Institute of  
Public Administration (IIPA), New Delhi to prepare a Report on Devolution Index (DI) 
2009-10. The Index will form the basis for ranking the States/UTs for the Panchayat 
Empowerment & Accountability Incentive Scheme (PEAIS). 
 A letter has been sent on 19.1 .2010 specially drawing the attention of States to 
the Scheme and requesting them to take benefit of PEAIS. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 4.68) 
The Committee find that with regard to District Planning Committee‟s (DPCs) 
there are three tasks before the Ministry. One relates to constitution of DPCs in 
Uttarakhand and Jharkhand, second pertains to professionalizing all the DPCs and third 
mass training for decentralized planning . The Committee are constrained to note that 
DPCs have not been constituted in Uttarakhand. The Committee recommend that the 
matter of constitution of DPCs be taken up with Uttarakhand Government. As for DPCs 
in Jharkhand, the Committee were informed that the elections are to held in the State. 
The Committee recommend that soon after the formation of Government the issue of 
early constitution of DPCs should be taken up with State Government of Jharkhand.  
Reply of the Government  
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is seized of the necessity of formation of District 
Planning Committee under the system of PRIs and their effective and meaningful 
functioning across the country. The States have been repeatedly advised to ensure and 
tone up the functioning of PRIs at all level.  As regards the formation of DPCs in the 

24 
 
 
 
States of Jharkhand it is stated that the election in the PRIs could not be held because 
of the litigations related to certain specific issues keeping in view the demography and 
other factors relating to that State. Since the legal cases have now been settled, it is 
reasonably expected that the State Government will take expeditious action to hold the 
elections of PRIs and the DPCs will soon be in place for effective working. 
 As regards the position about the State of Uttarakhand, it is stated that they have 
also been addressed on the point of non -constitution of District Planning Committee in 
the States. They have been requested on 12.1.2010 to ensure that requisite progress is 
made in the constitutions of DPCs. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 4.69) 
As regard, professionalizing DPCs, the Committee find that the process of 
integrated planning at district level was started way b ack in August, 2006. However, it 
took three years for the Ministry to even sanction funds to the National Institute of Rural 
Development for organizing training of trainers on District Planning and for organizing 
orientation programme for Technical Support  Institutes (TSIs). The Committee are of 
the opinion that serious efforts need to be made in this regard if the concept of 
Integrated District Plan is to succeed. They also desire that details of work done about 
professionalizing DPCs in terms of trainers trained, empanelling of reputed 
organizations as Technical Support Institutes (TSIs) etc. in different BRGF States be 
furnished to them. 
Reply of the Government  
 It is stated that two courses relating to Training of Trainers were conducted by 
National Ins titute of Management, Hyderabad. The first course was held from 14 -18 
September, 2009 on “Participatory Planning Process and Orientation Manual for 
Integrated District Planning”.  The second course was held between 3 -7 September, 
2009 at Guwahati.  The pro gramme was attended by Faculty Members of SIRDs, 
officers of the States Planning Board and officers of the Panchayati Raj Department of 
different States.  The first course was attended by 15 participants from the States of 
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisga rh, Maharashtra, Orissa and Tamil Nadu.  The 
second course was attended by 11 participants from Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram and Orissa. In addition to this, it is also submitted that the Ministry 
has been considering to take intensive as well as extensive action for involving the PRIs 
in formulation of effective integrated plans at different levels including those by the 
DPCs. The Ministry has initiated action for engaging a competent and highly 
professional agencies which may organize comp rehensive pointed and effective 
workshops / training courses at National, State, District and Block levels to sensitize and 
train the officers and staff of the Panchayat Department of State Government and those 
working in PRIs at different level down the l ine to make them professionally competent 
for framing respective integrated plans. 

25 
 
 
 
Regarding the BRGF districts, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and  Planning 
Commission together identified Technical Support Institutes (TSIs)  with a long term 
interest in district planning and constituted a panel of such institutions from which States 
were requested to choose institutions to assist the district planning process involving 
Panchayats and Municipalities in preparing plans and DPCs in consolidating these 
plans. A n allocation of Rs. 25 crore at the rate of Rs. 10 lakh per BRGF district was 
released to States for the purpose of engaging experts and the TSIs.  The TSIs have 
assisted the planning entities concerned in preparation of District Plans. The State 
Governments have been suggested to engage TSIs for 2009-10 and onwards and funds 
under the capacity building component of BRGF can be utilised towards their 
engagement cost. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ) 
  
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 4.80) 
The Committee find that Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act 
(PESA), 1996 empowering Gram Sabhas with special powers in 9 PESA States of 
Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Orissa, Gujarat, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh has not progressed on expected lines. Some 
States are yet to amend the subject laws like those relating to money lending, forest, 
excise etc. Consequently compliance remains incomplete perfunctory and formal in 
most States as has been admitted by the Ministry.  Not only that, the Committee are 
dismayed to learn that vital issues like ownership of minor forest produce, planning and 
management of minor water -bodies etc. which have been duly recognized in PESA as 
the traditional rights of tribals living in the scheduled areas, have still not received the 
required attention. Powers statutorily devolved upon Gram Sabhas and Panchayats 
have also not been matched by corresponding transfer of funds and functionaries, 
resulting in the non-exercise of such powers. The Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
has contended before the Committee that empowerment of Gram Sabhas and 
Panchayats is also necessary in order to solve the problem of naxalism prevalent in 
central India. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to follow up vigorously 
with the PESA State Governments to take all measures necessary for implementation of 
PESA in letter and spirit. The Committee would like to be informed of the efforts made 
by the Ministry in this regard.  
Reply of the Government  
 Action taken by Ministry of Panchayati Raj in respect of implementation of PESA:  
(1) This Ministry has again written to the all the 9 PESA States in Jan. 2010 to amend 
the subject laws e.g Land Acquisition, money lendi ng, forest, excise in compliance with 
PESA .For this the Ministry has requested the States to hold a consultation workshop 
with other line departments concerned with the subject laws. Such workshops have so 
far been held in Rajasthan, Orissa & Maharashtra.  Workshops are also planned for the 
other States.  
(2) Indian Law Institute has undertaken a Study of Central Acts where modifications are 
to be carried out to bring them in conformity with PESA. These Central Acts are mines & 
Minerals (Developments and Re gulation) Act, 1957, the Forest Act 1927, The Forest 

26 
 
 
 
Conservation Act, 1980. The ILI Report has been examined and has been sent to the 
Ministry of Mines and Ministry of Environment and Forests for comments.  
(3) This Ministry has drafted the Model Rules un der PESA which may be used as a 
framework the Rules to be framed by the States. The Model Rules have been 
forwarded to the State Secretaries/Principal Secretaries for comments.  
(4) Pursuant to the B.D.Sharma Committee Report on Model Guidelines to vest Gr am 
Sabha with Powers under PESA, the Gram Sabha Niyam Samhita was prepared and 
sent to the PESA States for comments.  
 (5)  PESA States have also been requested to include a section on implementation 
of PESA in the Governors Annual Report on Schedule V areas.  
 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 28, Para No. 4.87) 
The Committee are constrained to note that release position in respect of Twelfth 
Finance Commission Grants to different States for  supplementing the resources of 
Panchayats has not been encouraging as per latest figures. In this connection the 
Committee note that out of the total of Rs.20,000 crore recommended by the Twelfth 
Finance Commission, the actual releases has been only aroun d Rs.14,522 crore so far 
indicating a big gap of around Rs.5478 crore. The Committee find from the State -wise 
releases during 2008 -2009 that in respect of many States like Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Goa, Punjab, Tripura, Uttarakhand both 1 st and 2nd Installments have not been 
released. Further, in respect of States of Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, the second 
installment was not released. In this connection the Committee recall that the issue of 
expeditious releases of Twelfth Finance Commission Grant was also reco mmended by 
the Committee last year also (para 3.57 of 38 th Report). In view of huge amount of 
Rs.5478 crore lying unspent as also non-release of 1st and 2nd installments in respect of 
States referred above, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministr y should 
adopt a pro-active approach in this regard so that unreleased amount is made available 
to Panchayats. If the grants are not optimally used, the whole purpose is defeated. The 
Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take stri ngent 
measures to ensure that cent percent funds are utilized to get the intended results.   
Reply of the Government 
As per the latest position, out of Rs.20, 000 crore recommended by the Twelfth 
Finance Commission, the actual releases has been around Rs.17,613 crore. The States 
who have availed all the 10 installments are Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, 
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. States who have availed 9 installments are Bihar, 
Chattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharasht ra, Manipur, 
Nagaland, Orissa and Sikkim. The other States are being reminded to claim their 
remaining installments. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
 

27 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 29, Para No. 5.7) 
The Committee note t hat BRGF is facing a large number of constraints in 
implementation like time consuming process in transfer of funds from State 
Governments to implementing agencies, absence of technical staff at DPCs, difficulty in 
convergence of all schemes at DPC level s pecially in the case of financially weak DPCs 
etc. The Committee have been informed about various remedial measures like faster 
transfer of funds to Panchayats, helping States to identify the technical support to DPCs 
etc. The Committee desire that Ministr y should deal with the problems coming in the 
way of implementation of BRGF in a more resolute manner.  
Reply of the Government  
 The Ministry has issued a circular proposing imposition of penal interest at the 
RBI rate in cases of delay of transfer of BRG F funds from the State Governments to the 
implementation authorities.  This provision is being incorporated in all sanction orders of 
funds release to the States. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 31, Para No. 5.15) 
The Committee note that funds are being given for capacity building of 
Panchayats under BRGF at the rate or Rs.1 crore per district per year. Thus for 250 
BRGF districts Rs.250 crore are being given. On the contrary in 350 non -BRGF districts 
for capacity building, Rs.40 crore only are being allocated. The Committee concur with 
the Ministry‟s view that amount given under RSGY is grossly insufficient for training 
requirements. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the issue of up -scaling of 
funds for non -BRGF districts be examined in consultation with the Planning 
Commission.  
Reply of the Government  
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has sought for up scaling the allocation for RGSY 
to Rs. 100 crore for the year 2010 -2011 but as per the approved budget allocation, an 
amount of Rs. 50 crore only has been provided for the scheme. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
 

28 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 4.6) 
The Committee have been informed that various guidelines with regard to 
conduct of Gram Sabha meetings in a proper manner have been issued. However, they 
have a feeling that all of them are n ot being followed in letter and spirit leaving much to 
be desired. In this connection the Committee have also been informed about various 
initiatives like sending of advisories to State Governments in the form of circular issued 
in January, 2009 in this be half.  The Committee recommend that in order to ensure 
proper implementation of such Guidelines, some methodology like presence of officials 
of the Panchayati Raj Ministry when Gram Sabha meetings are in progress in some of 
the  selective States be evolved . This would also enable the Ministry to have an idea of 
the actual activities of Gram Sabhas in the country and take further steps to strengthen 
the Gram Sabha which is the backbone of democracy.  
Reply of the Government  
State Governments have been advis ed to hold regular Gram Sabha meetings in 
the presence of officials of the State Governments, District & Block Administration. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
  

29 
 
 
 
   Chapter IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 3.8) 
The Committee‟s examination has revealed that the Ministry is getting flow of 
funds the under two categories - one under Backward Region Grant Funds (B RGF) and 
the Other Schemes like Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY), e -Panchayats etc. The 
Committee also find that actual flow of funds for Panchayats in the country started at the 
end of the Tenth Plan with the arrival of Backward Region Grant Scheme in 2006-2007 
with an outlay of Rs.1925 crore (RE) that has risen to the present level (2007 -2008 
onwards) of Rs.4670 crore. Excluding this amount a small allocation of Rs.110 crore for 
Other Schemes is being made available to Ministry to take care of 24 lakh of 
Panchayats. In Committee‟s view the total amount of Rs.4780 crore provided during 
2009-2010 is inadequate for the Panchayats in the country from any yardstick let alone 
their upliftment in view of emerging demands. Since Panchayats are being given more 
power, more funds need to be released for infrastructural purposes. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that sufficient funds commensurate with the task involved should 
be made available.  
Reply of the Government  
Ministry of Panchayati Raj have been regul arly pursuing with the Planning 
Commission to provide adequate funds for the various schemes of Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15 Para No. 4.23) 
The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj does 
not even have the basic data about the number of elected representatives of 
Panchayats trained in different States. In Committee‟s opinion a sorry state of affairs is 
currently prevailing over this vital aspect relating to training of Panchayat functionaries 
in the country. The Committee find from the State -wise details made available to them 
that in almost all the States figures are not available with the Ministry. In the absence of 
necessary data, the Committee would wonder how the claims of the Ministry that out of 
28.8 lakh elected representatives a total of 11.95 lakh elected representatives have 
been traine d can be relied upon. The Committee expressed there concern over the 
under achievement of targets with regard to the training of elected representatives. The 

30 
 
 
 
Committee, strongly recommend that all initiatives should be taken to ensure that fixed 
targets for training of Panchayat functionaries in the country are achieved and make the 
training programme more effective.  
Reply of the Government  
The Ministry has collected information from all the States and UTs regarding the 
number of elected representatives, the number of trained under different programmes, 
etc. This information has been placed on the website of Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
 All the States and UTs have been advised to prepare and implement the training 
programme for the elected representatives and functionaries of the Panchayati Raj 
Institutions as per the National Capacity Building Framework (NCBF). More details in 
this regard may please be seen in reply to para 4.24. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.25 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16 Para No. 4.24) 
In view of the foregoing the Committee feel that business like approach is 
essential on the issue of training of elected representa tives in different States. The 
Committee are also of the view that Ministry‟s claim that within one year the remaining 
elected representatives would be trained provided the enhanced funds of Rs.1000 crore 
are made available under RGSY is also not based on any assessment particularly when 
everything is vague and inconclusive on the issue of training in different States. The 
Committee, therefore, feel that before asking for higher funds, the Ministry has to put its 
own house in order to take care of higher fu nds in future. They, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry should without any delay make realistic assessment of the elected 
representatives in PRIs who are yet to be trained so that it can gear itself to the task 
accordingly. According to the Ministry it ha s advised the Planning Commission to 
introduce integrated district planning through Centrally Sponsored Schemes/State 
Sector Schemes. Planning Commission is stated to have proposed a scheme for 
planning units at State and District level is for which the in ter Ministerial consultations 
are in progress. They recall that more or less a similar scheme was also floated by the 
Ministry last year but it could not see the light of the day. The Committee, therefore, feel 
that instead of charting out a flip -flop approach, a time bound programme for training of 
PRI functionaries on the pattern of „Bharat Nirman‟ should be prepared so that 
Panchayats in the country can work as a unit of self Governments in the real sense. 
 
 

31 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
(a)   The Ministry ha s adopted the National Capability Building Framework (NCBF) as 
the framework for undertaking the Capacity Building & Training activities for the Elected 
Representatives and Functionaries of PRIs. 
(b)  In order to take -up the Capacity Building and Training activities as per the NCBF in 
a Mission Mode,  the Ministry visualized holding of three Regional Workshops. 
Accordingly three Regional Workshops were organized in September, 2009 at Gangtok, 
Goa and Shimla covering all the States and UTs. The States were i mpressed to give 
thrust to the CB&T activities through preparation of integrated Perspective Plans for 
CB&T covering BRGF, RGSY as well as other schemes, for the current year and the 
next year. 11 States have already finalized their Perspective Plans while  other States 
are in the process of doing so. The Workshops also provided a platform for States to 
come together, exchange ideas, communicate their success stories as well as 
difficulties and deliberate on issues of common concern.   
(c)  The Ministry has also taken a new initiative for Public Private Partnership in CB&T 
where in the services of NGOs, Private Organisations as well as Academic Institutions 
are sought to be utilised for CB&T activities. The Ministry had organised a PRIs CB&T 
Business Meet on 07-01-2010 at New Delhi where well over 100 organisations 
participated. The  process is being carried forward in consultation with the State 
Governments/ UTs. 
(d)  The Ministry expects that these initiatives will help in bringing CB&T of PRIs in focus 
at the State level leading to better coverage and improvement in the quality of trainings. 
During the last five years, over 28 lakh Elected Representatives/Functionaries of PRIs 
have been provided training. With the new initiatives, the situation should improve  
further.  
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.25 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
  

32 
 
 
 
Chapter V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 4.15) 
The Committee find at present Panchayat functionaries like Gram Pradhans and 
members of Panchayats are not being provided remuneration as in the case of 
members of other elected bodies. In this connection the Committee have been informed 
by the Secretary, Panchayati Raj that this issue alongwith manpower and buildings for 
Panchayat Ghars were among those submitted before the 13 th Finance Commission 
whose award is yet be announced.  The Committee hav e also been informed that 
financial implications have been discussed with Principal Secretary Panchayati Raj. The 
Committee would await the 13 th Finance Commission Report before making detailed 
comments in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
The report o f Thirteenth Finance Commission has been submitted to the 
President and is under consideration. 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 4.47) 
The Committee are unhappy to note that ev en after five years of creation of the 
Ministry there are as many as 68000 Panchayats without their own Panchayat Buildings 
and another 58,000 Panchayat Bhavans across the country require major repairs. The 
Ministry is stated to have come up with a three y ears plan to build Panchayat Bhavans 
with increased funds. Simultaneously the Ministry has been impressing upon the States 
to utilise the BRGF funds first for building Panchayat Ghars. As recommended by the 
Committee in a previous chapter, a holistic and l ong term plan is necessary for solving 
this problem related with infrastructure of the Panchayats in the country. The Committee 
desire that the construction of Panchayat buildings in all the 68,000 Panchayats which 
do not have a building should be taken up in the right earnest so that each Panchayat in 
the country has a building of its own within the next three years. The Committee have 
also been informed assigning the Panchayats an exclusive role to handle the NREGA 
scheme is being contemplated. The Commit tee welcome this development and desire 
that further details in this regard be furnished to them.  
 
 
 

33 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
BRGF funds which are substantially untied are being used for building Panchayat 
Ghars.  During 2008 -09 & 2009-10 more than 5000 P anchayat Ghars were sanctioned.  
Under RGSY which has a small component of Infrastructure Development, 1016 
Panchayat Ghars have been sanctioned from 2006 -07 to till date in various States.  
Enhanced allocation for the component has been requested next yea r. (The 
Administration Division may comment on the assignment of exclusive role to 
Panchayats to handle the NREGS and provide the material to the Committee and 
construction of Gram Panchayats Ghars). 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.28 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 30, Para No. 5.11) 
The Committee‟s examination has revealed that even the achievement of major 
BRGF objective of removal of imbal ances is in doubt. The Ministry has concurred with 
the Committee‟s view that for proper implementation of BRGF scheme at Gram Sabha 
level certain degree of surveillance from the Ministry is needed. In this connection the 
Committee have been informed that a  Committee viz. Ramachandran Committee is 
already looking into various aspects of BRGF including the issue of its restructuring. 
The Committee have been informed that by December, 2009 the Committee was likely 
to submit its Report. The Committee would like  to be informed of the findings of the 
Ramchandran Committee. They also desire that expeditious action on these findings 
should be taken including restructuring of BRGF, so that the various difficulties being 
faced in the implementation of the programme can be removed. 
Reply of the Government  
The report of the National Advisory and Review Committee on BRGF, 
Ramachandran Committee, is yet to be submitted. 
 
(No. G-20012/2/2009-Parl.  Date: 15.3.2010 MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ)  
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.31 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
   NEW DELHI;       SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
 20 July, 2010                     Chairperson, 
 29 Asadha, 1932 (Saka)                   Standing Committee on Rural Development 

34 
 
 
 
APPENDIX I 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD 
ON WEDNESDAY, THE 07 JULY, 2010 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room „D‟, Ground Floor,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson            
 Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
3. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
4. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
5. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
6. Shri P.L. Punia 
7. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
8. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
9. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
10. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
11. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh 
12. Shrimati Usha Verma 
13. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Ganga Charan 
15. Shri P.R. Rajan 
16. Shimati Maya Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah  - Additional Director 
 
2. The Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee convened for 
consideration of Memoranda containing draft Reports of the Committee on action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in  four Reports on Demands for Grants           
(2009-10).  

35 
 
 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following memoranda and draft action-
taken Reports :-  
(i)  ****   ****   ****   ****  
(ii)  ****   ****   ****   ****  
(iii)  ****   ****   ****   ****  
(iv)  Memorandum No. 6 and draft R eport on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -
10) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
4. ****   ****   ****   ****  
5.  The Committee adopted the draft action-taken Reports at serial no. (iv) above with slight 
modification and those at serial nos. (ii) and (iii) above without any  modification.  
6.  The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid draft Reports 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned to meet on 20th July, 2010.  
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
**** Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately 

36 
 
 
 
   APPENDIX II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations :     31 
   
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted     
  by the Government :       24  
   
Para Nos. : 2.3, 2.4, 3.7, 3.9, 3.10, 3.14, 3.15, 3.18,  
4.10, 4.11, 4.16, 4.30, 4.34, 4.37, 4.40, 4.52, 4.61,  
4.65, 4.68, 4.69, 4.80, 4.87, 5.7 and 5.15     
     
Percentage to total recommendations           77.42  
   
III. Recommendations which the Committee do    
not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government‟s replies :      1 
 
  Para No.:  4.6         
         
Percentage to total recommendation        3.22 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of   
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee :        3 
 
Para Nos. : 3.8, 4.23 and 4.24      
 
Percentage to total recommendations               9.68 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies   
of the Government are still awaited :     3 
 
  Para Nos. : 4.15, 4.47 and 5.11  
  Percentage to total recommendation                 9.68 
 
 
 
 
  