STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                     (2009-2010) 
 
          
 
       FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]  
 
TENTH REPORT  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
10 


TENTH REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2009-2010) 
 
                
       (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
           MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
   (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMNET) 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.07.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.07.2010 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2010/Sravana, 1932 (Saka) 
  


CRD No. 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
© 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha   

CONTENTS 
 
Page Nos. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) ......................................  (iii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................  (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................  1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................  18 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply .............................................................................  46 
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee .....................................................  48 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited .....   52 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee  
held on 7 July, 2010………………………………… 56 
 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the First Report of the          
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)..................................... 58 
  

(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2009-2010) 
 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
   Members 
Lok  Sabha  
1. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
2. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
5. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
6. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
7. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
8. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
9. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
10. Shri Rakesh Pandey 
11. Shri P.L. Punia 
12. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
13. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
14. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu 
15. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
16. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
17. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
18. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh 
19. Shrimati Usha Verma 
20. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
Rajya  Sabha 
21. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar* 
22. Shri Ganga Charan 
23. Shri Silvius Condpan** 
24. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
25. Dr. Ram Prakash 
26. Shri P.R. Rajan 
27. Shri Arjun Singh 
28. Vacant@ 
29. Shrimati Maya Singh 
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey 
Secretariat 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah  - Additional Director 
3. Shri Raju Srivastava - Deputy Secretary 
 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
*    w.e.f. 15 April, 2010 
**    Re-nominated w.e.f. 3 May, 2010 
@  Consequent upon retirement of Shri Bhagwati Singh, MP, Rajya Sabha from membership of  Rajya Sabha w.e.f.  4 July, 2010.  

(iv) 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2009 -
2010) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present the Tenth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the 
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development).  
2.  The First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on               
17 December, 20 10. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 10th March, 2010. 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the draft Report was 
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 7th July, 2010. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
  NEW DELHI;     SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
20 July, 2010                  Chairperson, 
29 Asadha, 1932 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 

1 
 
 
 
    CHAPTER I 
 
     REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2009 -10) deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their First Report on Demands 
for Grants (2009-10) of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 December, 2009. 
 
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 44 
recommendations which have been categorised as follows: 
 
(i) Chapter II   Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Para Nos.: 2.5, 2.10, 2.15, 2.27, 2.40, 2.41, 2.42, 2.59, 3.19,  
3.25, 3.30, 3.34, 3.38, 3.42, 3.48, 3.51, 3.53, 3.81, 
3.82, 3.85, 3.96, 3.97, 3.101, 3.107, 3.121, 3.123, 
3.135, 3.150, 3.151, 3.164, 3.180, 3.191 and 
3.192 
(ii) Chapter III   Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government‟s replies : 
Para Nos.:  3.24 and 3.102 
(iii) Chapter IV  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government  have not been accepted by the Committee :  
Para Nos.: 2.26, 3.74, 3.103 and 3.127 
(iv) Chapter V   Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited : 
Para Nos.: 2.28, 2.54, 2.60, 3.31 and 3.55  
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the recommendations 
(paragraph nos. 2.28, 2.54, 2.60, 3.31 and 3.55 for which only interim replies have been 
given by the Government should be furnished within three months time from 
presentation of the Report to Parliament.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by  the Government on some of the  
recommendations of the Committee in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  

2 
 
 
 
A. UNSPENT BALANCES IN DIFFERENT SCHEMES  
 
  [Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.15)] 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee are  disturbed to note that during 2008 -2009, as high as 
29 per cent of the scarce funds released at the revised estimate stage 
have remained unutilized.  At the first place, the Department should not 
have asked for the funds if the implementing agencies do no t have the 
absorption capacity of spending during that particular year.  They feel 
instead of ensuring that the amount is spent for the purpose it has been 
sanctioned in the budget, the Government have mindlessly released the 
entire amount for the implemen ting agencies year after year and become 
a mute spectator for the huge unspent balance. The Government lost sight 
of their own  stipulation that if DRDAs/States have more unspent balances 
than the prescribed limit of 10 per cent of the available funds, the  excess 
carry over balance is proportionately deducted from the 2 nd instalment of 
Central allocation.  When the implementing agencies were not able to 
spend even the funds released at the revised estimates stage, entirely, the 
Government mindlessly released the fiscal stimulus package in four major 
schemes viz. IAY, PMGSY, SGSY and SGRY.  Further release of as high 
as 46 per cent of RE provision in the last few days of fiscal 2008 -2009 did 
more harm than good, as the implementing agencies were prevented fro m 
getting their next year‟s instalment in time which deprived the millions of 
needy persons living in rural areas to receive the development benefits in 
time.  They, therefore, recommend that Government should take steps to 
see that at the end of the finan cial year not more that stipulated 10 per 
cent of funds lie with the implementing agencies due to the fault of the 
Department at center regarding release of funds at the fag end of the 
financial year.  The Committee while expressing serious concern over th e 
trend of huge unspent balance would like to strongly recommend that the 
Government should analyse the position state -wise and take corrective 
measures accordingly.  The Committee should also be kept apprised of 
the follow-up action taken in this regard.” 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.15) 
 
6. The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as under:- 
“Out of unspent balance of Rs.18717.42 crore, the balance under NREGA 
was reported to be Rs.10345.59 crore and under IAY Rs.6246.17 crore on 
31.3.2009.  These two programmes i.e. NREGA and IAY alone constitute 
around 88.64% of the total unspent balances reported as on 31.3.2009.  
BE 2008 -09 provision for NREGA was Rs.16,000 crore. It was 
subsequently enhanced to Rs.30,000 crore at RE stage, which included 
stimulus package of Rs.3500 crore made a vailable in mid -January, 2009. 
Since the enhanced money was pro vided in the last quarter, it was 

3 
 
 
 
released to the districts in the fag end of the year. Because of this reason, 
the money released out of the funds provided under stimulus package 
could not be fully utilized during that year. In case, the amount of Rs.3500  
crore provided under stimulus package is deducted from the total 
availability of funds, the expenditure comes to 80.43%. Further, any 
unspent amount as on 31 st March of a particular financial year under 
NREGA is adjusted at the time of release of first in stalment at the 
beginning of the next financial year based on approved Labour Budget for 
the year. Further, the State Governments have been instructed to set up 
State Employment Guarantee Fund in accordance with the Section 21(1) 
of NREG Act. Setting up of  State Employment Guarantee Fund by the 
State Government would provide a greater flexibility to the State 
Governments in administering the NREGA funds in accordance with the 
needs of the districts. 
With regard to IAY, it is submitted that if the amount of Rs.3050 
crore released as stimulus package at the fag end of financial year and 
the corresponding State share of Rs. 1017.00 crore is deducted from the 
total available funds, the utilization stands at 80.32%.  Every year, 
utilization of IAY funds has been more than 80% as the construction is 
done by beneficiaries themselves and no contractors are involved.  
Physical targets are, therefore, invariably achieved.  Despite the General 
Elections to the Lok Sabha and imposition of Model Code of Conduct from 
the f irst week of March, 2009, the utilization of funds during the current 
year has already reached 63% of the total available funds including the 
unspent amount of last year. The Ministry makes proportionate deductions 
of excess carry over of funds at the time of release of second instalment in 
the next financial year if the expenditure reported upto 31 st December is 
less than 75% of total funds available during the year including the 
carryover balance. 
With regard to other allocation based Schemes viz. SGSY, 
PMGSY, DRDA Administration etc. it is re -iterated that under the 
guidelines governing the release of funds under these programmes, there 
are in built safeguards to ensure that there is no accumulation of unspent 
balances with the State Governments which int er-alia stipulate that the 2 nd 
instalment is released only on utilization of 60% of available funds and on 
receipt of Audited Statement of Expenditure of previous year.  In the case 
of SGSY, if the DRDAs have more unspent  balance than the prescribed 
limit of 10% of the available funds, the excess carry over balance is 
proportionately deducted from the 2 nd instalment of Central allocation, if 
the expenditure reported upto 31 st December is less than 75% of total 
funds available during the year including the carry over balance.  In the 
case of DRDA Administration, carry over in excess of 10% of total 
available funds of previous financial year is adjusted in the 2 nd instalment 
on a proportionate basis.  

4 
 
 
 
However, efforts are being made to accelerate the pace of 
utilization of funds by reviewing performance with State Governments 
regularly. With the strict financial management in the current financial 
year, it is expected that unspent balance at the close of the financial year 
will come down to the desired level.” 
 
7. The Committee take note of the explanation of the Government that huge 
unspent balances lying with the DRDAs/States were largely due to release of fiscal 
stimulus package of Rs. 3500 crore by the Government in four major schemes viz., 
IAY, PMGSY, SGSY and SGRY in mid January, 2009. Besides, release of as much as 
46 per cent of RE provision in the last few days of fiscal year 2008 -2009 also 
enlarged the quantum of unspent balances. The Committee also note the efforts 
made by the Department to accelerate the pace of utilisation of funds by reviewing 
performance with the State Governments on regular basis so as to bring down the 
unspent balance at the close of financial year. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the outcome of the new measures initiated by the Department with a 
view to accelerating the pace of utilisation of funds. The Committee note that if 
DRDAs/States have more unspent balances than the prescribed limit of 10 per cent 
of the available funds , the Department deduct the excess c arry over balance  from 
the 2nd instalment of Central allocation proportionately. While this may be a step in 
the direction of financial prud ence, it does not speak well about the financial 
planning of the Department. The Committee would also like to draw the attention of 
the Department that slashing the allocation , for whatever reasons , unjustifiably 
deprives targeted beneficiaries of intended benefits and the Committee urge that 
there should be no deduction in fund allocation to the State Governments in  
respect of these programmes. 
 
 

5 
 
 
 
B. Holding regular Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (V&MCs) meetings   
[Recommendation Serial No. 4 & 6 (Para No. 2.26 & 2.28)] 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“The Committee are unhappy to note that both at State and district level 
V&MCs meetings are not being held as per the guidelines. It is completely 
astonishing that when 28 States should have held a maximum of 112 
V&MC meetings at the State level each year, during 2006 -2007, 2007 -
2008 and 2008 -2009 the meetings held were only 35, 36 and 35 
respectively. They also note that, some of the States which have not held 
a singles State level V&MC meeting in the last two years are Haryana, 
Jammu and Kashmir, Mizoram, Dadra and Nagar Haveli.  They are 
disturbed to find that against a maximum  of 2476 meetings of district level 
V&MCs in a year which should have been held in 619 rural districts, only 
912 meetings during 2007-2008 and 579 meetings during 2008-2009 were 
held.  They feel that effective monitoring at the central level is not being 
done to ensure that the State and District level V&MCs hold a meeting in 
each quarter, as per the extant guidelines. The Committee desire that the 
Department should continue to put pressure and vigorously monitor the 
conduct of the meetings of V&MCs to ensu re that meetings of Vigilance 
and Monitoring Committees both at State and District Level are held as 
per the existing provisions of the guidelines. 
     (Recommendation Para No. 2.26) 
The Committee also desire that the Government devise a 
mechanism where by the States and Districts which are holding the 
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees as per the guidelines may be 
provided with some kind of incentive so that the other States and Districts 
not holding the meetings regularly are encouraged to do so.”  
(Recommendation Para No. 2.28) 
 
9. The Department in their action-taken replies have stated as under:- 
“The Department of Rural Development is continuously pursuing the matter with 
the State Governments for holding the Vigilance and Monitoring Committee 
(V&MC) meetings regularly. Letters have been sent by the Union Minister of 
Rural Development to the Chief Ministers of the States/UTs and Chairmen/Co -
Chairmen of V&MCs emphasizing the need and importance of holding the 
meetings of the Committees for effective  review of implementation of Rural 
Development Programmes.  Secretary (RD) had sent letters to Chief Secretaries 
of States/UTs, requesting immediate issue of Notifications for reconstituting State 
and District level V&MCs in the light of constitution of 15 th Lok Sabha and also to 
convene the first meeting by 30 th November, 2009. The urgency of the matter 
was re-emphasized by Secretary (RD) through further communication sent to the 
Chief Secretaries.” 
   (Reply to Recommendation Para No. 2.26) 

6 
 
 
 
 It is the end eavour of the Ministry that all the States/Districts hold 
regular meetings of the V&MCs. The matter has been taken up with the 
States/UTs at the highest level and efforts will be further continued in this 
regard. States whose performance has been as per re quirements will be 
singled-out for special mention in the Performance Review Committee 
(PRC) meetings held in the last quarter of the financial year.      
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 2.28) 
 
10. In response to the Committees’ recommendation for providing incentive to 
States and districts that are holding Vigilance and Monitoring Committee 
meetings regularly, the Government have stated that the States whose 
performance has been as per requirements will be singled out for special 
mention in the Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting s in the last 
quarter of the financial year (2009 -10). The Committee would like to know 
whether such special mention have yielded desired results in improving the 
performance of the other States.   
  
C. Single agency for identification of BPL families and estimation of poverty  
  
   [Recommendation Serial No. 10 (Para No. 2.54)] 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note with concern  that several agencies of Government 
of India are engaged in identification of the number of persons living below 
poverty line in the rural areas like, Planning Commission, National Sample 
Survey Organisation, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation, etc. simultaneously but without much 
success. This ultimately hampers development of needy persons of rural 
areas living below poverty line.  They, therefore, urge the Government that 
a single agency may be entrusted with the task of identifying and 
ascertaining the number of people living below poverty line in rural areas. 
The concern of the Committee in this regard may be taken up at the 
highest level and they may be apprised accordingly.” 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.54) 

7 
 
 
 
 
12. The Department in their action-taken reply have stated as under:- 
“The Ministry of Rural Development is the single agency responsible for 
formulation of Methodology and Guidelines for identification for 
households living below the poverty line in rural areas. As regards the 
Planning Commission, it is responsible for estimation of poverty ratios or 
number of persons living below the poverty line. The Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation is concerned with urban poor. Therefore, at 
present there is a single agency i.e. the Ministry of Rural Development for 
identification of households below the poverty line in rural areas and a 
single agency i.e. the Planning Commission for estimation of poverty. 
However, the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee regarding entrusting a single agency with the task of 
identification as well as estimation of poverty ratios or the number of 
people living below poverty line in rural areas would be taken up with the 
Planning Commission.” 
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 2.54) 
 
13.    On the issue of entrusting a single agency with the task of identification 
as well as estimation of poverty ratios or the number of people living below 
poverty line in rural areas,  the Committee  find it inexplicable as to why the 
Department is yet to take up the matter with the Planning Commission inspite of 
three months having elapsed since the First Report was presented to 
Parliament. The Committee desire the Department to take up the matter with the 
Planning Commission without any further loss of time. 
  

8 
 
 
 
D. Expeditious Conduct of independent BPL Survey 
[Recommendation Serial No. 12 (Para No. 2.60)] 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Department is already well aware of the 
existing limitations of the BPL census carried out by them in the past in 
which the APL people got into the list and some of the genuine people got 
left out as has been admitted by the Se cretary, Department of Rural 
Development during the course of oral evidence before the Committee.  
They also note that the fourth quinquennial BPL census survey being 
conducted by the Ministry since 1992 regularly at an interval of five years 
has fallen du e since 2007.  Enough precious time has already been 
wasted on some pretext or the other. Huge funds are being released by 
the Central Government through various welfare schemes meant for 
poorest of the poor.  But unless the BPL list is updated periodicall y, the 
benefits intended cannot reach the genuine beneficiaries. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that such BPL survey should be conducted without 
any further delay. An appropriated sum may be earmarked for the purpose 
of conducting the BPL survey and i t should be ensured that the results of 
the said survey be made available before the close of this financial year. It 
should further be ensured that the survey so finalized should have a 
component for correction if ineligible people like APL get into the l ist.  It 
should also be ensured that only genuine poor people are incorporated in 
the final list.  The Government may take suitable measures to ensure that 
an independent, unbiased and impartial authority takes the charge of the 
BPL survey.” 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.60) 
 
15. The Department in their action-taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“The Ministry of Rural Development, on 12th August, 2008, constituted an 
Expert Group, which could advise the Ministry on the methodology for 
conducting the BPL Census for  the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Expert 
Group submitted its report on 21 st August 2009. The report of the Expert 
Group has been circulated among the States/UTs and the concerned 
Central Ministries for comments. It has also been posted on the Ministry‟s 
website www.rural.nic.in. The Ministry is in the process of finalizing the 
methodology and guidelines to carry out next BPL Census for 
identification of people living below the Poverty Line in rural areas of the 
country taking into account the suggestions/comments received.  
The BPL Census is conducted by the State Governments with 
technical and financial assistance from the Ministry of Rural Development. 
While issuing Guidelines for conducting BPL Census, the concerns ra ised 
by the Parliament Standing Committee regarding inclusion of genuine 

9 
 
 
 
poor in the BPL list would be impressed upon and training & sensitisation 
on this issue of the responsible agencies will be undertaken.” 
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 2.60) 
16. The Committee are unhappy to note that the work of the fourth  
quinquennial BPL census survey which fell  due in 2007 has not yet commenced. 
The Committee discussed this matter with the representatives of the Department 
of Rural Development at their sitting held on 21 st July, 2010. The Committee have 
been informed that training of nominated officers by States/UTs and 
representative of selected institutes by NIRD, Hyderabad is expected to be over 
by mid of August 2010 and as advised by the Registrar General of  India, work of 
BPL Census is expected to start soon after the population census is over.  The 
Committee feel that there is likely to be inordinate delay if the BPL survey is to be 
conducted after the population Census. The delayed BPL survey will not cater  to 
the requirements of the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Committee, therefore, urge 
that the Ministry of Rural Development should take urgent steps to initiate and 
complete the BPL survey at the earliest.  
 
E. Streamlining of wage rates under NREGA  
 [Recommendation Serial No. 17 (Para No. 3.31)] 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee further recommend  that as far as practicable the 
minimum wage rate should not vary much between the adjoining States 
e.g. Karnataka Rs. 82 and Kerala Rs.125, West Bengal Rs.75 and Sikkim 
Rs.100, Chhattisgarh Rs.72 and Madhya Pradesh Rs.91 etc.  The 
Committee felt that the said wide scale variation in the wage rate in the 
adjoining States will definitely encourage migration instead of curbing it. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government 
should take necessary steps so that the adjoining States and Unio n 
territories do not have much difference in the minimum wage rates under 
the NREGA.” 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.31) 

10 
 
 
 
 
18. The Department in their action-taken reply have stated as under:- 
“Under NREGA wage rate for Karnataka, West Bengal, Sikkim, 
Chattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh is Rs.100/ - per day as per notification 
dated 15.12.2009 and 4.1.2010 under Section 6(1) of the Act.  The matter 
has been taken up with the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation for setting up a panel to formulate modaliti es of revision of 
real wage depending on consumer price index and variables.” 
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.31) 
 
19. The Committee are glad to note that Department’s notification s dated 15 th 
December, 2009 and 1st January, 2010 enhancing the wage rates under NREGA to 
Rs.100/- per day have partly addressed the concerns of the Committee regarding 
variations in wage rates prevailing in adjoining States like Karnataka and Kerala, 
West Bengal and Sikkim  and Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh. The Committee 
also note that steps are being taken to set up a panel to formulate modalities for 
revision of real wage under MGNREGA. The Committee would await the outcome 
in this regard. 
 
F. Studies to look into reasons for low women participation 
[Recommendation Serial No. 19 (Para No. 3.38)] 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the women participation in the activities under 
NREGA has been increasing from 43 per cent in 2007-2008 to 48 per cent 
in 2008 -2009 and to 51 per cent during 2009 -2010 so far against the 
statutory requirement of 33 per cent.  Howev er, in some of the States the 
percentage of women‟s participation has been very low. For example 
during 2008-2009, percentage of women participation in Bihar, Jharkhand 
and Uttar Pradesh was only 30 per cent, 28 per cent and 18 per cent 
respectively.  The Committee here also note that the Department of Rural 
Development has commissioned an independent study with the National 
Institute of Rural Development with the aim to look into districts where low 
women participation is taking place under the implementat ion of NREGA 
and also to look into the reasons of persistent low women participation. 

11 
 
 
 
The Committee recommend such a study should be completed 
expeditiously and corrective changes may be made in the implementation 
of the scheme accordingly.” 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.38) 
 
21. The Department in their action-taken reply have stated as under:- 
“From the various studies conducted regarding participation of women in 
MGNREGA, it has been found that the main reasons for low participation 
of women have b een non -revision of Schedule of Rates (SoR), socio -
cultural constraints and low awareness. Some of the states including Uttar 
Pradesh, Rajasthan, West Bengal have revised their SoRs to make them 
worker and gender sensitive. 
The National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD)   has 
completed its study and has also submitted the report. The study was on 
impact of women participation in NREGS on changing gender equations at 
individual, household and community level and to assess the extent of 
empowerment among women workers of NREGA. The study was 
conducted in 5 districts of Tamil Nadu. The main findings of the study 
included:   
  
• Women in socially developed areas gained more (Kanyakumari). 
• Gender sensitive delivery system facilitated greater effectiveness of 
NREGS.  
• NREGS‟ impact on poverty is significant.  
• Work participation of women and gains would be greater, if SHGs are 
entrusted with provision of mandatory worksite facilities.   
• Participation in NREGS benefited women - contribution to HH income 
- improvement in their access to resources and control - gender 
relations in social and economic areas at household level - improved 
considerably; the male workers‟ perception supports this 
• The self -esteem, self -image and confidence levels of women 
increased due to participation in NREGS. 
• NREGS has facilitated the empowerment of women. 
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.38) 
 
22. The Committee had been informed by the Ministry of Rural Development 
that to look into the reasons for persistent low women participation in States like 
Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and Bihar where women participation in 2008-09 ranged 
from 18 to 30 per cent, an independent study has been commissioned. The 
Committee have now been informed in the action -taken reply that the study has 

12 
 
 
 
been undertaken in Tamil Nadu. The Committee are at a loss to understand, how 
the outcome of the study undertaken in Tamil Nadu wh ere the women 
participation was already as high as 79 per cent, will help in finding solutions to 
the problem in UP, Bihar and Jharkhand where the women participation has been 
very low. It is not clear what deterred the Ministry of Rural Development from 
conducting the said study in the poor performing States. The Committee 
discussed the matter with the representatives of the Department of Rural 
Development at their sitting held on 21 st July, 2010. The Committee have been 
informed that during the year 2009 -10, studies on women participation have been 
conducted in States like Assam, UP, West Bengal, Karnataka and Kerala . More 
studies have reportedly been commissioned in Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya 
Pradesh, etc.  The Committee hope that these studies will be completed 
expeditiously and urgent remedial action will be taken to enhance wome n 
participation on the basis of outcome of these studies.  
 
G. Uniform norms for measurement of work   
 [Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 3.51)] 
 
23. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note with concern that no uniform norms for 
measurement of work under NREGA have been put in place. The reply of 
the Department that States are required to evolve norms for measurement 
of work is very vague.  The role  and responsibility of the Central 
Government has been ensured in the Act itself. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Central Government in consultation with all the States 
and Union Territories should ensure uniformity of measurement of work 
throughout the country without any further delay.” 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.51) 
 
 
 

13 
 
 
 
24. The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as under:- 
“Broad factors which are kept in view while evolving norms for 
measurement of works under the Act have been given in  detail in the 
Operational Guidelines of the Act. However, given the diversity of geo -
morphological and climatic conditions in States, flexibility has been 
provided to States to evolve Schedule of Rates (SoRs) for measurement 
of works.” 
 
25. The Committee agre e that due to diversity of geo -morphological and 
climatic conditions in States, flexibility has to be provided to States to evolve 
Schedule of Rates (SoRs) for measurement of works. There should be, however, 
uniform norms in States wh ere geo-morphological and climatic conditions  are 
similar. The Committee would like to know the extent of flexibility provided to 
States and Union Territories to evolve SoRs for measurement of work  and the 
norms fixed for measurement of work under NREGA in States having similar  geo-
morphological and climatic conditions. 
 
H. Remedial measures taken under Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana 
(SGSY) scheme for upliftment of BPL families to APL level     
[Recommendation Serial No. 25 (Para No. 3.74)] 
 
26. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee are dismayed to note the mismatch between the financial 
and the physical target -achievement under SGSY since 2007 -2008. As 
per the information furnished by the Department the financial utilization of 
SGSY was 82.17 per cent during 2007 -2008 which declined to 73.73 per 
cent during 2008 -2009.  In comparison, the physical performance of 
SGSY was 126 per cent and 106 per cent in these years respectively that 
gives a false impression that the performance of SGSY is very impressive 
and does not deserve a re-structuring in the form of NRLM. It appears that 
Government have resorted to target chasing under the SGSY so far 
instead of implementing the SGSY as per the guidelines of the scheme. 
Further, the Committee feel that per capita investment of Rs.29932 during 
2008-2009 under SGSY or that Rs.30723 so far during 2009 -2010 is very 
low to take someone living below the poverty line to above the poverty line 
permanently. The Committee, therefore, desire suitable corrective 
measures be taken in this regard and they be informed accordingly.”  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.74) 

14 
 
 
 
27. The Department in their action-taken reply have stated as under:- 
“The information provided for the financial utilization of funds for the year 
2007-08 and 2008-09 was the funds utilized against the total funds available 
with the states. The total available funds in the states in a particular year are 
always more than th e allocation made during that year, since the states also 
have some funds in the form of opening balance (funds carried over from the 
previous year) and other miscellaneous receipts. Thus, the percentage of 
funds utilization against the allocation is alway s more than the percentage of 
fund utilization against the total available funds.  On the other hand the 
targets for swarozgaris assisted in a particular year are fixed on the basis of 
funds allocated under SGSY. Therefore, targets achieved may go beyond 
100% also.  Moreover, SGSY has several components like formation of Self 
Help Groups (SHGs), training of swarozgaris, providing revolving fund to 
SHGs, number of swarozgaris to be assisted with subsidy & credit etc. 
Expenditure for all these activities is t o be met, out of the total allocation 
under the subsidy head. Though the achievement for total swarozgaris 
assisted including SHG swarozgaris & individual swarozgaris may be high, 
the achievement under all the various components may not be as good.  
As regard per capita investment, the norm under SGSY for per capita 
investment is of Rs 25,000 per Swarozgari. Under SGSY, during the year 
2007-08 & 2008 -09 the per capita investment is more than the prescribed 
norm. However, there is need to increase the per ca pita investment and the 
Ministry is taking appropriate measure in this regard in the proposed NRLM.”  
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.74) 
 
28. The Committee while noticing a mismatch between physical vis-à-vis financial 
performance under SGSY scheme durin g 2007-08 and 2008 -09 felt that per capita 
investment under SGSY was not enough for uplifting BPL families to APL level and 
had recommended that suitable corrective measures be taken in this regard. It is 
observed from the action -taken reply that the Department, while endorsing the 
Committee’s view of the need to increase the per capita investment , has merely 
informed that the Ministry is taking appropriate measure s in the proposed ‘National 
Rural Livelihoods Mission’ (NRLM) and has not spel t out the details and corrective 
steps being taken in this regard. They, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that 
necessary corrective steps be taken for enhancement of per capita investment  
under SGSY.  
 

15 
 
 
 
I. Increasing per unit assistance under Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) 
[Recommendation Serial No. 33 (Para No. 3.103)] 
 
29. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note the information furnished to them in which it has 
been stated that Rs.35,000 per unit in plain areas and Rs.38,500 in hilly 
and difficult areas, under the IAY, are being provided to construct a 
dwelling unit. They feel that the per unit assistance of a dwelling unit under 
IAY is too little and no where near the actual construction cost even if a 
beneficiary provides his/her labour. The Committee regret that their earlier 
recommendation made in this regard (paragraph No. 2.69 of 22nd Report 
- Fourteenth Lok Sabha refers) has not been given due consideration by 
the Government. The Committee once again reiterate their earlier 
recommendation made in their 22nd Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) that 
the per unit assistance under IAY be increased from the existing rate to 
Rs.50,000 in plain areas and Rs.60,000 in hilly/difficult areas from this 
financial year itself. 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.103) 
30. The Department in the action-taken reply have stated as under :- 
“The recommendations of the Committee were kept in mind while 
enhancing the unit cost of IAY houses in 2008 -09.  However, due to 
financial constraints, the unit cost could be enhanced from Rs. 25,000/ - to 
Rs. 35,000/ - in plain areas and from Rs. 27,500/ - to Rs. 38,500/ - in 
hilly/difficult areas.  However, in addition to the  unit assistance provided 
under IAY, an IAY beneficiary can avail a loan of up to Rs. 20,000/ - from a 
nationalized bank at an interest rate of 4% per annum under differential 
rate of interest (DRI) scheme.” 
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.103) 
 
31. The Committee observe from the Department of Rural Development D.O. 
letter no.  G-20011/1/2010 RH dated 5 th April, 2010  that after submission of the 
aforesaid action-taken reply dated 8th March, 2010, the per unit assistance for an 
IAY house has been enhanced from Rs.35,000/- to Rs.45,000/- in plain areas and 
from Rs.38,500/- to Rs.48,500/- in hilly and difficult areas w.e.f. 1 st April, 2010. The 
Committee feel that the enhancement is still not adequate to meet construction 

16 
 
 
 
cost of IAY unit. They, therefore, stress that the amount should be further raised 
to Rs.50,000/ - in plain areas and Rs.60,000/ - in hilly and difficult areas as 
originally recommended.  
 
J. Separate monitoring of targets under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sarak Yojana  
(PMGSY) and ‘Bharat Nirman’ programme and need for higher allocation for 
future rural connectivity  
[Recommendation Serial No. 36 (Para No. 3.127)] 
 
32. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the gigantic task to connect all unconn ected 
habitations in the rural areas of the country still remains to be achieved. 
Similarly, additional targets set under the Bharat Nirman component has 
been added to the existing targets and is being implemented 
simultaneously. The Committee desire that the target and achievement 
under PMGSY and under Bharat Nirman be monitored separately. They 
also note that in addition to the Department of Rural Development, the 
National Rural Road Development Agency (NRRDA) and all other 
implementing agencies in differ ent States under PMGSY are involved in 
implementing the scheme. They feel the Department of Rural 
Development, the NRRDA and all other implementing agencies of PMGSY 
have not been able to show a better physical performance of the scheme 
so far inspite of i t being made a part of the Bharat Nirman. Not 
withstanding the poor results of PMGSY so far, the Committee feel that 
more funds may be allocated for the scheme and the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance be consulted in this regard. They 
urge t he Department to chalk out a time bound plan to connect all 
unconnected habitations realistically and intimate them accordingly.” 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.127) 
 
33. The Department in their action-taken reply have stated as under:- 
“Absorption capacity of the  States has increased manifold during the last 
few years. To sustain this, adequate funds are required for achieving the 
physical targets. Minimum funds requirement for the years 2010 -12 is 
Rs.54,000 crore. Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance are b eing 
requested to the needful and increase the budgetary support so that 
physical pace of implementation does not slow down.” 
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.127) 
 

17 
 
 
 
34. The reply of the Ministry of Rural Development is silent on the issue of 
separate monitoring of PMGSY and ‘Bharat Nirman’ as these are being 
implemented simultaneously. The Committee would await the response of the 
Ministry in this regard.  
On the issue of higher allocation for PMGSY, the Committee find that owing 
to increased absorption capacity of States , a minimum requirement of Rs.54,000 
crore for 2010 -11 has been placed before the Planning Commission and Ministry 
of Finance for increasing the budget support. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the further progress made in this regard.  
 
      
  

18 
 
 
 
Chapter II  
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1, Para No. 2.5) 
The Committee note that the Government is not implementing the direction 73 A  
of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, in the right spirit.  As per the said 
direction, the Minister concerned should make the Statement on action -taken by the 
Government on their recommendations within six months.  The Committee observe that 
none o f the Statements were laid within the stipulated once -in-six-months period.  
Besides, the Statements laid did not indicate the status of action taken on the 
recommendations which had been categorized as interim reply in the Action -taken 
Reports of the Committee.  They are surprised to find that the Government is still sitting 
idle all these years and virtually doing nothing on their recommendations categorized as 
interim as per the Statements presented by the Minister concerned.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that action taken by Government on the recommendations categorized 
as interim be intimated to them without any further delay.  The Committee further desire 
that, in future, the Government should review the previous recommendations made by 
the Committ ee and intimate the Committee about the stage of their implementation 
before presentation of Demands for Grants for the next financial year. 
 
  Reply of the Government   
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The Department has 
made all efforts to lay the statements within the stipulated period of six months.  Except 
in  the case of  9 th & 18 th Reports of fourteenth Lok Sabha, the statements by the 
Minister on the other Reports have been laid on the Table of the House during the  
Parliament Sessions immediately following  on  completion of the period of six months.      
The latest status on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
categorized as “interim” would be sent separately on a priority basis. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O .M. No. H -11020/5/2009-
GC February, 2010 (Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.2, Para No. 2.10) 
The Committee are unable to comprehend the way the Ministry is presenting its Budget.  
While the Demands for Grants of the Department fo r the year 2009 -2010 depict a figure of Rs. 
106613.13 crore for Plan schemes, the material now furnished to the Committee indicates that 
the said demand is for Rs. 62670 crore in BE 2009 -2010, leaving aside Rs. 43943.13 crore as 
recoveries.  The Committee desire to know as to whether the funds marked as „recoveries‟ are 

19 
 
 
 
being spent in the specific schemes viz. NREGA and PMGSY and whether the Department is 
monitoring the said funds.  If so, they desire that such expenditure should be reflected in the 
Budget accordingly.  They note that Rs. 43943.13 crore mentioned as recoveries constitute 
41.22 per cent of scarce funds of the demand of the Department in BE 2009 -2010.  They desire 
that the Department should take suitable steps to clear the ambiguity in this re gard and intimate 
them accordingly. 
Reply of the Government  
The Detailed Demand for Grants of the Department is prepared and printed by the 
Department by following the pattern of the Budget document “Demand for Grants” printed by the 
Ministry of Finance at the time of presentation of the Union Budget to the Parliam ent.  In order 
to clear the ambiguity as pointed out by the Committee, the comments of the Ministry of Finance 
have been obtained and the same are reproduced below : 
“ Article 266(3) of the Constitution of India provides that no amount can be withdrawn 
from the Consolidated Fund of India except through Appropriation Act authorized by 
Parliament.  The expenditure on the schemes relating to NREGA is funded fully through 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Fund (NREGF) while the Pradhan Mantri Gram 
Sadak Yojan a (PMGSY) is partially funded through Central Road Fund (CRF).  The 
withdrawal from these funds precedes transfer (accretion) to the Fund.  Hence, in the 
Demands for Grants of the Department of Rural Development, approval of the 
Parliament is sought for tr ansferring the amounts to NREGF and CRF and incurring 
expenditure on the specified schemes to be met from these funds separately, in the 
Appropriation.  In other words, approval of the Parliament on the schemes relating to 
NREGA and PMGSY is sought simulta neously i.e.  (i) for transferring the money to the 
designated Funds and (ii) incurring expenditure on the schemes through the designated 
Funds.  Accordingly, the Demands for Grants provides for expenditure on Gross basis 
whereas, the Statement of Budget E stimates (Expenditure Budget Vol.2) is on net basis 
(net of withdrawal from the dedicated funds). 
2. Thus, there is no distortion of figures reflected in the Demands for Grants and the 
Statement of Budget Estimate (Expenditure Budget Vol.2) is as detailed below: 
(Rs. in crore)   
  Plan 
1 Plan outlay as depicted in the Demands for Grants 2009 -2010 
(Gross basis) 
106613.13 
2 Less met from NREGF (-) 39100.00 
  67513.13 
3 Less met from Central Road Fund (-) 4843.13 
4 Plan Outlay depicted in the Expenditure Budget Vol.2 (Net of 
recoveries). 
62,670.00 
 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
 

20 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3, Para No. 2.15) 
The Committee are  disturbed to note that during 2008 -2009, as high as 29 per 
cent of the scarce funds released at the revised estimate stage have remained 
unutilized. At the first place, the Department should not have asked for the funds if the 
implementing agencies do not  have the absorption capacity of spending during that 
particular year. They feel instead of ensuring that the amount is spent for the purpose it 
has been sanctioned in the budget, the Government have mindlessly released the entire 
amount for the implementing agencies year after year and become a mute spectator for 
the huge unspent balance. The Government lost sight of their own stipulation that if 
DRDAs/ States have more unspent balances than the prescribed limit of 10 per cent of 
the available funds, the e xcess carry over balance is proportionately deducted from the 
2nd installment of Central allocation. When the implementing agencies were not able to 
spend even the funds released at the revised estimates stage, entirely, the Government 
mindlessly released the fiscal stimulus package in four major schemes viz. IAY, 
PMGSY, SGSY and SGRY. Further release of as high as 46 per cent of RE provision in 
the last few days of fiscal 2008 -2009 did more harm than good, as the implementing 
agencies were prevented from g etting their next year„s installment in time which 
deprived the millions of needy persons living in rural areas to receive the development 
benefits in time. They, therefore, recommend that Government should take steps to see 
that at the end of the financia l year not more that stipulated 10 per cent of funds lie with 
the implementing agencies due to the fault of the Department at centre regarding 
release of funds at the fag end of the financial year. The Committee while expressing 
serious concern over the tr end of huge unspent balance would like to strongly 
recommend that the Government should analyse the position state -wise and take 
corrective measures accordingly. The Committee should also be kept apprised of the 
follow-up action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government  
Out of unspent balance of Rs.18717.42 crore, the balance under NREGA was 
reported to be Rs.10345.59 crore and under IAY  Rs.6246.17 crore on 31.3.2009.  
These two programmes i.e. NREGA and IAY alone constitute around 88.64% of the 
total unspent balances reported as on 31.3.2009.   
BE 2008 -09 provision for NREGA was Rs.16,000 crore.  It was subsequently 
enhanced to Rs.30,000 crore at RE stage, which included stimulus package of Rs.3500 
crore made available in mid -January, 2009.  Sinc e the enhanced money was provided 
in the last quarter, it was released to the districts in the fag end of the year. Because of 
this reason, the money released out of the funds provided under stimulus package 
could not be fully utilized during that year.  I n case, the amount of Rs.3500 crore 
provided under stimulus package is deducted from the total availability of funds, the 
expenditure comes to 80.43%.  Further, any unspent amount as on 31 st March of a 
particular financial year under NREGA is adjusted at t he time of release of first 
instalment at the beginning of the next financial year based on approved Labour Budget 
for the year. Further, the State Governments have been instructed to set up State 
Employment Guarantee Fund in accordance with the Section 21 (1) of NREG Act.  

21 
 
 
 
Setting up of State Employment Guarantee Fund by the State Government would 
provide a greater flexibility to the State Governments in administering the NREGA funds 
in accordance with the needs of the districts.   
With regard to IAY, it is submitted that if the amount of Rs.3050 crore released as 
stimulus package at the fag end of financial year and the corresponding State share of 
Rs. 1017.00 crore is deducted from the total available funds, the utilization stands at 
80.32%.  Every year, u tilization of IAY funds has been more than 80% as the 
construction is done by beneficiaries themselves and no contractors are involved.  
Physical targets are, therefore, invariably achieved.  Despite the General Elections to 
the Lok Sabha and imposition of  Model Code of Conduct from the first week of March, 
2009, the utilization of funds during the current year has already reached 63% of the 
total available funds including the unspent amount of last year.  The Ministry makes 
proportionate deductions of exce ss carry over of funds at the time of release of second 
instalment in the next financial year if the expenditure reported upto 31 st December is 
less than 75% of total funds available during the year including the carryover balance. 
 With regard to other al location based Schemes viz. SGSY, PMGSY, DRDA 
Administration etc. it is re -iterated that under the guidelines governing the release of 
funds under these programmes, there are in built safeguards to ensure that there is no 
accumulation of unspent balances with the State Governments which inter -alia stipulate 
that the 2 nd instalment is released only on utilization of 60% of available funds and on 
receipt of Audited Statement of Expenditure of previous year.  In the case of SGSY, if 
the DRDAs have more unspent   balance than the prescribed limit of 10% of the 
available funds, the excess carry over balance is proportionately deducted from the 2 nd 
instalment of Central allocation, if the expenditure reported upto 31 st December is less 
than 75% of total funds avail able during the year including the carry over balance.  In 
the case of DRDA Administration, carry over in excess of 10% of  total available funds 
of previous financial year is adjusted in the 2nd instalment on a proportionate basis.  
However, efforts are b eing made to accelerate the pace of utilization of funds by 
reviewing performance with State Governments regularly. With the strict financial 
management in the current financial year, it is expected that unspent balance at the 
close of the financial year will come down to the desired level. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No.5, Para No. 2.27) 
The Committee also recommend that the role and powers of the MPs and other 
Members of the V& MCs may be clearly defined so that they can discharge their duties 
effectively. Besides, the Department should monitor the action taken on the decisions 

22 
 
 
 
taken during the meeting and the officials of the Ministry should also pay random visits 
to the distric ts to know the functioning of V&MCs. Members of Parliament should also 
be informed well in advance whenever the officers pay such random visit. 
Reply of the Government  
The Guidelines for the Vigilance and Monitoring Committees contain in detail the 
terms of reference, including the role and responsibilities of the Committees. For action 
on any points pertaining to the State Government, the Committees are required to 
forward their observations/recommendations to them. The Ministry of Rural 
Development is re quired to be informed of any gross violation noticed. The officers of 
the Ministry do pay random visits to States/Districts to monitor and review the 
implementation of Rural Development Schemes, including the holding of V&MC 
meetings. This will be reiterated as recommended by the Standing Committee. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.7, Para No. 2.40) 
The Committee are happy to note that the plan budget of the  Department for BE 
2009-2010 has nearly doubled as compared to that of the previous year. Further the 
plan expenditure of the Department in the last three years starting from 2006 -2007 grew 
from 0.75 per cent of the GDP to 1.26 pre cent of GDP. The Ministr y is stated to be one 
of the very few Ministries which is getting maximum funds across all Ministries of 
Government of India, which shows that, of late the Government is giving high priority for 
rural development. They, therefore, urge the Department to ri se to the occasion and 
ensure that the people who are really in need are benefited out of the funds provided 
from the scarce resources with a view to achieve inclusive growth so that the benefits 
are shared by the poorest of the poor in the country. 
Reply of the Government  
The Department is committed to ensure that the benefits of the funds provided 
for Rural Development Programmes reach to the poorest of the poor people in the 
country who are really in need of the benefits.  Necessary monitoring  mechanis ms are 
in place for constant review of physical progress and outcomes of all the important 
programmes. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial  No.8, Para No. 2.41) 
 
The Committee note with concern that the non -plan expenditure made by the 
Department has more than doubled in the last six year period since 2003 -2004. The 
non-plan expenditure which was only Rs.18.07 crore in 2003 -2004 has risen to 
Rs.36.95 crore in BE 2009-2010. A significant rise in the non -plan expenditure is not a 

23 
 
 
 
healthy sign. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should take 
immediate steps to contain the increase in non-plan expenditure to the barest minimum. 
Reply of the Government  
The Non-Plan expenditure of the Department is just nominal as compared to the 
Plan budget of the Department.  This is because of the fact that the Department does 
not implement any Non -Plan scheme of the Government.  The Non -Plan provision is 
mainly m eant for meeting the administrative expenditure of the Secretariats of the 
Department of Rural Development and National Institute of Rural Development(NIRD), 
Hyderabad (an autonomous body under the administrative control of the Department).  
The trend of expenditure in the last six years has been as under : 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Expenditure 
2003-2004 18.07 
2004-2005 17.94 
2005-2006 20.04 
2006-2007 21.87 
2007-2008 23.31 
2008-2009 30.72 
2009-2010 (BE) 36.95 
     
As will be seen from above, there was marginal increase in expenditure upto 
2007-2008 as compared to the expenditure incurred in the previous year.  This increase 
was mainly due to normal inflation on account of payment of annual increment, DA 
instalment, bonus etc. during the course of the year.  The steep increase in expenditure 
has been registered only in the year 2008 -2009 & 2009-2010 and this is because of the 
implementation of the 6 th Central Pay Commission Report for the benefit of employees 
of the D epartment and NIRD, Hyderabad.  It may not be out of place to mention that 
while the increase in Non-Plan expenditure is mainly under salary head, the department 
has been strictly following the economy instructions issued by Ministry of Finance from 
time t o time including a 10% cut on Non -Plan provision for Non -salaried items of 
expenditure and it will be ensured that in future, all out efforts will be made to contain 
the increase in Non-Plan expenditure to the barest minimum. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9, Para No. 2.42) 
Another disturbing fact which has come to the notice of the Committee is that the 
Department is in the habit of re -appropriation of funds from one scheme to the other 
scheme of the Department. They are concerned to point out that more than Rs.136 
crore of funds has been re -appropriated by the Department between 2006 -2007 and 
2008-2009. In addition to the huge allocation received by the Department which has 

24 
 
 
 
ultimately resulted in accumulation of unspent balances with the implementing agencies 
at the end of t he financial year, the Department has also mindlessly surrendered more 
than Rs.5 crore of funds during 2007 -2008 and 2008 -2009. Such practice of re -
appropriation and surrender of amount is not a prudent and healthy financial practice to 
say the least. All these activities give an impression that the Department does not plan 
well in advance for spending its allocation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department should take necessary steps to ensure that scarce funds are spent for 
the purpose for  which these are allocated and are not re -appropriated or surrendered. 
The Committee while expressing serious concern over the trend of huge unspent 
balances would like to strongly recommend the Government to analyse the position 
State-wise and take corrective action accordingly. The Committee may be kept apprised 
of the follow up action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The re-appropriation of funds is made under the provisions of General Financial 
Rule (GFR) 59, which inter -alia states that subject to the provision of rule 10 of the 
Delegation of Financial Powers Rules (DFPR) and also subject to such other general or 
specific restrictions as may be imposed by Ministry of Finance in this behalf, re -
appropriation of funds from one primary unit of appropriation to another such unit within 
a grant may be sanctioned by the competent authority at any time before the close of 
the financial year.  This Rule also stipulates that re-appropriation of funds shall be made 
only when it is known or anticipat ed that the appropriation for unit from which funds are 
to be transferred which will be not utilized in full or that savings can be effected in the 
appropriation for the said unit.  Keeping these provisions of the GFR in view, this 
Department re-appropriated funds to the extent of Rs. 13623.57 crore between 2006 -
2007 and 2008 -2009 with the approval of competent authority.  Out of this, re -
appropriation of Rs. 7828.88 crore was made from Major Head 2552 – North Eastern 
Areas to the various functional program me heads of the Department under the power 
delegated by Ministry of Finance to the Ministries / Departments.  In this connection, it 
may be clarified that as per the directives of the Ministry of Finance, the budget 
provision for NE States is made under Ma jor Head 2552 – North Eastern Areas but the 
releases to the NE States are made from the functional heads of the respective 
programme.  Subsequently, the amount released to the NE States is recouped to the 
functional heads from Major Head 2552 by way of re-appropriation as per the procedure 
laid down by Ministry of Finance.  This is a continuing process which will be followed 
every year.  Further, a re -appropriation of Rs. 5786.33 crore was made during the last 
three years under various units of appropriatio n with the prior approval of Parliament 
through Supplementary Demand for Grants and remaining Rs. 8.36 crore was re -
appropriated with the approval of Ministry of Finance and powers delegated to the 
Department.  However, as recommended by the Committee, it will be ensured in future 
that the re-appropriation of funds is made, as far as possible, to the barest minimum. 
As regards surrender of over Rs. 5.00 crore during 2007-2008 and 2008-2009, it may be 
mentioned that during the year 2007 -2008, the total budge t allocation (RE) was to the tune of 
Rs. 28500.00 crore.  Against this, the net surrender was Rs. 3.68 crore which is 0.013% of the 
total budget allocation. Like -wise, against the RE of Rs. 56854.00 crore for 2008 -2009, the 

25 
 
 
 
saving was of the order of Rs. 1 .65 crore only which comes to 0.003% of  RE.  It will thus be 
seen that almost 100% funds provided in RE 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 were spent. 
 As regards huge unspent balances with the State Governments under various Schemes 
of this Department, the position has already been explained in reply to Para 2.15 of the Report.  
Efforts are being made to accelerate the pace of utilization of funds by reviewing performance 
with State Governments regularly. With the strict financial management in the current financial  
year, it is expected that unspent balance at the close of the financial year will come down to the 
desired level. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.11, Para No. 2.59) 
As per the information furnished to the Committee the calculation of population 
below poverty line is old, outdated and faulty and was last done for 2004 -2005. The 
Committee are surprised to find that even in this age of advanced information 
technology, the poverty ratio of many States and Union territories like all North Eastern 
States (except Assam), Goa, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Puducherry, Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep are based on the poverty ratio of the neighbouring 
States. O bviously, this does not give any exact reality on the ground. It also speaks 
volumes about the apathy of the Government towards finding out the exact position of 
poverty in these States and Union territories and the people living below poverty line. 
The Co mmittee, therefore, urge the Government to ascertain the poverty ratio in all 
these States and Union territory administrations without any further delay. The Ministry 
of Rural Development being the nodal Ministry for most of the schemes and 
programmes bein g implemented for benefit of BPL population, should take up this 
concern of the Committee at the highest level of decision making and impress upon the 
Planning Commission to conduct survey in all 28 States and 7 Union territories of the 
country without any further delay.. 
Reply of the Government  
The estimation of poverty in the country is done by the Planning Commission on 
the basis of a large sample survey of Consumer Expenditure carried out by the National 
Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) after an interval of 5 years approximately. 
Concern of t he Committee about non -availability of  poverty ratios for some of the 
States/UTs would be taken up with the Planning Commission. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.13, Para No. 3.19) 
The Committee note with concern that during 2009 -10, the hike in the number of 
districts proposed to be covered has been 86.36 per cent, whereas the enhancement in 
allocation has been as much as 150 per cent over the previous year. The unspent 
balance under NREGA amounting to Rs. 10345.59 crore at the end of 2008 -09 is 27.67 

26 
 
 
 
per cent of the total available funds. Even with the sufficient amount of total available 
funds, the Government could provide only 48 days of Persons per H ouse Hold work 
during 2008 -2009. Even though the Employment Guarantee Act is a very improvised 
programme for wage employment as compared to the previous programmes 
implemented by the Department, much remains to be done by all stakeholders including 
the Min istry of Rural Development if the Government is serious to provide at least 
hundred days of works per household in a financial year as envisaged in the Act. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should gear up the 
implementing agencies in volved in the implementation of NREGA at each level so that 
all the total available funds including the accumulated unspent balances are utilized to 
achieve the target of at -least hundred days of employment to those job card holder 
households who demand work. 
 
Reply of the Government  
Number of districts covered under MGNREGA during the year 2009 -10 is the 
same as during 2008 -09 since  the Act had been extended to all rural areas of the 
country with effect from 1.4.2008. During the year 2008 -09, Rs 30,000 c rore had been 
provided in the budget and entire amount had been released to the States. For 2009-10, 
budget allocation for MGNREGA is Rs. 39,100 crore which amounts to an increase of 
only 30% over the last year‟s allocations.          
MGNREGA is demand bas ed.   Number of days of employment provided to a 
household depends upon the number of days of employment demanded which in turn 
depends upon availability of other employment opportunities in an area.    National 
average for the number of days of employment  provided per household has gone up 
from  43 days in 2006 -07 to  48 days in 2008 -09.  During the current year so far, the 
average is 46 days. Funds under MGNREGA are non -lapsable. Unspent funds during 
the year are carried forward to the next financial year  for being used for meeting the 
labour demand. Funds under the Act are to be kept upfront to meet any sudden spurt in 
the labour demand.  
To generate awareness among the rural population about their legal rights under 
the Act, awareness generation activiti es have been taken up on regular basis. Civil 
Society Organisations have been engaged in these activities and Government  has 
introduced Rozgar Jagrookta Puraskar to recognize the outstanding contributions by the 
CSOs for promoting effective implementation of MGNREGA.  
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.15, Para No. 3.25) 
From the information furnished to the Committee, it is seen that payment of 
unemployment allowance to the job card holders who demanded work but could not be 
provided work since 2006 -2007 has become a regular feature of implementation of the 
NREG Act. The Committee can only conclude that even though enough money was 

27 
 
 
 
available with the implemen ting agencies, the poor job card holders could not be 
provided much needed employment during the lean season. In this scenario the 
Committee recommend that existing permissible works should further be broadened. 
Besides, some sort of flexibility should be provided to the State Governments to identify 
works keeping in view the geographical conditions and the local needs of that area. The 
Committee would also like to recommend that the State Governments should be ready 
with a shelf of schemes so that works ar e always available when the demand for 
employment comes so that payment of unemployment allowance is minimised. 
Reply of the Government  
       Permissible works under MGNREGA are stipulated in para 1 Schedule I of the Act.  
States are advised from time to  time to keep sufficient number of works in the shelf of 
projects to meet labour demand at any point of time. Vide notification dated 22.7.2009, 
works, as given in para 1(iv) of Schedule I, on the individual lands owned by small and 
marginal farmers have b een permitted.  Further, vide notification dated 11.11.2009, the 
Government allowed construction of Bharat Nirman Rajiv Gandhi Sewa Kendra under 
the Act in each Gram Panchayat which would serve as a Panchayat Bhawan as well as 
Knowledge Resource Centre.  T he State Governments may also recommend new 
works under Section 1(ix) of Schedule I of the Act for notification by the Central 
Government. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.16, Para No. 3.30) 
The Committee note with concern that the States and Union territories have been 
revising their minimum wage rate after the minimum wages were declared under 
NREGA on 1.1.2009 as per Section 6(1). The Committee w ould like to know whether 
the reasons for such a situation have been analysed and if so, they may be apprised of 
the same. Further, confusion in the existing wage rate in States has not been cleared 
even after the notification of wage rate under NREGA on 1.1.2009 as Rs.141.02 per day 
per worker in Haryana, Rs.98.61 per day per worker in Hosiharpur, Rs.94.91 per day 
per worker in Nawanshar and Rs.72.23 per day per worker in Chhattisgarh. Such 
declaration of wage rate to be paid in fraction of a Rupee i.e. 02 paise, 23 paise or 61 
paise is neither desirable nor practical. The Committee, therefore, recommend that such 
anomalies in the minimum wage rate under NREGA may be wiped out without any 
further delay. 
Reply of the Government  
Section 6 of Mahatma Gandhi N ational Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
provides for wage rate.  The provisions in the Act are as under :- 
6(1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes of this Act : 

28 
 
 
 
 Provided that different rates of wages may be specified for different areas : 
Provided further that the wage rate specified from time to time under any such   
notification shall not be at a rate less than sixty rupees per day. 
(2)   Until such time as a wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in respect of any 
area in a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State Government under section 3 of 
the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 for agricultural labourers, shall be considered as the 
wage rate applicable to that area. 
         In exercise of powers conferred under Section 6(1) of the Act, the Central 
Government notified the wage rate under the Act with effect from 1 st January, 2009.  
Minimum wages for agricultural labourers prevailing on 31st December, 2008, as notified 
under Section 3 of Minimum Wages Act, 1948 by the States had been taken into 
account by the Central Government while notifying the wage rate under Section 6 (1) of 
the Act. 
 Section 3(1)(a) of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, provi des for fixing of minimum 
rates of wages and Section 3(1)(b) provides that the minimum rates of wages so fixed 
may be revised at any interval as State may think fit, but such intervals should not 
exceed 5 years.  Some of the States have revised their minim um wages under the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 and approached the Ministry for revision of wage rate under 
NREGA.  
 The Central Government has taken the following decisions in this regard :- 
(i) The Ministry may revise wage rate under Section 6(1) for States appro aching the 
Centre for revision of their notified wage rate as per their suggestions based on their 
proposal. 
(ii) However, the revised wage rate may be kept at Rs.100/ - per day, anything more 
than this will be paid by the States.  However, States with wage rate  above Rs.100/- per 
day, as notified by the Centre on 1.1.2009 will continue to be reimbursed with wage 
rate, though it is above Rs.100/- per day. 
              In accordance with the above decision, Central Government has issued a 
notification dated 15.12.2009 and 4.1.2010 enhancing wage rate to Rs.100/ - per day for 
States who have sought revision of their wage rate after 1.1.2009 and the wage rate for 
States which was more than Rs.100/ - per day on 1.1.2009 has been kept at the same 
level. 
             At present, Haryana, Manipur and Dadra & Nagar Haveli have wage rate to be 
paid in fraction of a rupee as the minimum wage rate under the Minimum Wage s Act, 
1948.  This wage rate had been fixed by the respective State Governments and had 
been adopted by the Ministry vide notification dated 1.1.2009.  Subsequent notification 
for wage rate do not have wage rate to be paid in fraction of a rupee. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 

29 
 
 
 
 Recommendation (Serial No.18, Para No. 3.34) 
The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Department for payment of 
wages through Banks or Post Offices. However, the system should not only be more 
transparent but should be adequate also. The Committee note from the reply of the 
Department that the outreach of post offices and banks in remote and inaccessible 
areas, inadequate personnel both in post offices and banks are the immediate problems 
being faced by States in arranging payment of wages to the workers either through the 
banks or through the post offices. They, therefore, recommend that in consultation with 
all stakeholders, suitable remedial measures  be taken in this regard without any further 
delay. Personnel deployment and supportive infrastructure in rural branches of Posts 
offices and banks should be suitably increased as per the needs to handle large 
volumes of wage disbursements under the scheme . The Committee desire that in 
consultation with the Department of Posts, Ministry of Finance and the Planning 
Commission, such problems may be solved without loss of time. The Department 
should ensure that wages under the implementation of NREGA are paid on weekly 
basis without any delay. 
Reply of the Government  
Upto December, 2009,  8.60 crore accounts of workers under MGNREGA have 
been opened in Banks/Post Offices and Rs.13973.39 crore have been disbursed 
through these accounts, which accounts for 82% o f the total wages disbursed to the 
unskilled workers.  The issues of outreach and basic infrastructure are being taken up 
regularly with the Department of Posts and Department of Financial Services.  The 
Ministry is also taking proactive measures for ICT b ased technical innovations for timely 
payment of wages to the workers under MGNREGA. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.19, Para No. 3.38) 
The Committee note that the women participation in the activities under NREGA 
has been increasing from 43 per cent in 2007 -2008 to 48 per cent in 2008 -2009 and to 
51 per cent during 2009 -2010 so far against the statutory requirement of 33 per cent. 
However, in some of the States the percentage of women„s participation has been very 
low. For example during 2008 -2009, percentage of women participation in Bihar, 
Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh was only 30 per cent, 28 per cent and 18 per cent 
respectively. The Committee here also note that the Department of Rural Development 
has commissioned an independent study with the National Institute of Rural 
Development with the aim to look into districts where low women participation is taking 
place under the implementation of NREGA and als o to look into the reasons of 
persistent low women participation. The Committee recommend such a study should be 
completed expeditiously and corrective changes may be made in the implementation of 
the scheme accordingly. 
 

30 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
From the v arious studies conducted regarding participation of women in 
MGNREGA, it has been found that the main reasons for low participation of women 
have been non -revision of Schedule of Rates (SoR), socio -cultural constraints and low 
awareness. Some of the states  including Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, West Bengal have 
revised their SoRs to make them worker and gender sensitive.  
         The National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD)   has completed its study and 
has also submitted the report. The study was on im pact of women participation in 
NREGS on changing gender equations at individual, household and community level 
and to assess the extent of empowerment among women workers of NREGA. The 
study was conducted in 5 districts of Tamil Nadu. The main findings of the study 
included:    
• Women in socially developed areas gained more (Kanyakumari) 
• Gender sensitive delivery system facilitated greater effectiveness of NREGS.  
• NREGS‟ impact on poverty is significant.  
• Work participation of women and gains would be greater, if SHGs are entrusted 
with provision of mandatory worksite facilities.   
• Participation in NREGS benefited women - contribution to HH income - 
improvement in their access to resources and control - gender relations in social 
and economic areas at household level - improved considerably; the male 
workers‟ perception supports this 
• The self -esteem, self -image and confidence levels of women increased due to 
participation in NREGS. 
• NREGS has facilitated the empowerment of women 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.20, Para No. 3.42) 
The Committee note the vague reply furnished by the Department regarding 
performance of many States and Union territories in implementing the NREGA while 
facing the problems of severe drought or flood etc. that employment demand is likely t o 
be low in the districts that are comparatively more developed with greater opportunities 
of employment in other avenues both in agricultural and rural non -farm activities without 
leaving any justification for situations like drought or flood etc. The rep ly of the 
Department is vague as far as performance of NREGA in drought affected 
States/Districts is concerned and the reply that the demand for work under NREGA in a 
particular area depends on the availability of other employment opportunities in that 

31 
 
 
 
area. Since, more than half of the country was reeling under severe drought during 
2009-2010 it is difficult to say as to whether the performance of NREGA was better in 
the drought affected districts. The Committee, therefore, recommend that suitable 
remedial measures be taken to further tune up implementation of NREGA in the drought 
affected districts without any further delay 
 
Reply of the Government  
MGNREGA is demand based.  A registered rural household is provided 
employment under the Act within 15 days o f the demand made.  For drought affected 
rural areas, it was expected that demand for employment under MGNREGA would 
increase during the drought period due to lack of other avenues of employment.  
Accordingly, the Ministry had requested to all the States t o ensure the proactive 
measures are taken and sufficient workers are made available at all levels to provide 
employment wherever required.  It was also ensured that sufficient funds are available 
at all levels in the States. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.21, Para No. 3.48) 
The Committee find that only eight States have so far established State 
Employment Guarantee Fund. They are not convinced with the re ply of the Department 
that the States which have not set up the State fund continue to get central assistance 
directly to their districts from the Government of India. Even though the setting up of 
such a fund is not mandatory, the Committee would recommen d that the Department 
should persuade all the State Governments to establish the State Employment 
Guarantee Fund within a span of 2-3 years. 
Reply of the Government  
Setting up of State Fund entirely depends on the respective States based on 
their needs. H owever, it certainly provides greater flexibility to the States in fund 
management. Since as per Section 21(1) of the MGNREGA, establishment of State 
Fund is not mandatory, the Ministry cannot force any State Government for setting up 
the State Fund under MGNREGA. However, the Ministry has been regularly following 
up the issue with the State Governments to expedite the process and has issued 
advisories to the States from time to time for strengthening fund management for 
release of funds for MGNREGA.  
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
 
 

32 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.22, Para No. 3.51) 
The Committee note with concern that no uniform norms for measurement of 
work under NREGA have been put in place. The reply of the Department that States are 
required to evolve norms for measurement of works is very vague. The role and 
responsibility of the Central Government has been ensured in the Act itself. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Central G overnment in consultation with all the 
States and Union territories should ensure uniformity of measurement of work 
throughout the country without any further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government  
Broad factors which are kept in view while evolving norms for measurement of 
works under the Act have been given in detail in the Operational Guidelines of the Act.  
However, given the diversity of geo -morphological and climatic conditions in States, 
flexibility has been provided to States to evolve Schedule of Rates  (SoRs) for 
measurement of works. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.25 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.23, Para No. 3.53) 
The Committee note that the limit for administrative expenditure under NREGA 
has been raised from 4 per cent to 6 per cent last year. The Department wants it to be 
further raised to 10 per cent. The Committee feel that such a fixation of ad ministrative 
expenditure may lead to lesser funds being available for payment of wages to the 
workers under the scheme. The reduction of allocation for labourers/workers by 
increasing the administrative expenses is not a healthy sign. Further, the raising of 
administrative expenses from six per cent to ten per cent may not by itself solve the 
problem of getting good technical people for implementation of the NREGA. The 
Committee agree with the Ministry of Finance in this regard and urge the Department to 
gear up the implementing machinery for better results within the existing resources. 
Reply of the Government  
 Any enhancement in administrative expenditure under MGNREGA will not affect 
the wage component under the Act because administrative expenditure is 6% of the 
total expenditure incurred under the Act  and is paid separately by the Central 
Government.  NREGA is demand based and the Central Government is committed to 
pay the entire wages for the unskilled workers.  

33 
 
 
 
As regards appointment of technical per sonnel, it has been noticed that in some 
States adequate number of technical personnel have not been put in place and the 
reason has been non -availability of technical personnel at the rate of compensation 
being offered at present. However, the States have been directed to step up their efforts 
to hire technical personnel to the desired extent commensurate with the actual need 
which would ensure timely and effective measurement of works executed.  
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.26, Para No. 3.81) 
The Committee note that State-wise, 99 unbanked blocks are there in the country 
and these type  of banks largely pertain to the North Eastern States. They further note 
the reply of the Department that there were initially 145 unbanked blocks in the country. 
They further note the reply of the Department regarding repayment of the scheme 
throughout the country. Further, they note the reply of the Department that the issue has 
been taken up for strengthening the manpower with nationalized banks and the RBI and 
the States have been requested to offer incentives to banks to encourage them to open 
bank bra nches in unbanked areas. The Committee note with dismay about the 
performance of Banks under SGSY which is not at all satisfactory regarding making 
available the credit, or on repayment or on while addressing the issue of unbanked 
blocks or single manned b ranches. They urge that an independent and impartial study 
be initiated across the country urgently to find out all of the above aspects in the 
implementation of SGSY in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and the Reserve 
Bank of India. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The Ministry had constituted a high level Committee on “Credit related issues 
under SGSY” under the Chairmanship of Dr. R. Radhakrishnan, Professor, Centre  for 
Economic and Social Studies, Hyderabad in April, 2008. Senior Officers from Ministry of 
Finance, Reserve Bank of India, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD), State Bank of India (SBI), National Institute of Rural Development (N IRD) 
and selected State Secretaries of Rural Development were the members of the 
Committee. The Committee has already submitted its report to the Ministry. As regards 
unbanked blocks, it is mentioned that most of the unbanked blocks are in the North 
Eastern region. The Committee therefore has recommended that there should be 
substantial increase in the branch banking in the region, and States should be assisted 
in providing physical facilities and security arrangements wherever necessary.  High 
priority should be given by the banks and the Central Government in investing in new 
banking innovations like the provision of Smart Card, promoting institutions like 
„Business Facilitator‟, „Business Correspondent‟, and Mobile Banking among others. As 
far as providin g incentives to banks for opening branches in rural areas is concerned, 
the Committee has recommended that in order encourage banks to open branches in 
remote areas which are considered unviable, Government may provide suitable 

34 
 
 
 
incentives. The Committee al so observed that Staff shortage, particularly in rural 
branches, makes it difficult for addressing needs of illiterate or semi -literate customers 
and thus recommended that this could be partially addressed through the Bank Mithra 
as in the case of Andhra P radesh. The Ministry, however, is making continuous efforts 
at various fora such as Performance Review Committee (PRC) Meetings, Project 
Directors Conferences & Central Level Coordination Committee (CLCC) Meetings etc. 
to stress upon the States and the ban ks to improve credit flow by regular monitoring in 
every quarter. These issues were also taken up with all the State Secretaries and the 
representatives of various banks during the Meeting of the Central Level Coordination 
Committee (CLCC) held on 23rd December, 2009 in New Delhi.  
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.27, Para No. 3.82) 
The Committee note the information furnished by the Ministry that the Natio nal 
Level Recovery Rate for scheduled commercial banks was 47.32 per cent for individual 
beneficiaries and 57.32 per cent for Self Help Groups under SGSY. The Committee 
strongly feel that when the subsidy provided by the Government which is nearly 33 per 
cent of the assistance provided for SGSY is added to the existing recovery, the recovery 
of the scheme for the banks is not all that bad. The Committee feel instead of citing the 
false plea of non satisfactory recovery, the financial institutions viz. comme rcial, 
cooperative, Regional Rural and Private banks involved in the implementation of the 
scheme should lay stress on solving serious problems of unbanked and under -banked 
areas. The Committee find that the shortfall in the achievement of credit targets u nder 
SGSY are attributed by the Department to many reasons which include lack of sufficient 
Bank branches and manpower in rural areas and the improper attitude of Bank officials 
working in the rural areas. There is also a need for proper training of bank o fficials 
posted in the rural areas to change their mind set towards illiterate rural people and the 
Banking procedure also needs to be simplified for the convenience of the rural people. 
The Committee desire that the action taken by the Government in this regard may 
please be intimated to them. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The issues of lack of sufficient bank branches and manpower in rural areas has 
been taken up with the banks in various Central Level Coordination Committee 
Meetings (CLCC) of SGSY organized by the Ministry of Rural Development. The issue 
was also discussed during the Meeting of the Central Level Coordination Committee 
(CLCC) held on 23 rd December, 2009 in New Delhi. As already informed in order to 
encourage banks to open bank branches in unba nked blocks in NER, a special 
dispensation has been introduced by RBI in which it has been decided to provide 
subvention of capital cost and recurring cost for 5 years in respect of all blocks/centres 
figuring in an “Agreed List” to be identified by a join t team of Government officials and 
banks constituted under the aegis of SLBC in North eastern states. The “Agreed 

35 
 
 
 
centres” are those where it is considered necessary as per public policy to have 
branches of banks under different categories viz. general ban king, currency chests, 
forex business, Government business etc. not found to be viable and the banks are not 
willing to open branches at such Centres. As regards training of Bank Officials, the 
Ministry has already instructed all the State Governments to impart adequate training for 
bank officials through National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD), Hyderabad and 
State Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs) and Extension Training Centres (ETCs) 
located in all the States in order to familiarize them with  SGSY scheme and credit 
requirement of SGSY beneficiaries. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.28, Para No. 3.85) 
The Committee appreciate the efforts made b y the Department to develop the 
skills of the existing beneficiaries of SGSY. They were informed that up -to 31 August 
2009, 87000 beneficiaries have been trained out of which 65000 beneficiaries have 
been placed which shows that so far 22000 beneficiaries trained still remain to be 
placed. They feel that giving training to the needy and their absorption is one of the 
important aspects which was not given due importance so far. They also note the reply 
of the Department that only one project was approved und er this scheme during 2007 -
2008 which was followed by approval of 15 projects during 2008 -2009. They are 
concerned to note that only six projects have been approved by the end of first half of 
this fiscal. With the present pace of implementation of the sch eme the Government may 
not be able to approve more than 12 to 13 projects in the current year which is not at all 
a healthy sign. They therefore, recommend that Government in consultation with the 
States and Union territories should find out ways and means  to extend the scheme to 
the entire country under the skill development projects in a time bound manner so that 
BPL youths could be provided training in various skills which can enable them to earn a 
decent livelihood. Action taken in this regard may be intimated to them. 
Reply of the Government  
So far 43 Placement linked Skill Development Projects under SGSY have been 
sanctioned which together will cover 4,54,482 beneficiaries in the entire country.  Under 
these projects 93412 beneficiaries have been tra ined and 74,952 beneficiaries have 
been placed till 30.11.2009 which is about 80%.  The focus of the programme is on 
placements and it is prescribed that atleast 75% of beneficiaries trained under such 
projects should be given placement. 
During 2009 -10, 20  placement linked skill development projects under SGSY 
have been sanctioned to cover 1,44,220  beneficiaries.  It is expected that coverage of 
beneficiaries under the projects will be substantially scaled up during the current and 
coming financial years a s there are a large number of project proposals in the pipeline 
at different stages of processing at present.  For upscaling the initiative, the Department 
has also uploaded consolidated guidelines, procedures and norms of the scheme on the 
Ministry‟s website.       
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 

36 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.29, Para No. 3.96) 
The Committee find that during 2008 -2009 out of Rs.14443.21 crore available 
under IAY only Rs.8282.86 crore have been used in the scheme which is only 57.35 per 
cent of the available funds. The Committee are dismayed to note the poor utilization of 
available funds under IAY during 2008 -2009. Considering that more than Rs.6246 crore 
of unspent balance is lying with the implementing agencies as on 1.4.2009 there is an 
urgent need for the Department to fine tune and gear up the existing implementing 
agencies of Indira Awaas Yojana in all the States and Union territories of the country. 
Reply of the Government  
The utilization of funds during the year 2008 -09 was only 57.35% because an 
amount of Rs. 4067 crore (both Central and State share) was released to the DRDAs, 
as economic stimulus package, only at the end of the year 2008 -09.  If this amount is 
deducted from the total available funds, the utilization stands at 80.32%.  Every year, 
utilization of IAY funds has been more than 80% as the construction is by beneficiaries 
themselves and no contractors are involved.  Physically targets are therefore, invariably 
achieved. Despite the General Elections to the Lok Sabha and imposition of Model 
Code of Conduct from the first week of March, 2009, the utilization of funds during the 
current year has already reached 63% of the total available funds including the unspent 
amount of last year. 
However, efforts are being made to accelerate the pace of utilization of funds by 
reviewing performance with State Governments regularly.  
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.30, Para No. 3.97) 
The Committee note with concern that poor financial performance of IAY in many 
States and Union territories which was reportedly been in Manipur (8.69 per cent), 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands (10.88 pe r cent), Dadra and Nagar Haveli (18.39 per 
cent), Assam (31.41 per cent), Jharkhand (35.48 per cent), Karnataka (42.77 per cent), 
Puducherry (43.46 per cent) during 2007 -2008. The Committee also note with concern 
that poor physical performance of IAY in ma ny States and Union territories which has 
reportedly been in Manipur (2.59 per cent), Andaman & Nicobar Islands (6.78 per cent), 
Puducherry (4.62 per cent), Dadra and Nagar Haveli (13.44 per cent) during 2008 -2009 
also was not better either in this regard.  The information regarding State -wise physical 
performance of IAY during 2007 -2008 was no better either. The Committee, are 
therefore, dismayed to note the poor financial and physical performance of IAY during 
2007-2008 and 2008-2009 as mentioned above. Th e Committee would like to know the 
reasons for the poor performance in each of the States and Union territories mentioned 
above. They would like to urge the Department to initiate suitable corrective measures 
during this financial year in each of the afore said States and Union territories to achieve 
a better performance under the scheme. The Committee recommend that suitable 
corrective measures may please be initiated in this regard and they may be apprised 
accordingly. 
 

37 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
The overall performance of IAY in Assam, Jharkhand and Karnataka has been 
satisfactory in the past.   During the year 2007 -08 also, the financial performance of 
Assam and Jharkhand was fairly good with 81% and 71% of utilization, respectively. 
During the current year,  Jharkhand has already utilized 71% of funds up to November, 
2009 including the carryover of previous year.  In the case of Karnataka the utilization of 
funds was low during 2007 -08 because of General Elections to the State Legislative 
Assembly. 
However, t he low performance of IAY in Manipur is a cause of concern.  The 
position of development programmes in Manipur was reviewed at the level of Cabinet 
Secretary in a meeting held by him with the State Government of Manipur on 29 th 
September, 2008.  Director (RH) also visited Manipur and reviewed the position with the 
State Government Officers.  The matter is being following up with the State Government 
thereafter and it is expected that the position will improve in future. 
 As regards Union Territories, there is not much demand of IAY funds except in 
Lakshdweep.  In Andaman & Nicobar Islands, a number of houses were constructed 
during post -Tsunami period, particularly in Nicobar district. Puducherry has its own 
scheme of rura l housing under which Rs. 1 lakh are provided to the beneficiaries for 
construction of a house.  Due to this, there is not much demand of IAY houses. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.31, Para No. 3.101) 
The Committee note the reply of the Department that the housing shortage in 
rural areas after 2009-2010 will be around 240 lakh and in this pace of development, 48 
lakh houses are required to be build in the  next five years by investing Rs.12701 crore 
every year as central allocation. As against the said target the Department has only 
been able to build 21.32 lakh houses during 2008 -2009 which gives rise to the fear that 
it may take more than 10 years with th e present pace of achievement of targets to have 
shelterlessness in rural areas of the country. The way the Government is achieving the 
targets the Committee, therefore, apprehend that the Government cannot achieve the 
noble goal of eliminating housing sho rtage for the poor in the rural areas in a time 
bound manner. The Committee feel that the Department is not giving due importance to 
implement the flagship housing programme IAY. They, therefore, strongly recommend 
that all the implementing agencies should  further be geared up to show the optimum 
achievement of physical targets in the subsequent years. 
Reply of the Government  
During the year 2008 -09, 21.34 lakh houses were constructed against the 
physical target for construction of 21.27 lakh houses.  Further, the physical target for the 
current year 2009 -10 is for construction of 40.52 lakh houses out of which 15.67 lakh 
houses have already been constructed by the end of November, 2009 and more than 

38 
 
 
 
27 lakh houses are under construction at various stages.  As this is the working season 
for construction of houses in most of the States, the physical targets are likely to be 
achieved by the end of the year.  Further, the Planning Commission has been 
requested to provide funds for at least 40 lakh houses during the year 2010-11 also. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.34, Para No. 3.107) 
The Committee are  of the view that efforts of the Department to provide land to 
the beneficiaries under the Homestead scheme is a step in the right direction. However, 
the Department has not been able to frame the guidelines of the scheme which might 
come in the way of imp lementation of the scheme in different States and Union 
territories. The Committee recommend that before giving the final shape to the 
guidelines it should be ensured that the plot allotted to the poor beneficiary is not far 
away from the existing habitati ons. Further, the Government should find out ways and 
means, in consultation with all the States and Union territories and the Planning 
Commission so that the benefits of this scheme actually reach the poor people without 
any land and the scheme does not merely remain on paper. 
Reply of the Government  
The guidelines for the Homestead scheme have since been issued on 24.8.2009.  
The State Governments were also requested to submit proposals for release of funds 
for providing homestead sites.  The proposals have since been received from 
Karnataka, Kerala, Sikkim and Maharashtra.  The funds for this purpose have also since 
been released to Karnataka, Kerala and Sikkim while the proposal of Maharashtra is 
under consideration. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.35, Para No. 3.121) 
The Committee are concerned at the poor physical performance of the PMGSY 
during 2008 -2009 which has reportedly been 55 per cent inspite of the financial 
achievement being more than 98 per cent made during that year. This only shows that 
all is not well with the implementation of the yojana in different States and Union 
territories. Not only that, the unspent balance as on 31.3.2009 left with the implementing 
agencies was to the extent of Rs.1264.56 crore. The Committee deplore the fact that 
Department is giving more stress on approving the road projects rather than completing 
the road construction, as is evident from the fact that Rs.1.05 l akh crore cost of projects 
have so far been sanctioned against which funds to the tune of only Rs.47834 crore 
have been released to States for all the road projects. The Committee apprehend that 

39 
 
 
 
with the present pace of PMGSY, the Department would not be a ble to achieve the goal 
of full connectivity to all eligible habitations in the country in near future. They, therefore, 
recommend that immediate corrective steps be initiated by the Government in this 
regard and the Committee be apprised accordingly. 
Reply of the Government  
The information reflected regarding financial utilization of 98% relates to the 
utilization with respect to fund released for the programme. As percentage of value of 
projects sanctioned, financial utilization is 44%.  Percentage achievement in respect of 
length completed is with respect to total of sanctioned projects. Thus, the figures are 
55% of length of road works completed commensurate with the financial utilization of 
44%. 
 Expenditure during 2008 -09 is Rs. 15,162 crore whic h is fivefold increase over 
the capacity during 2004 -05 (Rs. 3,077 crore). With the capacity available, expenditure 
to the tune of Rs. 22,000 crore to Rs. 25,000 crore per year is anticipated. 
 Time taken for completion of projects including tendering and award is generally 
two to two & half years. As such, a bank of project proposals is required to be 
sanctioned and available so that required physical and financial output could be 
achieved during any year. From experience, it is seen that the bank of proje ct proposals 
of 2.5 times the expected output should be in different stages (tendering, award, 
execution). As such, the bank of project proposals to the tune of Rs. 55,000 crore for a 
targeted output of Rs. 21,000 crore during 2009 -10 has been kept. During  this period, 
funds requirement is Rs. 55,000 crore.  Goal set for achieving full connectivity can be 
achieved if the required funds are made available. 
 Under PMGSY, projects are sanctioned by the Ministry of Rural Development 
and funds are released again st sanctioned projects. The unspent balance as on 
31.3.2009 with the implementing agencies was for the current works in progress as 
PMGSY is a continuous process. As on March, 2009, projects worth Rs. 1.05 lakh crore 
have been sanctioned since beginning of  the programme.  Larger value of projects has 
been sanctioned in recent years in order to achieve the goal. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.36, Para No. 3.123) 
The Committee also find the reply of the Department regarding non achievement 
of targets under PMGSY during 10th Five Year Plan that it has failed to gear up the low 
institutional capacity of the State Governments to achieve the targets set under PMG SY 
since inception of the yojana in the year 2000. The Committee cannot accept the plea of 
the Department that the cost for constructing a KM of road and the target for 
achievement of full connectivity have gone up several times under PMGSY since 
inception. The Committee, therefore, recommend that suitable corrective actions be 

40 
 
 
 
initiated by the Department now, to gear up implementing agencies further and inform 
the Committee accordingly. 
Reply of the Government  
States have been requested to gear up impleme nting agencies and to take the 
following corrective steps:-  
 States are advised to strengthen the institutional capacity. 
 Deployment of adequate number of dedicated Programme Implementation Unit 
(PIUs). 
 Provisions of Standard Bidding Document rationalized. 
 To hold Joint meeting of forest officials and implementation agencies in 
problematic States. 
 States sensitize to the advantage to community participation through „transact 
walk‟ in alignment finalization. 
 Quarterly returns prescribed and reviewed to monitor delay in award and delay in 
completion.  
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.38, Para No. 3.135) 
The Committee feel that the PURA scheme is a very good scheme the intentions 
of which have not been properly understood while implementing the scheme. Moreover, 
the monitoring of the scheme has not been done properly alongwith the implementation. 
The Committee fail to understand that if pilot scheme of PURA has ended in 2007, why 
funds were allocated during 2007 -2008, 2008 -2009 and during the current year. It 
seems that there has been no planning on the part of the Department to start the PURA 
scheme in a much larger scale throughout the country and that is why PURA scheme is 
being implemented as a pilot scheme again during the 11th Five Year Plan. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Department to initiate necessary corrective steps so that 
PURA can be started as a f ull fledged scheme of the Department without any further 
delay. 
Reply of the Government  
Ministry of Rural Development implemented the PURA scheme on a pilot basis in 
seven clusters for a period of three years (2004 -05 to 2006-07). Subsequently, the pilot 
phase was got evaluated by National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD). In the 
evaluation study, it was found that the scheme was mostly implemented as an 
infrastructure investment plan in the pilot phase. There was no business plan, no 
institutional st ructure with professional support and no convergence with other 
schemes. There had been no participation of private partners. The recommendations of 

41 
 
 
 
NIRD, consequent to their evaluation of the pilot phase, have been taken into 
consideration while drawing up a restructured scheme.  
          This Ministry has been engaged in the process of restructuring the scheme right 
from the time the pilot phase was in operation.  The implementation of the pilot phase 
has been consistently monitored reviews, during meeti ngs of the Steering Committee 
setup under the PURA scheme, further accompanied by discussions with the concerned 
authorities through video conference, along with periodic correspondence. The total 
expenditure reported by the States as on 31.12.2009 is Rs. 25.54 crores against the 
release of Rs. 30 crores during the pilot phase.  
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in its meeting on 21 st January, 2010   
has approved the implementation of scheme on pilot basis during 11 th Plan with the 
approved outlay of Rs. 248 crores. The scheme is proposed to be implemented under 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) framework between Gram Panchayat and Private 
Sector partner and its implementation is likely to provide useful experience for up-
scaling the scheme in future. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.39, Para No. 3.150) 
The Committee note that Rs.252 crore has been released under the DRD A 
Administration scheme during 2008 -2009 against the central allocation of Rs.250 crore 
which is, reportedly, more than cent percent. Even though financial performance of 
DRDA Administration scheme is stated to be more than cent per cent, the Committee 
feel that many DRDAs in the country even today are in inadequately staffed. Most of the 
staff of DRDA are skeleton staff who are on a deputation from different Departments of 
the State Government. The Committee desire that the Department should urge all the 
States and Union territories to provide adequate staff without any further delay. The 
Committee should be apprised accordingly.  
Reply of the Government  
The Ministry has made amendments in the DRDA Administration Guidelines to fill 
up the vacancies with contractual staff. The Ministry has also been impressing upon the 
State Governments, from time to time, to fill up the vacancies in DRDAs in accordance 
with the staffing structure provided under the DRDA Administration Guidelines. The 
matter will again be taken up during the Project Directors/Chief Executive Officers of 
DRDAs Conference scheduled to be held on 20 -21 January, 2010 and will be followed 
up vigorously. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 

42 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.40, Para No. 3.151) 
The Committee note the reply of the Department that during 2008 -2009 the 
NREGA was being implemented in all 619 rural districts of the country whereas the 
DRDA Administration scheme was being imp lemented in only 612 districts. The 
Committee would therefore, like to know as to why the NREGA was being implemented 
in 619 districts whereas DRDA Administration scheme is implemented in 612 districts 
during 2008 -2009. They recommend that all the rural di stricts of the country should 
have a District Rural Development Agency and the DRDA Administration scheme 
should be implemented in all rural districts from this financial year. Action taken in this 
regard may be intimated to the Committee. 
Reply of the Government  
There is variation in the number of rural districts and corresponding number of 
DRDAs in certain States/UTs in the country. Under DRDA Administration Scheme, 
funds are released to DRDAs whereas under NREGA programme funds are released to 
the districts in a particular State. For example, there are four districts in Sikkim which 
are taken care of by one DRDA. Daman and Diu are two districts but there is only one 
DRDA viz. DRDA-Daman. In Pondicherry, Pondicherry and Karaikal are two districts but 
there is only one DRDA viz. DRDA -Pondicherry. NREGA is also implemented in 
Chandigarh which does not have any DRDA. The decision to create separate DRDAs 
for each and every district comes under the purview of the concerned State 
Government in accordance with administrative and financial feasibility. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.41, Para No. 3.164) 
The Committee have been informed that a large number of non  Government 
organizations (NGOs) or Voluntary Agencies (VAs) have been blacklisted because of 
financial misappropriation. The Committee would like to know as to how the said NGOs 
/VAs got selected to receive the assistance provided by the CAPART in the fir st 
instance. They feel that the existing checks and balances at the levels of CAPART and 
Department of Rural Development are not sufficient to ensure that only credible NGOs 
get the assistance from CAPART. As a result of this the said irregularities of the  
voluntary agencies/organizations could not be detected before selecting these for 
receiving the assistance. The Committee, therefore, desire that the existing guidelines 
on the matter may be strengthened. They also desire that sufficient publicity about t he 
blacklisted NGOs/VAs be made so that these organizations do not receive any financial 
assistance from the Government of India. 
 

43 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 CAPART does not select NGOs. Any eligible NGO can apply to CAPART to 
specific projects in accordance  with its guidelines. All projects received by the Council, 
are evaluated as per the prevailing guidelines and norms. Organisations are put under 
blacklist when the terms and conditions of the sanction are violated and in case of 
misappropriation of funds.  During the past 24 years of its existence, the Council has 
provided support to over 20,000 voluntary organisations for more than 26,000 projects. 
At present 861 voluntary organisations are under the blacklisted category. Out of this 
742 voluntary organisa tions have been blacklisted by CAPART and 119 voluntary 
organisations have been put under this category on recommendations of other 
government grant making organisations. Thus, Council has placed 3.7% organisations 
supported by it under this category.  
 CAPART was established in September, 1986. As the only organisation of its 
kind in the country, the Council had no precedents to follow. Keeping in view that grass 
root organisations are remotely located, small in size with limited resources, it had to 
evolve procedures that were easy to understand and simple. This led to a miniscule 
percentage of voluntary organisations to perhaps misuse the trust and faith reposed in 
the voluntary sector. Learning from experience, the Council has over the years refined 
its system of monitoring and evaluation to ensure that only genuine and credible 
organisations receive funds from it. Some of the measures introduced are enumerated 
below:  
(a) Photographs of office bearers of voluntary organisations  are insisted upon at the 
time of application for grant.  
(b) Each project is evaluated at three stages by external experts from institutions of 
repute.  
(c) Copies of sanction letters are endorsed to the concerned State and district 
authorities as well as the elected representatives of the area.  
(d) To ensure that voluntary organisations have presence at the grass root level and 
have confidence of the local people, all projects except those under the 
Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme need to be endorsed by the G ram 
Sabha of the area.  
(e) To further corroborate and verify the credentials of voluntary organisations, 
CAPART insists on a Bank Guarantee of 1% of the sanctioned amount. 
 From 01.10.2009, it has been made mandatory for voluntary organisations to first 
register themselves in the NGO portal set up by the Planning Commission and to submit 
projects online. At the time of registration, each NGO is given a VO Identification 
Number. If updated by funding bodies, this would prevent blacklisted organisations or 
their office bearers to access funds from any of the government agencies. The list of 
Blacklisted VO‟s is also available in CAPART website.  
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
 

44 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.42, Para No. 3.180) 
The Committee are not happy with the performance of the NIRD regarding the 
conduct of research and action research studies. As per the information furnished to the 
Committee during the year 2007 -2008, against a  target of 30 research and action 
research studies only 17 could be completed and the remaining studies were stated to 
be under progress. The information regarding the status of the remaining 13 incomplete 
research and action research studies started durin g 2007-2008 has not been provided 
in the subsequent years. Further, against the target of 30 research and action research 
studies to be conducted during 2008 -2009, the NIRD could complete only 7 such 
studies. The Committee in this regard desire that the ac tivities of the NIRD be further 
monitored by the Department so that the targets set for the institute are achieved. 
Moreover, they desire that radical changes in the functioning of NIRD be initiated from 
this year so as to meet the dynamic challenges of rural development in this country. 
 
Reply of the Government  
Out of the 30 research studies taken up by NIRD in 2007 -08, 28 projects have 
been completed and 2 projects are ongoing. 
In the year 2008 -09, NIRD had taken up 15 research studies, out of which 13 
have been completed and remaining are ongoing.  Some of the research studies taken 
up by NIRD are of long term in nature and are completed in a period of 2 years.  Action 
Research projects are carried out for 3 -4 years.  Long term studies like „Monitoring a nd 
Evaluation of   RKVY‟ and “case studies under National Agricultural Innovation Project” 
are ongoing for the year 2009-10 too. 
The functioning of the NIRD is reviewed by Executive Council and General 
Council of the Institute, both Chaired by the Minister of Rural Development.  However, 
as recommended by Standing Committee and in consultation with the Planning 
Commission, the Minis try had initiated the process to reform and revamp the Rural 
Development Training Institutes, including NIRD.  
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.43, Para No. 3.191) 
The Committee find a mismatch in the performance of the Management Support 
to Rural Development Programmes Scheme when it was informed that by spending 
Rs.35.50 crore to SIRDs, ETCs and OTCs during 2007 -2008, 8000 training 
programmes were arranged whereas by spending the same amount during 2008 -2009, 
18447 training programmes have been arranged. They urge the Department to verify 
again the number of training courses organized by the SIRDs, ETCs and OTCs under 
the scheme during 2007-2008 and 2008-2009. 

45 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
The target for conducting training programmes by SIRDs and ETCs during the 
year 2007-08 was 8000 while the releases were Rs.26.24 crore.  However, the SIRDs 
and ETCs conducted 17,668  training programmes in 2007 -08.  During th e year 2008 -
09, the SIRDs and ETCs together conducted 25,786 training programmes against a 
target of 15000 training programmes.  The grant released to SIRDs/ETCs/OTCs during 
the year was Rs.39.71 crores. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.44, Para No. 3.192) 
Further, the Committee desire  that the quality of the training programmes should 
be made up -to-date and appropriate. The training modules being provided by the 
SIRDs, ETCs and OTCs be modified during the current year to meet the ever changing 
challenges of rural development in this co untry. Suitable action may be initiated in this 
regard by the Department and the Committee be informed accordingly. 
Reply of the Government  
The NIRD modifies, from time to time the training modules provided to the SIRDs 
and ETCs to meet the ever changing challenges of rural development in the country and 
also update the same appropriately. The NIRD & SIRDs have again been requested to 
modify their training modules to conform to the revised guidelines of different 
programmes of the Ministry in accordance wi th the recommendation of Standing 
Committee. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
  

46 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
Recommendation (Serial No.14, Para No. 3.24) 
The Committee are concerned to note that all the job card holders could not be 
encouraged to apply for work under NRE GA since inception. As per the information 
furnished to the Committee, for example, during 2008 -2009 only 4.55 crore households 
out of 10.07 crore job card holder households demanded work. Similarly, during 2009 -
2010, only 3.50 crore households demanded wo rk so far, out of the 10.68 crore 
households who were given job cards till Sept., 2009. This shows that initial momentum 
of providing jobs under NREGA is on the decline. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Government to make a thorough study of implementati on of NREGA without any further 
delay and initiate suitable corrective measures in the implementation of the scheme and 
intimate them accordingly. 
Reply of the Government  
MGNREGA is demand driven.  A registered rural household  is required to apply 
in wri ting in the Gram Panchayat for getting employment under the Act.  Thus,  it is 
mandatory for a household to have a job card issued for getting employment under 
MGNREGA.  However, it is not mandatory that all job card holders must demand work 
under the Act.   Job card, once issued,  is valid for a period of five years.  Number of 
households provided employment is to be seen with reference to the number of 
households demanded employment. During 2008 -09, 4.55 crore households demanded 
employment out of which 4. 51 crore households were provided employment till 
31.3.2008. The small gap between number of households demanded and provided 
employment is due to the fact that employment is to be provided within 15 days from the 
date from which it has been demanded.  Dur ing the current year (2009 -10 up to 
December, 09), out of 4.17 crore households that have demanded employment, 4.15 
crore have been provided employment under the Act.  
However, awareness generation is a continuous process under the Act. Through 
intensive IEC campaign, workers are informed of their rights and entitlements under the 
Act.   
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No.32, Para No. 3.102) 
The Committee are  not satisfied with the present definition of a dwelling unit 
given under the IAY which does not give a clear indication for a decent and civilized 
living by the rural poor in this country. In their view, a single room with a smokeless 
chullah and a toilet does not give sufficient space for a civilized living in this country. 

47 
 
 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should consider revising 
the definition of a dwelling unit accordingly and intimate them at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government  
No type design of an IAY house has been defined or prescribed by the Ministry 
except that the plinth area of an IAY house should not be less than 20 sq.mt.  The IAY 
beneficiaries are at liberty to construct more than one room.  During field visits it is 
noticed that some beneficiaries do construct a room and verandah or two rooms under 
IAY scheme. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
 
      
  

48 
 
 
 
Chapter IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4, Para No. 2.26) 
The Committee The Committee are unhappy to note that both at State and 
district levels V&MC meetings are not  being held as per the guidelines. It is completely 
astonishing that when 28 States should have held a maximum of 112 V&MC meetings 
at the State level each year, during 2006-2007, 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 the meetings 
held were only 35, 36 and 35 respective ly. They also note that, some of the States 
which have not held a single State level V&MC meeting in the last two years are 
Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Mizoram, Dadra and Nagar Haveli. They are disturbed 
to find that against a maximum of 2476 meetings of d istrict level V&MCs in a year which 
should have been held in 619 rural districts, only 912 meetings during 2007 -2008 and 
579 meetings during 2008 -2009 were held. They feel that effective monitoring at the 
central level is not being done to ensure that the State and District level V&MCs hold a 
meeting in each quarter, as per the extant guidelines. The Committee desire that the 
Department should continue to put pressure and vigorously monitor the conduct of the 
meetings of V&MCs to ensure that meetings of Vig ilance and Monitoring Committees 
both at State and District Level are held as per the existing provisions of the guidelines. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The Department of Rural Development is continuously pursuing the matter with 
the State Governments for ho lding the Vigilance and Monitoring Committee (V&MC) 
meetings regularly. Letters have been sent by the Union Minister of Rural Development 
to the Chief Ministers of the States/UTs and Chairmen/Co -Chairmen of V&MCs  
emphasizing the need and importance of hol ding the meetings of the Committees for 
effective review of implementation of Rural Development Programmes.  Secretary (RD) 
had sent letters to Chief Secretaries of States/UTs, requesting immediate issue of 
Notifications for reconstituting State and Distri ct level V&MCs in the light of constitution 
of 15 th Lok Sabha and also to convene the first meeting by 30 th November, 2009. The 
urgency of the matter was re -emphasized by Secretary (RD) through further 
communication sent to the Chief Secretaries. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

49 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.25, Para No. 3.74) 
The Committee are dismayed to note the mismatch between the financial and the 
physical target -achievement under SGSY since 2007 -2008. As per the information 
furnished by the Department the financial utilisation of SGSY was 82.17 per cent during 
2007-2008 which declined to 73.73 per cent during 2008 -2009. In comparison, the 
physical performance of SGSY was 126 per cent and 106 per cent in these years 
respectively that gives a false impression that the performance of SGSY is very 
impressive and does not deserve a re -structuring in the form of NRLM. It appears that 
Government have resorted to target chasing under the SGSY so far instead of 
implementing the SGSY as per the guidelines of the scheme. Further, the Committee 
feel that per capita investment of Rs.29932 during 2008 -2009 under SGSY or that of 
Rs.30723 so far during 2009-2010 is very low to take some one living below the poverty 
line to above the poverty line permanently. The Committee, therefore, desire suitable 
corrective measures be taken in this regard and they be informed accordingly. 
Reply of the Government  
  The information provided for the financial utilization of funds for the year 2007 -08 
and 2008-09 was the funds utilized against the total funds available with the states. The 
total available funds in the state s in a particular year are always more than the 
allocation made during that year, since the states also have some funds in the form of 
opening balance (funds carried over from the previous year) and other miscellaneous 
receipts. Thus, the percentage of fun ds utilization against the allocation is always more 
than the percentage of fund utilization against the total available funds.  On the other 
hand the targets for swarozgaris assisted in a particular year are fixed on the basis of 
funds allocated under SGS Y.   Therefore, targets achieved may go beyond 100% also.  
Moreover, SGSY has several components like formation of Self Help Groups (SHGs), 
training of swarozgaris, providing revolving fund to SHGs, number of swarozgaris to be 
assisted with subsidy & credit etc. Expenditure for all these activities is to be met,  out of 
the total allocation under the subsidy head.  Though the achievement for total 
swarozgaris assisted including SHG swarozgaris & individual swarozgaris may be high, 
the achievement under all the various components may not be as good.  
As regard per capita investment, the norm under SGSY for per capita investment 
is of Rs 25,000 per Swarozgari. Under SGSY, during the year 2007 -08 & 2008 -09 the 
per capita investment is more than the prescribed n orm. However, there is need to 
increase the per capita investment and the Ministry is taking appropriate measure in this 
regard in the proposed NRLM.  
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.28 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

50 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.33, Para No. 3.103) 
The Committee note the information furnished to them in which it has been 
stated that Rs.35,000 per unit in plain areas and Rs.38,500 in hilly and difficult areas, 
under the IAY, are being provided to construct a dwelling unit. They feel that the per unit 
assistance of a dwelling unit under IAY is too little and no where near the actual 
construction cost even if a beneficiary p rovides his/her labour. The Committee regret 
that their earlier recommendation made in this regard (paragraph No. 2.69 of 22nd 
Report - Fourteenth Lok Sabha refers) has not been given due consideration by the 
Government. The Committee once again reiterate their earlier recommendation made in 
their 22nd Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) that the per unit assistance under IAY be 
increased from the existing rate to Rs.50,0 00 in plain areas and Rs.60,000 in 
hilly/difficult areas from this financial year itself. 
Reply of the Government  
The recommendations of the Committee were kept in mind while enhancing the 
unit cost of IAY houses in 2008 -09.  However, due to financial con straints, the unit cost 
could be enhanced from Rs. 25,000/ - to Rs. 35,000/ - in plain areas and from Rs. 
27,500/- to Rs. 38,500/ - in hilly/difficult areas.  However, in addition to the unit 
assistance provided under IAY, an IAY beneficiary can avail a loan of up to Rs. 20,000/- 
from a nationalized bank at an interest rate of 4% per annum under differential rate of 
interest (DRI) scheme. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.31 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No.37, Para No. 3.127) 
The Committee note that the gigantic task to connect all unconnected habitations 
in the rural areas of the country still remains to be achieved. Similarly, additional targets 
set under the Bharat Nirman component has been added to the existing targets and is 
being implement ed simultaneously. The Committee desire that the target and 
achievement under PMGSY and under Bharat Nirman be monitored separately. They 
also note that in addition to the Department of Rural Development, the National Rural 
Road Development Agency (NRRDA) and all other implementing agencies in different 
States under PMGSY are involved in implementing the scheme. They feel the 
Department of Rural Development, the NRRDA and all other implementing agencies of 
PMGSY have not been able to show a better physical performance of the scheme so far 
inspite of it being made a part of the Bharat Nirman. Not withstanding the poor results of 
PMGSY so far, the Committee feel that more funds may be allocated for the scheme 
and the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Fin ance be consulted in this regard. 
They urge the Department to chalk out a time bound plan to connect all unconnected 
habitations realistically and intimate them accordingly. 

51 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
Absorption capacity of the States has increased manifold  during the last few 
years. To sustain this, adequate funds are required for achieving the physical targets. 
Minimum funds requirement for the years 2010 -12 is Rs.54,000 crore. Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance are being requested to the needful and increase 
the budgetary support so that physical pace of implementation does not slow down. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.34 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
  

52 
 
 
 
Chapter V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6, Para No. 2.28) 
The Committee also desire that the Government devise a mechanism where by 
the States and Districts which are holding the Vigilance and Monitoring Committees as 
per the guidelines may be provided with some kind of incentive so that the other States 
and Districts not holding the meetings regularly are encouraged to do so. 
Reply of the Government 
It is the endeavour of the Ministry that all the States/Districts hold regular 
meetings of the V&MCs. The matter has been taken up with the States/UTs at the 
highest level and efforts will be further continued in this regard. States whose 
performance has been as per requirements will be singled-out for special mention in the 
Performance Review Committee (PRC) meetings held in the last quarter of the financial 
year.      
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.10, Para No. 2.54) 
The Committee note with concern that several agencies of Government of India 
are engaged in identification of the number of persons living below poverty line in the 
rural areas like, Planning Commission, National Sample Survey Organisation, Ministry 
of Rur al Development, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, etc. 
simultaneously but without much success. This ultimately hampers development of 
needy persons of rural areas living below poverty line. They, therefore, urge the 
Government that a sing le agency may be entrusted with the task of identifying and 
ascertaining the number of people living below poverty line in rural areas. The concern 
of the Committee in this regard may be taken up at the highest level and they may be 
apprised accordingly. 
Reply of the Government  
The Ministry of Rural Development is the single agency responsible for 
formulation of Methodology and Guidelines for identification for households living below 
the poverty line in rural areas. As regards the Planning Commission, it is responsible for 

53 
 
 
 
estimation of poverty ratios or number of persons living below the poverty line. The 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation is concerned with urban poor. 
Therefore, at present there is a single agency i.e. the Ministry of Rural Development for 
identification of households below the poverty line in rural areas and a single agency i.e. 
the Planning Commission for estimation of poverty. 
 However, the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
regarding entrusting a single agency with the task  of identification as well as estimation 
of poverty ratios or the number of people living below poverty line in rural areas would 
be taken up with the Planning Commission. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12, Para No. 2.60) 
The Committee note that the Department is already well aware of the existing 
limitations of the BPL cen sus carried out by them in the past in which the APL people 
got into the list and some of the genuine people got left out as has been admitted by the 
Secretary, Department of Rural Development during the course of oral evidence before 
the Committee. They a lso note that the fourth quinquennial BPL census survey being 
conducted by the Ministry since 1992 regularly at an interval of five years has fallen due 
since 2007. Enough precious time has already been wasted on some pretext or the 
other. Huge funds are b eing released by the Central Government through various 
welfare schemes meant for poorest of the poor. But unless the BPL list is updated 
periodically, the benefits intended cannot reach the genuine beneficiaries. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that s uch BPL survey should be conducted without 
any further delay. An appropriate sum may be earmarked for the purpose of conducting 
the BPL survey and it should be ensured that the results of the said survey be made 
available before the close of this financial  year. It should further be ensured that the 
survey so finalized should have a component for correction if ineligible people like APL 
get into the list. It should also be ensured that only genuine poor people are 
incorporated in the final list. The Governm ent may take suitable measures to ensure 
that an independent, unbiased and impartial authority takes the charge of the BPL 
survey. 
Reply of the Government  
The Ministry of Rural Development, on 12th August, 2008, constituted an Expert 
Group, which could ad vise the Ministry on the methodology for conducting the BPL 
Census for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Expert Group submitted its report on 21 st 
August 2009. The report of the Expert Group has been circulated among the States/UTs 
and the concerned Central Ministries for comments. It has also been posted on the 

54 
 
 
 
Ministry‟s website www.rural.nic.in. The Ministry is in the process of finalizing the 
methodology and guidelines to carry out next BPL Census for identification of people 
living below the Poverty Line in rural areas of the country taking into account the 
suggestions/comments received.  
The BPL Census is c onducted by the State Governments with technical and financial 
assistance from the Ministry of Rural Development. While issuing Guidelines for 
conducting BPL Census, the concerns raised by the Parliament Standing Committee 
regarding inclusion of genuine po or in the BPL list would be impressed upon and 
training & sensitisation on this issue of the responsible agencies will be undertaken. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
   Recommendation (Serial No.17, Para No. 3.31) 
The Committee further recommend  that as far as practicable the minimum wage 
rate should not vary much between the adjoining States e.g. Karnataka Rs.82 and 
Kerala Rs.125, West Bengal Rs.75 and Sikkim Rs.100, Chhattisgarh Rs.72 and Madhya 
Pradesh Rs.91 etc. The Committee feel that the sa id wide scale variation in the wage 
rate in the adjoining States will definitely encourage migration instead of curbing it. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should take necessary 
steps so that the adjoining States and Union territories do not have much difference in 
the minimum wage rates under the NREGA. 
Reply of the Government  
Under NREGA wage rate for Karnataka, West Bengal, Sikkim, Chattisgarh and 
Madhya Pradesh is Rs.100/- per day as per notification dated 15.12.2009 an d 4.1.2010 
under Section 6(1) of the Act.  The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation for setting up a panel to formulate modalities 
of revision of real wage depending on consumer price index and variables. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H -11020/5/2009-
GC February, 2010 (Department of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

55 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.24, Para No. 3.55) 
The Committee are dismayed to note that no serious effort has so far been made 
by the Ministry for the convergence of NREGA with all the schemes and programmes of 
the Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to 
evolve some sort of mech anism whereby the works being undertaken under NREGA 
can be dovetailed with Central and State Government„s schemes so that the assets 
created under NREGA are of good quality and durable. They, therefore, recommend 
that convergence of all the schemes in thr ee Departments of the Ministry of Rural 
Development may be made before the end of this financial year. The Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj may also be consulted with regard to convergence of all Central 
schemes being implemented by them with the NREGA. The guid elines of respective 
schemes be suitably revised/modified to reflect the convergence with the 
implementation of NREGA. The Committee may also be informed accordingly. Such 
convergence in the implementation of NREGA may ultimately be spread across all the 
Ministries of Government of India in a time bound manner 
 
Reply of the Government  
Joint Convergence Guidelines have been issued for convergence of rural 
development programmes of Ministries of Agriculture, Environment & Forests, Water 
Resources, Department  of Land Resources, SGSY and PMGSY schemes of 
Department of Rural Development with NREGA.  115 pilot districts in 23 States have 
been identified to give effect to the Joint Convergence Guidelines.  Progress made in 
this regard by various States is periodic ally monitored by the Ministry.  Depending upon 
the success of convergence initiative in these pilot districts, steps will be taken to widen 
the scope of convergence with other Ministries/Departments.  However, care would be 
taken to ensure that such convergence initiatives are in conformity with the provisions of 
the Act and the Operational Guidelines. 
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/5/2009-GC February, 2010 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;       SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
20 July, 2010                        Chairperson, 
29 Asadha, 1932 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 

56 
 
 
 
          APPENDIX I 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD 
ON WEDNESDAY, THE 07 JULY, 2010 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room „ D‟, Ground Floor,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson  
            Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
3. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
4. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
5. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
6. Shri P.L. Punia 
7. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
8. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
9. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
10. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
11. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh 
12. Shrimati Usha Verma 
13. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Ganga Charan 
15. Shri P.R. Rajan 
16. Shimati Maya Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah  - Additional Director 
 
 
2. The Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee convened for  
consideration of Memoranda containing draft Reports of the Committee on action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in four Reports on Demands for Grants           
(2009-10).  

57 
 
 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following memoranda and draft action-
taken Reports :-  
(i)  Memorandum No. 3 and draft Report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the First Report on Demands for Grants            
(2009-10) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development);  
(ii)  ***   ***   ***   ***   
(iii)  ***   ***   ***   ***   
(iv)  ***   ***   ***   ***   
4. The Committee adopted the draft action -taken Report relating to the Department of 
Rural Development with slight modification and authorized the Chairperson to finalise para 16 of 
the draft Report after discussion with the representatives of the Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development) scheduled to be held on 21st July, 2010.  
5.  ***   ***   ***   ***    
6.  The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid draft Reports 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned to meet on 20th July, 2010.  
 
 
 
 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
**** Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately 
  
       
 
 

58 
 
 
 
  APPENDIX II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations      44   
   
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted    33   
  by the Government        
Para Nos. 2.5, 2.10, 2.15, 2.27, 2.40, 2.41, 2.42, 2.59,  
3.19, 3.25, 3.30, 3.34, 3.38, 3.42, 3.48, 3.51, 3.53, 3.81,  
3.82, 3.85, 3.96, 3.97, 3.101, 3.107, 3.121, 3.123, 3.135,  
3.150, 3.151, 3.164, 3.180, 3.191 and 3.192 
    
Percentage to total recommendations           (75)   
   
III. Recommendations which the Committee do    
not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government‟s replies       2 
  Para No.:  3.24 and 3.102 
        
Percentage to total recommendation        (4.54) 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of   
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee        4 
Para Nos. : 2.26, 3.74, 3.103 and 3.124 
 
Percentage to total recommendations               (9.10) 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies   
of the Government are still awaited      5 
  Para Nos. : 2.28, 2.54, 2.60, 3.31 and 3.55  
  Percentage to total recommendation                 (11.36) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  