TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj for the year 2011-12]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.03.2012
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 22.03.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 28
Price : Rs. 56.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2011-2012) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government ............................................................ 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .............................................................................. 27
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................................ 28
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ......... 33
APPENDICES
I. Status of Plan Plus .................................................................. 36
II. Extracts of Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee
held on 29 February, 2012..................................................... 46
III. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-second Report
(15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development .............................................................................. 48
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012)
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit
5. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
6. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
7. Shri P . Kumar
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
10. Shri Rakesh Pandey
11. Shri A. Sai Prathap
12. Shri P .L. Punia
13. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
14. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
15. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray***
16. Dr. Sanjay Sinh
17. Smt. Supriya Sule
18. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh
19. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar
20. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan
21. Smt. Vijaya Shanthi M**
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
23. Shri Ganga Charan
(iii)
*** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 03.01.2012 vice Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu.
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 25.11.2011.

24. Shri Hussain Dalwai
25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
26. Dr. Ram Prakash
27. Shri P . Rajeeve*
28. Shri Mohan Singh
29. Smt. Maya Singh
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
31. Vacant****
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raju Srivastava — Deputy Secretary
(iv)
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 02.11.2011 vice Shri P .R. Rajan.
**** Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan retired on 15.02.2012.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2011-2012) having been authorised by the Committee to
present the Report on their behalf, present the 26th Report on the
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the 22nd Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj.
2. The 22nd Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya
Sabha on 26 August, 2011. Replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 13 February,
2012.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 29 February, 2012.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 22nd Report of the Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-III.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
21 March, 2012 Chairperson,
1 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2011-12) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in their Twenty-Second Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj for the year 2011-2012.
2. The Twenty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
26 August, 2011 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the
same date. The Report contained 17 observations/recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been examined and categorised as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos.: 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14 and 17
Total: 12
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Serial No.: NIL
Total: 00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Serial Nos.: 3 and 15
Total: 02
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos.: 11, 13 and 16
Total: 03
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of
recommendations (Serial Nos. 11, 13 and 16) for which only interim
replies have been given by the Government and the Action Taken
Notes on the recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of the recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Devolution of 3Fs and Centrality of Panchayats in Centrally
Sponsored Schemes
[Recommendation Serial No. 3 (Para No. 2.3)]
6. The Committee noted that in a country like India, largely
populated in villages, the growth and empowerment of Panchayats
has not taken place in post Independence era as it ought to have. It
was more disheartening to find that during post Independence period
spanning over six decades of Parliamentary democracy almost all the
constitutional provisions related to Panchayats have not been
implemented in letter and spirit. These include concept of Gram Sabha
(article 243A), constitution of Panchayats (article 243B), powers,
authority and responsibilities of Panchayats (article 243G) etc. as laid
down in Part IX of the constitution, article 243ZD of Part IXA relating
to District Planning Committees (DPCs) read with Eleventh Schedule
illustrating 29 matters which might be considered by the State
Legislatures for devolution to the Panchayats so as to ensure that they
function as a ‘unit of self-Government’.
The Committee learnt from the Document ‘Roadmap (2011-17) for
Panchayats’ brought out by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj recently
that slow progress on the implementation of article 243ZD regarding
consolidation of Plans prepared by the Panchayats at District Planning
Committees in relation to 29 subjects listed in Eleventh Schedule was
due to non-cooperation of Line Departments in different States.
Similarly, they were also dismayed to find that same dismal scenario
prevailing over implementation of article 243G (endowing Panchayats
with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them
as institutions of self-Government) because of discretion being enjoyed
by the State Governments under that article. The Committee’s
examination of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj of the last 2-3 years had revealed that status quo is prevailing on
the important issues of (i) devolution of Functions, Finances and

3
Functionaries from different State Governments to Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs), (ii) ensuring centrality of Panchayats on different
Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) related with subjects enumerated
in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution that are being mandated
exclusively for Panchayats under the Constitution. Coming to the issue
of devolution of 3Fs, the Committee observed that although devolution
of Functions and Finances has made some progress, these have not
been accompanied by transfer of Functionaries to the Panchayats. For
instance, from the latest details made available to the Committee which
pertain to 2009-2010 showing State-wise progress on 3Fs, the Committee
were dismayed to know that whatever devolution of ‘Functions’ from
various State Governments to Panchayats has been done that has been
restricted to the pro-Panchayat States of Kerala, Karnataka, West Bengal,
Bihar and Maharashtra. However, the same is not the case with the
States of Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Uttarakhand
and Uttar Pradesh. Similarly on devolution of Finances, the Committee
find that majority of the State Governments are releasing funds to
Panchayats based on ‘Functions’ devolved. However, on devolution of
Functionaries, the Committee were alarmed to note that barring the
States of Kerala, Karnataka and West Bengal and to some extent
Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh, in the
majority of the States, the situation highly unsatisfactory as Panchayats
under these State Governments are being managed with departmental
staff, skeleton staff or staff on deputation from the Government
Departments. To sum up, the Committee found that largely the
devolution of 3Fs from different State Governments to Panchayats has
not taken place as contemplated in the Constitution even after the six
decades of enforcement of the Constitution of India. In view of this,
the Committee were of the strong opinion that a lot more is needed
on the part of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and State Governments
which are lagging behind in the entire process of devolution of 3Fs to
Panchayats.
The Committee also recommended that this issue should be taken
up at the level of Union Minister of Panchayati Raj with Chief Ministers
of different States to have a first hand idea of the issues involved and
for faster transition of power to the Panchayats.
The Committee also strongly recommended that a high level
Committee should be constituted to assess the implementation/present
status of various provisions existing in the Constitution as also in the
relevant Central/State Acts aimed at strengthening the Panchayats. Such
a Committee should be asked to give their Report before start of the
Twelfth Five Year Plan with a view to ensuring that goal, objectives
and priorities of the 12 Five Year Plan cover the areas which need
greater focus for strengthening the Panchayats.

4
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“MoPR has continued to pursue with States/UTs to devolve 3Fs
to Panchayats as per Constitutional mandate. Recently, Rajasthan
has transferred all functions with funds and functionaries in respect
of 5 Departments namely Primary Education, Health, Women Child
Development, Agriculture and Social Welfare up to District level
to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) at appropriate level. Ministry
of Panchayati Raj has prepared model GOs on devolution of 3Fs
to the PRIs and has sent the same to 17 States namely UP , Madhya
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Tripura, Tamil Nadu, Sikkim, Punjab, Odisha,
Manipur, J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Chhattisgarh, Bihar,
Assam, Arunachal Pradesh & Andhra Pradesh on 3rd May, 2011
with a request to issue similar GOs after necessary changes, if
needed.
Meetings with Principal Secretaries/Secretaries have been held on
25.4.2011 and 19.9.2011 to review the status of devolution and to
recommend ways to ensure effective devolution to PRIs. In the
last meeting held with them, MPR has underscored the need for
devolving 3Fs by States/UTs. Besides, during visits to States/UTs,
Officers of MoPR continue to emphasise need for adequate
devolution of 3Fs to Panchayats.
MoPR also continues to improve its Panchayats Empowerment and
Accountability Incentive Scheme (PEAIS) aimed at incentivizing of
States that devolve 3Fs to Panchayats. For the last two years,
awards under PEAIS have been given by the Prime Minister to
emphasize the importance of devolving 3Fs to the States.”
8. The Ministry in their reply have stated that States/UTs have
been pursued to devolve 3Fs to Panchayats as per constitutional
mandate. The Committee appreciate the action taken by the
Government on their recommendation on this aspect. The Committee
had also recommended that a high level Committee should be
constituted to assess the implementation/present status of various
provisions existing in the Constitution as also in the relevant Central/
State Acts aimed at strengthening the Panchayats. Further, the
Committee had emphatically desired that the said Committee should
be asked to give their Report before the start of Twelfth Five Year
Plan. However, the Committee find that the Ministry had
conveniently skipped these aspects in the action taken reply. The
Committee are constrained to express that the Ministry have not
taken their recommendation in its right perspective inspite of the

5
fact that the Panchayats are the only institutions which could
effectively exercise the powers of preparation and implementation
of special developmental plan for alleviating poverty and employment
generation through various rural development programmes. Now that
the Twelfth Five Year Plan would commence from April, 2012, the
Committee expect that their recommendation for constitution of a
high level Committee to assess that implementation/present status
of various provisions for strengthening the Panchayats would be
taken up with all seriousness and in a result-oriented manner. The
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
B. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY)
[Recommendation Serial Nos. 9 and 10 (Para Nos. 2.9 and 2.10)]
9. The Committee found that RGSY Scheme under the MoPR
brought out for twin objectives of (i) training and capacity building
and (ii) infrastructure development that budget of Rs. 73.50 crore under
this scheme for around 350 non-BRGF districts in different States was
far less compared to Rs. 5,050 crore to BRGF scheme covering only
250 districts across the country. The inadequacy of funds under RGSY
had also been highlighted by the MoPR. The Committee were informed
that major schemes of the MoPR including RGSY are pending before
the Planning Commission for proposed merger with the proposed
umbrella scheme of Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Shashaktikaran Abhiyan
(RGPSA). The Committee recommended that BRGF should not be
merged with other schemes considering its unique objectives. Also the
issue of merger of various schemes of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
into a single umbrella scheme viz.  Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat
Shashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) should be reviewed by MoPR
threadbare with a view to ensure that basic objectives of the specific
schemes are not lost.
10. The Committee also found that the major area of operation
under RGSY is training of elected representatives and functionaries of
Panchayats. In this connection, the Committee found that as against
the MoPR plans to provide training of 30 lakh elected representatives
and 10 lakh functionaries each year training was provided by the
MoPR to only 3.5 lakhs representatives and 11.65 lakhs representatives
respectively in 2009-2010 and 2010-2011. The other infirmities noted
inter alia included mismatch of official figures of training with ground
realities, absence of physical verification of training, no symptoms of
improvement in SCs/STs trained under RGSY to fight back in a
effective manner, absence of accountability of funds given for training

6
as trainer officers elude Gram Panchayats quite often, delay in releases
of funds for training ranging from 3 to 4 months, absence of effective
Panchayat Secretary for utilization of funds at Gram Panchayat level
resulting in hijacking of Gram Panchayats by dishonest and persons
with criminal background, lack of coordination on the issue of training
among different Departments at district level etc. The Committee felt
that all these issues were relevant and should be adequately addressed
at the time of restructuring of the proposed new scheme. The
suggestions came up before the Committee inter alia included
association of local MPs in training programme for PRIs, fashioning
the duration of training programmes in such a manner that may
invariably include the involvement/interaction with the farmers for
undergoing such training programme, giving empowerment, protection
and necessary help under the training programme to the weaker
sections i.e. SCs/STs elected representatives and functionaries of
Panchayats etc. for making them more effective to run Panchayats. In
this connection, the Committee had been informed that various remedial
mid-course corrections have already been undertaken by MoPR these
include mid-course correction evaluation, online monitoring and
computerization etc. Since the fate of the RGSY is hanging on the
proposed merger of the scheme, the Committee felt that the remedial
measures taken by the Ministry are too inadequate and are to be
supplemented by proactive role of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and
concerned State Governments.
11. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“The Working Group on Panchayati Raj and Rural Governance for
12th Plan has proposed that during the 12th plan existing schemes
of MoPR, be rationalized through (a) segregation development grant
component of Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) and
(b) merger of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana(RGSY), e-Panchayat,
Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive
Scheme(PEAIS), Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan
(PMEYSA) and capacity building component of BRGF into one
scheme, which will have some additional features to be named as
Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan(RGPSA). As per
the proposals of the Working Group, this rationalization will result
in following two schemes:—
(i) RGPSA strengthening the Panchayats as effective and
accountable units of Governments in all districts of the
country.

7
(ii) BRGF: For providing adequate Development Grant for
Panchayats in blocks identified as backward as per their
own context specific plans.
RGPSA is envisaged as a scheme that will allow States to strengthen
their Panchayati Raj systems by taking up a range of activities as
needed. As the status of Panchayats varies across States, States
need to undertake different activities to strengthen Panchayati Raj
in their context. For example, in UP a major concern would be
staffing at the GP level. However, West Bengal already has
substantial staff at GP level and Karnataka has recently
strengthened its GPs by appointing Panchayat Development
Officers. The focus in these States may be on the creation of good
quality training infrastructure, improving Panchayat processes of
planning, accounting etc. RGPSA will allow a range of activities to
be undertaken by States as per State needs, so that each State can
bring about needed changes to strengthen their Panchayati Raj
system.
RGPSA will strengthen the Panchayati Raj system across the country
and address the critical deficiencies that constrain the functioning
of Panchayats. The goals of RGPSA will be:—
• Enhance the capacities and effectiveness of Panchayats and
the Gram Sabhas.
• Enable democratic decision-making and accountability in
Panchayats.
• Strengthen the institutional structure for knowledge creation
and capacity building of Panchayats.
• Promote devolution of powers and responsibilities to
Panchayats as per the spirit of the Constitution.
• Specially strengthen Gram Sabhas in Schedule V areas to
discharge their responsibilities as envisaged in Panchayat
Extension to Scheduled Areas 1996 Act (PESA).
RGPSA will have following components:—
• Strengthening of Panchayats: provision of manpower; GP
buildings; e-enablement of PRIs; support to Panchayat
processes; special support for Gram Sabhas in PESA areas.
• Capacity Building and Strengthening Institutional structure:
Training of elected representatives and functionaries;
institutional structure for training by way of provision of

8
State Panchayat Resource Centers in SIRDs; District
Panchayat Resource Centres; institutional support at
National level; Performance Assessment and incentivization
of Panchayats and Gram Sabhas; IEC activities; innovation
with new forms of capacity building and accountability
systems; and strengthening of SEC.
•P rogramme Management by establishing Programme
Management Units at National, State and District levels.
It is important to mention that the report of the Committee on
Restructuring of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) headed by
Sh.B.K.Chaturvedi, Member, Planning Commission recommended
restructuring of existing 147 CSSs and reducing these to 59. The
Committee has recommended that small schemes should be merged
into bigger flagship, umbrella or sectoral schemes.
A Mid-course Evaluation of RGSY was commissioned by MoPR in
2010, which covered several aspects of the programme in 6 States
viz. Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan
and West Bengal. The key findings and recommendations of the
Evaluation Report are:—
• Outreach of Capacity Building training needs, improvement
through collaboration with non-government bodies,
academic institutions etc.
•A  pool of trainers/resource persons should be developed
at the States, Districts and Block levels.
• The SIRDs and ETCs need to be strengthened in terms of
Human Resources.
• Training Needs Assessment of ERs and Functionaries should
be carried out at regular intervals.
• Exposure visits to beacon Panchayats should be made
mandatory.
• Monitoring and supervision mechanism needs to be set up
at MoPR, State and District levels.
MoPR has initiated steps to act on these recommendations. States
are being advised to avail the Public-Private-Partnership (PPP)
option in various CB&T activities including actual training
programmes following the Business Meet of Service Providers on
7.1.2010; it is proposed to strengthen the Training infrastructure
and Human resources in SIRDs and ETCs through the proposed

9
scheme of RGPSA. Training programmes undertaken by States are
usually done through a pool of Trainers. The Monitoring
mechanism is also being strengthened. MoPR has empanelled 37
National Level Monitors from amongst retired senior level
bureaucrats, academicians and Defence personnel. These NLMs are
being sent to States to monitor implementation of the BRGF and
RGSY programmes. Simultaneously, efforts are being made to
promote use of computerization through uploading of plans and
execution status in PlanPlus software. Training of SC/ST ERs is
given priority and from the current year, separate grants have
been provided for CB&T of SC/ST ERs. These steps would take
some time to bear fruit.”
12. The Committee find that the Ministry have reiterated their
earlier stated position of restructuring of existing Centrally Sponsored
Schemes and merging it into bigger flagship, umbrella and sectoral
schemes like Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Shashaktikaran Abhiyan
(RGPSA). The Committee would like to draw attention of the
Government to the recurring malady of initially floating various
schemes and subsequently merging and renaming them instead of
gearing up the existing mechanism of review, monitoring and control.
The Committee are of the considered opinion that to accelerate and
sustain development, there is need to strengthen Panchayats at all
levels so that they function as institutions of self-governance in the
letter and spirit of Article 243G of the Constitution. A fresh national
impetus is, therefore, required to be given to various schemes floated
by the Ministry in the past through conferences, activity mapping,
incentives and consensus instead of oft-repeated and simplest method
of merging and renaming of schemes. The Committee, therefore,
urge the Ministry to be extra careful while implementing the
recommendations of the Committee constituted for restructuring of
Centrally Sponsored Schemes headed by Shri B.K. Chaturvedi so
that the basic features of earlier schemes, especially BRGF and RGSY
do not get disoriented.
The Committee also note that the Ministry had initiated steps to
act upon the recommendations of Evaluation Report in regard to
mid-course evaluation of RGSY. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the progress made in this regard.
C. Evaluation of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY) by CRAN
[Recommendation Serial No. 11 (Para No. 2.11)]
13. The Committee found that valuable findings have come up as
a result of evaluation of RGSY by an UN Agency CRAN for capacity
development of PRIs in 6 States of Assam, Andhra Pradesh,

10
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan and West Bengal. These pertain to
outreach of capacity building, training needs with association of NGOs,
pooling of trainers, strengthening of SIRDs, regular assessment of
training needs, exposure to beacon Panchayats, etc. The Committee
felt that such an evaluation be undertaken in all the States under
RGSY to have a national perspective on this issue. The Committee
recommended that based on the evaluation necessary follow up action
should be initiated.
14. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“The recommendations of the Committee have been accepted by
the Ministry. Action in this regard would be taken and the
Committee would be kept informed of the developments.”
15. The Committee are happy to note that the findings of
evaluation of RGSY made by an UN Agency CRAN for capacity
development of PRIs which was confined to six States would now
be extended to all the States of the country. The Committee while
acknowledging the initiatives of the Ministry, re-emphasise the
significance of capacity building of PRIs for development of rural
areas and prepare them to deliver effectively on their responsibilities.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress made
in this connection.
D. Action Research and Studies
[Recommendation Serial No. 15 (Para No. 2.15)]
16. The Committee noted that another scheme of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj “Action Research and Studies” to formulate appropriate
policy and to identify and remove the gaps in implementation of
Part IX of the Constitution has not been implemented properly taking
into account underutilization of allocations during 2009-10 and low
physical performance during 2008-09 and 2009-10 in terms of studies
sanctioned and studies completed. The Committee were unhappy to
note that there are cases of defaulting agencies also which have not
submitted their reports. The Committee, therefore, recommended that
there is a need to have a fresh look into this scheme so that allocations
are given with reference to physical targets.
17. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as
under:—
• “Under the scheme the total expenditure during the year
2009-10 was to the tune of Rs. 1.61 crore. Due to the
shortage/non-receipt of meaningful and substantial

11
proposals on the themes identified by this Ministry. The
total allocation was reduced from Rs. 2.70 crore to
Rs. 1.75 crore (RE). Actual Financial Achievement during
the Financial Year 2009-2010 is as under:
(Amount in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Achievement
2009-10 2.70* 1.75 1.61
*Excluding North Eastern Areas provision.
• During the year 2008-09 & 2009-10, it was decided that the
Ministry will only sanction projects on the themes identified
by the Ministry depending upon the needs arising out from
the respective divisions of this Ministry. Accordingly bids
were invited and projects were sanctioned.
• The reasons for the non-completion of large number of
sanctioned research studies during the previous years was
that most of the studies sanctioned during 2007-08 and
2008-09 were at the end of the year, since the proposals
were received late and the organizations took some time to
revise their proposals as suggested to them by the Research
Advisory Committee. Also, the duration of the research
projects in most of the studies sanctioned were around
15-18 months. A list of studies sanctioned, completed and
still underway during the previous years till date are as
follows:
Year No. of No. of Studies
Studies Studies Still
Sanctioned Completed Underway
2004-05 5 5 -
2005-06 18 17 1 (*)
2006-07 18 17 1 (*)
2007-08 15 14 1
2008-09 10 8 2
2009-10 18 11 7
2010-11 7 4 3
2011-12 (till Dec., 2011) 4 - 4
Total 95 76 19
(*)The organizations have submitted the draft reports along with the
utilization certificate. They have been requested to make certain
modifications in the report, which will be submitted by them at the earliest.

12
• During 2010-11, it was decided that if an organization fails
to complete the project on time, the Ministry stops the
subsequent instalment until the agency submits the draft
report, makes a presentation on the findings and submits
utilization certificate along with audited statement of
accounts duly certified by a Chartered Accountant. Besides,
5% of financial penalty per month from the expiry of the
due date is imposed while releasing the last instalment to
the defaulting agency. The Ministry also imposes a time
line for the completion of a project depending upon the
area of the work, the sample to be covered and the time
line proposed by the concerned agency.”
18. Scrutiny of the Ministry’s reply shows that due to shortage/
non-receipt of meaningful and substantial proposals on the themes
identified by them, the total allocation under the scheme “Action
Research and Studies” was substantially reduced. The Ministry in
their action taken reply have also co-related the non-completion of
large number of sanctioned research studies with late receipt of
proposals and organizational delays in the form of revision of
proposals as suggested by Research Advisory Committee. Although
the Ministry have stated that time line for completion of a project
depending upon the area of work, sample to be covered etc., are
being imposed by them, yet they have been unable to come out
with any effective prescription in the form of monitoring mechanism
to oversee the flow of expenditure, completion of projects and
expeditious implementation of the findings of the Reports submitted.
The Committee, therefore, trust that the Ministry would come out
with an innovative method to follow up their action plan
meticulously so that their efforts which are aimed at identifying and
removing the gaps in implementation of Part IX of the Constitution
are converted into results for building of a vibrant India. The
Committee also desire that the Ministry should be proactive in
identifying the subjects for research alongwith individuals and
organisations for efficient and purposeful attainment of objectives.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
The Committee take note that the Rule 331G of the Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha relating to
examination of Demands for Grants by the Departmentally Related
Standing Committees (DRSCs) was suspended by the Hon’ble Speaker,
Lok Sabha due to rescheduling of the Financial Business in Lok Sabha
to pass the Demands for Grants for the year 2011-12 during the Seventh
Session of Fifteenth Lok Sabha without being referred to the concerned
DRSCs. However, the Committee have examined the Demands for
Grants and made report thereon. Since the Budget for the year
2011-12 has already been passed by the Parliament, the Committee
endorse the same. Nevertheless, the Committee feel that the suggestions
and recommendations of the Committee would help the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj in analyzing their performance and implementation of
various Schemes/Projects during the current year, which happens to
be the terminal year of the 11th Plan period. The Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee are given in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Reply of the Government
Need no comments. The suggestions and recommendations of the
Committee have been noted and necessary action is being taken as
per recommendations.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj is not complying with the Direction 73A of the
‘Directions by the Speaker’ in-as-much-as the Minister’s Statement
showing action taken by the Government on recommendations
contained in Committee’s Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj presented to the House on

14
16 April, 2010 has not been made in the Parliament in stipulated time
frame of six months. The Committee consider non-compliance of
Direction 73A by the Ministry as apathy towards the House. It also
denies the legitimate right of the House to get the action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Report of the
Parliamentary Committee. The Committee expect that the aforesaid
mandatory statement would be made in Lok Sabha expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
The concern of the Committee in the matter has been noted. All
out efforts are being made to submit the statement in both the Houses
of Parliament, at the earliest.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee’s examination of Eleventh Plan Projections and
allocations has revealed that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, the most
important and people oriented Ministry, is not getting desired level of
attention from the Planning Commission in securing the much needed
funds during the entire Eleventh Plan (2007-2012) on the ground that
there is a constraint with regard to overall limit of Gross Budgetary
Support (GBS). While analysing the year-wise position of proposed
vis-a-vis actual outlay, the Committee find that as against the demand
by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj of nearly Rs. 3,000 crore each year
during 2008-2009 and 2011-2012 to the Planning Commission, the
Ministry could get even lower than 10 per cent of the demanded
amount. Similarly, during 2009-2010 and 2010-2011, the allocation was
much lower than the demand. The Committee regret to note that the
Planning Commission as also the Ministry of Finance have not at all
appreciated the role assigned to Panchayats in governance at grassroot
level in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that both
the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance should consider
the requirement of funds for the Ministry of Panchayati Raj which is
primarily meant for strengthening the Panchayats.
Reply of the Government
In response to this Ministry’s letter to the Planning Commission,
the Planning Commission has furnished comments on the point and
the same are as under:—
(i) It has been the endeavour through the policy framework
put in place to strengthen the Panchayati Raj Institutions
and to make them effective delivery institutions. The funds

15
are flowing to the PRIs through Central schemes of various
Ministries such as MGNREGA to implement the projects.
Therefore, allocation of funds to PRIs has to be looked into
in totality rather than just looking at the allocations of
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
(ii) The MoPR has proposed introduction of a Panchayat
Sashaktikaran Yojana in the Twelfth Plan for increasing the
functional capacity of Panchayats besides the ongoing
capacity building programmes for elected representatives
and functionaries of Panchayats. An enhanced 12th Plan
allocation has been proposed.
(iii) The outlay for the schemes of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj will have to be considered keeping in view the total
GBS available for all the plan schemes and requirement of
funds for the flagship programmes of the Government
which should not be starved of funds.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
Another area that has attracted the attention of the Committee is
the staggering unspent amount available with the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj at end of March, 2009–March, 2010 to the tune of over
Rs. 5,000 crore, and around Rs. 4,500 crore respectively. The Ministry
has attributed this on account of non-receipt of Utilization Certificates
in stipulated period of 12 months. Besides, the Committee regret to
note that during 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 funds of BRGF to the tune
of Rs. 789 crore and over Rs. 1000 crore were reduced/unilaterally cut
by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee feel that these issues could
have been managed at the level of Ministry of Panchayati Raj with
proper and timely coordination with the Ministry of Finance. The
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should liaise with
the concerned State Governments and implementing agencies to address
the problem of unspent balances and surrender of funds with a view
to ensuring that this position is not repeated. The Committee would
await conclusive action in the matter.
Reply of the Government
This matter has been discussed with the Secretaries of the
Panchayati Raj of the State Governments requesting them to send
Utilization Certificates (UCs) in time so that the funds in the next
Plan period are sanctioned by the concerned authorities in time as
allocated to the State Governments.

16
In regard to Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive
Scheme (PEAIS), MoPR has regularly been interacting with State
Governments for sending UCs in respect of award money given to
them each year. They were reminded on 23.11.2009, 23.12.2009, 8.3.2010,
24.5.2010, 15.10.2010, 25.11.2010, 25.1.2011 5.4.2011, 31.05.2011 and
7.09.2011 in the matter. As part of this exercise, they have been
requested to furnish UCs or return amount alongwith accrued interest
failing which the amount would be adjusted against subsequent releases
from other Schemes of MoPR. Andaman & Nicobar Islands has returned
a sum of Rs. 41.02 lakh as against Rs. 36.52 lakh released to them in
the year 2005-2006.
In respect of RGSY, owing to regular monitoring and review with
the State Governments/implementing Agencies, the unspent balance/
outstanding UCs under the scheme have been considerably reduced as
would be seen from the following table:
Status of Outstanding UCs under Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana
(Rs. in crore)
As on As on As on As on As on
31.3.2009 31.12.2009 31.12.2010 31.03.2011 30.09.2011
38.71 25.77 19.50 15.60 11.80
The budgetary allocation of e-Panchayat in the current Five Year
Plan period is Rs. 130 crores against which a sum of Rs. 50 crore
(approx.) has been released during the last three years. Total pending
utilization certificate under the scheme so far is of the tune of
Rs. 20.85 crore only. Out of this Rs. 20.82 is outstanding with NICSI
and Rs. 0.03 crore with the Government of Puducherry. The
Implementing Agencies (IAs) have been reminded from time to time
by this Ministry for sending the utilization certificate.
In so far as the Schemes of Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti
Abhiyan (PMEYSA) and Rural Business Hub (RBH) are concerned, it
is stated that these Schemes are demand driven. In the Scheme of
PMEYSA, the funds are released to the concerned States/UTs or their
designated authorities in two instalments. The request for second
instalment is agreed to only when UCs etc. and funds earlier released
if any, of the first instalment are received by the Ministry. Similarly,
the Scheme of RBH is also a demand driven scheme, under which the
financial assistance is provided to the willing Implementing Agencies/
Organizations who submit viable proposals on RBH with proper
justifications. In their cases also the second instalment is released taking

17
into account the position of expenditure with regard to the amount
released in first instalment, receipt of Utilization Certificate, etc.
Nonetheless in deference to the observations of the Committee, the
concerned States/UTs/designated Authorities and the Implementing
Agencies related to implementation of the Scheme of PMEYSA and
the sanctioned projects of RBH are being requested separately in this
behalf appropriately.
The Ministry is regularly pursuing the issue of large unspent
balances and outstanding UCs with the State/District authorities. As a
result, there has been considerable improvement in the situation. The
BRGF programme had an unspent balance of Rs. 3641.21 crore and
the Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY) which has since subsumed in
BRGF had an unspent balance of Rs. 834.28 crore as on 31.03.2011.
These figures take into account the releases up to 2009-2010. These
figures do not include releases during 2010-2011. The outstanding UCs
in BRGF have been reduced from Rs. 306.62 crore as on 31.3.2011 to
Rs. 181.79 crore as on 31.01.2012, whereas the outstanding UCs in
respect of RSVY have been reduced from Rs. 827.50 crore as on
31.3.2011 to Rs. 234.17 crore as on 31.01.2012.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
While reviewing the preparedness of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj for Twelfth Plan (2012-2017), the Committee find that entire gamut
of vital areas like restructuring of BRGF, sanctioning of funds to
‘Mission project on e-Panchayats’ etc. have been unnecessarily delayed
and linked with the Twelfth Plan by the Planning Commission. Keeping
in view that as high as 2.4 lakh Panchayats in the country with over
28 lakh elected representatives, the Committee are of the opinion that
there is an error of judgment on the part of Planning Commission in
delaying these two crucial issues for the Twelfth Plan on the ground
that the proposed restructuring of BRGF is to be considered after getting
the Reports of the Steering Committee and Working Group for Twelfth
Five Year Plan. The Committee have been informed that the Working
Group is likely to submit its Report in August 2011. The Committee
also find that the MoPR has already placed before Planning
Commission a proposal to institutionalise the role of Panchayats in
governance, planning, implementation etc. creating their cadres
including infrastructure requirements with a view to effectively use
the huge outlay of the order of Rs. 1.7 lakh crore under the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes (CSSs). The Committee have also been informed
that a proposal of restructuring of BRGF is pending before the Planning

18
Commission that envisages the merger of Capacity building component
of BRGF, RGSY, e-Panchayat and PMEYSA into a single scheme under
the umbrella of Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Shashaktikarn Abhiyan
(RGPSA) for capacity building of PRIs in the country for augmenting
the genuine requirement of Panchayats like Panchayat staff, Panchayat
Ghars, Panchayat accounting, e-Panchayat, training & decentralized
planning etc. and keeping the BRGF Development Grant separately
with substantially higher allocations. The Committee do not approve
the proposal of merger of BRGF with other schemes of the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj. They, therefore, strongly recommend a thorough
review of the issue of proposed merger of BRGF with various schemes
of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj into one umbrella Programme as the
very objective of the BRGF scheme is aimed at providing assistance to
backward areas whereas the other schemes of the Ministry are aimed
at Capacity building of PRIs in general.
Reply of the Government
BRGF as a separate scheme is proposed to be continued in the
12th Plan with enhanced allocation. The RGPSA would aim at
comprehensive capacity building of PRIs with main component for
training manpower and infrastructure.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
While reviewing the Scheme-wise performance of MoPR, the
Committee find that under BRGF as on 31.03.2011, there has been
staggering amount of unspent balances in Bihar (Rs. 924.16 crore),
Uttar Pradesh (Rs. 556.07 crore), Jharkhand (Rs. 423.79 crore),
Madhya Pradesh (Rs. 327.93 crore), Odisha (Rs. 287.21 crore),
West Bengal (Rs. 264.66 crore), Andhra Pradesh (Rs. 268.12 crore),
Chhattisgarh (Rs. 210.65 crore), Maharashtra (Rs. 205.53 crore) etc. These
amounts include unspent balances both in Capacity Building as also
Development Grants for the Panchayats. The Committee do not approve
such parking of precious funds, particularly when, there are cases of
insufficiency of funds highlighted before the Committee from time to
time. In Committee’s view, this position is unjustifiable on the part of
the MoPR and concerned State Governments to sit over much needed
funds. This has seriously impacted the progress of Capacity Building
of the Panchayats in a big way. The Committee are not satisfied with
the explanation of the MoPR that they are interacting with the
concerned State Governments for expediting Utilization Certificates
(UCs). The Committee note that the BRGF, being the biggest Central
Assistance to State Plan (CASP) being currently handled by MoPR, is

19
poised for restructuring during the Twelfth Plan. The Committee
recommend that the MoPR should work hard to impress upon the
States to utilise their outstanding unspent balances so that the needed
amount is passed on to the Panchayats for the purpose of Capacity
Building and Development Grants.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Panchayati Raj have been impressing upon the State
Governments for liquidating the unspent balance at the earliest.
Meetings, video conferences and interactions are being held with the
representatives of the State Governments in this regard from time to
time.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee note that the BRGF has been evaluated twice, first
by World Bank and secondly by Ramachandran Committee constituted
by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj on matters of Capacity Building of
Panchayati Raj Institutions, identification of backwardness, emphasis
on convergence, identification of block as a unit, e-panchayat etc. and
these have been conveyed to States for action. The Committee have
also been informed that subsequent to Ramachandran Committee, the
Planning Commission in January, 2011 has set up a study and assigned
the task to Institute of Human Development, Delhi. The Institute was
to submit its report by March 2011. The Committee trust that the
Institute must have given their Report by now. The Committee do not
appreciate the system of constituting Committee after Committee for
evaluating schemes like BRGF which touches the pulse of the people
and needs no further lengthening of the process of decision making.
The Committee recommend that the findings of World Bank and
Ramachandran Committee and the findings of the Institute of Human
Development should be the basis for course correction since these are
sufficient enough for evaluating BRGF in a proper manner. Considering
its objectives and utility the Committee strongly recommend that the
funds for the scheme should be enhanced.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. Planning
Commission had set up a Working Group on Area Development
Programme for Restructuring the BRGF and other programme during
the 12th Plan period. The submissions made by Ministry of Panchayati

20
Raj to the working Group had taken into account the recommendations
of the World Bank review and the Ramachandran Committee’s report.
MoPR has also requested for enhanced funds to the tune of about
Rs. 10,000 crore per annum under BRGF during the 12th Plan Period.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee find that RGSY Scheme under the MoPR brought
out for twin objectives of (i) training and capacity building and
(ii) infrastructure development that budget of Rs. 73.50 crore under
this scheme for around 350 non-BRGF districts in different States is far
less compared to Rs. 5,050 crore to BRGF scheme covering only 250
districts across the country. The inadequacy of funds under RGSY has
also been highlighted by the MoPR. The Committee have been informed
that major schemes of the MoPR including RGSY are pending before
the Planning Commission for proposed merger with the proposed
umbrella scheme of Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan
(RGPSA). As recommended elsewhere in the Report, the Committee
reiterate that BRGF should not be merged with other schemes
considering its unique objectives. Also the issue of merger of various
schemes of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj into a single umbrella scheme
viz. Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) should
be reviewed by MoPR threadbare with a view to ensure that basic
objectives of the specific schemes are not lost.
Reply of the Government
The Working Group on Panchayati Raj and Rural Governance for
12th Plan has proposed that during the 12th plan existing schemes of
MoPR, be rationalized through (a) segregation development grant
component of Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) and (b) merger
of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY), e-Panchayat, Panchayat
Empowerment and Accountability Incentive Scheme (PEAIS), Panchayat
Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan (PMEYSA) and capacity building
component of BRGF into one scheme, which will have some additional
features to be named as Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan
(RGPSA). As per the proposals of the Working Group, this
rationalization will result in following two schemes:—
(i) RGPSA strengthening the Panchayats as effective and
accountable units of government in all districts of the
country.

21
(ii) BRGF: For providing adequate Development Grant for
Panchayats in blocks identified as backward as per their
own context specific plans.
RGPSA is envisaged as a scheme that will allow States to strengthen
their Panchayati Raj systems by taking up a range of activities as
needed. As the status of Panchayats varies across States, States need
to undertake different activities to strengthen Panchayati Raj in their
context. For example, in UP a major concern would be staffing at the
GP level. However, West Bengal already has substantial staff at GP
level and Karnataka has recently strengthened its GPs by appointing
Panchayat Development Officers. The focus in these States may be on
the creation of good quality training infrastructure, improving
Panchayat processes of planning, accounting etc. RGPSA will allow a
range of activities to be undertaken by States as per State needs, so
that each State can bring about needed changes to strengthen their
Panchayati Raj system.
RGPSA will strengthen the Panchayati Raj system across the country
and address the critical deficiencies that constrain the functioning of
Panchayats. The goals of RGPSA will be:
• Enhance the capacities and effectiveness of Panchayats and
the Gram Sabhas.
• Enable democratic decision-making and accountability in
Panchayats.
• Strengthen the institutional structure for knowledge creation
and capacity building of Panchayats.
• Promote devolution of powers and responsibilities to
Panchayats as per the spirit of the Constitution.
• Specially strengthen Gram Sabhas in Schedule V areas to
discharge their responsibilities as envisaged in Panchayat
Extension to Scheduled Areas 1996 Act (PESA).
RGPSA will have following components:—
• Strengthening of Panchayats: provision of manpower; GP
buildings; e-enablement of PRIs; support to Panchayat
processes; special support for Gram Sabhas in PESA areas.
• Capacity Building and Strengthening Institutional structure:
Training of elected representatives and functionaries;
institutional structure for training by way of provision of
State Panchayat Resource Centres in SIRDs; District
Panchayat Resource Centres; institutional support at

22
National level; Performance Assessment and incentivization
of Panchayats and Gram Sabhas; IEC activities; innovation
with new forms of capacity building and accountability
systems; and strengthening of SEC.
•P rogramme Management by establishing Programme
Management Units at National, State and District levels.
It is important to mention that the report of the Committee on
Restructuring of Centrally Sponsered Schemes (CSSs) headed by
Sh.B.K.Chaturvedi, Member, Planning Commission recommends
restructuring of existing 147 CSSs and reducing these to 59. The
Committee has recommended that small schemes should be merged
into bigger flagship, umbrella or sectoral schemes.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 12 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee find that the major area of operation under RGSY
is training of elected representatives and functionaries of Panchayats.
In this connection, the Committee find that as against the MoPR plans
to provide training of 30 lakh elected representatives and 10 lakh
functionaries each year training was provided by the MoPR to only
3.5 lakhs representatives and 11.65 lakhs representatives respectively
in 2009-2010 and 2010-2011. In this connection, various other issues
reflecting infirmities in the training programme have come up before
the Committee. These include mismatch of official figures of training
with ground realities, absence of physical verification of training, no
symptoms of improvement in SCs/STs trained under RGSY to fight
back in a effective manner, absence of accountability of funds given
for training as trainer officers elude Gram Panchayats quite often, delay
in releases of funds for training ranging from 3 to 4 months, absence
of effective Panchayat Secretary for utilization of funds at Gram
Panchayat level resulting in hijacking of Gram Panchayats by dishonest
and persons with criminal background, lack of coordination on the
issue of training among different Departments at district level etc. All
these issues, the Committee feel are relevant and should be adequately
addressed at the time of restructuring of the proposed new scheme. In
this connection, the Committee also find that some valuable suggestions
have also come up before the Committee. These include, association of
local MPs in training programme for PRIs, fashioning the duration of

23
training programmes in such a manner that may invariably include
the involvement/interaction with the farmers for undergoing such
training programme, giving empowerment, protection and necessary
help under the training programme to the weaker sections i.e. SCs/
STs elected representatives and functionaries of Panchayats etc. for
making them more effective to run Panchayats. In this connection, the
Committee have been informed that various remedial mid-course
corrections have already been undertaken by the MoPR these include
mid-course correction evaluation, online monitoring and
computerization etc. Since the fate of the RGSY is hanging on the
proposed merger of the scheme, the Committee feel that the remedial
measures taken by the Ministry are too inadequate and are to be
supplemented by proactive role of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and
concerned State Governments.
Reply of the Government
A Mid-course Evaluation of RGSY was commissioned by MoPR in
2010, which covered several aspects of the programme in 6 States viz.
Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan and
West Bengal. The key findings and recommendations of the Evaluation
Report are:—
• Outreach of Capacity Building training needs, improvement
through collaboration with non-government bodies,
academic institutions etc.
•A  pool of trainers/resource persons should be developed
at the States, Districts and Block levels.
• The SIRDs and ETCs need to be strengthened in terms of
Human Resources.
• Training Needs Assessment of ERs and Functionaries should
be carried out at regular intervals.
• Exposure visits to beacon Panchayats should be made
mandatory.
• Monitoring and supervision mechanism needs to be set up
at MoPR, State and District levels.
MoPR has initiated steps to act on these recommendations. States
are being advised to avail the Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) option
in various CB&T activities including actual training programmes
following the Business Meet of Service Providers on 7.1.2010; it is
proposed to strengthen the Training infrastructure and Human resources
in SIRDs and ETCs through the proposed scheme of RGPSA. Training
programmes undertaken by States are usually done through a pool of
Trainers. The Monitoring mechanism is also being strengthened. MoPR

24
has empanelled 37 National Level Monitors from amongst retired senior
level bureaucrats, academicians and Defence personnel. These NLMs
are being sent to States to monitor implementation of the BRGF and
RGSY programmes. Simultaneously, efforts are being made to promote
use of computerization through uploading of plans and execution status
in Plan Plus software. Training of SC/ST ERs is given priority and
from the current year, separate grants have been provided for CB&T
of SC/ST ERs. These steps would take some time to bear fruit.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 12 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note that Ministry of Panchayati Raj is currently
implementing a three year mega programme of computerization of
Panchayats across the country with an estimated cost of Rs. 6,989
crore to be sourced through Grants under Central Finance Commission,
BRGF-Capacity Building component, MGNREGA etc. by using two
softwares of PRIA SOFT and Plan Plus. The Committee are, however,
dismayed to note that the coverage of softwares of Plan Plus and
PRIA SOFT has been very limited. For instance, under Plan Plus only
46,226 District/Block/Gram Panchayats have been covered and only
13,374 have been trained so far. Likewise the coverage of PRIA SOFT
has been only 80,000 Gram Panchayats in 10 States so far. The
Committee, therefore, feel that the Scheme is in initial stage and urge
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to move faster to meet the deadline of
completing the task in stipulated period of three years time. The
Committee also recommend that any decision of merger of this Scheme
with Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Shaskatikaran Abhiyan be reviewed with
a view to ensure that each of the Schemes including ‘Mission Project
for e-Panchayat’ receive due attention with regard to availability of
funds for much needed capacity building of Panchayats in the country.
They also recommend that the issue of merger of Mission Panchayat
on e-Panchayats should not impede the progress of computerization
under the programme.
Reply of the Government
With a view to provide a whole range of IT related services such
as Decentralized Database and Planning, Budgeting and Accounting,
implementation and monitoring of Central and State Sector Schemes,
Unique Code to Panchayat, essential GIS based applications, online

25
self-learning medium for elected representatives and official
functionaries etc. MoPR has formulated a scheme of e-Panchayat MMP .
Initially a sum of Rs. 130.39 crore has been approved under the scheme
for carrying out Business Process Re-engineering (BPR), Information
and Service Need Assessment (ISNA) and Detailed Project Report
(DPR), and Capacity Building. Planning Commission had approved
e-Panchayat MMP in principle in 2007. The project proposal was last
considered by the Planning Commission in March 2011 and had desired
that the proposal be revised after obtaining the views of DG, NIC.
Now this Ministry is moving a revised proposal of the tune of
Rs. 6897 crores to Planning Commission involving IT Infrastructure,
manpower and training. The detailed study on Information and Service
Needs of all stakeholders including Central Line Ministries, State
Departments, District Administration, Panchayat and Citizens have been
carried out and as a result of this study 12 Common Core applications
have been indentified which address all aspects of Panchayats’
functioning from internal core functions such as Planning, Monitoring,
implementation to Accounting, Social Audit etc. Out of these 12
applications 5 have been developed. These are: PRIA Soft, Plan Plus,
National Panchayat Portal, Area Profiler and National Panchayat
Directory. The rest are expected to be developed within next 6 months.
The current adoption status of PRIA Soft, Plan Plus, Local Governance
Directory (LGD), National Panchayat Portal (NPP) and Area Profiler is
enclosed at Appendix I .
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee are distressed to find that the important scheme of
Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive Scheme (PEAIS)
of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj that seeks to encourage devolution
of 3 Fs among different States by way of incentivizing the States to
empower Panchayats and incentivizing Panchayats to put in place
accountability systems to make their functioning transparent and
efficient has not been getting sufficient funds for necessary
empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). In this connection,
the Committee find that as against the 2.4 lakh PRIs across the country,
the fund for 2011-12 under this Scheme are Rs. 31 crore only. In this
connection, the Committee find that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
has already proposed an amount of Rs. 1000 crores per annum
(Rs. 500 crores for incentivizing States and 500 crores for incentivizing
Panchayats) for 2011-12 and additionally appropriation of funds from
MGNREGA, if necessary. The Committee do not approve aforesaid
move of the MoPR of utilizing the funds of MGNREGA for promotion

26
of Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive Scheme
(PEAIS). Therefore, as recommended by them in Para Nos. 2.6 and
2.9, the issue of merger of all the schemes of MoPR including PEAIS
be reviewed thoroughly with a view to ensure that each scheme
including PEAIS receive due attention with regard to availability of
funds for actual capacity building of Panchayats during the Twelfth
Plan (2012-2017).
Reply of the Government
The Working Group on the Twelfth Plan on ‘PRIs and Rural
Governance’ has considered the funding requirements and merger of
schemes, and is making its recommendations accordingly.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 2.17)
The Committee’s examination has also revealed that the demand
driven scheme of Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan
introduced in 2007-08, aiming at forming associations of elected women
representatives and elected youth representatives for working
collectively for attaining decentralization in Panchayati Raj Institutions
has been getting lukewarm response from different States with only
23 States forming Core Committee and only 12 States conducting
training and sensitization Programme. The Committee feel that adequate
publicity has not been given by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. They
expect the Ministry now to convince the State Governments of the
benefits of the Scheme.
Reply of the Government
The pace of various activities being undertaken under the Scheme
of Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan (PMEYSA) and the
achievements made so far on those counts has been assessed from
time to time with a view to give a fillip to these activities. It has been
realized that one of the factors impeding the onward progress of this
Scheme is the lukewarm response from States. To do away with that
lacuna, a number of steps are under contemplation e.g. for providing
financial autonomy to the States/UTs to facilitate them for utilizing
the funds released to them for desired activities etc. In addition to
this, the States/UTs would also be addressed to accord their special
attention to the Scheme for the empowerment of Elected Women
Representatives.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]

27
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-Nil-

28
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee find that in a country like India largely populated
in villages, the growth and empowerment of Panchayats has not taken
place in post Independence era as it ought to have. It is more
disheartening to find that during post Independence period spanning
over six decades of Parliamentary democracy almost all the
constitutional provisions related to Panchayats have not been
implemented in letter and spirit. These include concept of Gram Sabha
(article 243A), constitution of Panchayats (article 243B), powers,
authority and responsibilities of Panchayats (article 243G) etc. as laid
down in Part IX of the constitution, article 243ZD of Part IXA relating
to District Planning Committees (DPCs) read with Eleventh Schedule
illustrating 29 matters which might be considered by the State
Legislatures for devolution to the Panchayats so as to ensure that they
function as a ‘unit of self-Government’.
The Committee learn from the Document ‘Roadmap (2011-17) for
Panchayats’ brought out by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj recently
that slow progress on the implementation of article 243ZD regarding
consolidation of Plans prepared by the Panchayats at District Planning
Committees in relation to 29 subjects listed in Eleventh Schedule has
been due to non-cooperation of Line Departments in different States.
Similarly, they are also dismayed to find that same dismal scenario
prevailing over implementation of article 243G (endowing Panchayats
with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them
as institutions of self-government) because of discretion being enjoyed
by the State Governments under that article. The Committee’s
examination of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj of the last 2-3 years had revealed that status quo is prevailing on
the important issues of (i) devolution of Functions, Finances and
Functionaries from different State Governments to Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs), (ii) ensuring centrality of Panchayats on different
Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) related with subjects enumerated
in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution that are being mandated
exclusively for Panchayats under the Constitution. Coming to the issue

29
of devolution of 3Fs, the Committee observe that although devolution
of Functions and Finances has made some progress, these have not
been accompanied by transfer of Functionaries to the Panchayats. For
instance, from the latest details made available to the Committee which
pertain to 2009-2010 showing State-wise progress on 3Fs, the Committee
are dismayed to know that whatever devolution of ‘Functions’ from
various State Governments to Panchayats has been done that has been
restricted to the pro-Panchayat States of Kerala, Karnataka, West Bengal,
Bihar and Maharashtra. However, the same is not the case with the
States of Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Uttarakhand
and Uttar Pradesh. Similarly on devolution of Finances, the Committee
find that majority of the State Governments are releasing funds to
Panchayats based on ‘Functions’ devolved. However, on devolution of
Functionaries, the Committee are alarmed to note that barring the
States of Kerala, Karnataka and West Bengal and to some extent
Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh, in the
majority of the States, the situation highly unsatisfactory as Panchayats
under these State Governments are being managed with departmental
staff, skeleton staff or staff on deputation from the Government
Departments. To sum up, the Committee find that largely the
devolution of 3Fs from different State Governments to Panchayats has
not taken place as contemplated in the Constitution even after the six
decades of enforcement of the Constitution of India. In view of this,
the Committee are of the strong opinion that a lot more is needed on
the part of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and State Governments
which are lagging behind in the entire process of devolution of 3Fs to
Panchayats.
The Committee also recommend that this issue should be taken
up at the level of Union Minister of Panchayati Raj with Chief Ministers
of different States to have a first hand idea of the issues involved and
for faster transition of power to the Panchayats.
The Committee also strongly recommend that a high level
Committee should be constituted to assess the implementation/present
status of various provisions existing in the Constitution as also in the
relevant Central/State Acts aimed at strengthening the Panchayats. Such
a Committee should be asked to give their Report before start of the
Twelfth Five Year Plan with a view to ensuring that goal, objectives
and priorities of the 12th Five Year Plan cover the areas which need
greater focus for strengthening the Panchayats.
Reply of the Government
MoPR has continued to pursue with States/UTs to devolve 3Fs to
Panchayats as per Constitutional mandate. Recently, Rajasthan has
transferred all functions with funds and functionaries in respect of

30
5 Departments namely Primary Education, Health, Women and Child
Development, Agriculture and Social Welfare up to District level to
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) at appropriate level. Ministry of
Panchayati Raj has prepared model GOs on devolution of 3Fs to the
PRIs and has sent the same to 17 States namely UP , Madhya Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Tripura, Tamil Nadu, Sikkim, Punjab, Odisha, Manipur,
J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Assam,
Arunachal Pradesh & Andhra Pradesh on 3rd May, 2011 with a request
to issue similar GOs after necessary changes, if needed.
Meetings with Principal Secretaries/Secretaries have been held on
25.4.2011 and 19.9.2011 to review the status of devolution and to
recommend ways to ensure effective devolution to PRIs. In the last
meeting held with them, MPR has underscored the need for devolving
3Fs by States/UTs. Besides, during visits to States/UTs, Officers of
MoPR continue to emphasise need for adequate devolution of 3Fs to
Panchayats.
MoPR also continues to improve its Panchayats Empowerment and
Accountability Incentive Scheme (PEAIS) aimed at incentivizing of
States that devolve 3Fs to Panchayats. For the last two years, awards
under PEAIS have been given by the Prime Minister to emphasize the
importance of devolving 3Fs to the States.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
The Committee find that another scheme of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj “Action Research and Studies” to formulate appropriate
policy and to identify and remove the gaps in implementation of
Part IX of the Constitution has not been implemented properly taking
into account underutilization of allocations during 2009-10 and low
physical performance during 2008-09 and 2009-10 in terms of studies
sanctioned and studies completed. The Committee are unhappy to note
that there are cases of defaulting agencies also which have not
submitted their reports. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
there is a need to have a fresh look into this scheme so that allocations
are given with reference to physical targets.

31
Reply of the Government
• Under the scheme the total expenditure during the year 2009-10
was to the tune of Rs. 1.61 crore. Due to the shortage/non-receipt
of meaningful and substantial proposals on the themes identified
by this Ministry. The total allocation was reduced from Rs. 2.70
crore to Rs. 1.75 crore (RE). Actual Financial Achievement during
the Financial Year 2009-2010 is as under:
(Amt. Rs. in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Achievement
2009-10 2.70* 1.75 1.61
*Excluding North Eastern Areas provision
• During the year 2008-09 & 2009-10, it was decided that the Ministry
will only sanction projects on the themes identified by the Ministry
depending upon the needs arising out from the respective divisions
of this Ministry. Accordingly bids were invited and projects were
sanctioned.
• The reasons for the non-completion of large number of sanctioned
research studies during the previous years was that most of the
studies sanctioned during 2007-08 and 2008-09 were at the end of
the year, since the proposals were received late and the
organizations took some time to revise their proposals as suggested
to them by the Research Advisory Committee. Also, the duration
of the research projects in most of the studies sanctioned were
around 15-18 months. A list of studies sanctioned, completed and
still underway during the previous years till date are as follows:
Year No. of Studies No. of Studies Studies Still
Sanctioned Completed Underway
2004-05 5 5 -
2005-06 18 17 1 (*)
2006-07 18 17 1 (*)
2007-08 15 14 1
2008-09 10 8 2
2009-10 18 11 7
2010-11 7 4 3
2011-12 (till 4 - 4
Dec., 2011)
Total 95 76 19
(*) The organizations have submitted the draft reports along with the utilization
certificate. They have been requested to make certain modifications in the report,
which will be submitted by them at the earliest.

32
* During 2010-11, it was decided that if an organization fails to
complete the project on time, the Ministry stops the subsequent
installment until the agency submits the draft report, makes a
presentation on the findings and submits utilization certificate along
with audited statement of accounts duly certified by a Chartered
Accountant. Besides, 5% of financial penalty per month from the
expiry of the due date is imposed while releasing the last
installment to the defaulting agency. The Ministry also imposes a
time line for the completion of a project depending upon the area
of the work, the sample to be covered and the time line proposed
by the concerned agency.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report)

33
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee find that valuable findings have come up as a
result of evaluation of RGSY by an UN Agency CRAN for capacity
development of PRIs in 6 States of Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan and West Bengal. These pertain to outreach
of capacity building, training needs with association of NGOs, pooling
of trainers, strengthening of SIRDs, regular assessment of training needs,
exposure to beacon Panchayats, etc. The Committee feel that such an
evaluation be undertaken in all the States under RGSY to have a
national perspective on this issue. The Committee recommend that
based on the evaluation necessary follow up action should be initiated.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been accepted by
the Ministry. Action in this regard would be taken and the Committee
would be kept informed of the developments.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee have come across large number of constraints
coming in the way of implementation of Mission Project on e-Panchayat
like non-availability of computers in Gram Panchayats, lack of
Panchayat Staff and buildings, absence of definite source of funding
in different States, non-availability of power back-up to run computers,
etc. The Committee recommend all these constraints are to be addressed
by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in association with the concerned
States. The Committee also recommend that the issue of specific source
of funding for e-Panchayat programme may be found out in States
which have been facing such problem. The Committee also desire that

34
the issue of uninterrupted supply of power for computers in Gram
Panchayats be taken up with different State Electricity Boards.
Alternatively, State Governments may be asked to emulate the good
work done in Odisha for use of Solar Photo Voltaic for running
computers where electricity supply is erratic.
Reply of the Government
This Ministry is seized of the problems coming in the way of
proper implementation of e-Panchayat MMP and has taken up the
matter with the concerned authority in the States. The issue of non-
availability of computers in Gram Panchayats with necessary
manpowers support will be taken care of in the proposal being sent
to Planning Commission by this Ministry. The problem of electricity
and connectivity particularly at GP level is really a very big obstacle
in implementation of the project. The States, facing such problems
have been advised to make data entry at Block levels by bringing the
data there. The connectivity problem will be improved after
implementation of the proposed scheme of Optical Fiber Network by
DoT in another three years time. As regards, uninterrupted power
supply, the matter is being taken with the States.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
The Committee’s examination has revealed that the innovative
scheme of “Rural Business Hub” with the objective of providing
technical support and market linkages has not picked up in a big way
during the Eleventh Plan period as its allocation is stagnating between
Rs. 2 crore to Rs. 2.70 crore during the years 2007-2008 to 2011-2012.
The Committee are also unhappy to note that the scheme is not getting
desired level of attention from the States as the scheme is demand
driven. The Committee find that the scheme is now being expanded
from pilot project basis in 35 districts to the extent of signing of 239
MoUs for setting up of Rural Business Hubs in 19 States. The
Committee trust that the Ministry would find funds for the increased
level of activities under the scheme.
Reply of the Government
The Scheme of Rural Business Hub (RBH) is applicable to the 250
districts covered by the Scheme of Backward Regions Grant Fund
(BRGF) and the entire North-East Region. Signing of MoUs amongst

35
the concerned stakeholders is one of the conditions prescribed for
submission of the proposal by the Implementing Agencies seeking
financial assistance under the RBH Scheme. Merely signing of MoUs
does not mean that the proposal qualifies for being granted financial
assistance and the proposal has been sanctioned by the competent
authority for providing financial assistance to the Implementing
Agencies. Signing of MoU is just one of the conditions for submitting
the proposal to be considered by the Ministry.
Taking into account the position that this Scheme has not picked
up in a big way and it is not getting desired level of attention from
the States, the evaluation of the implementation of this scheme has
been got done through an independent agency for its being up-scaled.
After examining the Report, action is further underway for working
out a strategy for its effective and meaningful implementation on a
larger scale. This will also depend on the decision taken in the 12th
Five Year Plan period both with regard to strategy finally approved
and plan allocation earmarked for the Scheme.
[No. G-20012/5/2011-B&F Dated: 03.02.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
21 March, 2012 Chairperson,
1 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

36
APPENDIX I
STATUS OF PLAN PLUS
Sl.No. State Notification Is TSI Availability Are EAS District-wise
issued on being used? of data being plan
Use of How is entry monitored uploaded.
Plan their manpower using If Yes, for
Plus support? at block Plan which
level Plus? Year
 12 3 4 5 6 7
 1. Andhra Pradesh Yes No Yes Yes Yes,
TSIs not for FY 2011-12
responding
 2. Arunachal Pradesh No Not yet No No No
started
 3. Assam No No No No No
 4. Bihar Yes No No No Yes
 5. Chhattisgarh Yes Not yet Yes No Yes, only for
started BRGF districts
 6. Goa NA NA NA NA NA
 7. Gujarat Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes, for 6
BRGF districts
 8. Haryana No TSI selected Yes Yes Yes, only for
(CRRID) for BRGF districts
1 district
only
 9. Himachal Pradesh Yes, for Only in No Yes, only for
BRGF 2 districts BRGF districts
districts
10. Jammu and Kashmir TSI in 5 Through Yes, only for
BRGF TSIs BRGF districts
districts
11. Jharkhand Yes Yes Through No Yes
TSIs

37
12. Karnataka Yes No Yes Yes No
13. Kerala Sulekha Only for
being BRGF
used districts
14. Madhya Pradesh No Yes Yes Only for
BRGF districts
15. Maharashtra Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
16. Manipur
17. Odisha Yes Yes No For 6 BRGF
districts
18. Punjab No Yes Yes Yes, for BRGF
districts
19. Rajasthan No No No No For BRGF
districts from
2007 to 2012
20. Tamil Nadu
21. Tripura 1 BRGF No Yes, CIC No —
district and GRS
being used
22. Uttar Pradesh Yes No Engagement Under Yes
is in process progress
23. Uttarakhand No Yes No No Yes, for BRGF
districts till
2010-2011
24. West Bengal Yes No Yes No Yes
12 3 4 5 6 7

38
STATUS OF LOCAL GOVERNANCE DIRECTORY
Sl.No. State What is the status Are the Census In the Urban
of data updation villages mapped Area, are the
at all levels with GPs and wards also
also with the being
Parliamentary mapped
Constituency &
Assembly
Constituency
12 3 4 5
1. Andhra Pradesh Completed Yes No
2. Arunachal Pradesh
3. Assam
4. Bihar (a) Mapping of Census Yes Yes
Villages to GPs - 95%
(b) Mapping of GPs to
Census Villages - 98%
(c) Mapping of GPs to
ACs / PCs - 100%
5. Chhattisgarh 95% Census Villages Yes No
mapping completed
6. Goa North Goa completed Yes, 37% No
South Goa yet to be
mapped
7. Gujarat 97% updated Yes Yes
8. Haryana 86 % updated Yes No
9. Himachal Pradesh
10. Jammu and Kashmir In Progress In Progress In Progress
11. Jharkhand (a) GPs mapped - 96% Yes No
(b) Census Villages
mapped - 95%
(c) PC mapping to
Parliament  Constituency,
Assembly Constituency-0
(fully), 9(partially),
5(not yet mapped).

39
12. Karnataka Almost complete Yes No
13. Kerala Yes Yes
14. Madhya Pradesh Updated
15. Maharashtra 86% mapped Yes No
16. Manipur
17. Odisha 81% GP Mapped and Yes Yes
80% Village mapped
with Census data
18. Punjab Almost Completed Yes
19. Rajasthan Updated with some Yes
Discrepancies
20. Sikkim NA Census Village No
Mapped with
GPs only
21. Tamil Nadu
22. Tripura Mapping of Census Under No
Villages with GP's Progress
have been completed
for 2 districts out
of 4. Others are in
process. Parliamentary
and constituency
mapping is under
process. Letter is
already issued to
DM’s for required
information.
23. Uttar Pradesh % of GPs Mapped=74 Yes Yes
% of Census Villages
Mapped=71
24. Uttarakhand Yes No
25. West Bengal Almost Completed Yes
12 3 4     5

40
STATUS OF NATIONAL PANCHAYAT PORTAL
Sl.No. State No. of Has the Are URLs for Interest shown
Panchayats State declared websites of by state in
having their NPP the State ZP/BP/ it’s usage.
own websites official portal GP registered. (High,
of the PR Dept What is the Medium,
progress  Low)
12 3 4 56
1. Andhra Pradesh 0 No No High
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0 No No High
3. Assam
4. Bihar 0 Yes No Medium
5. Chhattisgarh 9 District No State URL Medium
Panchayats, registration
29 Blocks currently
and 284 Gram underway
Panchayats
total 322
Panchayats
have uploaded
their 723
contents in NPP
6. Goa 0 No No
7. Gujarat Till date 430 No No Medium
total content
uploaded by
state including
ZP/BP/GP
8 Haryana None Not yet Yes Medium
9 Himachal Pradesh 300+ GPs No URL registration Medium
(In BRGF  underway
districts have
their own
websites)

41
10. Jammu and Kashmir Yes Not Yet State URL has Medium
been created
under the
domain name
www.jkpr.gov.in
11. Jharkhand 0 No State URL Low
created under
www.jharkhand
panchayats.gov.in
12. Karanataka All 5628 GPs No No High
have own
webpage
13. Kerala 14 District Yes State website High
Panchayats, is registered
152 Blocks
and 545
Gram Panchayats
have uploaded
their content
in NPP
14. Madhya Pradesh None Not yet No Medium
(portal
registered)
15. Maharashtra 25 GPs have No State website Medium
their websites is registered
16. Manipur 0
17. Odisha All 6234 GPs Yes No Yes
have websites
18. Punjab 0 Yes In Process High
19. Rajasthan 10 GPs No No Low
20. Sikkim 1 No No Low
21. Tamil Nadu
22. Tripura 0 In Process URL registered High
for State Portal
23. Uttar Pradesh 1 No In Process High
24 Uttarakhand 0 No In Process Medium
25. West Bengal 18 Yes WiP Medium
12 3   4    5 6

42
STATUS OF PRIA SOFT
Sl.No. State Status of Voucher How is Data Entry Total No. of ZP/BP/GP
Entries at GP level being done ZP/BP/GP using
PRIA Soft
12 3 4 5 6
1. Andhra Pradesh Started in 360 Junior Assistants with 22/1097/21807 22/9874/635
support from DIOs
2.. Arunachal Pradesh Not yet started N.A. 16/161/1779 —
3. Assam All GPs By PRI with 21/185/2202 21/185/2173
(except 6) assistance from
CAs in A/c section
4. Bihar Not yet started Would be done 38/531/8442 0/0/0
through PRI staff
5. Chhattisgarh 8053 GPs started By PRI staff. Staff at 16/146/9734 16/138/8848
GPs entering data at
all 3 tiers
6. Goa — — 2/0/189 —
7. Gujarat — — — —
8. Haryana 422 The data entry 21/119/6083 20/112/422
operator at Panchayat
samiti level
9. Himachal Pradesh Not yet started Will be done by 12/77/3243 0/0/3
PRI staff
10. Jammu and Kashmir Not yet started PRI staff 22/143/4128 —
11. Jharkhand Entries started PRI staff at block 24/259/4423 11/13/65
in 65 villages level
12. Kerala (Saankhya being Saankhya being used. N/A N/A
used) Mapping with PRIA
Soft A/c Heads yet
to be done
13. Madhya Pradesh In progress Data entry at ZP 50/313/23012 25/32/129
level, JP
14. Maharashtra In progress PRI staff at block 33/351/27920 33/351/18734
level
15. Manipur

43
16. Odisha In progress GRS and Panchayat 30/314/6236 30/314/6236
Executive Officers
17. Punjab In progress Data Entry Operators 22/142/12776 22/142/12776
of System Integrator
18. Rajasthan Negligible By PRI staff only at 33/249/9177 16/21/0
ZP and BP level
19. Sikkim Not started — 4/0/165 0/0/0
20. Tamil Nadu
21. Tripura 71797 vouchers CIC and PRI staff at 4/40/1038 4/40/1038
entered for BP/ZP level
FY 2010-11
22. Uttar Pradesh 23041 GPs have PRI staff at all levels 72/821/51914 72/222/44442
started
23. Uttarakhand Entries just PRI staff at ZP level 13/95/7555 13/0/28
begun in few
GPs
24. West Bengal • Voucher entry PRI staff 18/333/3351 18/331/2830
complete in
State-specific
application
• State has not
accepted
PRIA Soft
• GPMS & IFMS
being used at
all Panchayats
12 3 4 5 6

44
STATUS OF AREA PROFILER
Sl.No. State Geographic Health, Block Elected Training
and Education, Backwardness Member Details
Demographic Drinking Index Details uploaded
Details Water,
Infrastructure
12 3 45 6 7
1. Andhra Pradesh No No Yes Being PlanPlus
captured in updated.
State-specific PRIA Soft
application in process
2. Arunachal Pradesh No No No
3. Assam
4. Bihar No No 371/534 Yes Yes
blocks
updated
5. Chhattisgarh No No Yes 9 ZPs data Yes
uploaded
6. Goa No No No No No
7. Gujarat In progress In progress Yes Initiated till Yes
GP level
8. Haryana No No Yes No Yes
9. Himachal Pradesh Being In process
captured in
State-specific
application
10. Jammu and Kashmir No No No No
11. Jharkhand No No No No Yes
12. Karnataka Yes No Yes Yes Yes
13. Kerala Yes Yes Yes No Yes
14. Madhya Pradesh Yes Yes No Yes Yes

45
15. Maharashtra No No Yes No Yes
16. Odisha No No Yes Yes Yes
17. Punjab In progress In progress Yes In progress Yes
18. Rajasthan No No No No Yes
19. Sikkim No No No No No
20. Tamil Nadu
21. Tripura Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
22. Uttar Pradesh Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
23. Uttarakhand No No Yes No Yes
24. West Bengal In progress In progress Updated Yes
12 3 4 5 6 7

46
APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY,
THE 29 FEBRUARY, 2012
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
3. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit
4. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
5. Shri P . Kumar
6. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
7. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
8. Shri A. Sai Prathap
9. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
10. Dr. Sanjay Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
12. Shri Hussain Dalwai
13. Dr. Ram Prakash
14. Shri P . Rajeeve
15. Smt. Maya Singh
16. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
3. Shri Raju Srivastava — Deputy Secretary

47
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the
Committee to the sitting convened to discuss *** consideration and
adoption of draft Action Taken Report on action taken by the
Government on recommendations of the Committee contained in
22nd Report on Demands for Grants (2011-12) in respect of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
3. *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***
5. *** *** ***
6. *** *** ***
7. Thereafter, The Committee considered draft Action Taken Report
on action taken by the Government on recommendations contained in
22nd report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. After detailed discussion, the Committee
adopted draft Report with minor modifications. The Committee also
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report and present the same
to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portion of the Minutes not related with the subject have been kept separately .

48
APPENDIX III
[Vide Introduction of Report]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA)
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
I. Total number of recommendations: 17
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the 12
Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14 and 17
Total: 12
Percentage: 70.59%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 0
to pursue in view of the Government.s replies:
Serial No. Nil
Total: 00
Percentage: 0%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 02
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Serial Nos. 3 and 15.
Total: 02
Percentage: 11.77%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 11, 13 and 16
Total: 03
Percentage: 17.64%