18
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)]
EIGHTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


EIGHTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2010-2011)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department
of Rural Development)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ..................
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ..................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 18
Price : Rs. 88.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2010-2011) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government ............................................................ 28
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .............................................................................. 50
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee .............................................................. 56
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government ar e still awaited ........ 67
APPENDICES
I. Number and Percentage of Population Below Poverty
Line by States-2004-05 ....................................................... 68
II. Number of trained youths during 2009-10 under
RSETI (States/UT-wise) ..................................................... 70
III. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee
held on 6 January, 2011 .................................................... 74
IV . Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee
held on 13 January, 2011 .................................................. 76
V. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee
held on 7 February , 2011 .................................................. 78
VI. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Ninth Report
of the Committee (15th Lok Sabha) .............................. 80
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2010-2011)
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit
7. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
10. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar
11. Shri Rakesh Pandey
12. Shri P .L. Punia
13. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
14. Shri Jagdish Sharma
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Jagdanand Singh
17. Dr. Sanjay Singh
18. Shri Makansingh Solanki
19. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh
20. Shrimati Usha Verma
21. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
23. Shri Ganga Charan
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Dr. Ram Prakash
26. Shri P .R. Rajan
27. Shri Arjun Singh
28. Shrimati Maya Singh
29. Shri Mohan Singh
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
31. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Raju Srivastava — Deputy Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2010-2011) having been authorised by the Committee
to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Eighteenth Report
on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development).
2.  The Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to
Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2010. The replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on
30 September, 2010.
3. The Committee considered the action taken replies furnished
by the Government at their sitting held on 6 January, 2011. The
Committee also took oral evidence of the Representatives of the
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
and the Planning Commission on 13 January, 2011 for seeking
clarification the replies furnished by the Government.
4. The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee
at their sitting held on 7 February, 2011.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-VI.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
25 February, 2011 Chairperson,
6 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2010-11)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in their Ninth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha
on 16 April, 2010.
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 36 recommendations which have been categorised
as follows:--
Chapter II Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos.: 2.4, 2.7, 2.16, 2.17, 2.18, 2.48, 2.52, 3.16,
3.23, 3.38, 3.44, 3.80, 3.81, 3.90, 3.113, 3.125, 3.134, 3.148,
3.154, 3.168 and 3.169.
Chapter III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos.: 2.21, 2.55, 2.56, 3.114, 3.149 and 3.167
Chapter IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para Nos.: 2.45, 2.46, 2.47, 2.54, 3.9, 3.13, 3.17, 3.39
and 3.117
Chapter V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
Nil
3. The Committee further desire that comments in respect of
recommendations/observations contained in Chapter-I of this report
should be furnished to them within three months of presentation
of the Report to Parliament.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Strict adherence to Monthly Expenditure Plan
[Recommendation Serial No. 3 (Para No. 2.16)]
5. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have found that the expenditure of the Department
is not being made as per the monthly expenditure plan over the
years and except for last 2 to 3 months of the financial year, the
expenditure has always been lower than planned expenditure each
month. This has resulted in the unspent balances at the end of
third quarter during 2009-2010 being as high as 27.45 per cent of
the available resources as on 31.12.2009. Further, examination of
the furnished information to the Committee also reveal that for
SGSY (as on 31.12.2009), the unspent balance was as high as
43.22 per cent of the total available funds. The Committee vide
their First Report – Fifteenth Lok Sabha (Recommendation para
no. 2.15 refers) had expressed serious concern over the trend of
huge unspent balance and recommended the Department to analyse
the situation State wise and take corrective steps accordingly. The
Committee find that no serious effort has been made by the
Department in this regard. They, therefore, recommend that
expenditure plan should be evenly spread throughout the year
and the total available funds provided for scheme should be spent
within that year itself so that no unspent balances are left with
the implementing agencies. This will also ensure that the excess
carry over of available funds does not go beyond 10 per cent of
the available funds, resulting in the deduction of the Central share
of funds from the next financial year’s release.”
 (Recommendation Para No. 2.16)
6. The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The Monthly Expenditure Plan is prepared at the time of
finalization of Budget Estimates for the financial year. The Monthly
Expenditure Plan is a projection of monthly expenditure based on
the trend of expenditure in the previous years to help Ministry of
Finance to have an estimation of outgo from the exchequer.
However, the actual release of funds to the implementing agencies
is made on the basis of proposals received from them. The funds
under various programmes of the Department of Rural
Development are released in two installments. 1st installment is
generally released to all the DRDAs/States in the 1st and 2nd
quarters of the financial year and the 2nd installment released in

3
the 3rd and 4th quarters on utilization of 60% of available funds
and on receipt of Audited Statement of Expenditure of previous
year. Each proposal for release of 2nd installment undergoes
detailed scrutiny and if DRDAs/States have more unspent balances
than the prescribed limit of 10% of the available funds, the excess
carryover balance is proportionately deducted from the 2nd
installment of Central Allocation. As the releases are totally
dependent on the proposal received from the implementing agencies
and fulfilment of desired conditions for release of 2nd installment,
it is not possible to follow the monthly expenditure plan uniformly
throughout the year. However, in order to avoid accumulation of
unspent balances, the releases in the last quarter have been
contained within the limit of 33% of the budget allocation during
2008-2009 and 2009-2010 as per norms fixed by the Ministry of
Finance. The other measures taken to reduce unspent balances
are:—
(i) Any unspent amount as on 31st March of a particular
financial year under MGNREGA is adjusted at the time of
release of first installment at the beginning of the next
financial year based on approved Labour Budget for the
year. Further, the State Governments have been instructed
to set up State Employment Guarantee Fund in accordance
with the Section 21(1) of MGNREG Act. Setting up of State
Employment Guarantee Fund by the State Government
would provide a greater flexibility to the State Governments
in administering the MGNREGA funds in accordance with
the needs of the districts.
(ii) As regards IA Y, SGSY and DRDA Administration, if the
DRDAs have more unspent balance than the prescribed
limit of 10% of the available funds, the excess carry over
balance is proportionately deducted from the 2nd
installment of Central allocation, if the expenditure reported
upto 31st December is less than 75% of total funds available
during the year including the carry over balance.
It may also be noted that the releases in four quarters of the
financial year during 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 has more or less
followed the pattern in the Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) with
variations being in the range of 2% to 20%.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 2.16)
7. The Committee note the reasons furnished by the Department
for their not being able to adhere to Monthly Expenditure Plan
(MEP) over the years. While the contention of the Department about

4
the unpredictability of financial projections during the second half
of the Financial Year can be appreciated to a limited extent, there
seems to be no justification for the repeated non-adherence to MEP
during the first half of the fiscal year. The intention of the policy
makers was to prescribe MEP and other such measures with a view
to checking the spate of uneven and last moment spending of scarce
public resources and these stipulations should be followed by all
Ministries/ Departments without fail. The Committee hope that the
measures now being taken by the Ministry to implement the
Monthly Expenditure Plan would yield desired result.
B. Finalisation of BPL Census
[Recommendation Serial Nos. 7, 8 & 9 (Para Nos. 2.45,
2.46 & 2.47)]
8. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the expenditure on BPL Census 1997
which was Rs. 56.08 crore paid from the IRDP head, that increased
to Rs. 75.96 crore for the BPL Census 2002 and for the latest BPL
Census, Rs. 312 crore have been targeted to be spent. The
Committee also note that the Planning Commission is the nodal
agency in Government of India for estimation of poverty ratio of
persons living below the poverty line in rural and urban areas for
all India as well as for the States/UTs. The Committee would like
to know the exact number of persons living below poverty line in
this country as on date and the definition being used by the
Government to define the poverty line for providing funds under
different Central Sector/Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
(Recommendation Para No. 2.45)
The Committee note with concern that earlier Below Poverty Line
Census conducted during 1992, 1997 and 2002 by the Ministry of
Rural Development had reflected many irregularities and
shortcomings. The Committee have been informed that several
ineligible beneficiaries were selected as people/families living below
the Poverty Line in rural areas. In the later stages the same
ineligible BPL list cardholders could not be excluded from the BPL
Census. The Committee, therefore, recommend that before venturing
on calculating the BPL families living in rural areas the Ministry
should keep a provision to exclude anyone who is found to be
living above the poverty line at any point of time in order to
ensure that the benefits of schemes meant for BPL population reach
the deserving people only.

5
The Committee also note that the BPL survey being carried out by
the Ministry is to be carried out at the beginning of each Five
Year Plan. However, no BPL Survey has been done so far during
the 11th Five Year Plan (2007-2012). The Committee note from the
reply of the Department that Rs. 150 crore has been released for
conducting the BPL survey in 2009-10. They also note that during
2010-11 BE, the Ministry has been allocated Rs. 162 crore. The
Committee find that in total Rs. 312 crore has already been made
available for conducting the latest BPL Survey. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that these funds should be utilized fully
and the proposed BPL Survey be made within the targeted time
so that benefits intended under various Schemes may reach the
genuine beneficiaries well in time. The said survey should reflect
the correct persons living below the poverty line.
(Recommendation Para No. 2.46)
The Committee would like to recommend that the Department by
using the existing facilities including the latest information
technology, should find out the exact status of the BPL families
identified by them in the 2002 BPL Census, as of now.
The Committee also desire that the results of the current BPL
Census being done by the Department should be made available
on the website of the Department, beneficiary wise, so that the
conditions of the persons/families living below the poverty line
can be verified in subsequent years.
The Committee desire that the Department in subsequent years
should judge as to whether the money being spent by them for
uplifting families of below poverty line is really giving the desired
results or not.”
(Recommendation Para No. 2.47)
9. The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The Planning Commission estimates the percentage and number
of persons living below the poverty line (BPL) at national and
State level, separately in rural and urban areas from the large
sample survey on household consumer expenditure conducted by
the National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) at an interval of
approximately five years following the methodology contained in
the Report of the Expert Group on Estimation of Proportion and
Number of Poor (Lakdawala Committee). The latest estimates of

6
the percentage and number of persons living below the poverty
line is available for the year 2004-05 based on the large sample
survey of consumer expenditure data of the 61st Round of NSS
(July 2004-June 2005). According to these estimates, 30.17 crore
persons (27.5% of the total population) lived below the poverty
line. State-wise poverty ratio as per poverty estimates of 2004-05
are enclosed at Appendix-I.
The Poverty Line estimated by the Planning Commission is
expressed in terms of per capita consumption expenditure needed
to attain a minimum amount of calorie intake out of food
consumption along with a minimum amount of non-food
expenditure in order to meet the requirement of clothing, shelter,
transport etc. The per capita consumption norms has been fixed
at Rs.49.09 per month in rural areas and Rs. 56.64 per month in
urban areas at 1973-74 prices at national level corresponding to a
basket of goods and services anchored on a norm of per capita
daily calorie requirement of 2400 calories (kcal) in rural areas and
2100 calories in urban areas. The national level rural and urban
poverty lines (in 1973-74) are disaggregated into State-specific
poverty lines using State-specific price indices and inter-State price
differentials using the method outlined in the Report of the Expert
Group on Estimation of Proportion and Number of Poor
(Lakdawala Committee). These State-specific poverty lines of
1973-74 are updated for the later years using State-specific
Consumer Price Index of Agricultural Labourers (CPIAL) in the
rural areas and Consumer Price Index of Industrial Workers
(CPIIW) in the urban areas. The national poverty line at 2004-05
prices is Rs. 356.30 per capita per month in the rural areas and
Rs. 538.60 per capita per month in the urban areas.
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 2.45)
In the guidelines for BPL Census 2002, in order to ensure
transparency, the States were advised to give wide publicity to the
BPL list, get it approved from the Gram Sabha and to display it
on the website and in prominent places like the Panchayat
headquarters. A two-stage Appeal Mechanism was also introduced
to redress the grievances of the people. Under the appeal
mechanism, any household can file first appeal before the
designated authority and if still not satisfied, final appeal can be
filed with the District Collector. The appeal mechanism provided
under the guidelines is a continuous process and could keep the
BPL list updated.

7
While framing guidelines for conducting forthcoming BPL Census,
the concerns raised by the Parliamentary Standing Committee
regarding provision to exclude anyone who is found to be living
above the poverty line at any point of time in order to ensure that
the benefits of schemes meant for BPL population reach the
deserving people only would be considered.
Rs. 150 crores allocated for BPL Census during 2009-10 have been
fully released. Similarly all out efforts would be made to utilize
the allocated Rs. 162 crores BPL Census during 2010-11. The BPL
Census is conducted by the State governments with technical and
financial assistance from the Ministry of Rural Development. While
issuing guidelines for conducting BPL Census, the concerns raised
by the Parliamentary Standing Committee regarding inclusion of
genuine poor in the BPL list would be impressed upon and training
and sensitization on this issue of the responsible agencies will be
undertaken.
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 2.46)
It is expected that the two-stage Appeal Mechanism and provision
of ceiling for total number of households to be identified as BPL
would keep the BPL list updated and this makes the BPL list a
dynamic one. The forthcoming BPL Census in any case will further
up-date the list. Finding the status of BPL families of BPL Census
2002 against the list generated under forthcoming BPL Census
would be considered once results of forthcoming BPL Census are
available.
The BPL Census is conducted by the State Governments with
technical and financial assistance from the Ministry of Rural
Development. While framing guidelines for conducting forthcoming
BPL Census, States/UTs would be requested to make the BPL
lists available on the website.
The Ministry of Rural Development conducts Impact assessment/
concurrent evaluation studies to assess the Impact of various Rural
development programmes from time to time.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 2.47)
10. The Committee also wanted to know how the objective of
poverty alleviation can be achieved without identifying the rural poor
by the Government even after three Reports of Tendulkar Committee,
Saxena Committee and Arjun Sen Gupta Committee are available with

8
the Planning Commission/Government suggesting that poverty has
increased even after thousands of crore spent on reduction of poverty
year after year. The Committee wanted to know by when the final
results of BPL Census will be available. The Department of Rural
Development in their written note stated as under:
“The BPL Census is conducted to identify target households for
implementation of various programmes. There was a delay in
finalizing the results of the BPL Census 2002 as the Supreme Court
passed a Stay Order while hearing a writ-petition No.196/2001 on
5th May, 2003. The Stay Order was vacated on 14th February,
2006. In view of the many uses of the BPL list, the Planning
Commission was requested to look into the issue of having a single
BPL List for extending various benefits to the poor and constitute
a task force for the same. The issue was followed up with the
Planning Commission. However, the Planning Commission
communicated in July, 2008 that the Ministry of Rural Development
should constitute the Expert Group. Accordingly an Expert Group
was constituted on 12th August, 2008 to advise the Ministry of
Rural Development on the methodology for conducting BPL
Census. The Expert Group submitted its report on 21st August,
2009.
The on-going programmes are implemented on the basis of existing
BPL list. There is a provision of two-stage Appeal Mechanism
and provision of ceiling for total number of households to be
identified as BPL, which is being continued. Conducting fresh
BPL Census at intervals further basically updates the methodology
in accordance with changing economic situation. The BPL Census
is likely to commence in the first quarter of 2011-2012 and
scheduled to be completed by September, 2011. The preparatory
work has already started.”
11. During the course of evidence, the Committee pointed out
inordinate delay in conducting BPL Survey and enquired about any
time-frame fixed for the purpose. The representative of the Ministry
informed as under:—
“Pilot Survey is already over. The results of the pilot are under
examination and analysis. In fact, within a month, we are fixing a
meeting with all the experts to go through the findings and after
that we will be ready with the questionnaire for the survey. This
year, in all probability we will be able to do it. The target is end
of September. We are working on it and we hope that we would
succeed in this.”

9
12. In reply to further question of the Committee, the witness
replied that “Guidelines for the census are under finalisation.”
13. When further asked about how many States have started
cooperating with the Central Ministry, the witnesses clarified that:
“It will be there for all the States. They will start the census once
we convey to them the Methodology. The Pilot Survey have been
done with samples from all the State.”
14. Elaborating further about the progress with regard to BPL
Survey, the representative of the Ministry informed as under:
“As it known, it is a Census where each and every household is
to be counted. That is a massive exercise, and the work has started
in right earnest about six months back.
Guidelines are under consideration at the moment because what
we did this time is to go for a pilot project and 254 villages were
identified from NSSO Survey in all the States. The pilot is already
over and, apart from the pilot, we have gone in for Participatory
Rural Appraisal (PRA) to supplement the findings of the Survey.
That is now being examined. We hope our questionnaire will be
ready within a month’s time. After that, we will be going in for
a massive training of the trainers and training of the enumerators.
This exercise will take some time. Probably, in the month of May
or June, we will undertake the field survey/visits, after which the
data will be compiled.”
15. Regarding delay in Census, the witness informed:
“My submission is that we do agree that there has been some
delay, but nothing was intentional. At the moment, we are
committed to finish the census as early as possible. We try to do
a much better work this time with full involvement. Whatever
flaws were there in the earlier rounds, they will not be repeated.
A point was made that 42 per cent of the card holders are bogus.
We want to bring it to five per cent. We hope we will be able to
succeed. Ideally it should be zero per cent, but given the
constraints, we hope, it will be five per cent. That is a commitment
we make.”
16. The Committee enquired from the Planning Commission about
the need for estimating poverty through National Sample Survey
Organisation (NSSO) when actual figures are arrived at by BPL Census

10
through head count, the Planning Commission in a written reply
clarified:
“The estimation of poverty based on Consumer Expenditure Survey
of National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) and identification
of BPL households through BPL Census are two separate exercises
based on different methodologies, hence, are not comparable.
Moreover, the Planning Commission estimates proportion and
number of persons living below the poverty line at national and
States level separately for rural and urban areas. The Ministry of
Rural Development identifies the BPL households in the rural areas
through State Governments and Union Territories administration.
The Tendulkar Committee, while acknowledging the multi-
dimensional nature of poverty, has also recommended that the
estimates of poverty will continue to be based on private household
consumer expenditure of Indian households as collected by NSSO.”
17. In reply to a query about reliability of NSSO figures for
estimation of poverty, the Member Secretary , Planning Commission
informed during evidence as under:
“First of all, I would like to address this issue of NSSO. Actually
the NSSO Surveys began in 1978. Prior to that, in 1950, we have
had the NSSO Surveys but the issue relating to poverty was added
to the NSSO Surveys in 1978. The fact is that the BPL Census
began only in the decade of the 1990s, sometime around 1993.
Now, the NSSO Survey is not only a Survey which actually has
an example. It is actually called “a large-sized sample”. It is actually
1.5 lakh households. Each household is subjected to a questionnaire
which takes about two-and-a-half hours of interviewing. It is
actually done in 48 Regions of the country. Some large States
actually would have three or four Regions where a little bit of
diversity or a little bit of the common feature of a particular Region
would lead to that Region being taken as one. Now, for instance,
Uttar Pradesh has four Regions; Bihar has three Regions; and two
smaller States may comprise as one Region, where there is certain
similarity of our lifestyle or agronomical condition, etc. We are
actually making an assessment of the extent of poverty. We are
doing this on the basis of this quinquennial NSSO Survey, and the
results of the Surveys which have been done in 2009 should be
shortly becoming available.”
18. Regarding reliability of the present NSSO Survey, the Member
Secretary, Planning Commission stated:
“But the data to which it is being applied is outdated. We are also
currently going to have our Census this year, 2011 Census. So, if

11
we would like to make an absolutely realistic assessment of the
flaws of this particular methodology, the right time would be rather
sometime in this year. It should be done because we need to know
why in a country of this size we should be relying only on
1.5 lakh households.”
19. In reply to a query as to whether it is not desirable to have
uniform set of norms for assessing the extent of poverty and a single
agency entrusted with the task of poverty assessment, the Planning
Commission in a written reply informed as under:
“Planning Commission is the nodal agency in the Government of
India to assess and release the Official Poverty Estimates. A time
series estimates of poverty since 1973-74 have been released by
the Planning Commission. The other agencies/Committees have
indicated different numbers based on different assumptions,
perceptions and context.”
20. The Committee during the course of discussion also enquired
whether a unique national poverty line can be drawn up for the
country through the Gram Sabha with simplest method. The Member
Secretary, Planning Commission stated:
“In the States, we do not have a kind of commitment to the need
for empowering the Panchayati Raj.”
21. The Committee also enquired whether there has been any
reduction in poverty through use of rural development funds over
the years, the Member Secretary, Planning Commission replied as
under:
“On the issue of reduction of poverty, I would just like to quote
a speech of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission which was
given recently. He says  ‘The pace of reduction in poverty is much
slower than one would have expected. The percentage of the
population below poverty line has been falling at about
0.8 percentage points per year. The latest Planning Commission
estimate of poverty, based on the revised rural poverty line
recommended by Tendulkar Committee, indicates that 37 per cent
of the population was below the poverty line. If this percentage
declines at 0.8 percentage points per year, it would take 25 years
to reduce poverty by 20 percentage points. This is clearly
unacceptable’. Many times this percentage reduction is actually
low because all those who are in the poverty list are not there.
There are the worries.”

12
22. The Committee also enquired about the number of beneficiaries
actually elevated from BPL 2002 figures by way of any impact
assessment, a representative of the Department of Rural Development,
Ministry of Rural Development candidly admitted as under:
“Unfortunately, we do not have any figures.”
23. In reply to a question whether the Department has undertaken
impact assessment of its various rural development schemes, the
witness replied as under:
“Impact studies have been done for most of the schemes. That
should be on the public domain. We should put it on the public
domain.”
24. The Committee recall that they had made recommendations
with regard to BPL Census on four points. One, ascertaining the
exact number of BPL population in the country as on date. Two,
exclusion of anyone found to be above poverty line from the BPL
list. Three completing the BPL survey in a targeted time so that
intended benefits reach the genuine beneficiaries. Four, evaluating
that money spent for upliftment of BPL families are giving desired
results. The Ministry have informed that the Department of Rural
Development has broadly followed the methodologies of estimation
of number of poors being devised by the Planning Commission
based on large sample survey on household consumer expenditure
conducted by National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) from
1973-74 upto 2004-05, whereas, the Ministry identified the BPL
households in rural areas through State Governments and Union
Territories administration. For transparency on BPL issue, the
Department of Rural Development has informed that in the
Guidelines for BPL Census 2002, States were advised to give wide
publicity to BPL list followed by their approval from Gram Sabhas
with two stage State Appeal Mechanism system in place in the
event of any grievance. About detailed latest BPL figures in the
country, the Ministry has informed that those would be considered
once the outcome of forthcoming BPL Census are available. Similarly,
on the issue of actual impact of rural development funds in uplifting
BPL to APL, the Department has informed that these are assessed
from time to time. From the facts emerged out of action taken replies
and evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural
Development and Planning Commission, the Committee are
astonished to find that there is a lot of confusion about number of
poors in the country as three Expert Committees viz. Tendulkar

13
Committee, Saxena Committee and Arjun Sengupta Committee have
given different figures of poverty. Two, there is inordinate delay in
finalizing BPL list. BPL List which was to be available before the
beginning of the Eleventh Five Year Plan is now expected in the
terminal year of the Plan viz. 2011-12. Three, there is fundamental
fault in estimation/identification process of poverty relying on NSSO
figures which was originally not mandated for that purpose. Four,
the need for evolving pragmatic method for estimation/identification
of real poor in the country for accurate assessment including a
proposal for setting up of National Poverty Survey in place of NSSO.
The Committee recommend that all these suggestions viz.
undertaking a National Poverty Sample Survey in terms of per capita
income and multi-dimensional poverty assessment instead of per
capita consumption that have come up before the Committee be
utilised by the Planning Commission/Department of Rural
Development for bringing about a realistic picture of real poor in
the country. On the issue of finalisation of BPL Census, the
Committee hope that as admitted before the Committee, the
Department of Rural Development should come up with the BPL
Census data by September, 2011.
C. Effective functioning of Vigilance and Monitoring Committees
(V&MCs)
[Recommendation Serial No. 12 (Para No. 2.54)]
25. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that as per the extant guidelines a meeting
in each quarter of a year should be held by the State level Vigilance
and Monitoring Committees. The composition of the State level
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees is such that holding of one
such meeting in each quarter of the year is not possible due to
various reasons including non-availability of the Chairperson and
members. The Committee feel that the stipulation of holding one
meeting during each quarter and then finding that the States are
not able to hold the required number of State level V&MC meetings
might be an indication that the stipulation itself is now proving to
be unrealistic. The Committee, therefore, recommend that this aspect
may be examined in detail and if found necessary, the guidelines
may be amended accordingly.”
(Recommendation Para No. 2.54)

14
26. The Department in their action taken replies has stated as
under:
“Vigilance & Monitoring Committee (V&MC) provides crucial role
to MPs and other peoples’ representatives in the monitoring of
implementation of the RD programmes. As per Guidelines, V&MC
meetings are to be held every quarter. As per the information
available, State level meetings held in the year 2008-09 and
2009-10 were 36 and 10 respectively. Lesser number of meetings in
2009-10 could be due to the reason that after the formation of
XV Lok Sabha, Ministry issued Guidelines for reconstituting
V&MCs at State and District level on 26.8.2009. Thereafter, the
State/District Authorities started reconstituting the V&MCs and
holding their meetings. The Ministry impress upon the States/UTs
to hold the regular meetings in view of the large amount of Plan
Allocation under the various flagship programmes of the Ministry.
Diluting the requirement of holding the meetings every quarter
may weaken the monitoring process.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 2.54)
27. During the course of evidence, the Committee pointed out
that there was difficulty in holding of meetings of Vigilance &
Monitoring Committees in Districts where the sitting MP , Lok Sabha
who is ex-officio Chairman of V&MCs is unable to hold such meetings
by reason of his pre-occupation as Minister as a result such V&MC
meetings are not held at all even though there is a provision in
Para 7 of V&MC guidelines for holding meetings by the Secretary,
which States as under:
“Member Secretary shall convene the meeting on the direction of
the Chairman. In case the Chairman of V&MC is pre-occupied
and has not indicated any date for convening of meeting, the
Member Secretary, in consultation with Co-Chairman, may ensure
that the meeting is convened with in 15 days of end of each
quarter, under intimation to Chairman/Co-Chairman and all other
members of the Committee. Member Secretary shall be personally
responsible for convening Meetings.”
28. The Committee wanted to know about steps taken to ensure
that regular meeting are held by the officials, the representative of
the Department of Rural Development stated as under:
“So, the issue about the Vigilance and Monitoring Committee is
also very valid. We are also concerned that these meetings are not
being held regularly. Out of 622 districts in 2009-10 about

15
499 districts have held this Vigilance and Monitoring Committee
meetings; in 2010-11, it is about 488 districts. It is a matter of
concern of the Ministry. We note the strong views expressed by
the hon. Members and we would continue to put pressure on the
State Governments to hold these meetings regularly….. It is the
responsibility of the State Government. It is a federal system. We
have to write to the State Governments.”
29. While observing that the stipulated number of meetings of
V & MCs at State and District levels are not being held in different
States and Districts for reason of non-availability of Chairpersons
or Members, the Committee had recommended that if holding of
such meetings, as per guidelines, is becoming impractical, the
guidelines be amended accordingly. In the action taken replies, the
Department has informed that diluting the requirement of holding
quarterly Meetings of V & MCs may weaken the monitoring process.
Representatives of the Department of Rural Development were
candid in their admissions that not holding the Vigilance &
Monitoring Committee meetings was a serious concern. As assured
by the Ministry, the Committee trust that the Ministry would
vigorously pursue the matter with the State Governments to ensure
that V & MCs meetings are held by all States/UTs regularly as per
stipulations in the guidelines on the subject i.e. at the initiative of
the Member Secretary.
D. Delay in completion of work under MGNREGA
[Recommendation Serial Nos. 15, 16 & 18 (Para Nos. 3.9,
3.13 & 3.17)]
30. The Committee had recommended as under:-
“The Committee note with concern that as against a minimum of
100 days of work that should be provided as per the MGNREG
Act, the Department could only provide 51 days of work by
utilizing all the available funds for the scheme in the year
2009-10. They further find that during the previous years, the
number of days of work provided under the Scheme was 48 days
during 2008-09 and 42 days during 2007-08. Thus, even after
utilizing the entire funds for the MGNREGA as provided in the
Budget year after year, the Government have not been able to
provide a minimum of 100 days of employment to the needy
households who demanded work. The Committee, therefore, find
that in order to achieve a minimum of 100 days of employment,
either the allocation has to be increased substantially or the number

16
of minimum days for which employment is required to be provided
under MGNREGA is to be reduced. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the ambiguity created in this regard be cleared at the
earliest and the Committee may also be kept apprised about the
concrete action taken in this regard.
(Recommendation Para No. 3.9)
The Committee are surprised to find that out of 40.98 lakh works
undertaken during 2009-10 [upto February, 2010] under MGNREGA,
the implementing agencies could complete merely 40 per cent
works. Regarding high percentage of incomplete works, the
Department has furnished a vague reply by stating that a work
take 2 to 4 months to complete. According to the Department,
generally, peak demand season under MGNREGA starts from
November and ends in May. On the one hand, of the 28.90
per cent of the total available funds under MGNREGA, has been
stated to be available as on 31.12.2009, with the implementing
agencies, that are more often released very late and at the fag end
of the year. On the other hand, the Committee find that the
complete better physical performance of MGNREGA is never found
during April and May. When such facts are pointed out on account
of availability of unspent balances, the Department advances the
excuse that the scheme is demand driven and the works pick up
after November. The Committee are of the opinion that the
Department is not implementing the scheme in the right spirit.
The Committee would like the Department to work out a strategy
urgently so that works once commenced are executed properly in
order to make MGNREGA actually demand oriented.
(Recommendation Para No. 3.13)
The Committee are concerned to note that only one-third of the
job card holders could be encouraged to demand work under
MGNREGA during 2009-2010. As per the information furnished to
the Committee, during 2009-2010 only 3.68 crore job card holder
households could demand work out of 10.91 crore household job
cards issued. This indicates that more than two-third job
cardholders could not get jobs under the MGNREGA during
2009-2010. Even the one-third of the job cardholders who actually
got job, could get only 51 days of employment instead of the
minimum 100 days stipulated under the Act. The Committee would
like the Government to analyse this disparity in order to find out
whether such disparity is due to the shortcomings in the

17
implementation of the scheme or due to certain persons getting
the job card issued without really being interested in getting the
job. In order to ensure the benefits of MGNREGA reach the
intended beneficiaries, there should be some provision in the
existing system to exclude those job cardholders who are not
demanding jobs over a long period of time. The Committee
recommend that the Department should devise some mechanism
to ensure transparency and to eliminate chances of corruption in
the receipt of job cards.”
(Recommendation Para No. 3.17)
31. The Department in their Action Taken reply has informed
as under:-
“Under MGNREGA, employment to the adult members of a
household is provided on demand subject to a maximum of 100
days per household per year. Para 9 of Schedule II of the Act
provides that written application for work may be submitted either
to the Gram Panchayat or to the Programme Officer. Therefore,
the number of days of employment provided to a household is to
be seen against the number of Households provided employment.
Central Government releases funds to the States/UTs based on the
labour demand arising at the field level. States have to submit an
application in the prescribed format with necessary documents
based on the actual demand that is generated at the field level.
The first tranche is released based on the Labour Budget prepared
by the District Programme Coordinator in bottom up approach
with month-wise projections of demand, expenditure and
distribution of work and submitted to Empowered Committee. The
quantum of first tranche depends on the projection made for the
initial six months of the financial year subject to limitation of 50%
of the projection of the whole year. The 2nd tranche of funds is
released on utilization of 60% of available fund by the districts/
States and submission of proposal in the prescribe format alongwith
other necessary documents as indicated in paras 8.4 & 11.3 of the
operational guidelines. Under the Act, Central Government is
committed to bear entire expenditure towards payment of wages
to the unskilled workers besides bearing other expenses as
stipulated in the Act. Therefore, in case a State falls short of funds,
more funds may be released to the States on receipt of proposals
alongwith necessary documents.

18
 Number of days of employment availed by a household does not
depend on the quantum of funds released by the Centre. Since the
Act is demand based, number of days of employment availed by
each household depends upon the number of days of employment
demanded by a household. It also depends upon the availability
of other employment opportunities in an area because a worker is
free to avail any other employment opportunity available to him.
As per reports received from the States, at national level an average
of 54 days of employment was provided to every rural household
during 2009-10.
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.9)
As reported by the State Governments, 46.01 lakh works were
taken up during 2009-10 out of which 20.94 lakh (45.51%) works
had been completed during the year. As implementation of
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a continuous process, incomplete
works during the year are carried over to the next financial year
in order to meet the labour demand arising in the next year.
MGNREGA provides a legal guarantee for atleast 100 days of
wage employment per household in a financial year on demand.
Adult members of a rural household may exercise their right any
time during the year. In accordance with para 13 of Schedule-II
of the Act, a new work shall be commenced if atleast 10 labourers
become available for such work and the labourers cannot be
absorbed in the ongoing works. During the peak demand season
under MGNREGA which is from November to May, a large
number of works are opened to absorb the high labour demand.
A large number of these works remain incomplete at the end of
the Financial year and are spilled over to the next year.
With a view to address these issues, the Ministry has asked
National Institute for Rural Development (NIRD) to conduct work
census in one pilot district each in Madhya Pradesh, Andhra
Pradesh, Orissa and Rajasthan for the years 2006-07, 2007-08 and
2008-09. Decision has also been taken to undertake quality audit
of the works taken up under the Act. The Ministry has finalized
the Terms of reference for conducting the quality audit.
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.13)
A Job card issued to a household under MGNREGA is valid for
a period of 5 years. Job card is issued to a household if one or

19
more adult members of the household apply for it. Mere issuance
of a job card, however, does not entitle the household for an
employment under the Act. The adult members of the household
who volunteer to do unskilled manual work have to apply for
work in writing. A job cardholder may exercise his right for 100
days of guaranteed employment under the Act any time during
a financial year. Further, while it is mandatory for a job seeker
under MGNREGA to have a job card, it is not mandatory for a
job cardholder to take up employment under the Act in a
particular financial year.
As per available data, 5.25 crore households were provided
employment under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA during 2009-10.
National average for number of days of employment provided
per household during 2009-10 was 54 days per household. With
a view to ensure transparency in the implementation of the Act,
Ministry has taken the following steps:
(i) A Web enabled Management Information System (MIS)
(www.nrega.nic.in) has been made operational which places
all critical parameters such as job cards, muster rolls, wage
payments, number of days of employment provided and
works under execution online for monitoring and easy
public access for information. 10.95 crore job cards have
been up loaded on the website.
(ii) Wage disbursement to MGNREGA workers through Banks/
Post Office accounts has been made mandatory to ensure
proper disbursement of wages to MGNREGA workers. 9.19
crore bank/post office accounts have been opened so far.
To cover the gaps in financial services and outreach and
also to ensure greater transparency in wage disbursement,
Rural ATM, hand held devices, smart cards, biometrics and
business correspondent models have been initiated.
(iii) The Ministry has accorded utmost importance to the
organization of Social Audits by the Gram Panchayats and
issued instructions to the States to make necessary
arrangements for the purpose. Modifications have been
made in para 13 of Schedule-I of the Act to provide for
procedures on conducting social audits. The Ministry has
issued instructions to the State Governments for
enforcement of the new social audit provisions under
MGNREGA”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.17)

20
32. During the course of evidence, the Committee pointed out
that as against the 100 days of guaranteed employment, the actual
work given on an average was 54 days only. The Committee enquired
whether as against the total demand for work under MGNREGA, the
funds released were adequate. Clarifying the position a representative
of Department of Rural Development stated as under:
“The question is about everybody being given a guarantee of up
to a hundred days of work. The MGNREGA is meant to give this
kind of assurance. But people have other means of livelihood also
whether it is in farm or non-farm operations. So, the workers
have a choice. Therefore, it is the duty of the Administration to
provide work to all the people who have registered themselves
and have asked for work. What the State Governments have
reported to us is that about 3.94 crore people have demanded
work and about 3.9 crore people have been provided work, even
though job cards have been given to a much larger number. Job
cards have been given to close to 10 crore people, whereas the
demand for work has come from 3.94 crore people and work has
been provided to 3.9 crore people.”
33. Regarding availability of funds, the witness explained:
“Let me explain and I will also answer this point. First and
foremost is that we have advised all the State Governments to
start it, using the information technology which is there in all the
States, and tying up with the banks; we told them that wherever
there is work availability of fund should be ensured and there is
no excuse for not doing that. We cannot allow that to happen. In
reality, there are some districts and some blocks where money is
lying idle. There are other places where the pace of work is very
fast and they are running short of money.”
34. He further added:
“If you look at the country’s figure, even on the 1st April, 2010,
we had almost Rs. 11,000 crore as balance with the States. It could
be that the money is stuck in the blocks or districts. Money
availability is really not an issue because it is a demand driven
scheme. So, the States had Rs. 11,000 crore as the opening balance
when the year started. There could be villages where money was
not there because money could be stuck in some other block where
there is no work going on.”

21
35. Explaining difficulties coming in the way of smooth
implementation of MGNREGA, the witness stated as under:
“The issue here is firstly of the administrative machinery not being
adequate. Many States are not having the kind of technical staff
that is required at the District, Block and Gram Panchayat level.
This is a supply side constraint. The second issue is that there is
a gap between the demand and supply, in terms of inadequate
emphasis on organizing the workers to demand work. So, it does
not mean that only four crore people require work. More people
may be requiring work. But there is a gap, whether it is a
governance issue or something else. As Madam Secretary (Planning
Commission) has said, where Panchayati Raj Institutions have not
been empowered there are people even if they are asking for work
they will not be registered for work. So, there is both a supply
side issue and there is a demand side issue. For improving the
supply side issue we have enhanced the administrative costs
payable to the State Governments for implementing the programme
from four per cent to six per cent.”
36. The witness further added:
“The average days work actually hides the fact that there are some
people who have done hundred days work and there are some
people who have done much less than the average days of work.
It is the constant endeavour of the Government of India and also
the State Governments to improve their systems to ensure that
more and more people complete hundred days.
It is really I would say a shortcoming or failure on the
administrative side at various levels to be ready to actually
commence the works. If you do not have enough management
capabilities, you also would not like to open up works. Ministry
and also State Governments are improving their capabilities to
actually handle this large number of works.”
37. The Committee pointed out that for making available 100 days
of guaranteed employment under MGNREGA, a total of Rs. 1 lakh
crore would be the requirement as against the present provision of
Rs. 41,000 crore in the Central Budget. Responding to this, a
representative of the Department of Rural Development clarified as
under:
“It is Rs. 64,000 crore for 2010-11. That is only a Plan. It is agreed.
It is based on the Labour Budget, States and Districts are given
first installment”.

22
38. The witness added:
“Labour Budget is an estimate and there is a discussion between
the State Government and the Central Government. We release
50 per cent of the amount as the first installment. The State
Government can come back when 60 per cent of the money is
spent. If Labour Budget increases then, the Government of India
will give more funds.”
39. The witness further explained as under:
“There is an Empowered Committee which includes the State
Secretaries for Rural Development, chaired by the Secretary, Rural
Development. In that a figure is arrived at wherein the State
Governments participation is also there. But we are not restricted
to that. When they spend 60 per cent. They are eligible for revision
in the labour budget. Already two States have come to us for
upward revision in the labour budget—Andhra Pradesh and Tamil
Nadu.”
40. The Committee had recommended three things, one, in view
of less days of employment given under MGNREGA during the
previous three years, as against the guaranteed 100 days of
employment, either allocation has to be increased or number of
days have to be reduced. Two, in view of less number of works
completed during 2009-10 inspite of huge availability of funds,
largely released at the end of financial year, a strategy has to be
worked out to make the MGNREGA a really demand driven
programme. Three, since two-third of the total job card holders had
not got employment and remaining one-third getting only about
50 days of employment under MGNREGA during 2009-10, the
Government should analyse such a disparity whether it is due to
shortcoming in the scheme or due to non-seriousness on the part of
job-card holders for job under the scheme.
The Department in their action taken replies has informed that
since MGNREGA is demand driven, the number of days of
employment given is to be seen against the number of household
provided employment. Central releases of funds to States are based
on labour demand arising at field level and in the light of month-
wise projection of demand expenditure and distribution of work is
submitted based on labour budget. If any State falls short of funds
more funds are released on receiving of proposal alongwith
necessary documents. Number of days of employment given does
not depend on quantum of funds released by the Centre. It also

23
depend upon the availability of other employment opportunities.
With a view to addressing these issues National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD) has been asked to conduct work census in
different States and has informed various steps taken for bringing
about transparency in MGNREGA through MIS, making the
payment mandatory through Banks/Post Offices and undertaking
social audit.
During the course of evidence held to seek clarifications on
implementation of the scheme, the representative of Department of
Rural Development admitted before the Committee that there are
some Districts and Blocks where money is lying idle and the
available balance in the country as on 1 April, 2010 was Rs. 11,000
crore.
The Committee have also been informed that besides inadequate
management capabilities machinery and shortage of technical
manpower in many States, the representatives of the Department of
Rural Development concurred with the Member Secretary, Planning
Commission that for success of MGNREGA, Panchayati Raj
Institutions are to be sufficiently empowered in different States.
Even, though a series of steps have been taken for smooth
functioning of MGNREGA, yet the issues of shortage of funds in
specific districts, empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)
etc. need to be addressed comprehensively for the success of the
programme. For empowering PRIs, the Committee desire that the
issue be taken up by the Ministry of Rural Development with the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj being under one Minister for proper
co-ordination.
F.  Providing Last mile connectivity
[Recommendation Serial No. 21 (Para No. 3.39)]
41. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are concerned to note that by not providing the
last mile connectivity of around 7700 kms., 8045 habitations in the
country as on date remain to be connected. They note that the
major hindrances being faced by the Department are construction
of cross drainage works, non-availability of land, construction of
long span bridge, and non-timely availability of construction
materials. The Committee find the said hindrances are also being
faced by the Department in construction of the PMGSY roads in
general and these are not particular for the last mile connectivity.

24
The Committee wish to point out that by not providing the last
mile construction of roads, the PMGSY roads in a majority of cases
do not touch the Panchayat office, local market/haat or the hospital.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department to take
necessary steps to provide priority to the last mile construction of
PMGSY roads to the Panchayat office, local market/haat or to the
hospital, by chalking out an immediate action plan in this regard.”
(Recommendation Para No. 3.39)
42. The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“Under PMGSY, the target habitations are connected upto a
proposed point in the habitation which in the opinion of the State
is appropriate for the habitation. Though specific instruction that
road has to touch Panchayat office, local market, hospital etc. are
not prescribed in the guidelines, States have been advised to
propose the new road upto a point which is deemed prominent
within the habitation. When a habitation falls on a road being
constructed to connect another habitation, the road passes through
the habitation and may connect more than one prominent point in
this habitation.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.39)
43. During the course of evidence, the Committee wanted to know
how the last mile connectivity under PMGSY can be achieved if
prominent places which is above 500 meters away in a habitation is
not connected. A representative of the Department of Rural
Development stated as under:—
“Actually the criteria of 500 meters under PMGSY is not for the
purpose of constructing road upto which extent. However, it is for
connecting all the habitations whose population is more than 500
or more. When the issue of construction of road comes and the
agency which makes the map and constructs the road that agency
has been directed in clear terms that the distance upto which they
have to construct the road it is for them to decide. Whether they
want to bring the road within the village. We have also directed
them to take the road upto the prominent place. We do not say
that the road should be constructed outside the periphery of village
since we cannot check each and every road for the purpose of
measurement. We hold the view that whatever agency is
constructing the road that agency must have borne in mind the

25
welfare of the local people. Thus the agency should construct such
a road which connects the village properly . If in a habitation there
are more than one prominent places which are not in straight line
in that case they can connect one prominent place under PMGSY
but not the other prominent place.”
44. The Committee further enquired whether a road under PMGSY
could be constructed upto the end of the village, the witness explained
as under:—
“If they are constructing the road upto that point we have no
objection……we will give this in writing also. We have no objection
on this issue.”
45. The Committee had recommended that with a view to
achieving last mile connectivity under PMGSY, the Department
should take steps providing priority to connect Panchayat office,
local market or hospital. The Department in action taken reply has
informed that connectivity under PMGSY is upto a point in a
habitation that in the opinion of the State Government is a
prominent place. The Committee recommend that the Ministry would
emphasize upon the State Governments to take PMGSY roads upto
prominent land marks in the village like Panchayat Bhawan,
Hospital etc. i.e. within the habitation and not just adjacent to the
village.
G. Need for further increasing per unit assistance for Indira Awas
Yojana (IAY) unit
[Recommendation Serial No. 28 (Para No. 3.117)]
46. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that the per unit assistance of a dwelling
unit being constructed under IAY has been increased w.e.f. 1.4.2010
to Rs. 45,000 in plain areas and Rs. 48,500 in hilly areas. The
Committee are of the firm opinion that even this enhanced amount
of assistance is too low as per the existing cost of materials/
construction. The Committee find that Union territory of
Pudducherry is already providing Rs. 1 lakh for construction of a
dwelling unit in rural area. The Committee feel that a decent
dwelling unit cannot be constructed even with the enhanced cost.
The Committee in their earlier Report (First Report – Fifteenth
Lok Sabha, para 3.102 refers) had pointed out that the existing
definition of a dwelling unit under IAY is not proper for a decent

26
civilized living of rural poor. Keeping this in view, the Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the Ministry
should further enhance the per unit assistance substantially and
define the dwelling unit under IAY suitable for a healthy living in
consultation with the Ministry of Health. The Committee should
be kept apprised accordingly.”
(Recommendation Para No. 3.117)
47. The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The financial assistance provided under IAY is only a unit
assistance and not full cost of construction of the house. The unit
assistance has recently been enhanced w.e.f. 1.4.2010 from Rs. 35,000
to Rs. 45,000 in plain areas and from Rs. 38,500 to Rs. 48,500 in
hilly/difficult areas. It may not be possible to further enhance this
unit assistance at this stage. However, the beneficiary can avail a
loan of up to Rs. 20,000 at interest rate of 4 per cent per annum.
In addition Rs. 2200/- can be availed under Total Sanitation
Campaign (TSC) funds for construction of a sanitary latrine. Further,
20 sq. mt. plinth area prescribed in IAY guidelines is the minimum
and the beneficiaries can construct an IAY house on a bigger plinth
areas as well.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.117)
48. The Committee are aware that the Government revised
assistance level under IAY to Rs. 45,000 in plain areas and Rs. 48,500
in hilly/difficult areas in April, 2010. The Committee are already
aware that IAY beneficiary can avail of loan upto Rs. 20,000 at
interest rate of 4 per cent per annum and also avail assistance of
Rs. 2200 for construction of sanitary latrine under Total Sanitation
Campaign (TSC) considering the high rate of inflation leading to
steep increase in the cost of construction. The Committee urge that
the prevailing per unit assistance for IAY unit should be hiked
suitably.
H. Non-realisation of physical and financial targets of CAPART
[Recommendation Serial No. 31 (Para No. 3.148)]
49. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the BE of CAPART has been doubled
from Rs. 50 crore in 2009-10 to Rs. 100 crore in 2010-2011. However,

27
they find that the physical targets for CAPART have not been
increased commensurate with the enhanced allocation this year.
Further, between these two years the physical target has been
increased from 950 projects last year to 1340 projects this year.
However, they find even during 2009-10 against a target of 950
projects the CAPART has an achievement of 54 projects only.
Similarly, against the target of 50 Gram Shree Melas only 6 Melas
has been arranged. Not only that the financial achievement of
CAPART has come down from 83.53 per cent in 2008-09 to 47.26
percent during 2009-10 (upto 31.01.2010). The Committee feel that
before enhancing the financial outlay of CAPART, the performance
vis-à-vis  a target should have been reviewed and necessary
corrective action should have been taken. The Committee would
like to urge that the CAPART should take vigorous steps to achieve
the financial target in the coming years.”
(Recommendation Para No. 3.148)
50. The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The year 2009-10 was largely spent on reviewing and consolidating
the working of CAPART and planning new schemes and
programmes that would make CAPART more relevant organisation
to respond to new aspirations of rural poor in the context of
increasing pace of all round development and changing global
realities. It was in this context that the Executive Committee of
CAPART consciously decided to give a pause to sanctioning of
new projects under old schemes. This also explains the reasons for
not achieving physical as well as financial targets.
While increasing the budget the physical targets have not been
increased proportionately as the Council expects that the project
under newly launched schemes and programmes would require
greater outlay and hence the average size of projects would be
larger.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.148)
51. The Committee regret to note that the year 2009-10 was
largely spent on reviewing and consolidating the working of
CAPART and that sanctioning of new schemes was put on hold.
The Committee feel that review of working of an organisation is a
regular exercise which in no way should have affected the smooth
flow of normal work. The Committee hope that CAPART will not
be found wanting in the discharge of its responsibilities and will
function effectively and efficiently towards achievement of its stated
aims and objectives at least in future.

28
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee note that the Government is not implementing
the direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, in the
right spirit. As per the said direction, the Minister concerned should
make the Statement on action-taken by the Government on their
recommendations once in six months. It has been noticed that the
statement presented to the House is by and large a repetition of the
action taken notes furnished by the Government at the end of three
months of the presentation of the original Report. The Committee,
therefore, desire that in future before making a statement under
direction 73A, the Government should meaningfully review actual and
factual implementation of recommendations made by the Committee
in different States and Union territories of the country and the
Statement laid should not be mere repetition of the action taken notes
Reply of the Government
This Department reviews the Action Taken Report sent to the
Committee on the Original Report of the Committee and latest status
on action taken by the Government on the recommendations made
by the Committee, during the period of six months, is incorporated
in the statement to be made by the Minister under direction 73 A of
the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. The recommendations of
the Committee will be fully kept in view before the statement is
made by the Minister.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee are not satisfied to find that the Department could
utilize only 42 per cent of the planned funds in the first three years
of the 11th Five Year Plan. They feel that it should have been to the
tune of nearly 60 per cent of the total plan projections if the
expenditure were to be evenly spread over the Plan period. Not only

29
that, the Department has always incurred more expenditure than the
amount given for the non-plan expenditure in the Budget Estimates.
They, therefore, recommend that the Government should introspect
the reasons for the lower utilization of Plan funds so far during the
11th Five Year Plan and should initiate remedial measures so that the
targets of the said Plan are achieved. Regarding the non-plan
expenditure made by the Department, the Committee recommend that
the Department should initiate suitable corrective measures to restrict
the non-plan expenditure to the barest minimum.
Reply of the Government
The expenditure during 11th Plan should be seen in the context
of approved outlay for the 11th Five Year Plan and not in the context
of proposed 11th Plan outlay. As against the proposed 11th Plan outlay
of Rs. 328579.72 crore, the approved 11th Five Year Plan outlay was
to the tune of Rs. 194933.28 crore. Against the approved 11th Plan
outlay of Rs. 194933.28 crore, the expenditure for the first three years
i.e. 2007-2008 to 2009-2010 (upto 18th March, 2010) was Rs. 139475.93
crore which was 71.55 %. The expenditure upto 31st March, 2010 has
gone up to Rs. 142245.99 crore, which is 73% of the total approved
11th Plan outlay. There is, therefore, no underutilization of Plan funds
during the first three years of the 11th Plan. Taking into account the
BE 2010-2011 of Rs. 66100.00 crore, the estimated expenditure for the
first four years of 11th Plan would go upto Rs. 208345.99 crore. Thus,
the approved 11th Plan outlay would be exceeded in the first four
years of 11th Plan. Planning Commission will be requested to provide
additional allocation over and above the approved 11th Plan outlay
in the 5th and final year of 11th Plan.
As regards, non-plan expenditure, it may be stated that non-plan
expenditure of the Department is very nominal as compared to the
Plan budget. The non-plan provision is mainly meant for meeting the
administrative expenditure of the secretariat of the Department of
Rural Development and National Institute of Rural Development,
Hyderabad (an autonomous body under the administrative control of
the Department). The increase in non-plan expenditure over the
previous years is basically on account of increase under salary head
due to pay arrears on account of implementation of 6th Pay
Commission recommendations, DA instalments and normal annual
increment. However, in order to contain the non-plan expenditure to
the barest minimum, the Department has been strictly following the
economy instructions issued by Ministry of Finance from time to time

30
including a 10% cut on non-plan provision for non-salaried items of
expenditure.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.16)
The Committee have found that the expenditure of the Department
is not being made as per the monthly expenditure plan over the
years and except for last 2 to 3 months of the financial year, the
expenditure has always been lower than planned expenditure each
month. This has resulted in the unspent balances at the end of third
quarter during 2009-2010 being as high as 27.45 per cent of the
available resources as on 31.12.2009. Further, examination of the
furnished information to the Committee also reveal that for SGSY (as
on 31.12.2009), the unspent balance was as high as 43.22 per cent of
the total available funds. The Committee vide their First Report—
Fifteenth Lok Sabha (Recommendation para No. 2.15 refers) had
expressed serious concern over the trend of huge unspent balance
and recommended the Department to analyse the situation State-wise
and take corrective steps accordingly. The Committee find that no
serious effort has been made by the Department in this regard. They,
therefore, recommend that expenditure plan should be evenly spread
throughout the year and the total available funds provided for scheme
should be spent within that year itself so that no unspent balances
are left with the implementing agencies. This will also ensure that the
excess carry over of available funds does not go beyond 10 per cent
of the available funds, resulting in the deduction of the Central share
of funds from the next financial year’s release.
Reply of the Government
The Monthly Expenditure Plan is prepared at the time of
finalization of Budget Estimates for the financial year. The Monthly
Expenditure Plan is a projection of monthly expenditure based on the
trend of expenditure in the previous years to help Ministry of Finance
to have an estimation of outgo from the exchequer. However, the
actual release of funds to the implementing agencies is made on the
basis of proposals received from them. The funds under various
programmes of the Department of Rural Development are released in
two instalments. Ist instalment is generally released to all the DRDAs/
States in the 1st and 2nd quarters of the financial year and the
2nd instalment released in the 3rd and 4th quarters on utilization of
60% of available funds and on receipt of Audited Statement of

31
Expenditure of previous year. Each proposal for release of 2nd
instalment undergoes detailed scrutiny and if DRDAs/States have more
unspent balances than the prescribed limit of 10% of the available
funds, the excess carryover balance is proportionately deducted from
the 2nd instalment of Central Allocation. As the releases are totally
dependent on the proposal received from the implementing agencies
and fulfilment of desired conditions for release of 2nd instalment, it
is not possible to follow the monthly expenditure plan uniformly
throughout the year. However, in order to avoid accumulation of
unspent balances, the releases in the last quarter have been contained
within the limit of 33% of the budget allocation during 2008-2009 and
2009-2010 as per norms fixed by the Ministry of Finance. The other
measures taken to reduce unspent balances are:—
(i) Any unspent amount as on 31st March of a particular
financial year under MGNREGA is adjusted at the time of
release of first instalment at the beginning of the next
financial year based on approved Labour Budget for the
year. Further, the State Governments have been instructed
to set up State Employment Guarantee Fund in accordance
with the Section 21(1) of MGNREG Act. Setting up of State
Employment Guarantee Fund by the State Government
would provide a greater flexibility to the State Governments
in administering the MGNREGA funds in accordance with
the needs of the districts.
(ii) As regards IA Y, SGSY and DRDA Administration, if the
DRDAs have more unspent balance than the prescribed
limit of 10% of the available funds, the excess carry over
balance is proportionately deducted from the
2nd instalment of Central allocation, if the expenditure
reported upto 31st December is less than 75% of total funds
available during the year including the carry over balance.
It may also be noted that the releases in four quarters of the
financial year during 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 have more or less
followed the pattern in the Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) with
variations being in the range of 2% to 20%.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department
of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)

32
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.17)
The Committee note that the Department has got 6.34 percent
more funds in 2010-11 Budget Estimates over the 2009-10 Revised
Estimates. The Committee desire that Department should initiate steps
for making optimal utilisation of enhanced funds by strictly adhering
to the monthly expenditure plan.
Reply of the Government
The directions of the Committee have been noted. All efforts will
be made to regulate the outgo of funds during 2010-2011 in accordance
with the Monthly Expenditure Plan to the extent possible.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.18)
The Committee note from the reply of the Department that the
monthly expenditure target for MGNREGS is not being maintained
by the Department under the pretext that it is a demand-driven
scheme. In the absence of the information on monthly expenditure
target, it becomes impossible to know the financial achievement of
the MGNREGS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the trend
of expenditure of funds under MGNREGS be shown in each State
and Union Territory in the outcome budget of the Department from
the next financial year.
Reply of the Government
As Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is demand based, there are no pre-
determined targets under the Act. Therefore, monthly expenditure
targets can also not be given under the Act. As regards the trend of
achievements, this may be given in respect of previous years based
on the actual performance of a State/district. Monthly projected
expenditure of States based on agreed Labour Budget can, however,
be indicated.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.48)
The Committee are surprised to note that as per instructions of
Planning Commission, State-wise allocation of funds under various

33
programmes of the Department including IAY and SGSY, is made on
the basis of adjusted share worked out in 1993-94 poverty ratios by
the Planning Commission. The Committee express their dissatisfaction
over taking into account the calculation of 1993-94 as a basis for
allocation of funds since these figures are old and outdated and also
not based on the reality as on date. As more than 17 years have
elapsed, the same calculation cannot be the basis for allocation of
funds. They desire that their unhappiness in this regard be conveyed
to the Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance and the Cabinet
Secretariat at the highest level. They recommend that the allocation
for various schemes of the Department should be based on the latest
calculations made by the Planning Commission without any delay.
Reply of the Government
The observations and recommendations of the Committee with
regard to State-wise allocation of funds under the allocation based
programmes of Department of Rural Development including IAY and
SGSY is being communicated to concerned authorities including the
Planning Commission.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.52)
The Committee find that the Department has not given much
importance to the concurrent evaluation of the Centrally Sponsored
Schemes in the Eleventh Five Year Plan so far as in the case of
Tenth Five Year Plan. The Committee also find that during Tenth
plan period, the Department have completed concurrent evaluation of
four different programmes being implemented by them. They are
surprised to find that only one concurrent evaluation has been started
by the Department during the Eleventh Five Year Plan which is stated
to be under progress. Continuance of the programmes/schemes from
one plan to the other without finding out the achievement of their
aims and objectives is not a healthy practice. The Committee find
that 9 different programmes/schemes are being implemented by the
Department at present. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that an independent and impartial concurrent evaluation of all the
programmes/schemes being implemented by the Department be made
during the remaining period of the Eleventh Five Year Plan, so that
the relevance of their continuance in their present format or the
restructuring of the schemes in the Twelfth Five Plan can be judged.

34
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development places due importance to the
evaluation study of rural development programmes. Earlier, the
Ministry had a empanel of independent reputed research agencies
who have experience in conducting social economic studies in different
part of the country and the evaluation studies of rural development
programmes are assigned among them as per requirement of the study.
During 2007-08, a decision has been taken to invite applications from
the willing agencies through tender process following GFR. A
Committee for each evaluation study under the chairmanship of Chief
Economic Adviser (RD) is constituted with officials of the Ministry
and experts in the field and representative of Planning Commission
as members to suggest weightage to each parameter. Technical bids
are examined accordingly. Thereafter, Financial bids are opened and
agencies are shortlisted combining weightage of technical and financial
bids. This whole process takes four to six months time in selection of
agencies and remaining part i.e. finalizations of methodology , tabulation
plan, conducting of survey, data entry and preparation draft report
takes another six months. Thus the procedure is time consuming, but
it ensures transparency in the process of selection of the agencies.
The Ministry of Rural Development has taken up the following
evaluation studies during XIth Plan:
A. Completed Studies
(i) Evaluation Study of DRDA Administration.
(ii) Sub-mission Projects (quality) under ARWSP.
(iii) Evaluation Study of ARWSP
B. Evaluation Studies under Progress:
• Evaluation Study of SIRD
• Evaluation Study of SGSY
• Impact Assessment Study of PMGSY
• Impact Assessment of all Rural Development Programmes
The evaluation/impact studies of SIRD and SGSY are likely to be
completed shortly, where as other studies of PMGSY and Impact
Assessment may take some more time. The Ministry targets to
complete remaining evaluation/impact studies during XIth Plan.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

35
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 3.16)
The Committee are constrained to note that the inspection of works
taken up under MGNREGA has not been as per the stipulation in
this regard. The operational guidelines of the scheme provides for
100 per cent inspection of works at block level, 10 per cent at district
level and 2 per cent at the State level. As against this, the Committee
find that the percentage of works inspected at block level which was
80.8 per cent during 2008-2009 has fallen to 75.04 per cent during
2009-2010. Similarly, the percentage of works inspected at district level
came down from 14.96 per cent in 2008-2009 to 9.43 per cent in
2009-2010. What is more disturbing is the fact that not even a single
work has been inspected at the State level during 2008-2009 and
2009-2010. The Committee disapprove of this practice that the works
under MGNREGA are not being inspected at various levels in
accordance with the stipulations. They, therefore, recommend that the
operational guidelines in this regard should be strictly followed so
that the impact of the Scheme could be closely monitored.
Reply of the Government
As per reports received from the States/UTs, during 2008-2009,
out of 2774660 total works taken up, 27764 (1.00%) works were
inspected at State level. During 2009-2010, out of a total of 46.01 lakh
works taken up during the year, 4.61 lakh works (10.02%) had been
inspected at the district level and 13417 (0.29%) works had been
inspected at State level. Ministry has issued instructions to all States
to deploy adequate dedicated staff, both technical and non-technical
and to strengthen management and administrative support structure
for MGNREGA at all levels. Administrative expenses under the Act
have been enhanced from 4% to 6% to meet any additional expenditure
in this regard.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 3.23)
The Committee note from the reply of the Department that in
one of the studies made by IIM, Lucknow and NDUAT, Faizabad on
NREGA, it has been found that there is an increase in Minimum
Wages for agricultural labourer and wage earned per day and the
annual income. Further as per the said survey, the bargaining power
of labour is stated to have been increased. Similarly, the earnings per
household has reportedly been increased from Rs. 2795 in 2006-2007

36
to Rs. 4060 in 2008-2009. The Committee would like the Department
to initiate a study to find out the extent to which the availability of
agricultural labour has been affected because of NREGA and apprise
the Committee accordingly .
Reply of the Government
Ministry has so far not commissioned any specific study to assess
the impact of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA on availability of agricultural
labourers. The issue had, however, been raised during the review
meeting. The recommendation made by the Committee has been noted.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 3.38)
The Committee find that under the Bharat Nirman I, the financial
achievement of PMGSY was not at all satisfactory till 2009-2010 as
Rs. 13896.17 crore were released upto January 2010 against the
allocation of Rs.17840 crore. They also find that the physical
performance of PMGSY under Bharat Nirman-I has also not been
satisfactory till 2009-2010. For example, regarding habitations under
new connectivity, the Department could achieve 63 per cent of the
targets, regarding length of new connectivity, the Department could
achieve 69 per cent of the target. Further, for upgradation, against the
target of 116478 habitations, only 67129 habitations have been achieved
till end of January, 2010. The Committee apprehend that with the
pace of implementation of PMGSY, the Department may not be able
to achieve the goal of Bharat Nirman-I in near future. They, therefore,
recommend that immediate corrective steps be initiated by the
Government in this regard and the Committee be apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
In 2009-2010, total allocation for Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY) was Rs. 17,840 crore, which has been released by the
end of financial year 2009-2010. Against the target of connecting 54,648
habitations under Bharat Nirman, the project proposals for connecting
54,429 habitations have been cleared by the Ministry and 36,112
habitations have been provided connectivity by March, 2010. Further,
under New Connectivity, against a target to construct 1,46,185 km.
roads, projects for construction of 1,37,346 km have been cleared and
1,06,157 km. of road length has been constructed up to March, 2010.
Further, against the target for Upgradation/renewal of 1,94,131 km.

37
of road length, 1,97,456 km. have been upgraded/renewed up to
March, 2010. The target date for achieving the targets under Bharat
Nirman has been revised to March, 2012 by the Government. The
Ministry is making efforts to increase the pace of execution in the
States. In order to speed up the implementation of the programme,
the Ministry has advised the States to take all necessary action to
enhance the institutional and execution capacity. In addition, the
following measures have been taken by the Ministry to speed up the
implementation of the programme:
• Provisions of Standard Bidding Document have been
suitably modified to attract more qualified contractors.
• Regular review of the programme by the Ministry.
• On-line monitoring of the Programme.
• Strengthening of 3-tier quality control arrangements.
• Random inspections of PMGSY road projects by National
Quality Monitors (NQMs) to ensure quality in works.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 3.44)
The Committee note that the Department has decided to provide
assistance to 11 States for e-procurement of PMGSY projects during
2009-2010 and 2010-2011. They also note that only one State i.e. Orissa
has done impact assessment study on the e-tendering process in which
participation of bidders from other States have increased in that State.
The Committee find that in this system, participation of local and
small contractors will be minimized. Moreover, the compulsory
maintenance of PMGSY roads after 5 years of construction by the
contractors outside the State may be difficult as they are not aware
of the local conditions, topography etc. Big contractors having access
to the e-tendering might begin to pocket the works under the PMGSY.
The Committee, therefore, desire that percentage of works be fixed
for the local and small contractors also. Besides, the Committee
strongly recommend that there is an urgent need to closely monitor
the maintenance of PMGSY roads during the period of contract.
Reply of the Government
Even prior to Ministry of Rural Development introducing
e-tendering for all PMGSY works, the States like Andhra Pradesh,
Gujarat, Orissa had started the process of e-tendering not only for
PMGSY works but for tendering in other departments as part of

38
improving e-governance. Considering the advantages of transparency,
improved competition, reduction in time of evaluation and decision
making and also the reduction in cost due to switching over from
paper tendering, 11 States had come forward in the 1st instance to
make use of the assistance provided by the Ministry for e-procurement.
Capacity building of the organizations and the contractors is necessary
for the successful implementation of e-procurement. The system also
provides for free registration to the contractors and accessibility of
information regarding tender notices to all the bidders. As such, the
assistance provided by the Ministry includes training to various stake-
holders, and in providing help-line facilities to answer queries related
to the process of e-tendering. Extensive training was imparted to
various stake-holders including cyber-cafe owners in Orissa who could
assist contractors in the e-tendering process. The system of
e-procurement does not require physical presence of the intending
bidder, either at the time of purchase of tender document or at the
time of submissions or opening. As such any eligible contractor can
participate in the bidding process without any fear. Therefore, the
system provides equal opportunity to all the contractors- big or small
and provides level playing field for all the contractors. Tenders under
PMGSY are of relatively small size and are not much likely to attract
big contractors from remote places. Further, local contractors would
have advantage of being local and hence can match the bigger ones
in terms of prices. However, as the system of e-tendering progresses,
concerns of the Committee will be kept in mind and if any such
trend is observed in future, a suitable decision would be considered
at that time.
As per the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, rural roads are
within the jurisdiction of the State Governments. State Governments
or PRIs are required to own, construct, operate and maintain the
rural roads. PMGSY is a special intervention to provide 100% finance
for construction of important rural roads as per core network. As per
the programme guidelines, maintenance of assets created under the
programme is required to be carried out and funded by the respective
State Governments. The aspect of level of maintenance of PMGSY
roads by States during contract period, i.e.  5 years from the
construction, is also being monitored by the National Rural Roads
Development Agency (NRRDA). Once the contractual period of
maintenance is over, the State Government is expected to make a
maintenance plan for maintaining these roads and may award the
maintenance contract to same or other contractor or maintain it
departmentally as per its choice.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

39
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 3.80)
The Committee find that the unspent balance under SGSY as on
31.12.2009 is stated to be more than 43 per cent of the available funds
which gives the impression that the implementing agencies have
enough amount of funds with them. The Committee also note that
the financial performance of SGSY was not satisfactory as only 82 per
cent of the available funds during 2007-2008 were utilized that came
down to 73 per cent in 2008-2009 and to 67 per cent in 2009-2010.
The Committee find that the SGSY scheme is being replaced by the
National Rural Livelihood Mission. The SGSY Scheme was launched
in 1999 with certain aims and objectives. The Committee would like
to know how far the said SGSY has achieved its objectives in the last
decade. The Committee would also like to know the reasons for
restructuring the SGSY. They further note that initially the SGSY also
was restructured from the IRDP because of the failure of the said
scheme. It cannot be said with certainty that NRLM will not have the
same fate as that of the IRDP and SGSY simply by changing the
name. Therefore, before venturing on the restructuring and renaming
the scheme, the reasons for failure be properly studied and found
out. All States, Union territories and the stakeholders may be consulted
before the NRLM is implemented in a large scale throughout the
country.
Reply of the Government
Under SGSY during the last decade of its implementation about
38 lakh Self Help Groups have been formed out of which 8.9 lakh
SHGs have taken up income generating activities and 142 lakh
Swarozgaris have been assisted with the bank credit and subsidy out
of which 67 lakh Swarozgaris were SC/STs and 83 lakh women
Swarozgaris. The total investment under the programme is of
Rs. 33798 crore. The per capita investment during 1999 was Rs. 17,000
per sawarozgari which rose to Rs. 31817 during 2009-2010. Under the
Special projects 89 placement linked skill development projects to over
more than 7.60 lakh rural BPL youth have been sanctioned. About
1.30 lakh beneficiaries have been trained and over 99000 have got
placement so far.
The need for restructuring the SGSY has emerged basically due to
the following:
(a) The findings of various studies conducted by the agencies
National Institute of Rural Development, Banking Institute
of Rural Development ( BIRD), Concurrent evaluation of
SGSY by CMD, Thiruvananthapuram.

40
(b) Report of the Working Group/ Steering Committee of the
Planning Commission of 11th Plan & recommendations of
Prof. Radhakrishana Committee set up by the Ministry to
review the credit flow to SHGs under the SGSY including
policy environment, guidelines and to suggest measures and
strategies for effective and adequate credit linkages to the
SHGs.
(c) The gaps identified during the implementation of SGSY
during the last ten years.
The shortcomings identified under the programme are:—
— Inadequate Manpower and lack of professional expertise to
implement the complex and process oriented programme.
Existing staff are overburdened with number of schemes
being implemented by the District Rural Development
Agencies (DRDAs),
— Little flexibility to the states for innovations based on their
specific needs,
— Inadequate institutional arrangements for programme
implementation,
— Existing institution have limited capacity for training and
are inaccessible to rural poor,
— Inadequate flow of credit on account of both supply side
constraints like lack of sufficient number of bank branches
or adequately manned branches in the rural areas and
demand side constraints like inadequate skills among
beneficiaries, projects not properly prepared etc.
— High interest rates on credit by banks to the poor
beneficiaries,
— Most of the SHG enterprises are economically unviable,
— SHG members need multiple doses of credit and
long- term hand holding which is missing at present.
The proposal for restructuring SGSY has been prepared to remove
the shortcomings experienced in SGSY based on the recommendations
by the following task forces/committees/consultations:
(1) A Task Force under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary
(SGSY), Department of Rural Development, Ministry of
Rural Development.
(2) A Committee under the Chairmanship of DDG, NIRD,
Hyderabad.

41
(3) Professor Radhakrishana Committee on Credit related issues
of SGSY
(4) A Task Force constituted under the Chairmanship of
Minister of Rural Development.
(5) National Level meeting of all State Ministers of Rural
Development & Panchayati Raj for soliciting, inter-alia, their
views on the proposal for National Rural Livelihoods
Mission.
(6) Consultations with State Secretaries of Rural Development
during various review meetings.
The new approach proposed under NRLM, especially that of
having a dedicated sensitive support structure from National, State,
district and sub-district levels for better planning and implementation
of the programme and the flexibility to be provided to the states for
having state specific poverty reduction action plans as per their own
requirements, is based on the successful implementation of rural anti
poverty programmes through women SHGs in some states viz Andhra
Pradesh, Kerala and Tamilnadu. In accordance with this approach
each State will be expected to develop its own strategy, which will be
based on their socio-cultural-economic context. There will be no rigid
guidelines for the programme by this Ministry, instead only a broad
framework will be provided for the states to develop their own
poverty reduction strategies. In addition, there will be no imposition
of targets on the states—the process will be self driven.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 3.81)
The Committee hope that the present discussions about the norms
of the NRLM between the Ministry of Finance and the Department of
Rural Development would be concluded within the next 10-15 days,
as has been mentioned by the Secretary during the course of oral
evidence. The Committee would like to know the details of the final
decision on the different opinions of these two Ministries and desire
that the same may be communicated to them.
Reply of the Government
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has approved
the proposal for restructuring of SGSY as National Rural Livelihood
Mission (NRLM).
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

42
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 3.90)
The Committee note that as per the reply a new initiative in the
form of Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) have been
established as dedicated institutes for training of rural BPL youth to
enable them to take up self employment or wage employment. Further,
these institutes should be set up in each rural district, numbering 619
in 2009-10. The committee find that as per the RSETIs guidelines
70 per cent of the trainees should be from rural BPL category which
also states that balance 30 per cent can be from APL category. The
Committee would like to know the number of BPL youth targeted to
be trained and are actually trained District-wise in RSETI, State and
Union territory wise. The Committee note that reply of the Department
that the training expenditure on rural BPL beneficiary will only be
provided by the DRDAs only . They would also like to know as to
how many APL youth have been trained State and Union territory
wise. The Department should find out ways and means to train APL
Youth while giving priority to the BPL youth living in rural areas.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development proposes to support
establishment of 500 Rural Self Employment Training Institutes
(RSETIs) one each in 500 districts of the country within the 11th Five
Year Plan. As per the Guidelines, the RSETIs shall identify, orient,
motivate, train, assist and handhold a minimum of 750 rural BPL
youth per year to take up self employment or wage employment.
The details of BPL and APL youth actually trained District-wise in
the country during the year 2009-10 is given in Appendix-II. The
focus of the Government would continue to be the rural BPL youth
till such time they are brought above the poverty line by ensuring
appreciable increase in their incomes over a period of time. However,
the APL youth would also get training from the RSETIs to the extent
of 30 per cent of target numbers.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 3.113)
The Committee find that the financial performance of Indira Awaas
Yojana (IA Y) was not satisfactory during 2009-10 as only
Rs. 6248.99 crore were released upto end January 2010 against the
target of Rs. 8800 crore. Regarding the physical achievement, the
performance of IAY was also less than 50 per cent during 2009-2010

43
as it has been informed that 18.16 lakh houses were reportedly
constructed against the target of 40.52 lakh houses. Another disturbing
fact was that the number of houses ‘under construction’ category was
27.21 lakh whereas the Department could complete construction of
18.15 lakh houses which implies that the houses taken over for
construction spilled over to the next financial year. Since the idea
behind the scheme is to provide shelter to the poor, the Committee,
therefore, recommend that immediate corrective steps be initiated by
the Department in each of these aspects for the implementation of
IAY and the Committee be apprised accordingly .
Reply of the Government
The funds under Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) are released in two
instalments. While the first instalment amounting to 50% of the
allocation, is released suo moto  in the beginning of the year after
passing of the Budget, the second instalment is released only after
receipt of proposals from the District Rural Development Agencies
(DRDAs) along with Utilization Certificate and Audit Report for the
funds released during the previous year and expenditure of at least
60% of the total available funds during the current year. As per IAY
guidelines, the last date for receipt of proposals for 2nd instalment is
31st December though there is no bar in submitting the proposals
earlier. Accordingly, the 2nd instalment of IAY funds is in the latter
part of the year. However, by the end of the year 100% funds provided
for Rural Housing were released. Similarly , the physical achievement
by the end of the year is 33.36 lakh houses against the physical target
of 40.52 lakh houses. Generally, more than 90% of the physical targets
are achieved every year. However, the physical target for the year
2009-10 could not be achieved because of imposition of Model Code
of Conduct due to General Elections to the Lok Sabha, which remained
in force from 1st March to 16th May , 2009. During this period the
implementation of IAY Scheme remained suspended. The budget for
the year was also passed in the month of July, 2009 and therefore,
there was delay in release of funds also, which led to delayed receipt
of proposals for 2nd instalment affecting overall performance of IAY
during the year. However, efforts will be made to make up the shortfall
during the current financial year 2010-11.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

44
Recommendation (Serial No. 29, Para No. 3.125)
The Committee note that the restructured Provision of Urban
Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA) Scheme was started from 2003-04.
Between 2003–04 and 2007-08, the PURA scheme was implemented
on a pilot basis. Although, allocation for the scheme was made in
each financial year thereafter, the Committee find that the expenditure
for the scheme was nil. The Committee also note that for the
2010–11, Budget Estimate of the Scheme is Rs. 124 crore as against
the BE of Rs. 30 crore during 2009–10. The Committee find that the
PURA scheme is again being implemented as a pilot scheme during
the remaining years of the 11th Five Year Plan. They find that the
only difference in the implementation of the scheme is that it is now
being implemented through a Public Private Partnership (PPP) which
has not been attempted till date in any of the programmes of the
Department being implemented in rural areas. They, therefore,
recommend that before venturing on implementing the pilot projects
again, the Government should get the results on ground before
implementing the scheme on a test check basis after which the scheme
can be extended to the whole country.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Rural Development implemented Provision of Urban
Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA) Scheme on a pilot basis in seven
clusters for a period of three years during 2004-05 to 2006-07. No
budgetary allocation was made for PURA scheme, however,
Rs. 5.78 crore was released in 2003-04 to different States for preparation
of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) by re-appropriation of savings under
different scheme of the Ministry. The pilot phase ended in
March 2007.
Meanwhile efforts continued towards formulation of a restructured
scheme right from the time the pilot phase was in operation. Based
on the findings of the evaluation study by NIRD, comments of various
Ministries/Departments, feedback received during consultation with
private sector representatives and officials of State Governments, and
the recommendations of the consulting team of Asian Development
Bank (ADB), the scheme of PURA has been restructured. The
Government has approved the restructured PURA scheme for
implementation on a pilot basis during 11th Plan. The restructured
PURA scheme proposes holistic and accelerated development of
compact areas around a potential growth centre in a Gram Panchayat

45
(or group of Gram Panchayats) through Public Private Partnership
(PPP) framework by providing livelihood opportunities and urban
amenities to improve the quality of life in rural areas. The scheme is
being implemented to test the unique features i.e. Public Private
Partnership (PPP) of this scheme on the ground. The Ministry of
Rural Development accepts recommendations of the Committee.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 30, Para No. 3.134)
The Committee note that the entire funds allocated for the scheme
since 2006-07 has been released to the DRDAs across the country. The
Committee also note that a little over Rs. 249 crore has been released
under the DRDA Administration scheme during 2009-2010 against the
Central allocation of Rs. 250 crore. The Committee find that the
allocation of the Scheme has been increased in 2010-11 to Rs. 405
crore. With this substantial enhancement in funds for the scheme, the
Committee desire that the Department should urge all the State and
Union Territories to utilize the entire funds given for this Scheme.
The Committee should be apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
During the last few years the budget allocation under DRDA
Administration Scheme has not been adequate and the DRDAs were
complaining about difficulty in paying the salary to their staff due to
shortage of funds. The budget allocation for the year 2009-10 i.e.
Rs. 250 crore, was even less than the expenditure for the year
2008-09 which was Rs. 292 crore. During the year 2009-10, the
requirement of salary and other administrative costs increased
considerably due to implementation of 6th Pay Commission Report
by many States. Based on the request of the DRDAs for higher
allocation, the Ministry took up the matter with the Planning
Commission for increasing the allocation under DRDA administration
from Rs. 250 crore to Rs. 385 crore for 2009-10 and Rs. 405 crore for
the year 2010-11. The Planning Commission agreed to our request
and the allocation for 2009-10 was increased to Rs. 385 crore by way
of re-appropriation of funds and allocation for the year 2010-11 was
fixed at Rs. 405 crore.
The entire amount of Rs. 385 crore was released to the DRDAs
during 2009-10. The allocation of Rs. 405 crore for the year 2010-11
against the previous year’s expenditure of Rs. 385 crore is not
substantial and it is likely to be fully utilized during 2010-11.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

46
Recommendation (Serial No. 31, Para No. 3.148)
The Committee note that the BE of CAPART has been doubled
from Rs. 50 crore in 2009-10 to Rs. 100 crore in 2010-11. However,
they find that the physical targets for CAPART have not been increased
commensurate with the enhanced allocation this year. Further, between
these two years the physical target has been increased from 950
projects last year to 1340 projects this year. However, they find even
during 2009-10 against a target of 950 projects the CAPART has an
achievement of 54 projects only. Similarly, against the target of 50
Gram Shree Melas only 6 Melas has been arranged. Not only that the
financial achievement of CAPART has come down from 83.53 percent
in 2008-09 to 47.26 percent during 2009-10 (upto 31.01.2010). The
Committee feel that before enhancing the financial outlay of CAPART,
the performance vis-à-vis a target should have been reviewed and
necessary corrective action should have been taken. The Committee
would like to urge that the CAPART should take vigorous steps to
achieve the financial target in the coming years.
Reply of the Government
The year 2009-10 was largely spent on reviewing and consolidating
the working of CAPART and planning new schemes and programmes
that would make CAPART more relevant organisation to respond to
new aspirations of rural poor in the context of increasing pace of all
round development and changing global realities. It was in this context
that the Executive Committee of CAPART consciously decided to give
a pause to sanctioning of new projects under old schemes. This also
explains the reasons for not achieving physical as well as financial
targets.
While increasing the budget the physical targets have not been
increased proportionately as the Council expects that the project under
newly launched schemes and programmes would require greater outlay
and hence the average size of projects would be larger.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 51 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 33, Para No. 3.154)
The Committee note that the Executive Committee of CAPART
has approved revised new schemes for implementation that inter-alia
include 50 most backward districts. The Committee fail to understand

47
the criteria of selecting the backward districts in the first place.
Moreover, it has been admitted that the backwardness in the districts
chosen cannot be wiped out by the intervention of CAPART only.
The Committee desire that the criteria for selection of 50 most
backward districts be made clear. Moreover, the schemes proposed to
be implemented in these districts may be scrutinized by the
Department of Rural Development to ensure that the funds spent on
them deliver the intended benefits to the deserving people. The
committee may also be kept apprised of the details of schemes being
undertaken in these backward districts.
Reply of the Government
The fifty backward districts have been chosen entirely on the basis
of the selection made by the Ministry of Rural Development. The
recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 35, Para No. 3.168)
The NIRD is a premier institute in the country engaged in training,
research and consultancy for the last three decades. The Committee
note that apart from the funds provided by the Ministry of Rural
Development the NIRD was earning income from other Ministries of
Government of India during 2003-04 to 2006-07, which has not been
shown during the later years. In this regard the Committee desire
that NIRD should also strive to obtain assistance from other Ministries
on whose behalf research and training projects are being under taken
by it. Further, from this year, the Committee desire that NIRD may
strive to obtain some overseas consultancy projects in order to augment
its resources of funds. The action taken in this regard may be intimated
to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
NIRD is engaged in training, research and consultancy activities
in rural development sector for the last five decades. NIRD conducts
training programmes and research studies focusing on flagship
programmes of the Ministry of Rural Development, Govt. of India.
This is the main focus and mandate of NIRD. NIRD has been
concentrating on capacity development of functionaries for major
flagship programmes of NIRD like MGNREGA, SGSY, Rural Housing,
Rural Roads, Drinking Water etc. where huge amounts are spent by

48
the Ministry. While attaching highest priority for training and research
programmes, NIRD is also trying to cater to the needs of other
Ministries such as HRD, etc. However, further efforts will be made to
take up more sponsored studies from other Ministries with a view to
augmenting the resources of funds.
NIRD has continuing relationship with CIRDAP and AARDO. As
a result of this collaboration, training and research programmes are
taken up to cater to the needs of different countries in Asia and
Africa. NIRD has also entered into partnership with the Afghanistan
Institute of Rural Development (AIRD), Govt. of Afghanistan, for
capacity development of Rural Development functionaries in
Afghanistan. As a part of this agreement, faculty members of NIRD
have visited AIRD for establishment of Rural Technology Park at AIRD.
The officials of the Government of Afghanistan have also attended
training programmes on Capacity Development at NIRD. NIRD is
making further efforts to increase the number of international research
and training activities in collaboration with other institutions in the
area of rural development.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 36, Para No. 3.169)
From the examination of the performance of different Central
Sector and Centrally sponsored schemes of the Department of Rural
Development, the Committee have received an overall impression that
the schemes are not functioning the way, they should have. There is
no proper monitoring of the schemes as far as their financial and
physical performance is concerned. The targets are not being within
the stipulated deadlines. Allocations are being made without proper
assessment of the past performance of the schemes. The Committee
desire that the Department should ensure that the schemes are
formulated and implemented in a way, so that their benefits reach
the poorest of the poor living in the rural areas.
Reply of the Government
The Schemes of the Ministry of Rural Development are
implemented by the State Govts./UT Administrations as per the
programme guidelines. The Ministry of Rural Development has
released/utilized 91.05% funds with respect to budget allocation.
The Programme Divisions monitor their respective programmes/
schemes intensively on a regular basis. Besides, the Ministry monitors
all the programmes through, (i) periodical progress reports  i.e. monthly

49
and quarterly progress reports, (ii) Performance Review Committee,
(iii) Area Officer’s Schemes, (iv) Vigilance and Monitoring Committees
at the State and District Levels and (v) National Level Monitors.
The State Government and Union Territory Administrations have been
advised to adopt a five-pronged strategy to improve the
implementation of the rural development schemes consisting of
(i) creation of awareness about the schemes, (ii) transparency, (iii)
people’s participation, (iv) accountability, social audit and (v) vigilance
and monitoring of rural development programmes at all levels to
achieve maximum success rate.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

50
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.21)
The Committee note that some interest is earned by the DRDAs
on the funds made available to them which includes amount released
to them during the previous year. However, no separate accounts
were maintained on the interest accrual on unspent balance. In view
of the fact that huge amount is left with the implementing agencies,
the Committee recommend that the interest earned by the DRDAs on
the unspent balance be invariably shown in the Budget documents of
the Department from the next financial year. They also recommend
that funds released during the last two months of the financial year
should not be taken into account while arriving at the excess carry
over of the available funds at the beginning of the next financial
year.
Reply of the Government
The DRDAs are autonomous bodies registered under the Societies
Registration Act. The Central and State share of assistance is released
to the DRDAs in the form of grants-in-aid under various Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of this Department. The DRDAs maintain separate
bank account for each Scheme. The interest earned by DRDAs on the
total available funds (which inter-alia includes unspent balances for
the previous year and the grants-in-aid received during the current
financial year) is treated as receipt of the DRDAs and as a part of the
Programme Fund. The interest receipt is included in the total available
funds at the disposal of DRDAS and is taken into account while
releasing further instalment of funds.
Since interest earned by DRDAs is not refunded to the Department,
the same can not be treated as the receipt of the Government of
India. Therefore, the interest earned by the DRDAs on the total
available funds which also include the unspent balance of the previous
year cannot be shown in the Budget documents of the Department
either in the Receipt Budget or Expenditure Budget.
The other recommendation of the Committee that ‘funds released
during the last two months of the financial year should not be taken

51
into account while arriving at the excess carry over of the available
funds at the beginning of the next financial year’, has been noted.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.55)
The Committee note that at present there is no permanent office
of the District Vigilance and Monitoring Committees. They also find
that no permanent staff has been posted to provide secretarial
assistance to the District level vigilance and monitoring Committees
(V&MCs). The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department
of Rural Development should find out ways and means to establish
and functionalise permanent Office of the District level V&MC in
each district of the country within the next two years.
Reply of the Government
The V&MC meetings are convened by the Member Secretary of
the Committee. Member Secretary of the district V&MC is the District
Collector/District Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner for the District
V&MC. Officers in-charge of the Line Departments (such as PWD,
Water Supply, Irrigation, Forest, Agriculture) etc. executing the
Programmes of Rural Development and any other related Department
assist the Committee in the discharge of its functions. The District
authorities provide logistic support for convening the V&MC meetings.
As the V&MC meetings are to be held once in a quarter, there does
not seem to be any need to have permanent office and personnel/
office staff for V&MCs separately.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.56)
The Committee note the reply of the Department that monitoring
of the Schemes of the Department is done through the Area Officers
scheme, National Level Monitors (NLMs) etc. They also note that at
present Officers from the Central Ministry visit the district to monitor
the schemes and find out as to whether the schemes are being
implemented as per the guidelines. The Committee find to some extent
the same work of monitoring is done by the Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees (V&MCs) at the District level. As of now, the Central
team of monitors visiting districts do not inform the Vigilance and

52
Monitoring Committees (V&MCs) about their visit. The Committee
desire that the Department should invariably inform the Vigilance &
Monitoring Committees (V&MCs) and its Chairman and Vice-Chairman
about their visits to the Districts. Necessary changes in the guidelines
be made and the Committee be apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The National Level Monitors (NLMs) empanelled by the Ministry
of Rural Development to monitor the implementation of its
programmes are required to provide a copy of their report to the
Chairman of the District Vigilance and Monitoring Committees of the
district when they go for regular monitoring of RD programmes. As
desired by the Committee, all Area Officers of the Ministry are being
directed to inform concerned Chairman/Co-Chairman of the district
V&MCs before they proceed to any district for monitoring of Rural
Development Programmes.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 3.114)
The Committee find that the allocation of funds for IAY is based
on 75:25 weightage to housing shortage and the poverty ratio
respectively at the State level. They note, the reply of the Department
that in addition to the above formula, at the district level the allocation
is based on 75:25 weightage to the housing shortage and rural
SC/ST population respectively. The Committee also note that this
criteria has been changed recently. They note that the Department is
conducting the BPL households survey and finding out the number
of families living the below poverty line in rural areas at the beginning
of each five year plan. They also find that a fresh BPL Survey is
being conducted by the Department. The Committee fail to understand
the rationale for adopting a different criteria for allocation of funds
under IAY on the basis of the type of construction as brought out in
the Census Report of the Registrar General of India. The Committee
feel that the allocation of funds for IAY being made in this manner
is not proper and it should invariably be based on the latest BPL
family survey. The Committee in this regard recommend that the
allocation for IAY be done as per the fresh BPL survey across the
country being done by the Department only and it should not be
based on any other criteria like type of construction etc. and they be
apprised accordingly.

53
Reply of the Government
The criteria for allocation of funds under IAY to the States have
not been revised recently. The criteria was revised from the year
2005-06 when the figures of housing shortage was supplied to this
Ministry by the Registrar General of India in January 2005. The revised
criteria was recommended by the Planning Commission and approved
by the National Development Council. Further, the criteria is not based
on the type of construction but based on the housing shortage in
rural areas and poverty ratio. However, the housing data of fresh
BPL Survey or of fresh Census will be taken into account as soon as
figures of these surveys are made available.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 32, Para No. 3.149)
The Committee find that the budget of CAPART is not being
allocated to each of its Regional Committees located at 9 different
cities. The Committee in this regard desire that in order to strengthen
the regional committees funds of the CAPART be allocated for each
of its Regional Committees from the next financial year.
Reply of the Government
Each Regional Committee is allocated a budget at the beginning
of the year as a part of the internal budget exercise.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 34, Para No. 3.167)
The Committee note that the plan funds of NIRD have been
multiplied seven times from Rs. 15 Crores in 2009-10 BE to
Rs. 105 Crore in 2010-11 without corresponding increase in physical
targets. The targets have more or less remained the same/slightly
increased between 2009-10 and 2010-2011. For example, during
2009-10, 475 training programmes were targeted as against 523 training
programmes during 2010-11. They also find that number of research
and action research studies targeted during 2009-10 was 19 against
which during 2010-11 the same has been targeted for 23 studies.
Therefore, there is a need to suitably enhance the physical targets
also commensurate with the increase in the budget of NIRD for
2010-11.

54
Reply of the Government
National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) undertakes
capacity development of rural development officials, functionaries,
elected representatives, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and
Community Based Organisations (CBOs) through training and research.
NIRD also gives policy and programme analysis and feedback on
implementation of rural development programmes to the Ministry of
Rural Development through action research and impact studies. NIRD
has two regional centres, North-Eastern Regional Centre (NERC) at
Guwahati and Eastern Regional Centre (ERC) at Patna. Besides a
Centre on wage employment and livelihoods is going to be established
at Jaipur, Rajasthan.
Another important activity of the NIRD is publications and
dissemination of information on rural development matters. The
Institute has a strong publication record including research and impact
studies reports. NIRD also publishes Journal of Rural Development, a
quarterly publication which contains critical articles on various rural
development issues of relevance and significance.
NIRD has also introduced one year PG Diploma programme in
Rural Development Management (PGDRDM) starting from 2008-2009
onwards, to develop a committed and competent cadre of rural
development management professionals in the country. With these
multifarious activities, NIRD is fully engaged and strives to achieve
excellence in capacity development of rural development functionaries
and contribute to policy analysis and programme implementation in
rural development in the country.
To meet the requirement of increased number of training and
other capacity development programmes, NIRD proposed creation and
improvement of infrastructure like training halls and hostel blocks at
NIRD and its regional centres at Guwahati and Patna. During
2009-10, the Executive Council of NIRD approved the proposal for
establishment of a NIRD Regional Centre at Jaipur on wage
employment and livelihoods. The Jaipur Centre is proposed to be a
National Centre with full-fledged amenities for training and research
activities on the focus areas of wage employment and livelihoods. A
NIRD Centre is also proposed to be established in Delhi to cater to
the needs of training, research and conducting international
programmes.
Thus, the NIRD’s budget has been prepared taking into account
the requirement of funds for improvement and development of new
infrastructure, establishment of new centres, need for larger outreach
in terms of training and research, etc.

55
As regards the observations of the Committee that the Plan funds
of NIRD have been multiplied seven times from Rs. 15 crore in
2009-10 to Rs. 105 crore in 2010-11 without corresponding increase in
physical targets, the following are submitted:
For the year 2009-10, NIRD had prepared budget estimates for an
amount of Rs. 69.17 crore taking into account the capital expenditure
for the establishment of new hostels for strengthening the existing
physical infrastructure in Patna and NERC, Guwahati and also at the
headquarters. However, the required funds were not allocated for
NIRD when the Annual Plan was finalized by the Planning
Commission.
For the year 2010-11, the budget estimates planned are for an
amount of Rs. 105 crore which shows that the increase in the Plan
funds during the current year is to the extent of Rs. 35.83 crore over
the proposals for 2009-10. This increase is mainly on account of the
requirement of funds for the establishment of Jaipur Centre and also
development of infrastructure at Guwahati and the proposed NIRD
Centre at Delhi.
Besides, NIRD will also be playing a lead role in developing the
capacities of more than 10 lakh PRI functionaries through networking
with SIRDs, ETCs and other organizations engaged in training.
The target for training programmes in 2010-11 has been enhanced
from 551 in 2009-2010 to 906 programmes.
As regards research studies, NIRD has taken up 24 research studies
for the current year. A large number of research studies taken up in
2009-2010 are yet to be completed and including such studies
altogether 55 research studies will be taken up and completed during
2010-11. This is, because many of the research studies of last year
were started towards the fag end of the financial year or initiated
during the beginning of the current year.
It may be seen that in the area of training and research, there is
substantial increase proposed during the year 2010-2011, although the
increase in financial terms is only an amount of Rs. 3.73 crore for
training and research as compared to 2009-2010. In the circumstances
the outlay of Rs. 105 crores in 2010-2011, Rs. 67.00 crore under capital
and Rs. 38.00 crore under revenue is justified in view of the increased
activities of the Institute.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

56
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.45)
The Committee note that the expenditure on BPL Census 1997
which was Rs. 56.08 crore paid from the IRDP head, that increased to
Rs. 75.96 crore for the BPL Census 2002 and for the latest BPL Census,
Rs. 312 crore have been targeted to be spent. The Committee also
notes that the Planning Commission is the nodal agency in
Government of India for estimation of poverty ratio of persons living
below the poverty line in rural and urban areas for all India as well
as for the States/UTs. The Committee would like to know the exact
number of persons living below poverty line in this country as on
date and the definition being used by the Government to define the
poverty line for providing funds under different Central Sector/
Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
Reply of the Government
The Planning Commission estimates the percentage and number
of persons living Below the Poverty Line (BPL) at national and State
level, separately in rural and urban areas from the large sample survey
on household consumer expenditure conducted by the National Sample
Survey Organization (NSSO) at an interval of approximately five years
following the methodology contained in the Report of the Expert
Group on Estimation of Proportion and Number of Poor (Lakdawala
Committee). The latest estimates of the percentage and number of
persons living below the poverty line is available for the year
2004-05 based on the large sample survey of consumer expenditure
data of the 61st Round of NSS (July 2004-June 2005). According to
theses estimates, 30.17 crore persons (27.5% of the total population)
lived below the poverty line. State-wise poverty ratio as per poverty
estimates of 2004-05 are enclosed at Appendix-I.
The Poverty Line estimated by the Planning Commission is
expressed in terms of per capita consumption expenditure needed to
attain a minimum amount of calorie intake out of food consumption
along with a minimum amount of non-food expenditure in order to

57
meet the requirement of clothing, shelter, transport etc. The per capita
consumption norms has been fixed at Rs. 49.09 per month in rural
areas and Rs. 56.64 per month in urban areas at 1973-74 prices at
national level corresponding to a basket of goods and services
anchored on a norm of per capita daily calorie requirement of
2400 calories in rural areas and 2100 calories in urban areas. The
national level rural and urban poverty lines (in 1973-74) are
disaggregated into State-specific poverty lines using State-specific price
indices and inter-State price differentials using the method outlined
in the Report of the Expert Group on Estimation of Proportion and
Number of Poor (Lakdawala Committee). These State-specific poverty
lines of 1973-74 are updated for the later years using State-specific
Consumer Price Index of Agricultural Labourers (CPIAL) in the rural
areas and Consumer Price Index of Industrial Workers (CPIIW) in the
urban areas. The national poverty line at 2004-05 prices is Rs. 356.30
per capita per month in the rural areas and Rs. 538.60 per capita per
month in the urban areas.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.46)
The Committee note with concern that earlier Below Poverty Line
Census conducted during 1992, 1997 and 2002 by the Ministry of
Rural Development had reflected many irregularities and shortcomings.
The Committee have been informed that several ineligible beneficiaries
were selected as people/families living below the Poverty Line in
rural areas. In the later stages the same ineligible BPL list cardholders
could not be excluded from the BPL Census. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that before venturing on calculating the BPL families
living in rural areas the Ministry should keep a provision to exclude
anyone who is found to be living above the poverty line at any point
of time in order to ensure that the benefits of schemes meant for BPL
population reach the deserving people only.
The Committee also note that the BPL Survey being carried out
by the Ministry is to be carried out at the beginning of each Five
Year Plan. However, no BPL Survey has been done so far during the
11th Five Year Plan (2007-2012). The Committee note from the reply
of the Department that Rs. 150 crore has been released for conducting
the BPL Survey in 2009-10. They also note that during 2010-11 BE,

58
the Ministry has been allocated Rs. 162 crore. The Committee find
that in total Rs. 312 crore has already been made available for
conducting the latest BPL Survey. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that these funds should be utilized fully and the proposed
BPL Survey be made within the targeted time so that benefits intended
under various schemes may reach the genuine beneficiaries will in
time. The said survey should reflect the correct persons living below
the poverty line.
Reply of the Government
In the guidelines for BPL Census 2002, in order to ensure
transparency, the States were advised to give wide publicity to the
BPL list, get it approved from the Gram Sabha and to display it on
the website and in prominent places like the Panchayat headquarters.
A two-stage Appeal Mechanism was also introduced to redress the
grievances of the people. Under the appeal mechanism, any household
can file first appeal before the designated authority and if still not
satisfied, final appeal can be filed with the District Collector. The
appeal mechanism provided under the guidelines is a continuous
process and could keep the BPL list updated.
While framing guidelines for conducting forthcoming BPL Census,
the concerns raised by the Parliament Standing Committee regarding
provision to exclude anyone who is found to be living above the
poverty line at any point of time in order to ensure that the benefits
of schemes meant for BPL population reach the deserving people only
would be considered.
Rs. 150 crores allocated for BPL Census during 2009-10 have been
fully released. Similarly all out efforts would be made to utilize the
allocated Rs.162 crores BPL Census during 2010-11. The BPL Census
is conducted by the State Governments with technical and financial
assistance from the Ministry of Rural Development. While issuing
Guidelines for conducting BPL Census, the concerns raised by the
Parliamentary Standing Committee regarding inclusion of genuine poor
in the BPL list would be impressed upon and training & sensitization
on this issue of the responsible agencies will be undertaken.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)

59
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.47)
The Committee would like to recommend that the Department
by using the existing facilities including the latest information
technology, should find out the exact status of the BPL families
identified by them in the 2002 BPL Census, as of now.
The Committee also desires that the results of the current BPL
Census being done by the Department should be made available on
the website of the Department, beneficiary-wise, so that the conditions
of the persons/families living below the poverty line can be verified
in subsequent years.
The Committee desire that the Department in subsequent years
should judge as to whether the money being spent by them for
uplifting families of below poverty line is really giving the desired
results or not.
Reply of the Government
It is expected that the two-stage Appeal Mechanism and provision
of ceiling for total number of households to be identified as BPL
would keep the BPL list updated and this makes the BPL list a
dynamic one. The forthcoming BPL Census in any case will further
up-date the list. Finding the Status of BPL families of BPL Census
2002 against the list generated under forthcoming BPL Census would
be considered once results of forthcoming BPL Census are available.
The BPL Census is conducted by the State Governments with
technical and financial assistance from the Ministry of Rural
Development. While framing Guidelines for conducting forthcoming
BPL Census, States/UTs would be requested to make the BPL lists
available on the website.
The Ministry of Rural Development conducts Impact assessment/
concurrent evaluation studies to assess the Impact of various Rural
development programmes from time to time.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.54)
The Committee find that as per the extant guidelines a meeting
in each quarter of a year should be held by the State-level Vigilance
and Monitoring Committees. The composition of the State-level
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees is such that holding of one

60
such meeting in each quarter of the year is not possible due to various
reasons including non-availability of the Chairperson and members.
The Committee feel that the stipulation of holding one meeting during
each quarter and then finding that the States are not able to hold the
required number of State-level V&MC meetings might be an indication
that the stipulation itself is now proving to be unrealistic. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that this aspect may be examined
in detail and if found necessary, the guidelines may be amended
accordingly .
Reply of the Government
Vigilance & Monitoring Committee (V&MC) provides crucial role
to MPs and other peoples’ representatives in the monitoring of
implementation of the RD programmes. As per Guidelines, V&MC
meetings are to be held every quarter. As per the information available,
State-level meetings held in the year 2008-09 and 2009-10 were 36
and 10 respectively. Lesser number of meetings in 2009-10 could be
due to the reason that after the formation of 15th Lok Sabha, Ministry
issued Guidelines for reconstituting V&MCs at State and District level
on 26.8.2009. Thereafter, the State/District Authorities started
reconstituting the V&MCs and holding their meetings. The Ministry
impress upon the States/UTs to hold the regular meetings in view of
the large amount of Plan Allocation under the various flagship
programmes of the Ministry. Diluting the requirement of holding the
meetings every quarter may weaken the monitoring process.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 3.9)
The Committee note with concern that as against a minimum of
100 days of work that should be provided as per the MGNREG Act,
the Department could only provided 51 days of work by utilizing all
the available funds for the scheme in the year 2009-10. They further
find that during the previous years, the number of days of work
provided under the Scheme was 48 days during 2008-09 and 42 days
during 2007-08. Thus, even after utilizing the entire funds for the
MGNREGS as provided in the Budget year after year, the Government
have not been able to provide a minimum of 100 days of employment

61
to the needy households who demanded work. The Committee,
therefore, find that in order to achieve a minimum of 100 days of
employment, either the allocation has to be increased substantially or
the number of minimum days for which employment is required to
be provided under MGNREGS is to be reduced. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the ambiguity created in this regard be cleared
at the earliest and the Committee may also be kept apprised about
the concrete action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, employment to the adult
members of a household is provided on demand subject to a maximum
of 100 days per household per year. Para 9 of Schedule II of the Act
provides that written application for work may be submitted either
to the Gram Panchayat or to the Programme Officer. Therefore, the
number of days of employment provided to a household is to be
seen against the number of Households provided employment.
Central Government releases funds to the States/UTs based on
the labour demand arising at the field level. States have to submit an
application in the prescribed format with necessary documents based
on the actual demand that is generated at the field level. The first
tranche is released based on the Labour Budget prepared by the
District Programme Coordinator in bottom up approach with month-
wise projections of demand, expenditure and distribution of work
and submitted to Empowered Committee. The quantum of first tranche
depends on the projection made for the initial six months of the
financial year subject to limitation of 50% of the projection of the
whole year. The 2nd tranche of funds is released on utilization of
60% of available fund by the districts/States and submission of
proposal in the prescribed format alongwith other necessary documents
as indicated paras 8.4 & 11.3 of the operational guidelines. Under the
Act, Central Government is committed to bear entire expenditure
towards payment of wages to the unskilled workers besides bearing
other expenses as stipulated in the Act. Therefore, in case a State falls
short of funds, more funds may be released to the States on receipt
of proposals alongwith necessary documents.
Number of days of employment availed by a household does not
depend on the quantum of funds released by the Centre. Since the
Act is demand based, number of days of employment availed by
each household depends upon the number of days of employment
demanded by a household. It also depends upon the availability of
other employment opportunities in an area because a worker is free

62
to avail any other employment opportunity available to him. As per
reports received from the States, at national level an average of 54
days of employment was provided to every rural household during
2009-10.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 40 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 3.13)
The Committee are surprised to find that out of 40.98 lakh works
undertaken during 2009-10 [upto February, 2010] under MGNREGA,
the implementing agencies could complete merely 40 per cent works.
Regarding high percentage of incomplete works, the Department has
furnished a vague reply by stating that a work taken 2 to 4 months
to complete. According to the Department, generally, peak demand
season under MGNREGA starts from November and ends in May.
On the one hand, of the 28.90 per cent of the total available funds
under MGNREGA, has been stated to be available as on 31.12.2009,
with the implementing agencies, that are more often released very
late and at the fag end of the year. On the other hand, the Committee
find that the complete better physical performance of MGNREGA is
never found during April and May. When such facts are pointed out
on account of availability of unspent balances, the Department
advances the excuse that the scheme is demand driven and the works
pick up after November. The Committee are of the opinion that the
Department is not implementing the scheme in the right spirit. The
Committee would like the Department to work out a strategy urgently
so that works once commenced are executed properly in order to
make MGNREGA actually demand oriented.
Reply of the Government
As reported by the State Governments, 46.01 lakh works were
taken up during 2009-10 out of which 20.94 lakh (45.51%) works had
been completed during the year. As implementation of Mahatma
Gandhi NREGA is a continuous process, incomplete works during
the year are carried over to the next financial year in order to meet
the labour demand arising in the next year.
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA provides a legal guarantee for atleast
100 days of wage employment per household in a financial year on
demand. Adult members of a rural household may exercise their right
any time during the year. In accordance with para 13 of Schedule-II

63
of the Act, a new work shall be commenced if atleast 10 labourers
become available for such work and the labourers cannot be absorbed
in the ongoing works. During the peak demand season under
MGNREGA which is from November to May, a large number of works
are opened to absorb the high labour demand. A large number of
these works remain incomplete at the end of the Financial year and
are spilled over to the next year.
With a view to address these issues, the Ministry has asked
National Institute for Rural Development (NIRD) to conduct work
census in one pilot district each in Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh,
Orissa and Rajasthan for the years 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09.
Decision has also been taken to undertake quality audit of the works
taken up under the Act. The Ministry has finalized the Terms of
reference for conducting the quality audit.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 40 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 3.17)
The Committee are concerned to note that only one-third of the
job card holders could be encouraged to demand work under
MGNREGA during 2009-2010. As per the information furnished to
the Committee, during 2009-2010 only 3.68 crore job card holder
households could demand work out of 10.91 crore household job cards
issued. This indicates that more than two-third job cardholders could
not get jobs under the MGNREGA during 2009-2010. Even the one-
third of the job cardholders who actually got job, could get only 51
days of employment instead of the minimum 100 days stipulated
under the Act. The Committee would like the Government to analyse
this disparity in order to find out whether such disparity is due to
the shortcomings in the implementation of the scheme or due to certain
persons getting the job card issued without really being interested in
getting the job. In order to ensure the benefits of MGNREGA reach
the intended beneficiaries, there should be some provision in the
existing system to exclude those job cardholders who are not
demanding jobs over a long period of time. The Committee
recommend that the Department should devise some mechanism to
ensure transparency and to eliminate chances of corruption in the
receipt of job cards.

64
Reply of the Government
A job card issued to a household under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA
is valid for a period of 5 years. Job card is issued to a household if
one or more adult members of the household apply for it. Mere
issuance of a job card, however, does not entitle the household for an
employment under the Act. The adult members of the household who
volunteer to do un-skilled manual work have to apply for work in
writing. A job card holder may exercise his right for 100 days of
guaranteed employment under the Act any time during a financial
year. Further, while it is mandatory for a job seeker under MGNREGA
to have a job card, it is not mandatory for a job card holder to take
up employment under the Act in a particular financial year.
As per available data, 5.25 crore households were provided
employment under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA during 2009-2010.
National average for number of days of employment provided per
household during 2009-2010 was 54 days per household. With a view
to ensure transparency in the implementation of the Act, Ministry has
taken the following steps:
(i) A Web enabled Management Information System (MIS)
(www.nrega.nic.in) has been made operational which places
all critical parameters such as job cards, muster rolls, wage
payments, number of days of employment provided and
works under execution online for monitoring and easy
public access for information. 10.95 crore job cards have
been uploaded on the web site.
(ii) Wage disbursement to MGNREGA workers through Banks/
Post Office accounts has been made mandatory to ensure
proper disbursement of wages to MGNREGA workers.
9.19 crore bank/post office accounts have been opened so
far. To cover the gaps in financial services and outreach
and also to ensure greater transparency in wage
disbursement, Rural ATM, hand held devices, smart cards,
biometrics and business correspondent models have been
initiated.
(iii) The Ministry has accorded utmost importance to the
organization of Social Audits by the Gram Panchayats and
issued instructions to the States to make necessary
arrangements for the purpose. Modifications have been
made in para 13 of Schedule-I of the Act to provide for
procedures on conducting social audits. The Ministry has
issued instructions to the State Governments for
enforcement of the new social audit provisions under
MGNREGA.

65
 [O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 40 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 3.39)
The Committee are concerned to note that by not providing the
last mile connectivity of around 7700 kms, 8045 habitations in the
country as on date remain to be connected. They note that the major
hindrances being faced by the Department are construction of cross
drainage works, non-availability of land, construction of long span
bridge, and non-timely availability of construction materials. The
Committee find the said hindrances are also being faced by the
Department in construction of the PMGSY roads in general and these
are not particular for the last mile connectivity. The Committee wish
to point out that by not providing the last mile construction of roads,
the PMGSY roads in a majority of cases do not touch the Panchayat
office, local market/haat or the hospital. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the Department to take necessary steps to provide priority
to the last mile construction of PMGSY roads to the Panchayat office,
local market/haat or to the hospital, by chalking out an immediate
action plan in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Under PMGSY, the target habitations are connected upto a
proposed point in the habitation which in the opinion of the State is
appropriate for the habitation. Though specific instruction that road
has to touch Panchayat Office, local market, hospital etc. are not
prescribed in the guidelines, States have been advised to propose the
new road upto a point which is deemed prominent within the
habitation. When a habitation falls on a road being constructed to
connect another habitation, the road passes through the habitation
and may connect more than one prominent point in this habitation.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 45 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 28, Para No. 3.117)
The Committee find that the per unit assistance of a dwelling
unit being constructed under IA Y has been increased w.e.f. 1.4.2010 to

66
Rs. 45,000 in plain areas and Rs. 48,500 in hilly areas. The Committee
are of the firm opinion that even this enhanced amount of assistance
is too low as per the existing cost of materials/construction. The
Committee find that Union territory of Pudducherry is already
providing Rs. 1 lakh for construction of a dwelling unit in rural area.
The Committee feel that a decent dwelling unit cannot be constructed
even with the enhanced cost. The Committee in their earlier Report
(First Report-Fifteenth Lok Sabha, para 3.102 refers) had pointed out
that the existing definition of a dwelling unit under IAY is not proper
for a decent civilized living of rural poor. Keeping this in view, the
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the
Ministry should further enhance the per unit assistance substantially
and define the dwelling unit under IAY suitable for a healthy living
in consultation with the Ministry of Health. The Committee should
be kept apprised accordingly .
Reply of the Government
The financial assistance provided under IAY is only a unit
assistance and not full cost of construction of the house. The unit
assistance has recently been enhanced w.e.f. 1.4.2010 from Rs. 35,000
to Rs. 45,000 in plain areas and from Rs. 38,500 to Rs. 48,500 in hilly/
difficult areas. It may not be possible to further enhance this unit
assistance at this stage. However, the beneficiary can avail a loan of
up to Rs. 20,000 at interest rate of 4% per annum. In addition,
Rs. 2200/- can be availed under Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC)
funds for construction of a sanitary latrine. Further, 20 sq.mt. plinth
area prescribed in IAY guidelines is the minimum and the beneficiaries
can construct an IAY house on a bigger plinth area as well.
[O.M. No. H-11020/3/2010 dated September, 2010, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 48 of Chapter-I of the Report)

67
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—NIL—
   N EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
25 February, 2011 Chairperson,
6 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

68
APPENDIX I
NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF POPULATION BELOW
POVERTY LINE BY STATES - 2004-05
(Based on URP-Consumption)
Sl.No. Name of States/UTs Rural Urban Combined
%age of No. of %age of No. of %age of No. of
Persons Persons Persons Persons Persons Persons
(Lakhs) (Lakhs) (Lakhs)
12 3 4 56 7 8
1. Andhra Pradesh 11.2 64.70 28.0 61.40 15.8 126.10
2. Arunachal Pradesh 22.3 1.94 3.3 0.09 17.6 2.03
3. Assam 22.3 54.50 3.3 1.28 19.7 55.77
4. Bihar 42.1 336.72 34.6 32.42 41.4 369.15
5. Chhattisgarh 40.8 71.50 41.2 19.47 40.9 90.96
6. Delhi 6.9 0.63 15.2 22.30 14.7 22.93
7. Goa 5.4 0.36 21.3 1.64 13.8 2.01
8. Gujarat 19.1 63.49 13.0 27.19 16.8 90.69
9. Haryana 13.6 21.49 15.1 10.60 14.0 32.10
10. Himachal Pradesh 10.7 6.14 3.4 0.22 10.0 6.36
11. Jammu and Kashmir 4.6 3.66 7.9 2.19 5.4 5.85
12. Jharkhand 46.3 103.19 20.2 13.20 40.3 116.39
13. Karnataka 20.8 75.05 32.6 63.83 25.0 138.89
14. Kerala 13.2 32.43 20.2 17.17 15.0 49.60
15. Madhya Pradesh 36.9 175.65 42.1 74.03 38.3 249.68
16. Maharashtra 29.6 171.13 32.2 146.25 30.7 317.38
17. Manipur 22.3 3.76 3.3 0.20 17.3 3.95
18. Meghalaya 22.3 4.36 3.3 0.16 18.5 4.52

69
19. Mizoram 22.3 1.02 3.3 0.16 12.6 1.18
20. Nagaland 22.3 3.87 3.3 0.12 19.0 3.99
21. Orissa 46.8 151.75 44.3 26.74 46.4 178.49
22. Punjab 9.1 15.12 7.1 6.50 8.4 21.63
23. Rajasthan 18.7 87.38 32.9 47.51 22.1 134.89
24. Sikkim 22.3 1.12 3.3 0.02 20.1 1.14
25. Tamil Nadu 22.8 76.50 22.2 69.13 22.5 145.62
26. Tripura 22.3 6.18 3.3 0.20 18.9 6.38
27. Uttar Pradesh 33.4 473.00 30.6 117.03 32.8 590.03
28. Uttarakhand 40.8 27.11 36.5 8.85 39.6 35.96
29. West Bengal 28.6 173.22 14.8 35.14 24.7 208.36
30. A & N Islands 22.9 0.60 22.2 0.32 22.6 0.92
31. Chandigarh 7.1 0.08 7.1 0.67 7.1 0.74
32. Dadra & N. Haveli 39.8 0.68 19.1 0.15 33.2 0.84
33. Daman & Diu 5.4 0.07 21.2 0.14 10.5 0.21
34. Lakshadweep 13.3 0.06 20.2 0.06 16.0 0.11
35. Puducherry 22.9 0.78 22.2 1.59 22.4 2.37
All-India 28.3 2209.24 25.7 807.96 27.5 3017.20
URP consumption = Uniform Recall Period consumption in which the consumer
expenditure data for all the items are collected from 30-day recall period.
Notes:
1. Poverty Ratio of Assam is used for Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland and Tripura.
2. Poverty Line of Maharashtra and expenditure distribution of Goa is used to
estimate poverty ratio of Goa.
3. Poverty Ratio of Tamil Nadu is used for Pondicherry and A & N Island.
4. Urban Poverty Ratio of Punjab used for both rural and urban poverty of
Chandigarh.
5. Poverty Line of Maharashtra and expenditure distribution of Dadra & Nagar
Haveli is used to estimate poverty ratio of Dadra & Nagar Haveli.
6. Poverty Ratio of Goa is used for Daman & Diu.
7. Poverty Ratio of Kerala is used for Lakshadweep.
Source: -  Poverty Estimates for the Year 2004-05 released by the Planning Commission
12 3 4 56 7 8

70
APPENDIX II
NUMBER OF TRAINED YOUTHS DURING 2009-10 UNDER
RSETI (STATE/UT-WISE)
Sl.No. State District/Bank/Org Total Total BPL APL
No. of No. of Trainees Trainees
Training Youths
Programmes
12 3 456 7
1. Andhra Pradesh East Godavari-ANB(ABIRD) 29 438 306 132
2. Andhra Pradesh Krishna-ANB(PMIRD) 36 771 555 216
3. Andhra Pradesh Srikakulam-ANB(ABIRD) 23 504 363 141
4. Andhra Pradesh Kurnool-SYB 26 915 715 200
5. Andhra Pradesh Kadapa-SYB 18 528 375 153
6. Andhra Pradesh V ishakapatnam-SBI 7 241 188 53
7. Andhra Pradesh V izianagaram-SBI 4 177 160 17
8. Andhra Pradesh Medak-SBI 1 42 42 0
9. Andhra Pradesh Mahbubnagar-SBI 1 37 37 0
10. Bihar Vaishali-RUDSETI 23 690 429 261
11. Chhattisgarh Durg-DEN 4 53 53 0
12. Gujarat Bhavanagar-SBI 21 435 356 79
13. Gujarat Rajkot-SBI 2 54 48 6
14. Gujarat Jamnagar-SBI 6 120 88 32
15. Gujarat Mehasana-DEN 22 508 268 240
16. Gujarat Rajpipla(Narmada)-BOB 0 0 0 0
17. Gujarat Surendranagar 11 301 278 23
18. Haryana Gurgaon-RUDSETI 26 801 617 184
19. Haryana Mewat/Nuh-SYB 23 655 427 228

71
20. Himachal Pradesh Hamirpur-PNB 29 804 630 174
21. Jharkhand Saraikela-PNB 10 216 149 67
22. Jharkhand Ramgarh-PNB 34 867 359 508
23. Jharkhand Hazaribagh-ALB 29 752 472 280
24. Jharkhand East Singhbhum-BOI 9 274 204 70
25. Karnataka Gulbarga-KGB 223 3490 290 3200
26. Karnataka Chickmagalur-COR 87 2773 1361 1412
27. Karnataka Bagalkot-ING 9 2506 1816 690
28. Karnataka Dakshina Kannada-RUDSETI 25 644 585 59
29. Karnataka Dharwad-RUDSETI 45 1650 1427 223
30. Karnataka Chitradurga-RUDSETI 43 1541 1268 273
31. Karnataka Mysore-RUDSETI 38 1434 1193 241
32. Karnataka Bijapur-RUDSETI 27 1054 881 173
33. Karnataka Haveri-VYB 72 2968 2660 308
34. Karnataka Mandya-VYB 56 1843 1582 261
35. Karnataka Uttara Kannada-SYB 47 1357 1188 169
36. Karnataka Belgaum-SYB 42 1705 1374 331
37. Karnataka Gadag-SBI(GITSERD) 52 1514 915 599
38. Karnataka Ramanagara-CNB 46 2251 1479 772
39. Karnataka Kolar-CNB 70 3413 2871 542
40. Karnataka Shimoga-CNB 32 1062 883 179
41. Karnataka Hassan-CNB 50 2114 1159 955
42. Kerala Kasaragod-ANB(BIRED) 23 410 296 114
43. Kerala Kollam/Kottiyam-SYB 31 1124 984 140
44. Kerala Alappuzha-SBT 1 23 11 12
45. Kerala Kottayam-SBT 1 22 15 7
12 3 456 7

72
46. Kerala Pathanamthitta-SBT 9 230 86 144
47. Kerala Wayanad-SBT 37 1212 981 231
48. Kerala Ernakulam-UBI 24 488 320 168
49. Kerala Malapuram-CNB 25 679 411 268
50. Madhya Pradesh Bhopal-RUDSETI 21 647 472 175
51. Madhya Pradesh Datia-PNB 31 764 568 196
52. Madhya Pradesh Rewa-UBI 9 219 219 0
53. Maharashtra Pune-BOM 9 197 197 0
54. Maharashtra Amravati-BOM 10 223 223 0
55. Maharashtra Aurangabad-BOM 10 238 238 0
56. Maharashtra Nagpur-BOM 10 210 210 0
57. Maharashtra Nashik-BOM 10 229 229 0
58. Maharashtra Ratnagiri-BOI 12 452 354 98
59. Orissa Ganjam-ANB(ABIRD) 22 463 333 130
60. Orissa Baripada-BOI 13 357 255 102
61. Orissa Keonjhar-BOI 13 569 567 2
62. Punjab Jalandhar-RUDSETI 17 443 259 184
63. Punjab Ludhiana-PSB 9 252 211 41
64. Punjab Moga-PSB 3 92 82 10
65. Punjab Ferozpur-OBC 41 1821 964 857
66. Punjab Faridkot-PSB 4 107 99 8
67. Rajasthan Bhilwara 0 0 0 0
68. Rajasthan Bikaner-SBBJ 21 626 437 189
69. Rajasthan Sirohi-SBBJ 13 249 15 234
70. Rajasthan Jhalawar(Jhalara Patan) 4 98 98 0
71. Rajasthan Nathadwara(Rajasamand)-SBBJ 75 1309 1225 84
72. Rajasthan Hanumangarh-SBBJ 6 115 20 95
73. Rajasthan Udaipur-BOR 14 1622 1475 147
12 3 456 7

73
74. Rajasthan Tonk-BOB 13 292 201 91
75. Rajasthan Karauli-BOB 26 789 266 523
76. Rajasthan Chittorgarh-BOB 37 1689 1135 554
77. Rajasthan Dungarpur-BOB 30 868 674 194
78. Rajasthan Banswara-BOB 35 957 742 215
79. Rajasthan Churu-BOB 22 632 266 366
80. Rajasthan Ajmer-BOB 61 1461 523 938
81. Rajasthan Dausa-UCO 16 817 817 0
82. Tamil Nadu Karaikudi Sivagangai-CNB 4 33 28 5
83. Tamil Nadu Salem-INB 16 516 516 0
84. Tamil Nadu V ellore-INB 36 924 924 0
85. Tamil Nadu Coimbatore-CNB 35 1108 1063 45
86. Uttarakhand Almora-SBI 10 193 193 0
87. Uttar Pradesh Moradabad-SYB 24 988 289 699
88. Uttar Pradesh Meerut-SYB 19 540 374 166
89. Uttar Pradesh Mathura-SYB 0 0 0 0
90. Uttar Pradesh Amethi-BOB 23 569 322 247
91. Uttar Pradesh Faizabad-BOB 21 644 308 336
92. Uttar Pradesh Bar eilly-BOB 17 546 175 371
93. Uttar Pradesh Udham Singh Nagar-BOB 0 0 0 0
94. West Bengal South 24 Paraganas-UTB 16 361 195 166
95. West Bengal Jalpaiguri-CBI 45 719 552 167
96. West Bengal Murshidabad-RUDSETI 28 773 439 334
97. West Bengal Birbhum-ALB 52 1556 1556 0
98. West Bengal Paschim Midnapur-ALB 20 578 365 213
99. Puducherry Puducherry-INB 20 519 247 272
T otal  2512 77064 54075 22989
12 3 456 7

74
APPENDIX III
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2010-2011)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 6 JANUARY , 2011
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Pulin Bihari Baske
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavaliya
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy
6. Shri Govind Chandra Naskar
7. Shri Rakesh Pandey
8. Shri P .L. Punia
9. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
10. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
11. Shri Jagdanand Singh
12. Shri Makansingh Solanki
13. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Ganga Charan
15. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
16. Dr. Ram Prakash
17. Shrimati Maya Singh
18. Shri Mohan Singh
19. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan

75
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
4. Shri Raju Srivastava — Deputy Secretary
2. The Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the
Committee and greeted them on the occasion of ‘New Year’. There
were four Memoranda regarding draft action taken Reports ***.
3. The Committee first took up for consideration the following
memoranda one by one:-
(i) Memorandum No. 7 regarding consideration and adoption
of draft action taken Report on the recommendations
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2010-11) relating to Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development).
(ii) * * * * * *
(iii) * * * * * *
(iv) * * * * * *
(v) * * * * * *
4. The Committee considered the action taken replies circulated
vide Memorandum No. 7 and were not satisfied with the Government's
replies to the recommendations concerning BPL census, delay in
completion of works under MGNREGA and providing last mile
connectivity. The Committee noted that the replies were evasive in
nature. The Committee, while noting that Planning Commission is
responsible for estimation of poverty ratios, felt that there is confusion
about the exact number of persons living Below Poverty Line (BPL)
in the country. The Committee, therefore, decided to discuss this matter
and about delay in conducting BPL Census with the representatives
of Planning Commission and Department of Rural Development and
about other action taken replies with the representatives of the latter.
5. * * * * * *
6. * * * * * *
7. * * * * * *
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately .

76
APPENDIX IV
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2010-2011)
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 13 JANUARY , 2011
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1750 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
4. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
5. Shri Jagdanand Singh
6. Dr. Sanjay Singh
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
8. Shrimati Maya Singh
9. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
10. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
3. Shri Raju Srivastava — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Rural Development (Ministry
of Rural Development)
1. Shri P .K. Padhy — Chief Economic Advisor
2. Shri T. Vijay Kumar — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar Rakesh — Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.R. Meena — Director

77
5. Shri Y .S. Dwivedi — Director
6. Shri Rohit Kumar — Director
7. Smt. Indu Sharma — Director
8. Shri P .K. Katare — Director
9. Shri B.P . Chandrasekhar — Director
10. Shri R. Chouhan — Director
Representatives of Planning Commission
1. Ms. Sudha Pillai — Member Secretary
2. Dr. Pronab Sen — Principal Adviser (PC & MD)
3. Sh. Ashok Sahu — Senior Adviser (LEM/PP)
4. Ms. Suman Kaushik — Adviser (RD)
5. Dr. P .C. Mishra — Director (RD)
2. Welcoming the members to the Sitting of the Committee, the
Chairperson apprised the members that as decided at the previous
sitting, the Committee would be seeking clarifications from the
representatives of Planning Commission and Department of Rural
Development (Ministry of Rural Development) on action taken replies
furnished by the Department of Rural Development on
recommendations contained in their Ninth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-2011) of Department of Rural Development on the issue
of delay in finalization of BPL List and also seeking clarifications from
the representatives of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry
of Rural Development) on the issue of last mile connectivity under
PMGSY and delay in completion of works under MGNREGA.
[Witnesses were then called in ]
4. The Chairperson then read out Direction 59 (1). Thereafter, the
Committee sought clarifications from representatives of Planning
Commission and Department of Rural Development on the issue of
delay in finalization of BPL Survey. The main issues that came up for
discussion before the Committee were absence of updated BPL figures
in the country, inappropriateness of estimation of poverty by the
Planning Commission based on Consumer Expenditure Survey and
need for undertaking National Poverty Sample Survey for accurate
estimation of poverty in terms of per capita income and multi-
dimensional poverty assessment instead of per capita consumption etc.
The members raised queries which were responded to by the witnesses.
(Thereafter, the representatives of Planning Commission withdrew).
5. Subsequently, the Committee sought clarifications from the
representatives of Department of Rural Development on delay in
completion of works under MGNREGA and last mile connectivity
under PMGSY. The members raised queries which were answered by
the witnesses.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

78
APPENDIX V
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2010-2011)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2011
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
3. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy
4. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
5. Shri P .L. Punia
6. Shri Jagdish Sharma
7. Shri Jagdanand Singh
8. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh
9. Shrimati Usha Verma
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
11.D r. Ram Prakash
12. Shrimati Maya Singh
13. Shri Mohan Singh
14. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
15. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Raju Srivastava — Deputy Secretary

79
* * * * * *
2. * * * * * *
3. * * * * * *
4.  After detailed discussions, the Committee, thereafter considered
Memoranda No.(s) 7 **** on Draft Action Taken Reports on action
taken by the Government on recommendations contained in
Ninth Report *** of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development) ***, without any modifications.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
* Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately .

80
APPENDIX VI
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
NINTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (15TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations: 36
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by 21
the Government:
Para Nos.: 2.4, 2.7, 2.16, 2.17, 2.18, 2.48,
2.52, 3.16, 3.23, 3.38, 3.44, 3.80, 3.81, 3.90,
3.113, 3.125, 3.134, 3.148, 3.154, 3.168 and 3.169
Percentage to total recommendations: (58.33)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not 6
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Para Nos.: 2.21, 2.55, 2.56, 3.114, 3.149 and 3.167
Percentage to total recommendations: (16.67)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of 9
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para Nos.: 2.45, 2.46, 2.47, 2.54, 3.9, 3.13, 3.17,
3.39 and 3.117
Percentage to total recommendations: (25.00)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited:
Para No. : Nil
Percentage to total recommendation: (0)