 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                         (2013-2014) 
      
 
        FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION 
  
   
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the                             
Fortieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the                                    
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]  
 
FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
50 


 FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2013-2014) 
          (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION 
   
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the                             
Fortieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the                                    
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]  
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 04.01.2014 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.02.2014 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2014 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2014/Pausa, 1935 (Saka) 
 


CRD No. 096 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-2014) ......................................   (ii)   
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................   (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................   1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................   14 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies ...........................................................................  30 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee .....................................................   31 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ..............  34 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Extracts of Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 17 December, 2013…….. 37 
II.  Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations   
contained in the Fortieth Report  (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing  
Committee on Rural Development  ……………………….................................39 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(ii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
5. Shri Premchand Guddu 
6. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
7. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
8. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
9. Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy 
12. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy 
13. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
14. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
15. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
16. Smt. Supriya Sule 
17. Smt. Annu Tandon 
18. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar 
19. Smt. Usha Verma 
20. Shri P. Viswanathan 
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar  
23. Shri Munquad Ali 
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
28. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
29. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
30. Vacant* 
31. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Satish Kumar    - Committee Assistant 
 
* Vacancy caused on account of demise of  Shri Mohan Singh on 22.09.2013 

 (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (201 3-2014) having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the 50th Report on the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 40th Report of the Standing Committee 
on Rural Development (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Drinking Water 
& Sanitation.  
2.  The 40th Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 April, 20 13. Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 02 August, 2013. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 17 December, 
2013. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by  the Government on the recommendations contained in the          
40th Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                         SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
 17 December, 2013                                               Chairperson, 
   26 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                   Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Comm ittee on Rural Development (201 3-14) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Fortieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation for the year 2013-2014. 
 
2. The Fortieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 30.04.2013 and was laid on 
the Table of  Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 19 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government.  These have been 
examined and categorised as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18 and 19. 
Total:14 
Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
 
Serial No. NIL  
Total:NIL 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Serial Nos. 8 and 16  
Total:02 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. 3, 7 and 10. 
Total:03 
Chapter-V 
 
  

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that final repl ies in respect of recommendations for 
which only interim replies have been submitted by the Government included in 
Chapter V of this Report and replies to recommendations made in the Chapter-I of 
this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
5. The Committee w ill now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Coverage of Piped Water Supply 
 
[Recommendation Serial No. 8 (Para No. 2.9)] 
 
6. The Committee in aforesaid para of the Report had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee are informed that the Ministry is preparing to roll out a 
World Bank assisted Rural Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Project in four 
States i.e. Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh, that have lagged behind 
the other States in providing piped water supply to the rural population.  The total 
outlay of the project is Rs. 5,400 crore (US Dollar 1 billion) out of which Rs. 2,700 
crore will be World Bank assistance and the remaining Rs. 2,700  crore will be 
funded from the Central and Stat e resources.  The Committee note that this will 
be a six year project and about 16,200 rural habitations are proposed to be 
benefited by this.  The Committee are further apprised that based on its success, 
second phase in four more States will be rolled ou t.  The Committee feel that six 
years time is too long to complete such an important project and desire the 
Ministry to review the time period of its completion.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire to implement the project with utmost sincerity and complete it within two -
three years time so that rural areas in these States, which are lagging behind in 
piped water supply, are benefitted." 
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
 "The World Bank supported RWSS -LIS Project plans to c over 16,200 
habitations in 33 districts of 4 States – Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand and Uttar 
Pradesh. The Project is designed to bring about a combination of institutional 
changes, enhanced investments in infrastructure and capacity and 
transformation in polici es and processes to achieve the Project objectives. The 
Project has therefore been designed with the following fundamental principles:  
 
(a) Decentralization  
(b) Community participation and demand responsiveness  
(c) District-wise approach  
(d) Enhanced accountability  
(e) Water Security for all, and  
(f) Convergence of water and sanitation measures 

3 
 
The Project has been planned to be completed in 6 years with the following 
approach due to reasons including: 
 
1. The decentralized nature of the Project requires community mobilization. 
Extensive IEC/HRD activities are planned to mobilize the PRIs and 
beneficiaries and achieve better service delivery in the Project area. 
 
2. The proposed Project envisages implementing water schemes through:  
 Single Village Schemes (SVS) which includes Single Habitation 
Schemes (SHS) and Single GP Schemes (Multiple Habitations), 
 Small Multi Village Schemes (multiple GPs- usually 3 to 4)  
 Large Multi Village Schemes (multiple GPs- usually more than 5) 
The scheme cycle for each SVS is planned to be 12 -18 months after the 
selection of GPS, including pre -planning, planning and implementation. 
Similarly, the schemes cycle for each MVS has been planned to be 24 -33 
months. 
 
3. The Project plans to cover selected districts in the participating States – 7 
in Assam, 10 in Bihar, 6 in Jharkhand and 10 in Uttar Pradesh. In view of 
existing limited capacity of the implementing authorities, it is not possible 
to implement many schemes in parallel in a dist rict. Therefore, the 
implementation has been planned to be staggered in 3 batches. 
 
4. The Project is planned to be implemented in 3 batches each of three years 
duration. The Project plans to implement majority of the projects during 
the first 2 batches. The details of each batch are as follows. 
 
5. Batch I:  FY 2013 -14 to FY 15 -16: In all the four States with 30% of 
infrastructure investments along with full scale capacity building and 
project management activities. 
 
Batch II:  FY 15 -16 to FY 17 -18: 35% of new s chemes are planned to be 
implemented during this batch, along capacity building of associated PRIs. 
Capacity building and project management activities started in batch 1 will 
continue. 
 
Batch III: FY 16 -17 to FY 18 -19: The remaining schemes are planned to  
be taken up in this batch along with capacity building and project 
management activities. 
 
6. A rigorous M&E is planned for the Project and the lessons learnt from 
previous batches will be incorporated in the new schemes." 
 
  

4 
 
8.  While noticing the time frame of six years of the World Bank Assisted Rural 
Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Project to be rolled out by the Ministry in 
four States of Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh which are lagging 
behind the other States in providing piped water  supply,  the Committee had 
recommended  to implement the said project with utmost  sincerity and complete 
it  within  2 -3 years instead of 6 years  so that rural areas in these States  are 
benefitted at  the earliest.   
The Ministry in their action taken reply  furnished have cited  various 
reasons for  long duration of 6 years  to complete the  said project which  mainly 
include decentralized nature of project requiring community mobilization, 
implementing  water schemes through Single Village Schemes, Sm all Multi 
Village Schemes and Large  Multi Village Schemes, implementing  the project in 3 
batches each of three  years duration and  limited capacity of implementing 
authorities due to which  it is not possible to implement many schemes in parallel  
in a  district etc.,  are not acceptable to the Committee.  The Committee also find 
from the reply furnished by the  Ministry  that even after 6 years, the project will 
cover only  selected districts in the participating States i.e. 7 in Assam, 10 in 
Bihar, 6 i n Jharkhand and 10 in Uttar Pradesh. The Committee while reiterating 
their earlier recommendation, would like the Government to review the time frame 
of completion of the World Bank Assisted Rural Drinking Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project to 2 -3 years. The Committee  expect the Government to 
implement the project with utmost sincerity and  desire  that  the project should 
rather  cover all districts  of  the participating  States so that the rural population  
in these States is  provided  piped water supply at the earliest. 
 

5 
 
B. Functioning of Reverse Osmosis (RO) Plants in Andaman & Nicobar Islands  
[Recommendation Serial No. 11 (Para No. 2.12)] 
 
9. With regard to functioning of RO plants set up in Andaman & Nicobar Islands, the 
Committee recommended as under:- 
  "The Committee had sought the status of functioning of Reverse Osmosis 
(RO) plants set up in Andaman & Nicobar Islands through Zilla Panchayats. It 
was pointed out by the Committee during evidence that the data furnished by the 
Ministry in respect of functioning of Reverse Osmosis (RO) plants was inaccurate 
as the Committee themselves had inspected these Reverse Osmosis (RO) plants 
during their study visit to Andaman & Nicobar Islands during February 2013.The 
said data was provided to the Ministry  by the Directorate of RD, PRIs and Urban 
Local Bodies in Andaman & Nicobar Islands. The Secretary , Ministry of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation in this context, assured the Committee to send a two 
member Committee consisting officials of the Ministry to visit Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands to visit the plants, consult local representatives including Member of 
Parliament, the members of the district and Zila Panchayats to get the figures 
verified in respect of functioning of RO plants set up there and submit a Rep ort in 
this regard to the Committee. The Committee expect that information furnished to 
them is factual and accurate. They also desire the Ministry to take necessary 
action to have a factual Report on the status of functioning of R.O. Plants in 
Andaman & N icobar Islands and submit the same to the Committee at the 
earliest." 
 
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
"Based on the advice of the Standing Committee, the Central Team 
constituted by the Ministry, visited Andaman and Nicobar  Islands in April, 2013 
and submitted its report with detailed performance of each RO Plant  visited by 
the team.  Requisite copies of this report have already been submitted by the 
Ministry to the Lok Sabha (Secretariat) both in Hindi and English versions.  
During the Standing Committee meeting held for North East States and 
Andaman and Nicobars Islands on 12.7.2013, the Hon‟ble MP from A&N Island s 
also appreciated the facts brought out by the team in their report." 
 
  

6 
 
11.  In  view of inaccurate data furnished  by the Ministry in respect of  
functioning  of Reverse Osmosis (RO) plants  in Union Territory of Andaman & 
Nicobar  Islands, the Committee had recommended the Ministry  to take 
necessary action to submit a factual Re port on the status of  functioning of RO 
plants in A&N  Islands  to the Standing Committee. The Ministry in their action 
taken reply  have stated that a Central Team constituted by the Ministry for 
assessing the factual  correctness of information provided  by the UT 
Administration of Andaman & Nicobar Islands on erection, commissioning and 
status of working of RO plants visited the Andaman & Nicobar  Islands in April 
2013 and submitted its Report with detailed performance of each RO plant visited 
by them.  
 The Committee while acknowledging the efforts  made by the Ministry in 
furnishing factual and accurate information  on the  status of  functioning of RO 
plants in UT of Andaman & Nicobar  Islands would like to be  apprised of the 
further follow up action taken by them  on the suggestions   made by the  Central 
Team in the said Report for improvement of drinking water availability in 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands viz. action suggested on non -functional RO plants, 
not keeping plants non –functional for more than 3-4 days, backwashing sand 
filter daily before RO plant operation and washing plant after operation, periodic 
cleaning of membrane systems, following agreement document signed between 
UT Administration and contractor for operating and maintaining the RO pl ants by 
the contractor for 3 years, maintaining a log book for every RO plant, carrying out 
routine water analysis once in 3 months and results thereof to be made available 
on site, avoiding use of RO technology in case TDS level of  product water is  
below 500 mg/l, carrying out geo -physical studies for providing more number of 

7 
 
sustainable ring wells/skimming well source s  and capacity building of at least 
one operator per RO plant, of AEE, EEs for understanding various membrane 
technologies, of ZP, APWD A E/EEs on understanding various water quality 
monitoring instrumentation and sampling of technologies for chemical and 
bacteriological quality of drinking water and  pro -active role of the Ministry for 
proper co -ordination with the UT Administration of A&N Islands etc. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the follow up action taken by the 
Government in this regard. 
C. Research & Development Projects  
[Recommendation Serial No. 16 (Para No. 2.17)] 
 
12. In the aforesaid para of the Original Report, the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
  "The Committee find that in order to promote research and development in 
the area of water quality, the Ministry funds R & D projects to premier institutions, 
universities, autonomous organisation s including NGOs/voluntary agencies. To 
consider R&D proposals and provide guidance, the Ministry has constituted a 
Research & Development Advisory Committee (R&DAC). The Committee note 
that against the target of 149 sanctioned projects, 127 projects have been 
completed. During the year 2012 -13, a total of 5 R & D projects have been 
approved by the R & DAC. However, no R & D project is reported to be 
completed during 2011-12 and 2012-13. The reason adduced by the Ministry that 
since no R&D institution has furnished t he necessary documents during these 
two years and therefore, no project could be completed sounds unconvincing as 
Government should have examined this aspect and would have taken corrective 
action to enable the timely completion of projects. The Committee find this 
situation highly unsatisfactory and would await further follow -up action by the 
Ministry in this regard." 
 
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
"In this regard, it is stated that the Ministry will follow up with R &D 
Institutions  asking them to furnish required documents in order to ensure 
completion of R&D projects without further delay." 
  
 

8 
 
14.   Finding non -completion of R&D projects during the last two years i.e.  
2011-12 and 2012 -13 due to non -furnishing of requisite documents by R&D 
Institutions highly unsatisfactory, the Committee had strongly recommended the 
Government to take corrective follow up action for timely completion of projects 
in order to promote research and development in the are a of water quality. The 
Committee regret to note the  casual manner in which the recommendation of the 
Committee is taken by the  Ministry  which is evident from the reply furnished by 
them which merely states that it will follow up with  R&D Institutions asking them 
to furnish required documents in order to ensure completion of R&D projects 
without further delay. The Committee regret to find that the Ministry have not  
initiated any corrective action in this regard and are yet to follow up with the R&D 
Institutions. The Committee deplore the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry for 
not initiating any action so far in this regard.  While reiterating their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee would like to be apprised of the present status 
of furnishing the necessary documents by R&D Institutes  and follow -up action 
thereon. They would also like to be apprised of the specific steps taken by the 
Government in this regard so as to ensure that R&D projects are completed in 
time. 
 
  

9 
 
D. Sanitation Coverage in Rural Areas  
 
[Recommendation Serial No. 17 (Para No. 2.18)] 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
  "The Committee note  that as per progress reported by the State 
Governments through online monitoring system 71% of families in rural areas 
have sanitation facilities. However, as per Census 2011 data, sanitation 
coverage in rural India has reached 32.70% taking into consider ation the 
increased population, which is an increase of 2.96 crore households as 
compared to earlier Census of 2001. In respect of wide variation found in the 
data, the Committee are informed that the Government of India has instructed 
the States/UTs to co nduct fresh baseline survey to assess the actual situation at 
ground level and the said survey is reported to be going on. While expressing 
concern to note that rural habitations still do not have access to sanitation, the 
Committee would like to know the reasons for this wide variation in the data of 
Census 2011 and that reported by the State Governments. At the same time, the 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the findings of the fresh baseline 
survey being undertaken inter alia including when initiated, broad areas covered, 
time frame fixed for completion etc. 
  The Committee find that the goal of NBA (earlier Total Sanitation 
Coverage) is to achieve 100% access to sanitation for all rural households by 
2022. The new strategy is to transform rural India into „Nirmal Bharat‟ by adopting 
community saturation approach. During 2012 -13, as against budgetary allocation 
of Rs. 2500 crore at RE, the actual expenditure was Rs.2473.29 i.e. 86.07% . 
During 2013-14, the budgetary allocation BE is Rs. 4260 crore which indicates an 
increase of 70% over RE of 2012-13.  
The Committee note that since NBA is a demand driven scheme, hence 
no annual targets are fixed. During 2012 -13 (upto February 2013), 38,30,495 
IHHL, 1342 sanitary complex, 60,457 school toilets and 24,422 Anganwadi 
Toilets were constructed. Whereas during 2011 -12, 87,98,864 Individual 
household latrines, 2547 sanitary complex,1,22,471 school toilets and 28409 
Anganwadi Toilets were constructed. The Committee are constrained to note that 
the performan ce during 2012 -13 was less than 50% as compared to 2011 -12. 
The Committee are apprised that low achievement of targets was due to revision 
of NBA guidelines in July 2012 as State Governments took time to put in place 
the mechanism of implementation of new guidelines. The Committee are unable 
to understand that restructuring of any programme should reflect by way of 
improvement in the achievement, whereas in this case the performance during 
2012-13 showed a declining trend.  
The Committee are further apprise d that during the year 2013 -14, 100 
lakh Individual household latrines, 70,000 school toilets and 80,000 Anganwadi 
toilets are proposed to be constructed and more emphasis will be given on Solid 
and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM). It is also proposed to de velop 20,000 
Gram Panchayats as Nirmal Grams during 2013 -14.The Committee are informed 
that the construction of Individual toilets, schools toilets, Anganwadi toilets and 
Community Sanitary Complexes will be given priority to keep Government's 
vision of Nirmal Bharat by 2022 but due to reduction in allocation, target of solid 
and liquid waste management will not be achieved. The Committee desire the 
Ministry to make earnest and sincere efforts to achieve the targets set by fully 

10 
 
utilizing the budgetary allo cation. The Committee while expressing concern that 
target of solid and liquid waste management will not be achieved would like the 
Ministry to approach the Ministry of Finance for higher allocation of funds.  
The Committee find that major bottleneck faced  in the attainment of 
objectives of NBA is that large sections of Indian population are not convinced of 
the need to stop open defecation because of lack of proper awareness about the 
problems associated with it and hence building toilets is often not a pr iority even 
for people who can afford to construct toilets and use it. The Committee are of 
the considered view that utmost priority should be given to bring about behavioral 
change in the rural populace because without creating awareness, demand to 
create the toilets from the rural communities is least expected. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to take suitable policy measures to create 
awareness so that demand is created from communities to have toilets.  
The Committee note that another diffi culty being faced by State 
Governments/UTs in implementation of NBA is convergence with MGNREGS. 
The Committee feel that because of involvement of two different Departments 
which have to converge at local level, States are finding difficulties. The 
Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to have a dialogue with Ministry of 
Rural Development to resolve the difficulties faced in convergence with 
MGNREGS for smooth implementation of NBA." 
  
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
  
 "Efforts of the State Governments for promoting rural sanitation were 
supplemented from 1986 till 1999 by the Central Government under the Centrally 
sponsored Rural Sanitation Programme (CRSP) and thereafter from 1999 under 
the Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC).  Total sanitation Campaign (TSC) was 
launched as demand driven, community led programme with major IEC inputs to 
make sanitation a felt need of  the people. Under TSC, financial assistance to 
BPLs was to be provided after construction and usage of the toilets. 
      As per study conducted by CMS and as reported by various States, the 
very low incentive, which prevailed under the Total Sanitation C ampaign have 
played havoc with the programme. Many dysfunctional toilets and slip -backs have 
been attributed owing to this. The gap between the Census data 2011 and the 
figures reported by States in sanitation coverage through Integrated Management 
information System is primarily due to the low incentive /subsidy (Rs 625/ - ) given 
during major portion of the programme implementation ( 2001-2006).  
        MoDW&S have requested all States/UTs to carry out baseline survey in 
September‟2012 broadly to cover sa nitation status of Individual Household 
Latrines (IHHLs)/School & Anganwadis toilets/ Community Sanitary Complexes, 
identified APL category as per modified provision of NBA and defunct toilets. No 
timeframe was fixed though all States were directed to complete the survey at the 
earliest preferably before March‟13. As per entry made by States, as if now, 
online data for 151444  out of  253818 (59.67 %) GPs have been entered.    
2. During 2012-13 as against budgetary allocation of Rs. 2500/ - crore at RE, 
the actual expenditure was Rs. 2473.29 i.e.  98.93 % not 86.07 % as reported. 

11 
 
 
3. So far as declining trend after modification in guidelines is concerned it is 
submitted that Cabinet Committee on Economic. Affairs in its meeting held on 
7.6.2012 had approved the continuation of the Rural Sanitation Programme in the 
12th FYP from 1.4.2012.  Accordingly, Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan(NBA) Guidelines 
modified & issued in July, 2012. Under NBA, the provision of enhanced incentive 
for individual household latrine units was extended to identified categories of  APL 
households along -with all BPL households w.e.f 1.4.2012. The NBA guidelines 
also envisaged convergence with MGNREGS for addit ional financial assistance. 
To implement the NBA -MGNREGS smoothly, MGNREGS guideline was revised 
by Ministry of Rural Development in September, 2012 and eventually States could 
frame their line of Action in Oct -Nov, 2012 only  to implement the NBA 
programme.  
 
4. So far as approaching to Ministry of Finance for higher allocation of funds 
is concerned it is submitted that this depends on utilization of funds by the States 
and the position will be assessed at the time of RE and if required  Ministry of 
Finance will be requested for allocation of additional funds as suggested by the 
Committee.    
 
5. As desired by the C ommittee that Ministry may take suitable policy 
measures to create awareness so that demand is created from communities to 
have toilets, in this regard it is submitted that Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) is an important component of the Total Sanitation 
Campaign (TSC) / Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA). Government of India has 
formulated and issued IEC Guidelines in order to provide a br oad framework to 
the States for the implementation of IEC activities to increase awareness among 
rural people, generation of demand for sanitation facilities and creation of clean 
environment. The other major steps taken by the Government to improve IEC as  
part of TSC /NBA are as under: 
 Under Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) formerly known as Total Sanitation 
Campaign (TSC), 15% of the total outlay of district projects has been 
earmarked for Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities.  
 Sanitation and Hygiene Advocacy and Communication Strategy 
Framework (2012 -2017) has been launched. It is designed to roll out a 
number of activities in a phased manner, including implementation to 
monitoring. It also provides a framework for States to dev elop State -
specific action plans for rolling out of the strategy.  
 For effective dissemination of IEC messages, provision to engage Non 
Governmental Organisations (NGOs), village level motivators (Swachhata 
Doots/Sanitation Managers), field functionaries l ike Accredited Social 
Health Activists (ASHA), Anganwadi Workers, School Teachers, and 
Bharat Nirman Volunteers has been made. 
 Mobile messages based Communication was carried out on a pilot basis 
as an effective tool for dissemination of awareness on Sanit ation targeting 
rural areas of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Jharkhand 
and Uttar Pradesh. 

12 
 
 Audio and audio -visual spots have been produced in collaboration with 
UNICEF, on sanitation and hygiene related messages. These are being 
telecast/broadcast on Doordarshan, AIR, Lok Sabha TV , certain Satellite 
Channels and other radio station. GoI is stepping up IEC activities, to be 
taken-up by GoI directly. There is a Budget provision (BE) for Rs.100 crore 
for carrying out IEC at National level whic h involves not only TV, Radio but 
also print publicity, hoarding and banners etc.  
 
6. Difficulties are being faced by the implementing agency at Gram 
Panchayat / District level, as intimated by the States are regularly being taken up 
with the Ministry of Rural Development. Some of the issues have been resolved, 
however still most of the States have requested to delink MGNREGA from NBA 
due to poor convergence.   
However, MODW&S and MORD are continuously meeting for effective 
convergence of NBA & MGNREGA and  States have been requested that 
convergence at local level may be made effective."  
 
 
17. Finding that a fresh baseline survey to assess the actual  rural sanitation 
situation at ground level, in view of wide variation found in data of State 
Governments a nd Census 2011, as instructed by GOI is ongoing in various 
States, the Committee had desired to be apprised of its  findings  inter alia when 
initiated, broad areas covered, time frame fixed for its completion etc. In response 
thereto the Ministry in their action taken replies informed  that  all  States/UTs  
were requested in September 2012  to carry out baseline survey to broadly cover 
sanitation  status of Individual Household Latrines(IHHLs)/School and Anganwadi 
toilets/Community Sanitary  Complexes, identified APL category as per modified 
provision of NBA  and defunct toilets. But no time frame was fixed though all 
States were directed  to complete the survey at the earliest preferably before 
March 2013. The Committee are also informed that as per entry made by States  
as on 31 July 2013 online data for 151444 out of 253818 (59.67%) GPs have been 
entered. Noting that  even after 3 months  beyond the deadline  of March 2013  for 
completing  the  survey, 40.33% data still remains to be entered ,the  Committee 
feel  that the Ministry  should have identified  the reasons for this laxity in not  

13 
 
completing  the survey in time  and desire that t he  Ministry should  vigorously  
persuade the States to complete the survey expeditiously so that there is 
uniformity  in data and a clear picture of rural  sanitation coverage of the country 
emerges. 
Further, the Committee in view of difficulty being face d by State 
Governments/UTs in implementation of Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan  (NBA) 
convergence with MGNREGAS had recommended the Ministry to have a dialogue 
with the Ministry of Rural Development  to resolve the difficulties faced in 
convergence with MGNREGAS for  smooth implementation of NBA. The Ministry  
in their action taken replies submitted to the  Committee have stated that 
difficulties are  being faced by the implementing agency at Gram Panchayat / 
District level, as intimated by the States are regularly be ing taken up with the 
Ministry of Rural Development. Some of the issues have been resolved, however , 
still most of the States have requested to delink MGNREGA S from NBA due to 
poor convergence. The Committee, however, note that  MODW&S and MORD are 
continuously meeting for effective convergence of NBA and MGNREGA S and 
States have been requested that convergence at local level may be made 
effective. The Committee are of the considered view that since convergence of 
MGNREGAS  with NBA  will help rural families  to enhance quality of life, the 
Ministry should consider replicating the experience of States which have made 
convergence successful in those States which are facing difficulties in this 
regard.  At the same time , the Committee would urge the Ministry to continue 
their efforts to make convergence of MGNREGAS and NBA effective and should 
also persuade the States to closely monitor convergence at local level. 

14 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.2) 
The Committee note that the total budgetary allocation BE (Plan and non -plan) 
made during the fiscal year 2012 -13 was Rs. 14005.24 crore which was reduced to Rs. 
13005.26 crore at RE stage and the Ministry spent Rs. 12962.35 crore upto 31 Mar ch, 
2013 and the utilization was almost close to 100%. The Committee note that total 
budgetary allocation for 2013 -14 is Rs. 15265.70 crore which is Rs. 1260.46 crore 
higher than BE (2012 -13) and Rs. 2260.44 crore higher than RE (2012 -13) of the 
previous year budget. However, looking at the continuous downward trend at RE stage 
during the years 2011 -12 and 2012 -13, the Committee feel that any cut in funds at RE 
stage would hamper achievement of targets. Considering the fact that drinking water is 
one of the  most important input for survival of humanity, the allocation should not be 
reduced at RE stage. The Committee, accordingly, recommend that the Ministry should 
work in their plans right from the start of the year so that the full budgetary provisions 
are utilized and there is no case of reduction of budget at RE stage.  
 
Reply of the Government 
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) 
As regards the  National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) in the year 
2012-13, out of the allocation at BE as well as RE stage  of Rs. 10500 crore, the 
utilisation was Rs. 10489.06 crore (99.90%).No cut was made at the RE stage, and  the 
funds allocated for the rural drinking water supply has been fully utilized.  
In the year 2013 -14 the Ministry has been allocated Rs.11000 crore for National 
Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP). The release of fund to the States is being 
done from the beginning of the financial year and the Ministry would strive to achieve its 
financial targets for the year 2013-14 as has been achieved in the previous year. 
Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) 
Under Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA), States / UTs are required to forward their 
respective Annual Implementation Plan ( AIP) to MDWS  for approval before the 
commencement of the financial year. AIP for the year 2013-14 for all the states/UTs has 
been approved in April, 2013 itself.  Funds also have been allocated to the States/UTs 
as per the Budget Estimate (BE).  
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.3) 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has been 
entrusted with the responsibility of implementing two major Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes i.e., the National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) and Nirmal 
Bharat Abhiyan (NBA)  through which support is extended to the State Governments in 
their endeavour to provide safe drinking water in the rural areas of the country and 
achieving 100% rural sanitation coverage.  Hence, the budgetary planning of the 
Ministry spins around these two Schemes.  The committee find huge variation in the 
amount proposed to the Planning Commission by the Ministry vis -a-vis amount 
allocated by the Planning Commission.  During the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the total 
outlay proposed was Rs. 58,139.01 crore whereas Rs. 45,740 crore was allocated. 
Similarly, during the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the total outlay was proposed at Rs. 
1,66,686 crore and the allocation was to the tune of Rs. 98,015 crore only.  The 
committee have been given to understand that this re duction of 59% of allocation 
proposed by the Ministry is due to constraints on availability of budgetary resources and 
competing demands on limited sources.  The Secretary, Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation during evidence apprised the committee th at in addition to Rs. 98,015 crore 
for Twelfth Plan outlay Rs. 9000 crore more has been allocated by the Planning 
Commission under Flexi Fund Scheme.  The Committee are concerned to note that 
reduction of funds during Twelfth Five Year Plan, by the Plannin g Commission would 
result in reduction in the target of rural population to be covered with piped water supply 
from the proposed 55% to50%.  Similarly due to the reduced allocation under NBA, the 
Ministry will not be able to work in solid and Liquid Waste Management projects to the 
extent proposed so as to achieve 50% Nirmal Grams during Twelfth five Year Plan.  
Keeping in view the targets fixed by the Ministry for its two schemes, the committee 
recommend that the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation sho uld approach the 
Planning commission/ the Ministry of Finance with proper justifications to ensure 
additional funds so that their future development plans are not hampered and targets 
fixed are achieved fully.  The Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation bein g crucial areas, 
the committee feel that funds in these areas should not be reduced. 
Reply of the Government 
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) 
 The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has been approaching the 
Planning Commission for enh anced allocation of funds.  Under the Twelfth Plan outlay 
Rs. 9000 crore more has been allocated by the Planning Commission under Flexi Fund 
Scheme to this Ministry. The Ministry had approached the Planning Commission to urge 
that the allocation of the amo unt of Rs.9000 crore under Flexifund be made to the 
Ministry itself. The Planning Commission has intimated now a revised allocation of Rs. 
1,05,945 crore  for the XIIth. Plan, after including allocation of Rs. 9000 crore under 
Flexifund and allocating 1% o f the Ministry‟s allocation to the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayati 
Shashaktikaran Yojana.  
The Ministry had also approached the Ministry of Finance for an allocation of 
Rs.1400 crore for tackling water quality problems in remaining quality affected 
habitations, especially affected by Arsenic and Fluoride, in the country, spread over a 
period of two years. The Hon. Finance Minister has made the announcement in hi the 
Budget speech for 2013 -14. The process of utilising this fund has been initiated. This 

16 
 
fund has been requested in addition to the annual allocations to Ministry for the years 
2013-14 and 2014-15.  
Similarly for implementation of the Solar Energy based Dual Pump Piped Water 
Supply systems in 10000 rural habitations in IAP districts of nine states, the fund 
allocated from the National Clean Energy Fund for part funding of the scheme is  an 
additionally to the allocation made under the Ministry‟s budget. 
Thus it is the Ministry endeavour to obtain additional financial resources so as to 
strengthen the programme.  
Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) 
Noted and agreed to. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.5) 
The Committee are at a loss to understand that since 1950‟s i.e. start of First 
Five Year Plan, more than Rs. 1,65,000 crore has been invested to achieve the 
objective of providing safe and adequate drinking water to rural habitations of the 
country, but the problem of quantity, quality and sustainability of water still persists.  The 
committee would strongly urge the government to make sincere and earnest efforts so 
that rural population has access to safe and clean water which is a basic human need.  
The committee, therefore, expect that the Ministry shall strive to accelerate the 
coverage of rural habitations by proper planning in terms of quantity and quality. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government of India has since the 1950‟s made significant investment in the 
rural drinking water sector.  Commensurately, the achievements in rural drinking water 
supply sector have been significant. T he Ministry has data of 16.91 lakh rural 
habitations of which about 12.18 lakh habitations are reported fully covered (as on 
1.4.2013 – subject to updation) with adequate and safe drinking water while the 
remaining habitations are partially covered with sa fe drinking water supply (coverage 
measured as 40 lpcd) or have drinking water quality problems. The achievements have 
also been reflected in the Census 2011 report. The performance of the rural water 
supply sector is further reflected in the fact that the MDG target for drinking water supply 
in rural areas has been achieved by the country in the year 2010, five years before the 
target year 2015. 
However it is also true that there are a number of challenges in the sector. As per 
Census 2011, a majority of t he population resides in rural areas. Often rural areas have 
poor accessibility and erratic power supply affecting development in general and 
establishment and functioning of rural water supply schemes in particular. For ensuring 
livelihoods and food secur ity, groundwater is increasingly being drawn for irrigation 
purposes. Industrial development has required increasing inputs of water as raw 
material and has also resulted in the contamination of many water bodies due to release 

17 
 
of untreated effluents. Furt her, changes in climate patterns due to climate change have 
resulted in erratic rainfall across the country. Increasing natural calamities like drought 
and floods have also created disruptions in water supply especially in rural areas. While 
the Census Rep ort of 2011 has  given encouraging figures of coverage of rural water 
supply, the reports have also indicated that a sizable percentage of rural population 
have to travel more than 500 mtrs to obtain drinking water.  Further, issues like large 
number of un covered wells in the country still exist. In the Annual Action Plan 
discussions being held with States in the month of March -April, 2013, States have been 
asked to study the Census Reports and take corrective actions urgently 
Tackling Water Quality problem s have also been the focus of this Ministry. Upto 
67% of allocation to States can be spent on covering water quality habitations. From 
2012, 5% of allocation at the National level is provided to States having chemical 
contamination problems in drinking wat er as well as to States with high incidence of 
Japanese Encephalitis and Acute Encephalitis syndrome cases. The problem of Water 
Quality is dynamic one, with chemical contamination reports for ground water being 
reported in many parts of the country primar ily due to deeper drilling for drinking water 
sources. The Ministry has also asked the States to ensure maintenance of traditional 
and old water bodies which could be used as surface sources for drinking water scheme 
by utilising the NRDWP Sustainability f und.  The Ministry has also been asking State 
Governments to ensure that schemes once installed do not slip back in terms of service 
delivery by ensuring regular Operation & Management with participation of local PRIs. 
 To ensure Sustainability, the Minist ry has, under NRDWP, provided 10% of the 
funds to the States on 100% Central share basis to be spent on ensuring sustainability 
of drinking water sources. This fund is utilised for construction of structures for recharge 
of ground water which is essential for ground water based water supply systems. States 
are also provided 15% funds under NRDWP for Operation & Maintenance activities 
which is utilised to ensure sustainable service delivery. 
 It is the endeavour of the Ministry to work with States to ensure quick 
implementation of drinking water supply schemes for providing adequate potable water 
on a sustainable basis.  
Thus in the XIIth. Five Year Plan, the Ministry is prioritising the following: 
 Focus on piped water supply rather than on Hand pumps.  
 Enhancement of service levels for rural water supply from the norm of 40 lpcd to 
55 lpcd for designing of systems.  
 Greater thrust on coverage of water quality affected habitations.  
 Prioritization of States which are lagging in terms of coverage with piped-water 
supply.  
 Focus on States with IAP Districts.  
 Providing additional resources for operation and management of schemes.  
 Conjoint approach between rural water supply and rural sanitation so as to 
achieve saturation of habitations with both these services.  
 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
  

18 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.6) 
The Committee have been informed that during Twelfth Five Year Plan, the 
emphasis of the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation would be on provision of piped 
water supply in rural areas to reduce the burden of fetching water on women and 
children and to raise the service level of supply of safe drinking water to 55 lpcd from 
the present level of 40 lpcd. 
 The committee further note that financial performance of NRDWP during 2012-13 
almost 100% as against Rs. 10,500 crore at RE, the expenditure was Rs. 104 89.06 
crore.  The committee, however, are concerned to note the decline in achievement in 
case of Slipped -back/Partially covered and Quality affected habitations during 2012 -13 
as compared to 2011 -12.  During 2011 -12, against a target to cover 1,15,379 sli pped-
back/Partially covered habitations, the achievement was 1,16,246 i.e. 100.75% whereas 
during 2012 -13 against target of covering 1,15,139 Slipped -back/Partially covered 
habitations, the achievement was only 82,711.  Similarly in case of Quality affecte d 
habitations, during 2011 -12, against target of 29,790, the achievement was 22,121.  
However, during 2012-13 against target of 26,521 achievement made was only 15,560. 
 The Committee are further apprised that under NRDWP the focus will continue to 
be on p roviding coverage of Quality affected and Partially covered habitations 
preferably through piped water supply.  It is planned to cover 75,000 Partially covered 
habitations and 22,000 Quality affected habitations under NRDWP in 2013 -14 and 
cover 3.25 crore persons with piped water supply.  The Ministry owe an explanation to 
the Committee for steep decline in achievement during the year 2012 -13.  They also 
expect the Ministry to make concrete efforts to achieve the targets set for the current 
year viz. 2013-14. 
Reply of the Government 
The figures quoted in the para for 2012 -13 are as on 31 st. December 2012. The 
final targets and achievements under the NRDWP for 2012 -13, at the end of the 
financial year as on 31.3.2013, are as follows:- 
  Against a total target  to cover 1,41,660 rural habitations, the achievement was 
1,55,706 habitations (110%). Against a target of covering 1,15,139 Slipped -
back/Partially covered habitations, the achievement was 1,36,304 habitations (118%) 
while in the case of Quality affected h abitations, against a target of 26,521 habitations,  
achievement  was 19,402 habitations (73.15%).  
While the achievement in the Partially Covered category is higher than the target, 
the performance in the quality affected targets is less than the target.  States which 
have performed significantly less than their targets under this category  include Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, UP and West Bengal.  The reason for this 
includes the fact that some schemes have taken a longer time to complete t han 
originally envisaged. States  have been asked to ensure proper targeting and 
completion of schemes taken up  in time. 
To focus on coverage of quality affected habitations in 2013 -14, States have 
specifically asked re -examine the issue and plan for achi eving the target at the 
beginning of the year. Further the Ministry is initiating a specific effort by providing at the 
Central level, an earmarked allocation of Rs.1400 crore to cover Arsenic and Fluoride 
affected habitations. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 

19 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.7) 
The Committee are  dismayed to note that States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Assam, 
Odisha and Madhya Pradesh have less than 10% access to piped water from taps. 
Whereas, 40.70% households in Manipur, 37.90% in Meghalaya, 36.40% in Jharkhand 
and 36.10% in Madhya Pradesh still fetch  drinking water form more than 500 meters.  
The Committee while expressing concern at the sorry state of affairs in Bihar, 
Jharkhand, Assam, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh having less than 10% access to piped 
water from taps, desire that special attention needs  to be paid to these States so as to 
enhance the piped water supply.  The Committee also desire the Ministry to take 
effective measures to accord priority to encourage households connections so as to 
reduce the burden of fetching water on women and children. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken cognizance of the fact that rural areas need an 
improvement in service levels with respect to drinking water supply, and the need to 
bridge the gap between rural and urban areas. During the Annual Action Pl an 
discussions held in the months of March and April 2013, the Ministry specifically 
discussed with the States the situation arising out of the Census 2011 report in respect 
of the distance that the rural population in their states have to travel to fetch water. 
States have been told to study the Census report in detail and see what the reasons for 
such results could be. State plans have to be prepared to tackle this issue. 
  The Ministry has also analysed the Census 2011 report with respect to piped 
water supply  and found that Bihar, Jharkhand, Assam, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh 
are indeed the states with less than 10% coverage of piped water supply.  Piped water 
supply being the main focus area in the XIIth. Five Year Plan, the Ministry has taken the 
proactive stand of initiating the preparation of a World bank supported Project for Low 
Income states, with specific focus of extending the coverage of piped water supply, to 
be implemented in the Ist. Phase in 4 states including Bihar, Jharkhand and Assam, due 
to their poor coverage of piped water supply, and Eastern Up, due the incidences of 
Japanese Encephalitis and Acute Encephalitis Syndrome in the State. In Phase II of the 
Project it is proposed that States like Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal and 
Chhattisgarh, which also have low piped water supply coverage will be taken uip. 
Establishment of Household connections is also being proposed under this project. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 

20 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.10) 
 The Committee note that a project costing Rs. 574 crore under the National 
Clean Energy Fund (NCEF) for solar Powered Dual pump based piped water supply 
scheme which is not dependent on electric supply for water pumping, will be set up in 
82 Integrated Act ion Plan districts, in 9 States, covering 10,000 habitations,.  The 
Committee are also informed that the scheme which is designed by the Groundwater 
Surveys and Development Agency (GSDA), Government of Maharashtra, Pune has 
been successfully implemented in  about 1716 habitations of Maharashtra.  The 
committee are apprised that each scheme can meet the drinking water needs of about 
250 persons and has been found to be useful in providing piped water supply and 
tackling drinking water problems of remote and s mall hamlets/habitations.  The 
committee also find that Ministry has obtained clearance of partial funding from the 
NCEF and the remaining cost will be borne from the NRDWP.  The NCEF shall bear 
40% of the cost of the project while the rest of the expenditure (60%) is to be borne from 
the NRDWP. 
          While appreciating the utilization of innovative technologies like Solar Powered 
Dual pump based piped water supply scheme whereby water can be pumped from 
deeper levels without using electricity or batter ies in remote and small 
hamlets/habitations with drinking water problems, the committee would like to be 
apprised of the proposed year -wise targets to cover 10,000 habitations in 9 States 
under the project. 
Reply of the Government 
The targets of coverage of rural habitations under the NCEF Supported Solar 
Powered Dual pump based piped water supply scheme, State -wise is as below. States 
are to implement their targets over a period of 2 years 2013-14 and 2014-15. 
Sl 
No 
Name of the State No of rural 
habitations proposed 
by State 
No of Habitations for 
which funds were released 
in March 2013. 
1. Bihar 504 281 
2. Maharashtra 68 38 
3. Madhya Pradesh 1199 669 
4. Andhra Pradesh 275 153 
5. West Bengal 704 393 
6. Uttar Pradesh 173 96 
7. Jharkhand 1922 1072 
8. Orissa 3159 1761 
9. Chhattisgarh 1722 960 
 Total 9726 5423 
 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
  

21 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.12) 
The Committee had sought the status of functioning of Reverse Osmosis (RO) 
plants set up in Andaman & Nicobar Islands through Zilla Panchayats. It was pointed 
out by the Committee during evidence that the data furnished by the Ministry in respect 
of functi oning of Reverse Osmosis (RO) plants was inaccurate as the Committee 
themselves had inspected these Reverse Osmosis (RO) plants during their study visit to 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands during February 2013.The said data was provided to the 
Ministry by the Directorate of RD, PRIs and Urban Local Bodies in Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands. The Secretary, Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in this context, 
assured the Committee to send a two member Committee consisting official of the 
Ministry to visit Andaman & Nicobar Islands to visit the plants, consult local 
representatives including Member of Parliament, the members of the district and Zila 
Panchayats to get the figures verified in respect of functioning of RO plants set up there 
and submit a Report in this r egard to the Committee. The Committee expect that 
information furnished to them is factual and accurate. They also desire the Ministry to 
take necessary action to have a factual Report on the status of functioning of R.O. 
Plants in Andaman & Nicobar Island s and submit the same to the Committee at the 
earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
     Based on the advice of the Standing Committee, the Central Team constituted by the 
Ministry, visited Andaman and Nicobar Islands in April, 2013 and submitted its report 
with detailed performance of each RO Plant  visited by the team.  Requisite copies of 
this report have already been submitted by the Ministry to the Lok Sabha (Secretariat) 
both in Hindi and English versions.   During the Standing Committee meeting held for 
North East states and Andaman and Nicobar Island on 12.7.2013,  the Hon‟ble MP from 
A&N Island also appreciated the facts brought out by the team in their report. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.13) 
During the study visit of the Committee in February, 2013 at Barrackpore in North 
24 Parganas, West Bengal, a de monstration of Mobile Treatment Plant (MTP) van for 
supply of safe drinking water during disaster situation was made before the Committee. 
The Committee are apprised that MTPs are of immense help during natural calamity as 
the MTP system effectively remove s varied contaminants from untreated water to 
produce drinking water instantly at the site @ 5000 pouches per hour which is pure 
enough for human consumption. The Committee find that the main advantage of MTP is 
that it can be carried away anywhere to trea t the water, the unit comprises of power 
generator, pre-treatment, post-treatment storage tank and pouch packing machine. This 
not only desalinates the water but also prevents the spread of post flood epidemics. The 
Committee are also apprised that MTP van s are available with the States of West 

22 
 
Bengal, Tripura and Assam and can be purchased by the State by utilizing 67% of 
NRDWP funds available for Coverage/Quality Components after obtaining approval of 
the State level Scheme Sanctioning Committee or by uti lizing Natural Calamity funds 
under NRDWP.  
Keeping in view the effectiveness of the Mobile Treatment Plants (MTPs) to 
produce drinking water instantly at the site @ 5000 pouches per hour, the Committee 
strongly recommend  that the Government should encourage and motivate the State 
Governments to come forward and purchase these MTP vans to cover more and more 
areas. 
Reply of the Government 
      As directed by the Standing Committee, the Ministry will suggest all the State 
Govt.‟s to consider procuring Mobile Water Treatment Plants as power to sanction/ 
approve projects has been delegated to the States.  They will be advised to take up 
such plants especially in those states which are frequently affected by cyclones and 
floods and/ or large tracts of area having water quality problems  viz Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Orissa etc.  However, the states will be advised to consider only such unit processes in 
the Mobile Treatment Plant which are applicable to the local areas. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.14) 
The Committee note  that Jalmani scheme was initiated with a view to providing 
safe and clean drinking water to children studying in water deficient schools. Against the 
target of 1,00,000 rural schools, coverage as on 20.02.2013 has been to the extent of 
91, 409 rural schools. The Committee also note that out of Rs. 19,999.98 crore released 
since 2008 -09, Rs. 11,989.55 have been utilized so far. The Committee are apprised 
that the remaining schools are expected to be covered by the end of the financial year 
as those States w hich have not achieved the targets set under Jalmani scheme have 
been advised to commission the stand alone water purification systems in targeted rural 
schools immediately and State Governments have also given commitment to complete 
the targets within the next few months. The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised 
of the up -to-date status of achievement of targets in respect of covering 1,00,000 rural 
schools. To overcome the problem of regular supply of electricity, the Committee would 
like the Ministry to explore the possibility of installing solar based Jalmani scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
      The Jalmani scheme of providing Standalone water purification system is only 
a pilot project intended to target 1 lakh rural Schools for providing safe d rinking water at 
the consumption point.  As reported into the IMIS by the states, installation of such units 
have been completed in  95,855 rural Schools and the remaining Schools are likely to 
be covered in the current financial year itself.  The States have already been advised to 
convert normal hand pumps into force -lift hand pumps for pumping water into the over 
tanks wherever availability of power is a problem.  Technologies like ultra -filtration are 
available which can reduce turbidity  & bacterial contamination without using electricity.  

23 
 
However, the recommendation of the Standing Committee has already taken into 
cognizance by approving installation of 10,000 solar based dual pumps in 9 states 
having IAP districts and first installment funds have been released. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.15) 
The Committee note that the National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring 
and Surveillanc e Programme was initiated in February, 2006 to develop the 
understanding and appreciation of safe and clean drinking water amongst rural 
habitations and to enable them to carry out tests to determine the quality of drinking 
water by providing 100% financia l assistance to States. The programme aimed at 
empowering rural habitations by bringing awareness about drinking water quality, 
sanitary survey and importance of environment sanitation etc. So far as on 22.03.2013, 
total 17,46,509 persons viz. 19,696 Distr ict Officials, 1,85,866 Block Officials and 
1,54,0947 Grass root workers in GPs have been trained for using field test kits for 
testing drinking water quality in various States. The Committee are also informed that 
during the Eleventh and Twelfth Five Year  Plans so far Rs. 418.64 crore have been 
utilized by the States/UTs, while the amount released was Rs. 561.30 crore. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to make concerted efforts to persuade the State 
Governments to impart training to the remaining peopl e by effectively utilizing the funds 
so as to achieve the objectives of National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring and 
Surveillance Programme. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the committee to impart training to the rural people on 
use of field test kit is well taken by the Ministry. During the year 2013,   4.40 lakh people 
have been imparted training in Gram Panchayats as a part of Water Quality Monitoring 
and Surveillance during the year 2012 -13 and as per reports available, during 201 3-14 
as on 22/7/13, 25,864 people in GPs have been reported to have provided training on 
usage of field test kits. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.16) 
The Committee have  been informed that as on 22.03.2013, 729 District 
laboratories have been established in 650 Districts of the Country. 1,129 sub -divisional/ 
block level laboratories have also been set up in various States. Against a target of 192 
and 518 new labs to be se t up at District and sub district level respectively, the 
achievement is 14 and 162 respectively. The Committee further find that 3,246 labs out 
of 4,143 have been upgraded so far. Further against a target of 39,87,825 water 
samples to be tested, 18,80,936  samples have been tested. The Committee feel that in 
view of more than half districts of the country being quality affected, concrete efforts 
need to be made towards meeting the targets of testing water samples as this will help 
the Ministry in taking sto ck of contamination of ground water and to take corrective 
action accordingly. 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
  During the year 2013, 192 new sub divisional laboratories have  
been set up and reported to the IMIS.  As a result of which about 22  
lakh rural drinking  water sources have been tested in the last year  
through 1,927 Water Quality Testing Laboratories.  The recommendations  
of the committee is well taken and every effort will be made by the  
Ministry to further improve and strengthen water quality & monitorin g 
& surveillance activities through laboratories. During the current year 2013 -14, 4.40 lakh 
sources have been reported to be tested in laboratories so far as on 22/7/13. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.17) 
 
 The Committee note  that as per progress reported by the State Governments 
through online monitoring system 71% of families in rural areas have sanitation 
facilities. However, as per Census 2011 data, sanitation coverage in rural India has 
reached 32.70% taking into consider ation the increased population, which is an 
increase of 2.96 crore households as compared to earlier Census of 2001. In respect of 
wide variation found in the data, the Committee are informed that the Government of 
India has instructed the States/UTs to co nduct fresh baseline survey to assess the 
actual situation at ground level and the said survey is reported to be going on. While 
expressing concern to note that rural habitations still do not have access to sanitation, 
the Committee would like to know the reasons for this wide variation in the data of 
Census 2011 and that reported by the State Governments. At the same time, the 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the findings of the fresh baseline survey 
being undertaken inter alia including when in itiated, broad areas covered, time frame 
fixed for completion etc. 
  The Committee find that the goal of NBA (earlier Total Sanitation Coverage) is to 
achieve 100% access to sanitation for all rural households by 2022. The new strategy is 
to transform rural India into „Nirmal Bharat‟ by adopting community saturation approach. 
During 2012 -13, as against budgetary allocation of Rs. 2500 crore at RE, the actual 
expenditure was Rs.2473.29 i.e. 86.07% .During 2013 -14, the budgetary allocation BE 
is Rs. 4260 crore which indicates an increase of 70% over RE of 2012-13.  
The Committee note that since NBA is a demand driven scheme, hence no 
annual targets are fixed. During 2012 -13 (upto February 2013), 38,30,495 IHHL, 1342 
sanitary complex, 60,457 school toilets and 24,422 Anganwadi Toilets were 
constructed. Whereas during 2011 -12, 87,98,864 Individual household latrines, 2547 
sanitary complex,1,22,471 school toilets and 28409 Anganwadi Toilets were 
constructed. The Committee are constrained to note that the performan ce during 2012-
13 was less than 50% as compared to 2011 -12. The Committee are apprised that low 
achievement of targets was due to revision of NBA guidelines in July 2012 as State 
Governments took time to put in place the mechanism of implementation of new 
guidelines. The Committee are unable to understand that restructuring of any 
programme should reflect by way of improvement in the achievement, whereas in this 
case the performance during 2012-13 showed a declining trend.  

25 
 
The Committee are further apprise d that during the year 2013 -14, 100 lakh 
Individual household latrines, 70,000 school toilets and 80,000 Anganwadi toilets are 
proposed to be constructed and more emphasis will be given on Solid and Liquid Waste 
Management (SLWM). It is also proposed to de velop 20,000 Gram Panchayats as 
Nirmal Grams during 2013 -14.The Committee are informed that the construction of 
Individual toilets, schools toilets, Anganwadi toilets and Community Sanitary Complexes 
will be given priority to keep Government's vision of Ni rmal Bharat by 2022 but due to 
reduction in allocation, target of solid and liquid waste management will not be 
achieved. The Committee desire the Ministry to make earnest and sincere efforts to 
achieve the targets set by fully utilizing the budgetary allo cation. The Committee while 
expressing concern that target of solid and liquid waste management will not be 
achieved would like the Ministry to approach the Ministry of Finance for higher allocation 
of funds.  
The Committee find that major bottleneck faced  in the attainment of objectives of 
NBA is that large sections of Indian population are not convinced of the need to stop 
open defecation because of lack of proper awareness about the problems associated 
with it and hence building toilets is often not a pr iority even for people who can afford to 
construct toilets and use it. The Committee are of the considered view that utmost 
priority should be given to bring about behavioral change in the rural populace because 
without creating awareness, demand to create  the toilets from the rural communities is 
least expected. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take suitable policy 
measures to create awareness so that demand is created from communities to have 
toilets.  
The Committee note that another difficulty being faced by State Governments/UTs in 
implementation of NBA is convergence with MGNREGS. The Committee feel that 
because of involvement of two different Departments which have to converge at local 
level, States are finding diffic ulties. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to 
have a dialogue with Ministry of Rural Development to resolve the difficulties faced in 
convergence with MGNREGS for smooth implementation of NBA. 
Reply of the Government 
 Efforts of the State Go vernments for promoting rural sanitation were 
supplemented from 1986 till 1999 by the Central Government under the centrally 
sponsored Rural Sanitation Programme (CRSP) and thereafter from 1999 under the 
Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC).  Total sanitation C ampaign (TSC) was launched as 
demand driven, community led programme with major IEC inputs to make sanitation a 
felt need of the people. Under TSC, financial assistance to BPLs was to be provided 
after construction and usage of the toilets. 
      As per study conducted by CMS and as reported by various states, the very low 
incentive, which prevailed under the Total Sanitation Campaign have played havoc with 
the programme. Many dysfunctional toilets and slip-backs have been attributed owing to 
this. The gap between the census data 2011 and the figures reported by states in 
sanitation coverage through Integrated Management information System is primarily 
due to the low incentive /subsidy (Rs 625/ - ) given during major portion of the 
programme implementation ( 2001-2006).  
        MoDW&S have requested all States/UTs to carry out baseline survey in 
September‟2012 broadly to cover sanitation status of Individual Household Latrines 
(IHHLs)/School & Anganwadis toilets/ Community Sanitary Complexes, identified APL 

26 
 
category as per modified provision of NBA and defunct toilets. No timeframe was fixed 
though all states were directed to complete the survey at the earliest preferably before 
March‟13. As per entry made by States, as if now, online data for 151444   out 
of  253818 (59.67 %) GPs have been entered.    
2. During 2012 -13 as against budgetary allocation of Rs. 2500/ - crore at RE, the 
actual expenditure was Rs. 2473.29 i.e.  98.93 % not 86.07 % as reported. 
3. So far as declining trend after modification in guidel ines is concerned it is submitted 
that Cabinet Committee on Economic. Affairs in its meeting held on 7.6.2012 had 
approved the continuation of the Rural Sanitation Programme in the 12 th FYP from 
1.4.2012.  Accordingly, Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan(NBA) Guidelines  modified & issued in 
July, 2012. Under NBA, the provision of enhanced incentive for individual household 
latrine units was extended to identified categories of APL households along-with all BPL 
households w.e.f 1.4.2012. The NBA guidelines also envisage d convergence with 
MGNREGS for additional financial assistance. To implement the NBA -MGNREGS 
smoothly, MGNREGS guideline was revised by Ministry of Rural Development in 
September, 2012 and eventually States could frame their line of Action in Oct -Nov, 
2012 only to implement the NBA programme.  
 
4. So far as approaching to Ministry of Finance for higher allocation of funds is 
concerned it is submitted that this depends on utilization of funds by the States and the 
position will assessed at the time of RE and if required  Ministry of Finance will be 
requested for allocation of additional funds as suggested by the Committee.    
5. As desired by the committee that Ministry may take suitable policy measures to 
create awareness so that demand is created from commun ities to have toilets, in this 
regard it is submitted that Information, Education and Communication (IEC) is an 
important component of the Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) / Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan 
(NBA). Government of India has formulated and issued IEC Guid elines in order to 
provide a broad framework to the States for the implementation of IEC activities to 
increase awareness among rural people, generation of demand for sanitation facilities 
and creation of clean environment. The other major steps taken by t he Government to 
improve IEC as part of TSC /NBA are as under: 
 Under Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) formerly known as Total Sanitation 
Campaign (TSC), 15% of the total outlay of district projects has been earmarked 
for Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities.  
 Sanitation and Hygiene Advocacy and Communication Strategy Framework 
(2012-2017) has been launched. It is designed to roll out a number of activities in 
a phased manner, including implementation to monitoring. It also provides a 
framework for States to develop State -specific action plans for rolling out of the 
strategy.  
 For effective dissemination of IEC messages, provision to engage Non 
Governmental Organisations (NGOs), village level motivators (Swachhata 
Doots/Sanitation Managers), f ield functionaries like Accredited Social Health 
Activists (ASHA), Anganwadi Workers, School Teachers, and Bharat Nirman 
Volunteers has been made. 
 Mobile messages based Communication was carried out on a pilot basis as an 
effective tool for dissemination o f awareness on Sanitation targeting rural areas 

27 
 
of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Jharkhand and Uttar 
Pradesh. 
 Audio and audio-visual spots have been produced in collaboration with UNICEF, 
on sanitation and hygiene related messages. These are being telecast/broadcast 
on Doordarshan, AIR, Lok Sabha TV , certain Satellite Channels and other radio 
station. GoI is stepp ing up IEC activities, to be taken -up by GoI directly. There is 
a Budget provision (BE) for Rs.100 crore for carrying out IEC at National level 
which involves not only TV, Radio but also print publicity, hoarding and banners 
etc.  
6. Difficulties are being  faced by the implementing agency at Gram Panchayat / 
District level, as intimated by the States are regularly being taken up with the Ministry of 
Rural Development. Some of the issues have been resolved, however still most of the 
states have requested to delink MGNREGA from NBA due to poor convergence.   
  However, MODW&S and MORD are continuously meeting for effective 
convergence of NBA & MGNREGA and States have been requested that convergence 
at local level may be made effective.  
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 2.19) 
The Committee note that to encourage Panchayati Raj Institutions in sanitation 
promotion, an incentive scheme called „Nirmal Gram Puraskar‟ (NGP) was initiated in 
October, 2003. The emphasis of NGP is on attaining 100% sanitation coverage in Gram 
Panchayats so that the practice of open defection is completely eliminated and health 
benefits actually accrue to the villagers. The committee find that Rs.162 crore have 
been allocated for NGP for 2013 -14. The committee also note that so far 28,002 Gram 
Panchayats have been awarded „Nirmal Gram Puraskar‟ by the Ministry.  
The Committee consider that awarding Gram Panchayats, „Nirmal Gram 
Puraskar‟ for achieving open defecation free status is a step in the right direction and 
are of the view that sincere efforts need to be made to popularize NGO.  The 
Committee also desire t o make concerted efforts to ensure sustainability of Open 
Defecation Free (OFD) status of the awarded Gram Panchayats.   
Reply of the Government 
In this connection it is submitted that new Nirmal Gram Puraskar (NGP) 
guidelines with reference to Nirmal Bhar at Abhiyan (NBA) have been issued in 
December, 2012. NGP till 2011 was given by MODW&S, Government of India all levels 
of PRIs that is Gram Panchayat, Block Panchayat and district Panchayat. It has now 
been decided that with the transition to NBA, selectio n of Gram Panchayats to award 

28 
 
NGP from the year 2012 shall be taken up by the States, while selection of the Blocks 
and District Pnchayats shall continue to be with the Centre. Award money for the Gram 
Panchayats has also been enhanced. 
Additional Award Money for bonus points for house hold piped water connections 
from Nation Rural Drinking Water Supply Programme (NRDWP) has also been made. 
GPs will get additional award money,    
For sustainability of Nirmal Status of the Gram Panchayat, provision has been made 
in NGP guidelines for release of award money  in the following mode: 
 25% of the award money will be released to the GPs in cash on declaration of 
award. 
 75% of the award money to be kept as a fixed deposit for two years in the GP‟s 
name. 
The Gram Panchayat can utilize the interest derived from the fixed   deposit for 
sustaining the Nirmal status. The District must verify the sustainability of Nirmal Gram 
status and provide a certificate to the State to the effect that the Gram Panchayat has 
maintained the Nirmal gram status at the end of two years for release of the fixed 
deposit.   
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 2.20) 
The Committee are constrained to note consistent unspent balances under 
National rural Drinking Water Supply Programme (NRDWP) at the end of 2010 -11, 
2011-12 and 2012 -13 which are to the tune of Rs. 376 6.55 crore, Rs. 3522.20 crore, 
and Rs. 5447.71 crore respectively. Similarly, under Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) the 
unspent balance are to the tune of Rs.1176.70 crore, Rs.1292.48 crore and Rs.1835.24 
crore at the end of 201 -11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 respectively. The Committee find that 
the problem of unspent balances is prominent in the States of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Karnataka and Gujarat under NRDWP. Whereas substantial unspent 
balances under NBA, are lying with States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Odisha, 
Maharashtra and Jharkhand.  
The Committee are apprised about the efforts made in pursuing the State 
Governments to liquidate these unspent balances. Under the NRDWP, a specific 
provision exists that excess closing balance of more than 10% of  available funds, is 
deducted while releasing the 2 nd installment of the subsequent year.   This deducted 
amount can be restored when the State is able to spend at least 75% of the available 
funds in that year. Further the 2 nd installment is released to the States only when they 
report utilization of at least 60% of available funds. At the same time States with higher 
pace of utilization of funds are incentivized by release of additional funds over and 
above their annual NRDWP allocation. Under NBA, strict monitoring methods are 
adopted to obtain the progress of each District on real time basis using the online 
monitoring system. Regular review meetings/Video Conferences etc. are organized by 
the Ministry to discuss issues relat ing to implementation o9f the NBA and utilization of 

29 
 
funds. Apart from this, strict financial regulation with release of 2 nd installment only after 
60% utilization has been incorporated to address the issue of unspent balances.  
The Committee are disappointed to note that despite various efforts made by the 
Ministry to liquidate the unspent balances, the problems of unspent balances still 
persists. The committee, therefore, strongly urge the Ministry to vigoursly pursue the 
matter with State Governments by way of strict monitoring and exercising financial 
management so that funds allocated for the schemes are effectively utilized in time. 
Reply of the Government 
So far as unspent balance with the States/UTs  in respect of NBA is concerned it 
is submitted tha t strict financial norms has now been included in NBA guidelines as 
under: 
“para 13.1.4 – The fund released in the first installment shall be 50%  of the 
amount approved in the PAC and shall be reduced by the amount of opening 
balance in excess of 10% of the previous year‟s release to the State.” 
Therefore, at the time of release of f irst installment to the States/UTs, the 
opening balance in excess of 10% of the previous year‟s release to the States/UTs is 
being reduced. This will improve the position of unspent balance with the States/UTs. 
Moreover, before the release of 2 nd installment following documents will be 
obtained: 
 District wise physical and financial progress reports 
 Annual Performance Report 
 Statement of achievement 
 Committee of the state to the release of proportionate State share 
 Utilization of 60% of the available funds w ith the SWSM i.e. opening balance, 
funds released as first installment of Grant -in-aid under NBA during the year 
and interest earned thereon, Central Share and State Share separately.   
 Audited Statement of Accounts of the preceding financial year  
 Utilization Certificate for Central and State Share separately  
However, as suggested by committee, State Governments will be pursued more 
vigorously to monitor and exercise financial management so that funds allocated for the 
schemes are effectively utilized in time. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
 
  

30 
 
Chapter III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
  
 
 
-NIL-  
  

31 
 
Chapter IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation  (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.9) 
 The Committee are informed that the Ministry is preparing to roll out a World 
Bank assisted Rural Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Project in four States i.e. 
Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh, that have lagged behind the other States 
in providing piped water supply to the rural population.  The total outlay of the project is 
Rs. 5,400 crore (US Dollar 1 billion) out of which Rs. 2,700 crore will be World Bank 
assistance and the remaining Rs. 2,700  crore will be funded from the Central and Stat e 
resources.  The Committee note that this will be a six year project and about 16,200 
rural habitations are proposed to be benefited by this.  The Committee are further 
apprised that based on its success, second phase in four more States will be rolled ou t.  
The committee feel that six years time is too long to complete such an important project 
and desire the Ministry to review the time period of its completion.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire to implement the project with utmost sincerity and complete it within 
two-three years time so that rural areas in these States, which are lagging behind in 
piped water supply, are benefitted. 
Reply of the Government 
The World Bank supported RWSS -LIS Project plans to cover 16,200 habitations 
in 33 districts of 4 Sta tes – Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh. The Project is 
designed to bring about a combination of institutional changes, enhanced investments 
in infrastructure and capacity and transformation in policies and processes to achieve 
the Project objectiv es. The Project has therefore been designed with the following 
fundamental principles:  
(a) Decentralization  
(b) Community participation and demand responsiveness  
(c) District-wide approach  
(d) Enhanced accountability  
(e) Water Security for all, and  
(f) Convergence of water and sanitation measures 
The Project has been planned to be completed in 6 years with the following 
approach due to reasons including: 
1. The decentralized nature of the Project requires community mobilization. 
 Extensive IEC/HRD activities are planned to mobilize the PRIs and beneficiaries 
 and achieve better service delivery in the Project area. 
 
2. The proposed Project envisages implementing water schemes through:  
 Single Village Schemes (SVS) which includes Single Habitation Schemes (SHS) 
and Single GP Schemes (Multiple Habitations), 
 Small Multi Village Schemes (multiple GPs- usually 3 to 4)  
 Large Multi Village Schemes (multiple GPs- usually more than 5) 

32 
 
The scheme cycle for each SVS is planned to be 12 -18 months after the selection 
of GPS, including pre -planning, planning and implementation. Similarly, the 
schemes cycle for each MVS has been planned to be 24-33 months. 
 
3. The Project plans to cover selected districts in the participating States – 7 in 
 Assam, 10 in Bihar, 6 in Jharkhand and 10 in Uttar Pradesh. In view of existing 
 limited capacity of the implementing authorities, it is not possible to implement 
 many schemes in parallel in a district. Therefore, the implementation has been 
 planned to be staggered in 3 batches. 
 
4. The Project is planned to be implemented in 3 batches each of three years 
 duration. The Project plans to implement majority of the projects during the first 2 
 batches. The details of each batch are as follows. 
 
5. Batch I:  FY 2013-14 to FY 15-16: In all the four States with 30% of infrastructure 
 investments along with full scale capacity building and project management 
 activities. 
 Batch II:  FY 15 -16 to FY 17 -18: 35% of new schemes are planned to be 
 implemented during this  batch, along capacity building of associated PRIs. 
 Capacity building and project management activities started in batch 1 will 
 continue. 
 Batch III: FY 16-17 to FY 18-19: The remaining schemes are planned to be taken 
 up in this batch along with capacity building and project management activities. 
 
6. A rigorous M&E is planned for the Project and the lessons learnt from previous 
 batches will be incorporated in the new schemes. 
 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation  (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.17) 
 The Committee find  that in order to promote research and development in the 
area of water quality, the Ministry funds R & D projects to premier institutions, 
universities, autonomous organisation including NGOs/voluntary agencies. To consider 
R&D proposals and provide guida nce, the Ministry has constituted a Research & 
Development Advisory Committee (R&DAC). The Committee note that against the 
target of 149 sanctioned projects, 127 projects have been completed. During the year 
2012-13, a total of 5 R & D projects have been a pproved by the R & DAC. However, no 
R & D project is reported to be completed during 2011 -12 and 2012 -13. The reason 
adduced by the Ministry that since no R&D institution has furnished the necessary 
documents during these two years and therefore, no project could be completed sounds 
unconvincing as Government should have examined this aspect and would have taken 
corrective action to enable the timely completion of projects. The Committee find this 
situation highly unsatisfactory and would await further foll ow-up action by the Ministry in 
this regard. 

33 
 
Reply of the Government 
 In this regard, it is stated that the Ministry will follow up with R&D Institutions  
asking them to furnish required documents in order to ensure completion of R&D 
projects without further delay. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

34 
 
Chapter V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.4) 
The Committee note that in order to supply clean, safe and adequate water to the 
rural population, the Government of India supplements the programmes of the State 
Governments through National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP).  About the 
status of functioning of all dr inking water schemes as on 28.02.2013, the committee 
have been apprised that out of 16,66,075 rural habitations in the country, 12,84,512 
rural habitations are fully covered with access to at least 40 liters per capita per day 
(lpcd) of safe drinking water .  The remaining partially covered rural habitations have 
access to safe drinking water but may be providing less than an average of 40 lpcd 
round the year.  The Committee further find that according to the figures of Census 
2011, out of 16,78,26,730 rural  households, 5,16.90.633 i.e. 30.80 %, have access to 
piped drinking  water from taps, 3,70,89,707 i.e., 22.10 % rural habitations fetch their 
drinking water from more than 500 meters from their homes. The Secretary, Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitati on during evidence informed that according to NSSO 65 th 
Round for 2008 -09, 90% rural households had access to water from secured sources 
which could now be 92.93%.  The committee have also been informed that Millennium 
Development Goals (MDG) target for dr inking water supply in rural areas has been 
achieved by the country in the year 2005, ten years before the target year 2015. 
 The committee find it strange that there is no uniformity in the figures relating to 
coverage of drinking water in the country.  In this context, the committee in their Twenty-
seventh Report had also recommended that an independent evaluation study may be 
carried out to determine the actual coverage of drinking water in the rural areas so that 
the planning process may be properly calibrated for taking corrective measures to cover 
the entire population at the earliest .While reiterating  their earlier recommendation, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the independent study 
commissioned by the Ministry of determin e the actual coverage of drinking water in the 
rural areas. 
Reply of the Government 
The main sources of data on coverage of rural habitations and population with 
drinking water supply are the NSSO report (65 th round in 2008 -09), the Census 2011 
reports and the data on the IMIS of the Ministry.  
The NSSO survey gave information on the coverage of rural households, 
showing 90.2% of the population getting water from safe sources. Secretary DWS 
during oral evidence had stated this information i.e. that 90.2 per cent of the households 
were covered including piped water, tap connections, hand pumps and all protected 
wells, which is  the definition of “improved sources” used by the Joint Monitoring 
Programme (JMP) of UNICEF and WHO, which monitors the achievement o f the MDGs 
by countries. India has achieved its MDG goal of halving the population without access 
to safe sources as it existed in 1990. 

35 
 
The Census 2011 has also assessed access to drinking water facilities of all rural 
households in the country and report ed that 84.02% of the rural households have tap 
water, covered well water and hand pump/ tube well water as the main source of 
drinking water. 
Now that the Census 2011 figures are available, States have been urged to 
identify habitations without safe drinking water sources and also those where the 
drinking water source is more than 500 metres away from households and prioritise 
them in their Annu al Action Plans for taking corrective measures to cover them at the 
earliest.  
The data on the IMIS as entered by the States as on 1.4.2013, indicate that out 
of the 16.91 lakh rural habitations, about 12.18 lakh habitations are fully covered (as 
measured on the basis of 40 lpcd), 3.90 lakhs Partially covered and 0.82 lakhs quality 
affected (data subject to updating). 
The order of coverage reported in all the three sources are similar, with variations 
that exist possibly being due to varying time frames of the survey and the sample size 
and methodology of data collection. 
However to verify the data on the IMIS the Ministry has in 2012-13 commissioned 
an independent evaluation study of the data entered on the IMIS by States, the report of 
which is expected to be available in 2013-14. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.8) 
 The Committee in their Twenty -seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -
13) had recommended to work out modalities to ascertain the sustainability of sources 
in the form of measuring service standard levels in terms of number of hours and 
number of days o f water supply throughout the year.  The Committee have been 
informed that the issue of measurement of services in terms of number of hours and 
number of days in respect of drinking water supply in rural areas throughout the year for 
all 16.66 lakhs rural habitations in the country is a huge challenge and currently, the 
Ministry is not in a position to monitor the hours and days of water supply of each 
individual scheme covering rural habitations at national level as this kind of monitoring 
can be done at t he State level or below.  However, the Ministry in principle has agreed 
to a proposal by Administrative Staff College, Hyderabad for Benchmarking of Service 
Levels for a study of rural drinking water supply and sanitation in rural areas.  This study 
will enable the Ministry to lay down the modalities for measuring service standard levels 
for guidance of States.  The committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to expedite the 
study and apprise them of its outcome. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry is in  consultation with the Administrative Staff College, Hyderabad 
for a study on Benchmarking of Service Levels in rural drinking water supply and 
sanitation that can be carried out across the country. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 

36 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.11) 
The Committee are constrained to note that out of the total 650 districts in the 
country more than half i.e. 358 districts have water quality problems covering 94,00 0 
habitations. The Committee also take note that the Finance Minister in his Budget 
Speech 2013-14 had highlighted that there are still 2,000 arsenic and 12,000 fluoride 
affected rural habitations in the country and Rs. 1400 crore have been provided toward s 
setting up water purification plants. The Committee are apprised that to utilize this 
amount, a detailed EFC Memorandum for tackling about 14,000 remaining fluoride and 
arsenic affected habitations in the country is being prepared and the details of the 
proposal are being worked out. In view of various health hazards posed by arsenic and 
fluoride contaminants the Committee cannot but deplore the delayed action on the part 
of the Government in tackling water quality problems. The Committee would, therefore , 
like the Ministry to expedite the process for timely setting up of water purification plants 
so that the remaining arsenic and fluoride affected habitations are covered by fully 
utilizing the funds earmarked.  
The Committee have also been apprised that t o remove arsenic substance in the 
water, 57 technologies have been test trialled. They are apprised that major problem 
involved in arsenic removal is to desensitivise and to inactivate the reject material which 
comes out of the plant containing large amoun t of arsenic which goes into the food 
chain as well as into the water chain and this requires more R&D because unlike 
fluoride, arsenic mobilization is very fast. The Committee would, therefore, emphasise 
to make concerted R&D efforts not only to remove ar senic, but also other contaminants 
from the water so that clean and safe water is available for consumption. 
Reply of the Government 
As directed by the Standing Committee, the Ministry has already circulated the 
EFC Memo on setting up of Water Purification  Plants not only for the remaining 2,000 
 Arsenic and 12,000 fluoride affected habitations but also in such habitations reported 
with contamination of heavy metals (including uranium)  and pesticides in rural drinking 
water sources.  The Ministry will make  all efforts to get the proposal appraised by the 
EFC and approved by the Cabinet. 
        In the EFC Memo prepared for setting up of Water Purification Plants emphasis 
has been laid on a seven year Operation and Maintenance protocol which inter alia 
include Reject Water Management.  The studies on Arsenic and fluoride getting into the 
food chain will be taken up in details by the Ministry once the proposed International 
Centre for Drinking Water Quality is approved and set up in Kolkata. 
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2013-DWS(Coord.) dated 2 August, 2013, 
 Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation] 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                       SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
17 December, 2013                                             Chairperson, 
  26Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                 Standing Committee on Rural Development 
  

37 
 
Appendix-I 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON                                                    
TUESDAY, THE 17 DECEMBER, 2013 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1540 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan  -             Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
4. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
5. Smt. Annu Tandon 
6. Smt. Usha Verma 
7. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
9. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
10. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
11. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz    
          SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
   
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee convened for 
consideration of Memoranda containing draft Reports of the Committee on action taken by the Govern ment 
on the recommendations contained in three Reports on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) and one Report on 
'Working of Vigilance and Monitoring Committee in States/UTs'.  
 

38 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
(i)    X X X X X X X X X X X; 
(ii)    X X X X X X X X X X X; 
 (iii)  Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  
Fortieth  Report on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation; and 
(iv)    X X X X X X X X X X X.  
4. Draft Reports were tak en up seriatum.  After detailed discussions, the Committee adopted the 
Reports with minor modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid 
Reports and present the same to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
X Relevant portion of the Minutes not related with the subject have been kept separately. 
  

39 
 
APPENDIX - II 
[Vide Introduction of Report] 
  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTIETH REPORT                              
(15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations:     19 
     
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the     
  Government :    
Serial Nos.1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18 and 19     
      
Total:          14 
Percentage:         73.68 %
            
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not 
  desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies :      
 
Serial No.   -  NIL - 
 
Total:          00 
Percentage:         0.00 %
    
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the    
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:     
Serial No.  8 and 16 
 
Total:          02 
Percentage:         10.52 %
            
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the   
Government are still awaited :       
 
Serial Nos. 3, 7 and 10   
Total:          03 
Percentage:         15.80 % 
 