TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Drinking Water and Sanitation for the year 2011-12]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.03.2012
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 22.03.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 25
Price : Rs. 59.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2011-2012) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government ............................................................ 14
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .............................................................................. 40
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee ...................................................................... 41
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ...................... 46
APPENDICES
I. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 22 February, 2012 .............................................................. 50
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development .............................................................................. 52
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012)
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit
5. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
6. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
7. Shri P . Kumar
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
10. Shri Rakesh Pandey
11. Shri A. Sai Prathap
12. Shri P .L. Punia
13. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
14. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
15. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray*
16. Dr. Sanjay Singh
17. Smt. Supriya Sule
18. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh
19. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar
20. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan
21. Smt. Vijaya Shanthi M**
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
23. Shri Ganga Charan
(iii)
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 03.01.2012 vice Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu.
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 25.11.2011.

24. Shri Hussain Dalwai
25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
26. Dr. Ram Prakash
27. Shri P . Rajeeve***
28. Shri Mohan Singh
29. Smt. Maya Singh
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
31. Vacant****
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raju Srivastava — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Satish Kumar — Committee Assistant
(iv)
*** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 02.11.2011 vice Shri P .R. Rajan.
**** Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan retired on 15.02.2012.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2011-2012) having been authorised by the Committee to
present the Report on their behalf, present the 23rd Report on the
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the 19th Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of
Drinking Water and Sanitation.
2. The 19th Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 18 August, 2011. Replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on
19 December, 2011.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 22 February, 2012.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 19th Report of the Committee is
given in Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
21 March, 2012 Chairperson,
1 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2011-12) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in their Nineteenth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Drinking Water and Sanitation for the year 2011-2012.
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
18 August, 2011 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the
same date. The Report contained 27 observations/recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been examined and categorised as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21,
24, 25, 26 and 27
Total: 20
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Serial No.: Nil
Total: 0
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Serial Nos.: 9, 13 and 22
Total: 03
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. : 11, 17, 18 and 23
Total: 04
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of
recommendations (Serial Nos. 11, 17, 18 and 23) for which only
interim replies have been given by the Government and the Action
Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the
Report may be furnished to the Committee within three months of
the presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of the recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Budgetary Planning
[Recommendation Serial No. 4 (Para No. 2.4)]
6. The Department* of Drinking Water and Sanitation has been
entrusted with the responsibility of implementing two major Centrally
Sponsored Schemes viz., the National Rural Drinking Water Programme
(NRDWP) and the Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC). These two
Schemes, considered as flagship programmes of the Government, are
intended to meet the basic needs of the rural populace. Therefore, the
budgetary planning of the Department revolves around these two
Schemes. The Committee find that for the Eleventh Plan, a sum of
Rs. 40,150 crore was allocated for NRDWP while for TSC, the allocation
was Rs. 6,690 crore. The corresponding allocations in the Tenth Plan
for these two Schemes were Rs. 16,195 crore and Rs. 2,190 crore
respectively.
The Committee found that in the case of NRDWP , the Eleventh
Plan outlay was Rs. 39,490 crore while the actual allocation had been
Rs. 40,150 crore. On the other hand, for TSC, the outlay was pegged
at Rs. 7,816 crore, which had been substantially reduced (by Rs. 1,126
crore) during allocations to Rs. 6,690 crore. The Department had
ascribed this amongst other factors to the fact that TSC being a demand
driven scheme. The Committee were of the considered view that the
Schemes of the Department were very crucial for serving millions living
in the rural areas of the Country. From the point of view of the
Millennium Development Goals, it was incumbent upon the Department
to walk that extra mile for the amelioration of the abysmally poor
living conditions of the majority of our rural poor, who were mostly
landless, poor and small/marginal farmers. Taking note of the fact
that 6% of the GDP was spent by the citizens on treatment of water
borne diseases, the Committee expected the Government to be more
*The Department has been created into a Ministry w.e.f. 13 July, 2011.

3
proactive, even in the context of demand driven Schemes, so that
these basic amenities were universalized in the rural areas of the
country expeditiously. Once this is done, the Committee were sure,
that the Department would be able to utilise the precious funds to
their fullest and with optimum benefits to the targeted beneficiaries.
The Committee also recommended convergence between Indira Awas
Yojana (IAY) and Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) so that, henceforth,
all IAY houses were provided with toilets.
The Committee further recommended that instead of continuing to
treat TSC as a demand-driven Scheme, the Department pro-actively
incentivize village Panchayats and Gram Sabhas to propagate the
Schemes, recognizing that the additional investment required would
be more than compensated by the decline in health costs and human
suffering caused by unsanitary conditions and open-air defecation.
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“TSC Guidelines since the year 2007 stipulate specifically vide
para 9 (e) of guidelines that ‘All houses constructed for BPL families
under Indira Awas Yojana shall invariably be provided with a
toilet under this programme’. The provisions have been brought
to the notice of the State Officials and field functionaries in various
review meetings and workshops held to review the status of
implementation of TSC. To boost the Ministry’s efforts in the
direction, a joint letter from concerned Joint Secretaries of Ministry
of Drinking Water & Sanitation and Ministry of Rural Development
to Principal Secretary/Secretary in charge of RD/Housing/Rural
sanitation of all States/UTs has been issued on 18th May, 2011 for
dovetailing of funds under Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) with
Indira Awas Yojana(IAY) for availability of sanitation facilities.
Further, as a matter of fact, TSC identifies Gram Panchayat as a
unit both for implementation of the programme as well as awarding
community for achieving open defecation free status through its
scheme viz. Nirmal Gram Puraskar (NGP). The Ministry encourages
Gram Panchayat based approach with milestone linked
disbursements of incentives and awards for accelerating sanitation
coverage and achieving Nirmal Status by Gram Panchayats. A total
of 25,145 Gram Panchayats have been awarded ‘Nirmal Gram
Puraskar’ by the Ministry till date.
Only about 22% of the rural families had access to sanitation
facilities in 2001. The percentage has gone up to 73% approximately
as per the progress reported by all the States through online
monitoring system maintained by the Ministry as of September
2011, which is mainly due to the success of Total Sanitation
Campaign.”

4
8. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry had not only
brought the provisions of TSC Guidelines for providing toilets in
all houses constructed for BPL families under Indira Awas Yojana
(IAY) to the notice of State officials and field functionaries but also
issued letter to all States/UTs for dovetailing of funds under Total
Sanitation Campaign (TSC) with IAY for availability of sanitation
facilities. However, the Committee feel that till the time the problem
of toilets becoming dysfunctional is not tackled seriously by the
Ministry, the objective of full household sanitation coverage in the
entire rural areas of the country by the year 2015 would remain a
distant dream. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry
should take all the necessary steps to ensure that adequate funds
are earmarked for upgradation of old toilets non-functional due to
lack of proper maintenance and/or destroyed due to natural calamities
like floods etc. The Committee would also like the Ministry to have
realistic check at ground level to be sure about stated 73% of
sanitation coverage in the country. They would await action taken
in this regard.
B. Plan Outlay and Outcomes
[Recommendation Serial No. 7 (Para No. 2.7)]
9. From the break-up of funds allocated to the Department during
the various years of the Tenth and Eleventh Plans, the Committee
found that the Department were provided Rs. 18,385 crore in the Tenth
Plan and this had risen to Rs. 46,840 in the Eleventh Plan. Scheme-
wise outlay during the two Plans was Rs. 16,195 crore for NRDWP in
Tenth Plan and Rs. 40,150 crore in the Eleventh Plan. For TSC, the
allocation during Tenth Plan was of the order of Rs. 2,190 crore. This
increased to Rs. 6,690 crore in the Eleventh Plan. The annual increase
in outlay for NRDWP during the Tenth Plan was 22%, whereas, in the
Eleventh Plan, it had gone down to 9.56%. The fall in the case of TSC
had been still steeper with the average annual growth in Eleventh
Plan being just 12.3% as compared to 52% in the Tenth Plan. The
Department had justified this on account of low base in the initial
year of the Tenth Plan period. They had further justified this on account
of the absolute increase from the initial year of Tenth Plan to its
terminal one being Rs. 3,025 crore against an increase of Rs. 3,440
crore during the corresponding period of the Eleventh Plan. The
Department had also put forth before the Committee their point about
the lower annual increase year-wise not being regressive in real terms.
While not in agreement with Government’s view in this regard,
the Committee urged the Ministry for ensuring that drinking water
and sanitation facilities in rural areas were provided expeditiously as

5
possible, with funds never acting as an impediment. These two basic
facilities had been grossly neglected during six decades plus of
Independence. Their universalisation at this juncture was not any kind
of favour to the majority of our people living in rural areas. The
Department themselves had admitted that owing to the paucity of
funds caused by lower budget allocations for NRDWP in 2011-12, the
coverage of quality affected and partially covered habitations, schools
and anganwadis, and the completion of incomplete Schemes had been
adversely affected. Similarly, in the case of TSC, the Department had
admitted that because of paucity of funds, physical objectives likely to
be achieved for households, school toilets and anganwadi toilets would
fall far short of the objectives initially projected to the Planning
Commission. Moreover, although the initial target of the Department
was to achieve 100% TSC coverage by the end of the Eleventh Plan,
owing to lower allocations, revision in the incentive amount and
increase in project objectives, the achievement of the 100% target had
now been pushed back to the year 2015. The Committee desired that
these two Schemes should not be impeded by any financial constraints
whatsoever as the rural population had remained deprived of these
minimum basic requirements for decades together, resulting in a steep
increase in health costs owing to water-borne diseases. The Committee,
therefore, urged upon the Government that allocations to the
Department be made in ample measure to meet physical targets and
social objectives, and be provided on priority basis. The Committee
would consider it a beginning well-made when the Government
substantially revise the allocations to the Department at the RE stage
in the current fiscal itself.
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and it is
assured that the Ministry will forcefully take up the issue with the
Planning Commission for substantially enhanced allocation.
Financial requirements to achieve the goals proposed by the
Working Group on Rural Domestic Water and Sanitation for the
12th Five Year Plan have been calculated and included in the Report
submitted to the Planning Commission. For the first year of the
12th Five Year Plan in 2012-13 the Planning Commission has been
requested to provide the allocations recommended in the Working
Group Report.”
11. The Committee had recommended that since National Rural
Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) and Total Sanitation Campaign
(TSC) are the main programmes for providing quality life in rural

6
areas of the country, adequate funds should be made available for
the implementation of these schemes. However, the past experience
had revealed that the funds allocated for these schemes were not
sufficient to meet the desired objectives. The Committee are happy
to note that the Ministry have taken up the issue of enhanced
allocation during the Twelfth Five Year Plan with the Planning
Commission as recommended by the Working Group on Rural
Domestic Water and Sanitation. The Committee, therefore, expect
the Ministry to take up the matter vigorously with the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance at the highest level for providing
enhanced allocation especially when the Twelfth Five Year Plan will
commence from April, 2012 and ensure that the availability of funds
are not stand as an impediment in achieving the physical and
financial targets of these two schemes.
C. Unspent Balances
[Recommendation Serial No. 9 (Para No. 2.9)]
12. The Committee’s examination of Demands for Grants of the
Department for the year 2011-12 had revealed that huge amounts of
unspent balances were lying with States. As per the Outcome Budget
(2011-12) of the Department, as on 31 December, 2010, a sum of
Rs. 5,363.16 crore was lying as unspent balance in NRDWP and a sum
of Rs. 1,275.15 crore was lying unspent in TSC. The Department had
attributed this phenomenon to the procedural aspects of the two
Schemes. For instance, funds under NRDWP were released to the State
Governments in two installments, the second one being released when
the States submit Audited Statements of Accounts (ASA) and Utilisation
Certificates for at least 60% of available funds. As most of the States
submit ASAs and UCs in November/December, the second installment
consisting of 50% of the allocation was released to them in December
leading to accretion of larger balances on 31 December. Some of the
unspent balances had also been attributed to many of the Schemes,
now under implementation, being large multi-village pipe water
Schemes which needed more than one year for completion. Most of
the times, funds allocated to such Schemes in one year spilled over to
the next fiscal leading to unspent balances at the end of the year. The
Committee found that the unspent balance under NRDWP was
Rs. 4,523 crore at the end of February, 2011. As regards the
Department’s endeavour to control this problem, the Committee found
that a specific provision exists in NRDWP that excess closing balance
of more than 10% of available funds was deducted while releasing the
second installment of subsequent year. They further noted that during

7
2010-11, an amount of Rs. 75 crore was withheld from release to two
States as their closing balance was exceeding the permissible amount.
The Department also monitored the expenditure being reported by the
States through review meetings, video-conferences; review visits to
States and pursues the same with the States to ensure financial progress.
In so far as TSC was concerned, the Committee noted that as the
Scheme was implemented in a demand-driven mode, the eligibility of
the States holding higher unspent balance automatically reduces their
eligibility for fund releases in the subsequent year. According to the
Department, due to this specific modality and inbuilt provision in the
TSC guidelines, States observe better financial discipline. Indeed, the
Committee were of the view that TSC should not be treated as a
demand-driven Scheme but pro-actively pursued by all concerned with
particular emphasis for the primacy of Panchayats and Gram Sabhas
in planning and implementation.
Notwithstanding the justifications provided by the Department for
the unspent balances, the safeguards built within NRDWP and TSC,
and the measures taken by the Department to control them, the
Committee were of the opinion that the problem of unspent balances
still remains a formidable one. While the Department had justified
additional accretions to the unspent balances in December-end as a
procedural matter, the Committee felt that an unspent amount of
Rs. 2,533 crore in NRDWP at the end of March, 2009 could neither be
explained by the logic extended by the Department nor wished away.
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“The Ministry monitors the financial expenditure on the NRDWP
and TSC through the Integrated Management Information System
(IMIS). Care is taken to ensure that the release of funds to the
States is done only after they have utilized 60% of the funds
available with them. Regular review meetings are being held, letters
sent and visits made to lagging States to ensure that States utilize
funds expeditiously and reduce the unspent balances.”
14. The Committee’s main concern in their recommendation was
to reduce the burgeoning problem of unspent balances by taking
remedial measures by the Ministry. The Ministry in their action taken
reply have confined themselves to spelling out the normal procedure
being followed by them for release of subsequent funds to the States
rather than devising an effective apparatus to overcome the perennial
problem of unspent balances. While it is incumbent upon the
Ministry to effectively pursue the matter with the States/UTs who

8
failed to submit the Audited Statements of Accounts and Utilization
Certificates for release of second instalment, the overall success of
Centrally Sponsored Schemes would always be in limbo for want of
funds on the one hand and non-utilization of scarce funds on the
other hand. While re-emphasizing their earlier recommendation, the
Committee would like the Ministry to come out with some
coordinated mechanism so that States and the Union Government
could work in tandem as far as reducing the problem of unspent
balances is concerned. The Committee would also like to be apprised
of the progress made in this regard.
D. Performance of National Rural Drinking Water Programme
(NRDWP) in North-Eastern States
[Recommendation Serial No. 13 (Para No. 2.13)]
15. The Committee had expressed their concern over the
performance of NRDWP in NE States. In most of these States, the
Department had not progressed well in physical as well as financial
achievements. To cite a few, the reported expenditure in Arunachal
Pradesh was 46 odd percent of all released funds till February, 2011
end. On the physical achievement side against targets of 270 and 264
respectively for the slipped back and Quality-affected habitations, the
achievements during the corresponding period had been 145 and 135
respectively. In the case of Assam, the reported expenditure upto the
end of January, 2011 was about 36%. Their achievement against the
respective targets of 4,642 for slipped back and 3515 for Quality-affected
habitations were 2,862 and 2,120 respectively upto February, 2011 end.
Manipur had reported almost 74% of funds utilization upto January ,
2011, but had lagged behind in physical achievements. Against targets
of 305 and 25 for slipped back and Quality-affected habitations, the
State had achieved coverage of 226 and 01 only. Meghalaya had
reported almost 42% utilization of funds till 31 January, 2011. However,
against the target of 738 and 102 for slipped back and Quality-affected
habitations, their achievement had been 363 and 17 respectively.
Mizoram had utilized about 55% of the total funds released upto
February, 2011 and they had achieved a target of 121 habitations out
of 124 in slipped back category. In case of Nagaland, the fund
utilization had been to the extent of 32% upto December, 2010. The
physical achievement being 43 slipped back habitations against a target
of ‘zero’ and only 03 Quality-affected habitations out of a target of
105. Sikkim had reported utilisation of about 55% of funds released
upto February, 2011. Against this expenditure, they had an achievement
of 100 slipped back habitations out of the targeted 175. Tripura had

9
been able to spend upto February, 2011 almost 69% funds released to
them. On the physical achievement side, against the target of 516 and
309 respectively for slipped back and Quality-affected habitations, the
State had been able to cover 105 and 871 habitations respectively.
North-Eastern States had remained continuously neglected and
deprived of the fruits of development in the past. Precisely for these
very reasons the Union Government had made a 10% allocation of all
Scheme funds to the NE States mandatory. The above narrated
performance of the NE States was not at all reflective of seriousness
and purposefulness that the Region demands and deserves. The
Department's plea that difficult hilly terrains, scattered habitations, low
accessibility of the habitations and water sources and even rains, all
add up to the cost of delivery and, therefore, low achievements cannot
be accepted. These conditions were well known about NE States for
all these years. Therefore, these were invariably factored into cost and
time schedules for all projects to be carried out by any Ministry/
Department.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that rather than seeking
alibis in remediable situations the Department should improve its
monitoring and coordination mechanism in NE Region so that funds
utilization and physical achievements were regularly tracked. Once
this is done, the Department would be able to ensure that the State
Governments were rendered timely advices for adhering to cost and
time schedules with due promptitude and in more professional manner.
To this end, the Committee urged the statutory role of the North-
Eastern Council in planning programmes for the North-East and
monitoring implementation and emphasized for more closely and
effectively coordinated action in this regard with NEC and the Ministry
of DoNER.
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“Under the NRDWP , in addition to earmarking 10% of the National
allocation for the North-Eastern States, the matching State share
has also been brought down to 10%, as compared to 50% of Central
allocation for other States. This amendment has smoothened the
flow of Central funds to the NE States, as well as making it easier
for the States to utilize these allocated resources. The Ministry is
regularly monitoring the funds utilization and physical
achievements under NRDWP , so as to optimize them. The Ministry
shall coordinate with DoNER in complementing each others
programme.”

10
17. National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) is a
flagship programme of the Government to provide safe and adequate
drinking water supply to all rural households. In order to make the
dream of providing quality drinking water to all rural populance in
the country come true, financial assistance is being provided by the
Union Government in the ratio of 90:10 to North-Eastern States as
compared to the ratio of 50:50 for other States. The Committee are
dismayed to find that the Ministry have not taken any concrete
steps for low achievements under NRDWP in the North-Eastern
States. The Committee would, therefore, like the existing monitoring
system to be made more effective and result-oriented with a view to
ensuring that the genuine development-related problems of the
NE States are adequately and promptly redressed. The Committee
feel that rather than finding excuses, the Ministry should examine
this issue in its entirety and take concrete steps in the right
perspective in a time bound manner.
E. Jalmani—Installation of standalone water purification systems in
rural schools
[Recommendation Serial No. 21 (Para No. 2.21)]
18. The Committee noted that Jalmani Scheme had been initiated
on 14 November, 2008 with a view to providing safe and clear drinking
water to children studying in water deficient rural schools. Under this
Scheme, 100% financial assistance was provided to the States for
standalone water purification systems. A sum of Rs. 100 crore was
provided for the Scheme in 2008-09. Another sum of Rs. 100 crore was
provided for the Scheme in the next fiscal with a view to cover another
50000 schools. By March, 2012 the Department expect to cover 1 lakh
schools. As per the information provided to the Committee, initially
during the examination of Demands for Grants, the cumulative number
of schools covered under the Scheme was 51,090 with 15,406 of them
being covered during 2010-11. Impliedly, 35,584 schools were covered
upto 2009-10. Subsequently, however, the Committee were informed
that as per Report of 14 April, 2011 on the online IMIS, 58,159 schools
had been covered. Thus, it could be safely presumed that during
2010-11 at the most 22,475 schools (58,159-35,584) could be covered
under the Scheme. The Committee found this was a very unsatisfactory
situation. They could very well imagine, as to what would happen to
the target of 1 lakh schools by the end of March, 2012 if the Scheme
continued to be implemented at this pace. The Department had
attributed the delay to reasons like slow identification of schools by
State Governments; time consuming procurement process; coverage data

11
not being put online; delay in certification of Terafil Technology users
by IMMT, Bhubaneswar; delay in past subvention by States, wherever
prices were higher than the prescribed unit cost. The Committee
expressed their unhappiness as none of these reasons appears to be so
insurmountable as to overwhelm the pace of such an important
endeavour. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the
Department should make renewed and concerted efforts to convince
the States about the impact of this small but very significant effort
towards provision of safe drinking water to children in rural areas. As
far as delays at IMMT, Bhubaneswar were concerned, the Department
can, if required sound them through the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research for prompt certification within the realms of
feasibility. On the aspect of the prices of Jalmani being higher than the
prescribed average unit cost in some States, the Committee would
suggest that if the Department were satisfied about the genuineness of
the price difference, they may consider entertaining the higher cost of
Jalmani units in such cases as exceptions.
While delving into the Scheme, the Committee noted that RO
systems with their price tag and substantial water wastage were not
a preferred choice for installation under Jalmani Scheme, which was
inherently meant for water scarcity areas. The Committee thought that
while opting for various purification systems, the Department should
also ensure that the States should also keep in mind such systems that
work without electricity, given the erratic power situation in most of
the rural areas.
The Committee also urged the Government to conduct a study of
the impact of supply of water purifiers under the Scheme to over
58,000 schools. Since the working of water purifier was related to
availability of electricity, availability of waterlines, overhead tanks, etc.,
the Committee were not sure whether water purifiers installed in
schools so far were put to optimal use. They may like the Government
to conduct a study of functioning of installed water purifiers. The
Committee would also like the Government to ensure that related
facilities were made available for achieving the goal of supply of safe
drinking water in the schools.
19. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“The Ministry has informed the State Governments about the
simple and green technology of terafil filtration and suggested that
they adopt it for removal of turbidity, iron and bacteriological

12
contamination. As per the guidelines of Jalmani Programme the
unit cost of standalone water purification systems can go up to
Rs. 40,000 but the overall average unit cost should not exceed
Rs. 20,000.
The State Governments have already been informed about treatment
systems like terafil filtration and ultra-filtration which do not
require electric power for running the system. This was also
highlighted in the recent National Workshop held on Drinking
Water Quality on 15-16 November, 2011.
The Ministry has got conducted a third party independent
evaluation on the performance of Jalmani Programme and the
deficiencies found as per the evaluation have already been informed
to all State Governments with a request to rectify them and
implement the programme effectively so that school children get
safe drinking water within the school premises.”
20. While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry, the
Committee feel that the Ministry should pay more attention in
coordination with the State Governments for success of Jalmani
Programme so that the target for coverage of one lakh schools with
standalone water purification system is achieved by the end of March,
2012. The Committee urge the Ministry to work out modalities to
realistically revise the guidelines of Jalmani Programme so that
standalone water purification system could be installed in the schools
inspite of appreciation in the average cost of the system. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome in pursuance
of third party independent evaluation on the performance of Jalmani
Programme.
F. Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC)
[Recommendation Serial No. 22 (Para No. 2.22)]
21. The Committee noted that Central Rural Sanitation Programme
was launched 25 years back in 1986 with a view to having a nationwide
focus on rural sanitation. Based on the recommendations of National
Seminar on Rural Sanitation, CRSP was revised in 1992. From a supply
driven model of past, the new programme aimed at an integrated
approach to rural sanitation. TSC came into being on 1 April, 1999
under the restructured CRSP . The new programme was based on a
community led and people centric approach and instead of previous
supply driven mode works on a demand driven one. TSC was presently
being implemented in 607 Rural Districts of the Country. The Committee

13
further noted that as of December, 2010, according to Department,
70% families in rural areas had access to sanitation facilities. The
Department also intended to cover all the rural households with
sanitary facilities by the end of 2015. The projection of the Department
were based on the logic that the last three years had seen an annual
increase of 7% to 8% in rural sanitation coverage with physical coverage
being 1.2 crore households per annum. In this context, the Committee
while sharing the optimism of the Department, proffered a word of
caution to them. The Department had based their projection on a base
population of 74 crore or so. By 2015, many more crore had been
added to this base figure. The average annual coverage of 1.2 crore
household would then not suffice. The Committee, therefore, desired
that entire scenario needed to be worked out with the incremental
figures of population in view, so that a more precise deadline and
accordingly a need based strategy for total rural coverage is worked
out and put in place.
22. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“The Working Group constituted by the Planning Commission
reviewed the entire scenario and has made its detailed
recommendations in the report submitted to the Planning
Commission.”
23. The Ministry in their action taken reply have informed that
the Working Group constituted by the Planning Commission
reviewed the entire scenario and has made detailed recommendations
in the report. The Committee do understand that the Ministry intend
to cover all rural households with sanitary facilities by the end of
2015. Nevertheless, in the absence of concrete incremental figures of
population in rural areas except the recommendations made by the
Working Group constituted by the Planning Commission that too in
the year, 2012, it is difficult for the Committee to believe the claim
of the Ministry to accomplish the gigantic task in less than three
years i.e., by 2015. After analyzing the entire related facts, the
Committee are of considered opinion that the report of the Working
Group should be implemented and a practical and pragmatic
approach should be worked out to achieve the objective of covering
all the rural households with sanitary facilities by the end of 2015.
The Committee would like to be kept abreast of the steps taken by
the Ministry and progress made thereafter.

14
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 1 & 2, Para Nos. 2.1 & 2.2)
The Committee take note that the Rule 331G of the Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha relating to
examination of Demands for Grants by the Departmentally Related
Standing Committees (DRSCs) was suspended by the Hon’ble Speaker,
Lok Sabha due to rescheduling of the Financial Business in Lok Sabha
to pass the Demands for Grants for the year 2011-12 during the Seventh
Session of Fifteenth Lok Sabha without being referred to the concerned
DRSCs. However, the Committee have examined the Demands for
Grants and made report thereon. Since the Budget for the year
2011-12 has already been passed by the Parliament, the Committee
endorse the same. Nevertheless, the Committee feel that the suggestions
and recommendations of the Committee would help the Department
of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Ministry of Rural Development in
analyzing their performance and implementation of various Schemes/
Projects during the current year, which happens to be the terminal
year of the 11th Plan period. The Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee are given in the succeeding paragraphs.
The Committee note that the Department of Drinking Water and
Sanitation are yet to comply with Direction 73A of the Speaker. The
Statement of the Minister on the status of the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on
“Demands for Grants for the year 2010-11”, which was to be made by
15 October, 2010, is yet to be made. The Committee would like the
Department to take necessary action in this regard so that the Statement
by the Minister be made in the Monsoon Session, 2011 itself. The
Committee further desire that henceforth the Department should ensure
compliance with Direction 73A of Directions by the Speaker. The
Statement by the Minister should be made within the stipulated six
months period.
Reply of the Government
The Statement of the Minister on the status of the implementation
of the recommendation contained in the Eighth Report of the
Committee on “Demands for Grants for the year 2010-11”, was laid on

15
the table of the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 8th September 2011
and 6th September 2011 respectively. The recommendation in this regard
has been noted for compliance.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee find that for Fiscal 2011-12, the Department of
Drinking Water and Sanitation have been allocated a sum of
Rs. 11,005.24 crore. The entire amount is Voted under the Revenue
Head. Out of this Rs. 11,005.24 crore, a sum of Rs. 11,000 crore is on
the Plan side while the Non-Plan side consists of Rs. 5.24 crore. On a
year to year basis, the Committee find that there has been an increasing
trend in the allocation on the Plan side in the budgeted amount in
each of the last three Fiscals. However, in percentage terms, the rise
in funding is not consistent. The Department allocation under Plan
side witnessed an 8.25% increase in 2009-10 over the allocation of
2008-09.
In 2010-11, the increase over last year’s allocation rose sharply by
15%. Unfortunately, however, the rate of increase in allocation this
year has nose-dived three times to 3.96%, which is a matter of concern.
The Committee feel that apart from an obvious funds availability aspect,
a major reason for the small hike in Plan side expenditure of the
Department is their inability to spend the entire amount allocated to
them in the penultimate year of the Eleventh Plan, when, out of
Rs.10,580 crore, they could spend only Rs. 8,284 crore. As will be
borne out from the preceding Chapters of the Report, the performance
of the Department has been deficient on several counts due to which
funds allocated could not be utilised to the fullest. The Committee
hope that by implementing the recommendations contained in this
Report, the Department will certainly improve upon its performance
in the ongoing Fiscal so that the Twelfth Plan does not witness any
reductions in their allocation. The Committee wish to emphasize that
the responsibility entrusted to the Department for rural drinking water
supply and total sanitation is of the highest importance as it is designed
to serve the rural population at large, particularly the poorer and
poorest segments of that population.
Reply of the Government
As far as National Rural Drinking Water Programme is concerned,
the total funds indicated under XI Five Year Plan for Rural Drinking
Water was Rs. 39,490 crore against which the budgetary allocation was

16
Rs. 30,800 crore in the first four years of the plan. The actual releases
was Rs. 30,718.01 i.e. 99.73% . Expenditure at the national level is in
terms of release of funds to States. It can thus be seen that actual
releases or expenditure in the first four year of the plan are nearly
100%. During 2010-11 against a Plan allocation of Rs. 9,000 crore, the
expenditure incurred during that year was Rs. 8986.74 crore which is
99.85% of the allocation. It may thus be seen that this Ministry has
been consistently efficient in spending the allocation. However, the
Ministry has noted the recommendations made in the report and will
try to do its best to further improve its performance in the current
fiscal and thereafter.
The total funds allocated under XI Plan for TSC was Rs. 7816
crore. The year wise allotment and release in respect of TSC during
the first four years and the current financial year is as follows:
Total Rs. 6690 crore received (Central Share) during XI Plan
(Rs. in crore)
Year Allocation Actual % Total
Release Utilization Expenditure
including that
reported by
States
2007-08 1060.00 996.35 93.99 877.76
2008-09 1200.00 1192.81 99.40 1047.52
2009-10 1200.00 1200.00 100.00 1495.23
2010-11 1580.00 1580.00 100.00 1224.22
Total 5040.00 4969.16 98.35 4644.73
It could thus be seen that the Ministry has been able to consistently
release the allocated funds to the States. Further, the cumulative
expenditure reported by the States is also in tune with the release
made by the Ministry.
During the current year also out of total allocation of Rs. 1650
crore, utilisation of funds to the tune of Rs. 791.58 crore (47.97%) has
already been made as of 30th September 2011.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]

17
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation are entrusted
with the responsibility of implementing two major Centrally Sponsored
Schemes viz., the National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP)
and the Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC). These two Schemes,
considered as flagship programmes of the Government, are intended
to meet the basic needs of the rural populace. Therefore, the budgetary
planning of the Department revolves around these two Schemes. The
Committee find that for the Eleventh Plan, a sum of Rs. 40,150 crore
was allocated for NRDWP while for TSC, the allocation was Rs. 6,690
crore. The corresponding allocations in the Tenth Plan for these two
Schemes were Rs. 16,195 crore and Rs. 2,190 crore respectively.
The Committee find that in the case of NRDWP , the Eleventh Plan
outlay was Rs. 39,490 crore while the actual allocation has been
Rs. 40,150 crore. On the other hand, for TSC, the outlay was pegged
at Rs. 7,816 crore, which has been substantially reduced (by Rs. 1,126
crore) during allocations to Rs. 6,690 crore. The Department has ascribed
this amongst other factors to the fact that TSC being a demand driven
scheme. The Committee are of the considered view that the Schemes
of the Department are very crucial for serving millions living in the
rural areas of the Country. From the point of view of the Millennium
Development Goals, it is incumbent upon the Department to walk
that extra mile for the amelioration of the abysmally poor living
conditions of the majority of our rural poor, who are mostly landless,
poor and small/marginal farmers. Taking note of the fact that 6% of
the GDP is spent by the citizens on treatment of water borne diseases,
the Committee expect the Government to be more proactive, even in
the context of demand driven Schemes, so that these basic amenities
are universalized in the rural areas of the country expeditiously. Once
this is done, the Committee are sure, that the Department will be able
to utilise the precious funds to their fullest and with optimum benefits
to the targeted beneficiaries. The Committee also recommend
convergence between Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) and Total Sanitation
Campaign (TSC) so that, henceforth, all IAY houses are provided with
toilets.
The Committee further recommend that instead of continuing to
treat TSC as a demand-driven Scheme, the Department pro-actively
incentivize village Panchayats and Gram Sabhas to propagate the
Schemes, recognizing that the additional investment required will be
more than compensated by the decline in health costs and human
suffering caused by unsanitary conditions and open-air defecation.

18
The Committee particularly emphasize that Mahatma Gandhi’s
priority for the regeneration of our village was sanitation. The priority
conferred by the Government to TSC must match up to the dreams of
the Father of the Nation.
Reply of the Government
TSC Guidelines since the year 2007 stipulate specifically vide
para 9 (e) of guidelines that “All houses constructed for BPL families
under Indira Awas Yojana shall invariably be provided with a toilet
under this programme”. The provisions have been brought to the notice
of the State Officials and field functionaries in various review meetings
and workshops held to review the status of implementation of TSC.
To boost the Ministry’s efforts in the direction, a joint letter from
concerned Joint Secretaries of Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
and Ministry of Rural Development to Principal Secretary/Secretary in
charge of RD/Housing/Rural sanitation of all States/UTs has been
issued on 18th May, 2011 for dovetailing of funds under Total Sanitation
Campaign(TSC) with Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) for availability of
sanitation facilities.
Further, as a matter of fact, TSC identifies Gram Panchayat as a
unit both for implementation of the programme as well as awarding
community for achieving open defecation free status through its scheme
viz. Nirmal Gram Puraskar (NGP). The Ministry encourages Gram
Panchayat based approach with milestone linked disbursements of
incentives and awards for accelerating sanitation coverage and achieving
Nirmal Status by Gram Panchayats. A total of 25,145 Gram Panchayats
have been awarded ‘Nirmal Gram Puraskar’ by the Ministry till date.
Only about 22% of the rural families had access to sanitation
facilities in 2001. The percentage has gone up to 73% approximately as
per the progress reported by all the States through online monitoring
system maintained by the Ministry as of September 2011, which is
mainly due to the success of Total Sanitation Campaign.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
During the course of their examination of Demands for Grants
(2011-12) of the Department, the Committee have noted that the
Department does not exactly follow the Zero Based Budgeting concept.

19
However, their extant system of budgeting broadly meets the concept.
The Committee also note that with a view to duly prioritizing
allocations as also to ensure that they are in sync with national goals
and priorities, the Department base their proposals on extensive
discussions with the Planning Commission.
The Committee, however, note that the Planning Commission had
conducted a Zero Based Budgeting exercise, sometime in mid-2007,
with several Ministries/Departments. The Department had also
conducted a thorough review of the rural water supply scenario leading
to merging the Rural Water Supply Programme with NRDWP from
1 April, 2009. Similarly, the Committee find that TCS, which is a Scheme
based on ZBB as it is a demand driven scheme with no fixed targets,
has also been modified from time to time during the ongoing Five
Year Plan. With a view to ensuring better implementation and sustained
sanitation for improved quality of life in the rural areas, the Department
has also modified TSC Guidelines in pursuance of the Guidelines issued
by the Planning Commission.
Notwithstanding the submissions of the Department regarding the
system of budgetary planning being followed by them as also their
supposedly vigorous interactions with the Planning Commission for
the purpose, the Committee are of the firm opinion that ZBB is a
sine qua non for prudent and realistic financial planning. Moreover, it
also expedites the planning process, thereby, leaving ample time for
the implementation process. The Committee also recall with deep
concern, the delay in finalization of the Eleventh Plan, so much so
that the approved Eleventh Plan Document was released on 25 June,
2008 i.e., almost fourteen months into the Eleventh Plan, which
commenced from 1 April, 2007. The result was that almost the entire
first two years of most Ministries/Departments were spent on planning
and approvals stages, leaving hardly any time for implementation
proper. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should
without any further loss of time explore the possibility of putting
across their projections regarding the Twelfth Plan to the planners and
the Government, after conducting a ZBB exercise at their end. This
would not only save precious time but also avoid of what happened
during the Eleventh Plan. The Committee further desire that the
planners, policy makers and the Government should work with utmost
purposefulness and promptitude now so as to ensure that all planning
and approvals etc., of the Twelfth Plan are in place at least six months
ahead of its commencement so that all Ministries/Departments know
their mandate and funds allocation well in advance and the
implementation of Schemes begins in right earnest from day one of
the Twelfth Plan. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action taken by the Government in the matter at the earliest.

20
Reply of the Government
The Ministry conducted an extensive review exercise of the rural
water supply programme leading to the launching of the NRDWP
with guidelines effective from 1.4.2009. Regarding the 12th Five Year
Plan, the Ministry has placed its projections of fund requirement before
the Planning Commission.
A working group under chairmanship of Shri Joe Madiath, Gram
Vikas, Orissa and co-chaired by Secretary, Ministry of Drinking Water
& Sanitation, Govt. of India was constituted by Planning Commission
to give recommendations on various issues related to rural drinking
water and sanitation for the 12th Five Year Plan. Terms of Reference
of the Working Group included a review of present approach, strategies,
priorities, on-going policies, institutional arrangements and resource
allocation and to suggest strategies, priorities, priorities and allocation
for the 12th Plan. The report of the Working Group has since been
submitted to the Planning Commission on 30th September 2011.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
The Ministry of Finance had in 2006-07 launched a modified Budget
and Cash Management Scheme with a view to reducing expenditure
asymmetry and to plan market borrowings. This modified Scheme
stipulates amongst other things a quarterly exchequer control with a
limit of maximum 33% funds in Quarter-4 ( i.e., January to March);
and March spending control with a maximum ceiling of 15% of funds
during that month. The Committee analysed the performance of the
Department on both the parameters viz., Q-4 and March spendings.
Since the inception of the Scheme in 2006-07, the Q-4 spending of
the Department has been 23.25%, 30.54%, 27.78%, 27.02% and 28.60%
in succeeding financial years. Likewise, their March spending in each
of financial year since 2006-07 has been 11.02%, 14.41%, 12.82%, 11.72%
and 13.16% respectively. Thus, in none of the Q-4 quarters, the 33%
ceiling has been breached and in no year since the modified Scheme
came into being in 2006-07, the 15% ceiling of expenditure during the
month of March.
While appreciating the Department for adhering to these financial
parameters during all these years, the Committee expect them to
continue the good work with same level of professionalism in the
forthcoming years.

21
The Committee would also like to be ensured that on account of
spending limitations in fourth quarter of the year and also in March,
the completion of projects is not suffered particularly in difficult areas
like J&K wherein work cannot be progressed in several months on
account of heavy rains or snowing. Therefore, the expenditure pattern
is to be viewed in the context of climatic working conditions which
vary from State to State.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry shall continue to strive to adhere to the financial
parameters as in the past. The observations of the Committee regarding
the special situation of difficult areas have been noted for compliance.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
From the break-up of funds allocated to the Department during
the various years of the Tenth and Eleventh Plans, the Committee find
that the Department were provided Rs. 18,385 crore in the Tenth Plan
and this has risen to Rs. 46,840 in the Eleventh Plan. Scheme-wise
outlay during the two Plans was Rs. 16,195 crore for NRDWP in Tenth
Plan and Rs. 40,150 crore in the Eleventh Plan. For TSC, the allocation
during Tenth Plan was of the order of Rs. 2,190 crore. This increased
to Rs. 6,690 crore in the Eleventh Plan. The annual increase in outlay
for NRDWP during the Tenth Plan was 22%, whereas, in the Eleventh
Plan, it has gone down to 9.56%. The fall in the case of TSC has been
still steeper with the average annual growth in Eleventh Plan being
just 12.3% as compared to 52% in the Tenth Plan. The Department has
justified this on account of low base in the initial year of the Tenth
Plan period. They have further justified this on account of the absolute
increase from the initial year of Tenth Plan to its terminal one being
Rs. 3,025 crore against an increase of Rs. 3,440 crore during the
corresponding period of the Eleventh Plan. The Department has also
put forth before the Committee their point about the lower annual
increase year-wise not being regressive in real terms.
The Committee are not in agreement with Government's submission
in this regard. The Committee would wish to emphasize their concern
with ensuring that drinking water and sanitation facilities in rural
areas are provided expeditiously as possible, with funds never acting
as an impediment. These two basic facilities have been grossly neglected
during six decades plus of Independence. Their universalisation at

22
this juncture is not any kind of favour to the majority of our people
living in rural areas. The Department themselves have admitted that
owing to the paucity of funds caused by lower budget allocations for
NRDWP in 2011-12, the coverage of quality affected and partially
covered habitations, schools and anganwadis, and the completion of
incomplete Schemes have been adversely affected. Similarly, in the
case of TSC, the Department has admitted that because of paucity of
funds, physical objectives likely to be achieved for households, school
toilets and anganwadi toilets will fall far short of the objectives initially
projected to the Planning Commission. Moreover, although the initial
target of the Department was to achieve 100% TSC coverage by the
end of the Eleventh Plan, owing to lower allocations, revision in the
incentive amount and increase in project objectives, the achievement
of the 100% target has now been pushed back to the year 2015. The
Committee desire that these two Schemes should not be impeded by
any financial constraints whatsoever as the rural population has
remained deprived of these minimum basic requirements for decades
together, resulting in a steep increase in health costs owing to water-
borne diseases. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Government
that allocations to the Department be made in ample measure to meet
physical targets and social objectives, and be provided on priority
basis. The Committee would consider it a beginning well-made when
the Government substantially revise the allocations to the Department
at the RE stage in the current fiscal itself.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and it is
assured that the Ministry will forcefully take up the issue with the
Planning Commission for substantially enhanced allocation. Financial
requirements to achieve the goals proposed by the Working Group on
Rural Domestic Water and Sanitation for the 12th Five Year Plan have
been calculated and included in the Report submitted to the Planning
Commission. For the first year of the 12th Five Year Plan in 2012-13
the Planning Commission has been requested to provide the allocations
recommended in the Working Group Report.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report)

23
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
Keeping in view that this is the last year of the Eleventh Five Year
Plan and the country will be in the Twelfth Five Year Plan from April,
2012 onwards, the Committee find that as a preparatory to the Plan,
a Working Group consisting of technical experts in the fields of drinking
water and sanitation, representatives of NGOs working in the sector,
representatives of concerned Ministries of the Union Government and
Departments of some State Governments has been set up. The said
Working Group was required to submit its Report by 30 June, 2011.
On a query, the Department has also informed the Committee that the
Working Group has identified major issues affecting the rural water
and sanitation sectors and formed sub-Groups to examine and study
the issues. The issues identified by the Working Group include coverage
of rural drinking water and sanitation; appropriate technology;
sustainability of sources and Schemes; capacity building and IEC; right
to water and equity; incentives and subsidies in drinking water and
sanitation; water quality; Nirmal Gram Puraskar etc. The Committee
feel that Working Group also take note of the reasons for non-
completion of projects in time and resultant cost over-runs due to
inflation, etc. for suitable remedial measures.
The Committee also urge that the Working Group consider in
particular the indispensability of making the Panchayats and Gram
Sabhas the focal point for planning and implementing the Schemes at
the ground level. They now expect the Working Group to give their
Report without any delay to the Planning Commission so that the
Commission are in a position to take further necessary action
expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
The Working Group on Rural Domestic Water and Sanitation has
submitted its report to the Planning Commission for the 12th Five
Year Plan on 30th September, 2011. As suggested, it has recommended
that PRIs be given an important role in planning and managing rural
water supply schemes. Recommendations have also been made in the
Report to expedite implementation of projects.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
In case of TSC, this becomes all the more glaring. A Scheme which
has an allocation of Rs. 1,200 crore in 2009-10 has an unspent balance
of Rs. 1,353 crore or so on 31 December, 2009. In 2010-11, against an

24
allocation of Rs. 1,580 crore, the unspent balance at the end of
December, 2010 was as high as Rs. 1,275 crore. Clearly , the extant
measures are not effective in tackling the problem. The Committee,
therefore, feel that the extant system needs to be thoroughly revamped
to make TSC an essential target of local governance instead of being
kept in “demand-driven” mode. TSC needs to be converged with IAY,
as recommended above, only then available finances will be gainfully
utilised and the vexed problem of unspent balances become a thing of
past. The Department may also introduce finer and modified Budget
and Cash Management Scheme for ensuring better management of
financial resources downstream. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken by the Government within three months
of the presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
Reply of the Government
As mentioned earlier, TSC Guidelines since the year 2007 stipulate
specifically vide para 9 (e) of guidelines that “All houses constructed
for BPL families under Indira Awas Yojana shall invariably be provided
with a toilet under this programme”. The provisions have been brought
to the notice of the State Officials and field functionaries in various
review meetings and workshops held to review the status of
implementation of TSC. To boost the Ministry’s efforts in the direction,
a joint letter from concerned Joint Secretaries of Ministry of Drinking
Water & Sanitation and Ministry of Rural Development to Principal
Secretary/Secretary in charge of RD/Housing/Rural sanitation of all
States/UTs has been issued on 18th May, 2011 for dovetailing of funds
under Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) with Indira Awas Yojana (IAY)
for availability of sanitation facilities.
The Ministry is following the principles of modified budget and
cash management scheme. It may be stated in this regard that this
year the States have been released only 25% of their eligibility funds
as per the guidelines in a bid to control unspent balance. The second
instalment shall be released only to those States, in conformity with
the TSC Guidelines, that show better fund utilization pattern.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
The NRDWP is one of the six components of Bharat Nirman
launched in 2005. Known previously as ARWSP , this is the main
Scheme of the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation and a

25
massive sum of Rs. 40,150 crore out of the total Eleventh Plan allocation
of Rs. 46,840 crore to the Department stands allocated to NRDWP . The
Committee find that the Government identified the problem of
sustainability, water availability and supply , poor water quality,
centralized versus decentralized approaches, financing of O&M costs
while ensuring equity in regard to the underprivileged sections of
rural populace, as the major issues that needed to be tackled during
the Eleventh Plan. With this mandate, the erstwhile rural water supply
programme and related guidelines were revised with effect from
April, 2009 and the NRDWP came into being.
During Bharat Nirman Phase-I, 55,067 uncovered habitations and
about 3.31 lakh slipped back habitations were to be covered and 2.17
lakh quality-affected habitations were to be addressed. Apart from these
physical targets, tackling arsenic and fluoride contamination had been
accorded first priority. A typical feature of Bharat Nirman, which is
meant to build rural infrastructure, is that Schemes under it have
physical targets only. There are no financial targets. According to the
Department, the fixing of physical targets without any corresponding
financial targets is essential to ensure that the investment of funds
under Bharat Nirman is dovetailed into the goal of filling the gaps in
rural infrastructure. During the preceding three years, the BE and RE
for the Scheme have remained static at Rs. 7,300 crore, Rs. 8,000 crore
and Rs.9,000 crore respectively and the Department have utilized almost
the entire amounts in each of these years. For the ongoing one, they
have been allocated a sum of Rs. 9350 crore for the Scheme. It is
noted that while the preceding years saw an average increase of 10%
to 12% in the annual allocations, this year, the increase has been of
the order of 4% or so because of lower physical targets for some of
the components.
In so far as the physical targets are concerned, the Committee find
that there have been slippages in achievements. For instance, during
2009-10, out of 586 uncovered habitations proposed for coverage only
377 were actually covered. During 2010-11 also against the target of
376 only 168 had been covered upto 31 January, 2011. In case of slipped
back habitations, where the Committee were told that lesser
commitments would be required as compared to the uncovered ones,
against a target of 80,342 habitations, only 58,985 had been covered
upto 31 January, 2011. Of the 41,094 Quality-affected habitations to be
covered during 2010-11, not even one-third (13,277 only) had been
covered till January, 2011 end. On persistent queries of the Committee,
the Department have extended several reasons for lower targets as
also lower achievements over the years. These include lesser number

26
of uncovered habitations having remained for coverage as per Bharat
Nirman Targets fixed in 2005, partially covered remote and difficult
habitations require more investment, preference for piped water supply
which again require more investment, and so on and so forth. While
agreeing with some of the reasons furnished by the Department, the
Committee feel that NRDWP seems to be suffering from a serious
drawback, in so far as the physical targets fixed for the purpose six
years back in 2005 are almost redundant now. There are now many
more new habitations which may be have to be assisted under NRDWP
for the provision of drinking water. Unless that is done, the very aim
of NRDWP/ Bharat Nirman about universalizing drinking water supply
in rural areas will remain a pipe dream. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the Department should carry out an exercise in tandem
with State Governments and others concerned with the matter and
reorient its strategy accordingly, rather than carrying on with data
based on assessment made in 2005 outdated physical targets of 2005.
The principal deficiency in the planning and implementation of
NRDWP is that Panchayats and Gram Sabhas are being marginalized
in many parts of the country. Not until these initiatives of local-self
government are made central to the NRDWP as envisaged in the
Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution, will Bharat Nirman targets be
met is the moot point as the present system of bureaucratic delivery
has badly failed.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that since the inception of the Integrated
Management Information System (IMIS) from 1.4.2009, data regarding
existence of habitations and the status of rural water supply is being
updated on an annual basis by States. Information on new habitations
is entered by the States on the IMIS every year since 1.4.2009. Coverage
data therefore includes data of these habitations as well as the changing
status of existing habitations, both in terms of coverage and quality.
This is borne out by the fact that the total number of rural habitations
as reported by States on the IMIS has increased from 14,22,664 in 2005
to 16,58,323 as on 1.4.2009 and further to 16,64,186 as on 1.4.2011.
Targets are fixed annually keeping this dynamic situation in view, and
not depending on the data or the physical targets of 2005.
In the implementation of the NRDWP , increasing focus is being
placed on empowering Gram Panchayats for planning, implementing
and operating their rural water supply schemes. While the NRDWP
guidelines provide for the involvement of Gram Panchayats and Village
Water and Sanitation Committees (VWSCs) in rural water supply, it is
conceded that actual progress in this regard has been insufficient so
far.

27
In the current year, the Ministry has brought an amendment in
the NRDWP guidelines, providing for a Management Devolution Index
(MDI) to measure the extent of devolution of funds, functions and
functionaries with regard to rural water supply to PRIs. This MDI
shall be used to finalize the allocation among States of the “Incentive
Fund” of 10% of the NRDWP National allocation. It is envisaged that
this measure shall encourage State Governments to devolve
management of more water supply schemes to the local self
Government institutions, thus resulting in improved efficiency and
better delivery.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee note that under Bharat Nirman there has been
fundamental change in the monitoring process, wherein, targets and
coverage are marked and reported in terms of names of villages/
habitations. Accordingly, an Integrated Management Information System
(IMIS) has been set up by the Department, which is accessible online.
The IMIS allows a bird’s eye view to both the Union and
State Governments for monitoring progress of Scheme through a
Common Monitoring Format. The Department has asked the
State Governments to enter physical and financial progress online on
a monthly basis. Monitoring is also ensured through periodic review
meetings, video-conferences, State-wise reviews and monitoring visits
etc. Under the IMIS, the Committee have been informed, 13 new
formats have been developed to cover all aspects of implementation
and are used to monitor progress. The Committee are happy to note
that with a view to ensuring the authenticity of data provided by the
States online it has been kept on public domain and is open to
checking, verification and comments by all. Feedback can, therefore,
be given by the public and other stakeholders to point out incorrect
entries. Corrections can also be made with the help of information
received through the Central Public Grievances Reporting Website. The
Committee also note that with a view to ensuring timely feedback,
States are required to furnish their monthly reports by 15th of the
next month. Non-compliance can even lead to non-release of funds to
the State concerned.
The Committee appreciate the comprehensive and professional
monitoring and feedback system put in place by the Department for
NRDWP and they complement the Department for the same. However,
they still feel that some information gaps and glitch areas still do exist

28
due to which data on several aspects furnished to the Committee was
not updated. And there is still some to go to make the data online,
real time. The Committee are, however, confident that the good work
done by the Department in developing the extant mechanism will
keep them in good position and they would overcome the technical
and procedural constraints at the earliest so as to ensure that the data
base is as near as real time at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is constantly strengthening the IMIS which now plays
a crucial role in the monitoring of the implementation of the NRDWP .
Further, a pilot project on the verification of the IMIS data is being
carried out in 3 States viz. Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan. A
detailed independent study/verification of the IMIS data has also been
initiated in 2011-12.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
As far as training and capacity building under NRDWP is
concerned it is envisaged that 5 grass root workers in each
Gram Panchayat, including ASHA worker, Anganwadi worker, science
teacher, high school girl child, panchayat member, ex-servicemen etc.
will be trained. Apart from them, 5 Gram Panchayat workers, 2 persons
at State level, 4 persons at District level and 5 persons at Block level
are to be trained. The Committee note that so far 997467 persons have
been trained. For this purpose, a sum of Rs. 147.75 crore has been
spent out of the total released amount of Rs. 248.97 crore. The
Committee also note that the Planning Commission has taken a serious
view of this under utilisation of funds for training. They have also
categorized as “poor” the training aspect in their evaluation. In fact,
in their study based on experiences in 5 States that the overall situation
presents a poor picture with a sustainability index of only 30 per cent.
More disconcertingly the provision of training of community members,
especially the women has not been given adequate attention.
From their own experience at the field levels, the Committee cannot
but agree in toto with the evaluation of Planning Commission. The
training and capacity building aspect is one of the weak areas of
NRDWP . They , therefore, desire that the Department should take steps
on a war footing to ameliorate the situation. Unless training and
capacity building of requisite kind is ensured, the Scheme cannot be

29
sustained at the local community level. The Department must also
keep in mind that local training and capacity building measures will
go a long way in tackling the slip-back habitation cases to a significant
extent. They, therefore, recommend that the Department should review
their training and capacity building programme at once so as to ensure
that well trained personnel at ground level are available without any
delay in requisite numbers so that the gains of NRDWP are not fettered
away due to lack of training and capacity building. The Department
may also co-ordinate their efforts in this regard with the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj. The Committee would like to be apprised of a definite
roadmap for the purpose within three months of presentation of this
Report to the Parliament.
Reply of the Government
Under the NRDWP guidelines, Training and Capacity Building
activities have now been subsumed under the 5% Support activities
funds.
The Ministry has recognized the need of capacity building of the
PRIs and the rural communities for achieving the ultimate objective of
sustained availability of safe drinking water. Block Resource Centers
(BRC), District Water and Sanitation Missions (DWSM), State Water
and Sanitation Support Organizations (WSSO) have been constituted
to build capacities of the Gram Panchayats and the Village Water and
Sanitation Committees (VWSCs), to mobilize communities, educate
them, ensure their training and availability of technical support. States
have been requested to recruit staff for these on priority bases and
take up support activities to GPs and VWSCs. The Ministry has also
issued a handbook for Gram Panchayats and VWSCs to enable them
to understand the issues related to the Drinking Water Security, the
roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders and the available
institutional support systems under NRDWP . For creating awareness
among rural people on all aspects of rural water supply and to enhance
the capacities of the Panchayati Raj Institutions/Local Bodies/VWSCs,
NRDWP (Support) fund is being provided for all these activities on a
100% grant basis. An illustrative list of IEC activities and IEC guidelines
have also been made available to the States.
Earlier, the training programmes were not very successful, due to
inadequate co-ordination between the PHEDs and the training
institutions. Under the NRDWP , the training activities have been
merged with the WSSO, which is set up in all the States under the
State Water and Sanitation Missions.

30
In order to provide specific training to various stakeholders
including PHED engineers PRI, representatives and Master Trainers,
25 National Key Resource Centres have been identified, which include
20 Institutions in drinking water sector and the remaining 5 in rural
sanitation sector. An amount of Rs. 302.63 lakh and Rs. 85.57 lakh has
been released during 2010-11 and in 2011-12 to the KRCs for conducting
trainings, workshops etc. So far in 2011-12, 22 training programmes
have been conducted by KRCs apart from conducting one Training
Needs Assessment Workshop, 4 National/regional workshops and
5 State level workshops.
As a part of the framework for the implementation of the rural
drinking water programme, the Ministry is facilitating Training Needs
Assessment by the State Govts. and implementation of identified
training programmes at all levels is being monitored, to ensure adequate
capacity building. States have also targeted to train 10,371 VWSC
members in 2011-12 as part of their Annual Action Plan.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
With a view to promoting R&D in the area of water supply and
water quality, the Department funds such projects in premier
institutions, universities, autonomous organisations including NGOs/
voluntary agencies. They have sanctioned 143 R&D projects out of
which 127 have been completed. As far as financial progress is
concerned, during the last three Fiscals, out of the allocation of Rs. 50
lakh, Rs. 50 lakh and Rs. 100 lakh respectively, the Department have
utilized sums of Rs. 30 lakh, Rs. 50 lakh and Rs. 30 lakh respectively.
Thus, it is apparent that the Department has failed to utilize even
these minimal funds on R&D activities. In the opinion of the
Committee, R&D holds the key in NRDWP Scheme. If newer cost
effective techniques, technologies and processes are worked out and
implemented, particularly in slip back and Quality-affected habitations,
things will improve dramatically. Not only will the execution and
operating costs go down but the maintenance problems will also be
kept down to the minimum. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Department should change its mindset about R&D activities and
allocate funds for R&D in a big way. Needless to emphasize that
every rupee invested in R&D activities today will ensure considerable
savings both in terms of cost and time in future. They would also like
the Department to consult CWC and CISR laboratories for the guidance
about the R&D activities that would be related to their Schemes. The
Committee would like to be apprised on the outcome of the efforts of
the Department in this regard.

31
Reply of the Government
The funds allocated for R&D activities are not negligible. Besides
Rs 1.00 crore provided specifically under the Budget Head for R&D
activities, 5% of the funds provided to State Government under
NRDWP have been earmarked for support activities which inter-alia
include R&D. IITs, CSIR institutions and other reputed Technical
institutions have been requested to send their R&D proposals in R&D,
Water and Sanitation sector. So far, 143 R&D projects have been
sanctioned, out of which 127 have been completed. To consider R&D
proposals and provide guidance, the Ministry has constituted a Research
& Development Advisory Committee (R&DAC). Presently, 16 R&D
projects are ongoing. In all, 5 R&D proposals were approved by the
R&DAC on 16.06.2010 and funds were released to all of them,
subsequently 7 new R&D proposals have been approved by the
R&DAC on 30.05.2011. Specific priority areas for research have been
identified and the Ministry has once again requested all IITs/NITs/
CSIR labs to send R&D proposals as per the priority areas identified.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 2.19)
The Committee undertook a study visit to Kuttanad on 2 July,
2011, the second largest rice growing tract of Kerala which extends
through three Districts viz., Alappuzha, Kottayam and Pathanamthitta.
The Committee found that the area was waterlogged and soil condition
was the worst due to continuous saline intrusion. The unscientific
construction of roads and culverts, inadequacy of sewage treatment
plants to check dumping of waste into canals, rivers and other water
sources in the region, degradation of fresh water resources etc., also
added to the woes of the Kuttanad region and its community. The
Committee were apprised that based on the request of the Government
of Kerala to address the perennial problems faced in Kuttanad, the
Union Government entrusted the Dr. M.S. Swaminathan Research
Foundation, Chennai (MSSRF) to conduct a scientific study of the region
and suggest suitable measures to mitigate agrarian distress in Kuttanad.
The MSSRF submitted its final report in August, 2007 and had
recommended a variety of interventions to be implemented as a
package which was accepted by the Government of India for funding
under ongoing Central Sector Schemes. The Committee were informed
by the representatives of the State Government during their visit that
the Drinking Water Project submitted by them to the Central

32
Government for approval has been repeatedly referred back to them
for revision as well as for seeking more clarifications. The proposal
with revised cost of Rs. 316.70 crore is now with the Central
Government with all clarifications, updates, etc. The Committee were
also apprised that replacement of old, outdated water supply pipelines
should also form part of the project. Taking note of the fact that the
approval of the Project by the Government of India has been
considerably delayed due to which the problems faced by the Kuttanad
Region has compounded considerably, the Committee desire that the
Government should expedite the clearance of Project without further
loss of time. The Committee would also like to emphasise that the
mechanism involving approvals and monitoring of all such Projects
need to be properly calibrated so that the element of delay is reduced
to the minimum and there are specific time schedules for project
submission, clarification to be sought and final approval.
Reply of the Government
A project for water supply to the Kuttanad region of Kerala was
received from the Government of Kerala. The project was for bilateral
funding (JICA). Certain clarifications had been sought from the State
Government, which have been received. The State is also to submit
the project with latest SOR Rates. Upon receipt of the revised project,
it shall be processed on priority for forwarding to the Department of
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, for consideration for posing to
JICA for funding.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 2.20)
As a part of its responsibilities, the Department also supports the
setting up and upgradation of District level and sub-District level water
quality testing laboratories. The Committee were given to understand
during the course of examination of the subject that 676 District
Laboratories have been established by the States/UTs using funds from
the Centre, their own resources and from other sources. As per the
reports available, 84 rural Districts do not have District labs as yet.
Even where labs have been established, they suffer from paucity of
technical staff and other personnel. While information previously
submitted to the Committee indicated that apart from Andhra Pradesh
none of the States were having adequate technicians, subsequently
they were informed that except for Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand,

33
Odisha, West Bengal, Meghalaya and Sikkim, all other States have
reported adequate staff for testing laboratories samples. To encourage
appointment of lab assistants and chemists in these labs, the Union
Government is providing assistance upto the extent of Rs. 3,500. The
Department is also making efforts to establish a national level
laboratory. They are also working out on an agreement with National
Environment Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur (NEERI) with a
view to appoint it as the national reference institute of the Department.
In the eventuality of the agreement not coming of, the Department
may contemplate a similar agreement with the Institute of Health and
Family Welfare for establishment of a national laboratory in their
premises.
The Committee are disappointed to note that the establishment of
water quality testing laboratories has not been accorded due priority
by the Government. Even now there is a lack of enabling infrastructure,
facilities and wherewithal. In as many as six States the laboratories do
not have adequate staff. In such a scenario, the Committee can well
imagine the efficacy of the regulatory mechanism at present. What
would be the quality of water which is being made accessible to the
rural populace remains a moot point in the absence of quality checks
and control that an efficient system of laboratories at State, District
and Block levels would have ensured.
If the Government are serious about making available quality
drinking water to all, there priority should not merely be provision of
water but also establishment of a chain of laboratories which would
establish the quality of water being made available to the people for
drinking purposes. The matter acquires added dimensions in view of
the fact that every year an amount equal to 6% of GDP is spent by
individual citizens on treatment of water borne diseases. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should in view of
the messy situation obtaining country wide, contemplate a hundred
percent centrally sponsored Scheme for setting up and operating water
quality laboratories at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been duly considered.
Approval of Cabinet has recently been accorded for revision of NRDWP
guidelines to provide a dedicated 3% NRDWP-Support fund on 100%
central assistance basis to States for water quality monitoring and
surveillance, which inter-alia includes setting up new and operating of
district/sub-district water quality testing laboratories, upgradation of

34
the existing labs, providing chemicals and consumables to labs, hiring
of trained manpower for the laboratories, providing field test kits/
refills to GPs etc.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 2.21)
The Committee note that Jalmani Scheme has been initiated on
14 November, 2008 with a view to providing safe and clear drinking
water to children studying in water deficient rural schools. Under this
Scheme, 100% financial assistance is provided to the States for
standalone water purification systems. A sum of Rs. 100 crore was
provided for the Scheme in 2008-09. Another sum of Rs. 100 crore was
provided for the Scheme in the next fiscal with a view to cover another
50,000 schools. By March, 2012 the Department expect to cover 1 lakh
schools. As per the information provided to the Committee, initially
during the examination of Demands for Grants, the cumulative number
of schools covered under the Scheme was 51,090 with 15,406 of them
being covered during 2010-11. Impliedly, 35,584 schools were covered
upto 2009-10. Subsequently, however, the Committee were informed
that as per Report of 14 April, 2011 on the online IMIS, 58,159 schools
have been covered. Thus, it can be safely presumed that during
2010-11 at the most 22,475 schools (58,159-35,584) could be covered
under the Scheme. The Committee find this a very unsatisfactory
situation. They can very well imagine, as to what will happen to the
target of 1 lakh schools by the end of March, 2012 if the Scheme
continues to be implemented at this pace. The Department have
attributed the delay to reasons like slow identification of schools by
State Governments; time consuming procurement process; coverage data
not being put online; delay in certification of Terafil Technology users
by IMMT, Bhubaneshwar; delay in past subvention by States, wherever
prices were higher than the prescribed unit cost. The Committee are
pained to state that none of these reasons appears to be so
insurmountable as to overwhelm the pace of such an important
endeavour. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
Department should make renewed and concerted efforts to convince
the States about the impact of this small but very significant effort
towards provision of safe drinking water to children in rural areas. As
far as delays at IMMT, Bhubaneshwar are concerned, the Department
can, if required sound them through the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research for prompt certification within the realms of

35
feasibility. On the aspect of the prices of Jalmani being higher than the
prescribed average unit cost in some States, the Committee would
suggest that if the Department are satisfied about the genuineness of
the price difference, they may consider entertaining the higher cost of
Jalmani units in such cases as exceptions.
While delving into the Scheme, the Committee note that RO
systems with their price tag and substantial water wastage are not a
preferred choice for installation under Jalmani Scheme, which is
inherently meant for water scarcity areas. The Committee think that
while opting for various purification systems, the Department should
also ensure that the States should also keep in mind such systems that
work without electricity, given the erratic power situation in most of
the rural areas.
The Committee would also like the Government to conduct a study
of the impact of supply of water purifiers under the Scheme to over
58,000 schools. Since the working of water purifier is related to
availability of electricity, availability of waterlines, overhead tanks, etc.,
the Committee are not sure whether water purifiers installed in schools
so far are put to optimal use. They may like the Government to conduct
a study of functioning of installed water purifiers. The Committee
would also like the Government to ensure that related facilities are
made available for achieving the goal of supply of safe drinking water
in the schools.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has informed the State Governments about the simple
and green technology of terafil filtration and suggested that they adopt
it for removal of turbidity, iron and bacteriological contamination. As
per the guidelines of Jalmani Programme the unit cost of standalone
water purification systems can go up to Rs. 40,000/- but the overall
average unit cost should not exceed Rs. 20,000/-.
The State Governments have already been informed about treatment
systems like terafil filtration and ultra-filtration which do not require
electric power for running the system. This was also highlighted in
the recent National Workshop held on Drinking Water Quality on
15-16 November, 2011.
The Ministry has got conducted a third party independent
evaluation on the performance of Jalmani Programme and the
deficiencies found as per the evaluation have already been informed

36
to all State Governments with a request to rectify them and implement
the programme effectively so that school children get safe drinking
water within the school premises.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.20 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 2.24)
The Committee note with some sense of relief that the Department
have at last woken up to the badly felt need for enhancement of
funds for units constructed under TSC. As the revision is long overdue,
the Committee expect the Department to complete all related formalities
expeditiously and after obtaining the requisite approvals convey the
revised rates to the States at the earliest so that they get implemented
from the second quarter of ongoing Fiscal.
Reply of the Government
The approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA)
has since been obtained for revision of incentive for Individual
household latrines for BPL households. The increased incentive from
Rs. 2200 to Rs. 3200 (Rs. 3700 for Hilly and Difficult Areas) has since
been made effective from 1st June 2011. All States/UTs have accordingly
been intimated and their project outlay revised.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 2.25)
The Committee are concerned to note that in case of TSC also, the
performance of NE States is not upto the expectations. Starting with
an opening balance of Rs. 116 odd crore on 1 April, 2010, they are
expected by the Department to at the most match the expenditure of
last year viz., Rs. 137 crore or so. A sum of almost Rs. 167 crore is still
left as closing balance on 31 March, 2011. As development of NE
Region is a top priority area, the Committee desire the Department to
work out new and effective strategies to ensure greater utilization of
funds for TSC in the Region and not be content just by matching
expenditure with that of previous years. The North-East Council and
the Ministry of DONER may be drawn into this Scheme.

37
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has given special priority to North Eastern region
and has taken the following effective measures to ensure greater
utilization of funds and accelerate sanitation coverage in rural areas of
North Eastern Region.
1. Higher incentive for Individual Household toilets for BPL
households.
2. Higher financial assistance for institutional toilets viz. school
and anganwadi toilets.
3. Release of practitioner Manual on Eco-sanitation on
26.09.2011.
4. 10% allocation of the funds essentially for STs.
The Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region is being
informed of the developments taking place and issues of relevance
from time to time.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 2.26)
The Nirmal Gram Puraskar, as the Committee have observed, has
been basically designed to encourage Panchayati Raj Institutions in
promoting sanitation. The Puraskar is awarded to Panchayati Raj
Institutions of village where 100% sanitation has been achieved. The
cumulative number of awardees as of now is 25,427. For the ongoing
Fiscal, a sum of Rs. 50 crore has been earmarked for the Scheme for
which the Department expect that 3000 Gram Panchayats will be
eligible. The Committee also note that in pursuance of their
recommendation contained in the Third Report on DFG (2009-10), the
Department have got carried out “Assessment Study of Impact and
Sustainability of Nirmal Gram Puraskar” through an outside agency.
The agency has carried out a survey in 664 NGP awardees Panchayats
of 56 Districts in 12 States and submitted a draft Report to the
Department. The Department is analyzing the Report for all its findings.
As per the top end findings of Report, almost 82% of the rural
households had access to sanitation facilities in the sample Gram
Panchayats.
The Committee are of the view that NGP has served well as a
catalyst for giving impetus to the Panchayati Raj Institutions to
vigorously pursue complete sanitation in the village concerned.

38
However, what has caused dismay to the Committee is the finding of
the survey that 82% of the rural households have access to sanitation
facilities in sample villages. Apparently, the requisite tempo of coverage,
maintenance etc., have not been maintained in the NGP villages once
they have got the NGP . The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Department should also think beyond NGP for such villages so that
the momentum for complete sanitation remains on constant even after
the award is bestowed.
Reply of the Government
The survey made by the Ministry through M/s Centre for Media
Studies was for the Gram Panchayats awarded Nirmal Gram Puraskar
during the years 2005 to 2008 wherein the complete award money
was given to the awarded Panchayats in one instalment. The Ministry
has since evolved a mechanism to ensure sustainability of NGP
awarded GPs through revised Nirmal Gram Puraskar Guidelines-2010.
Guidelines include release of prize money in two equal instalments.
The first instalment will be released immediately after GPs are selected
for the award. The second instalment will be released on the
sustainability of Nirmal status and Open Defecation Free (ODF)
environment by the GP . For this purpose, random checks will be carried
out by the State after 6 months in all the awarded GPs. If NGP and
ODF status is found continuing, second instalment will also be released.
Otherwise, State will take necessary measures to revive the NGP Status
of awardee and till such time, the awardee regains the state of
sustainability of NGP , further award money will not be released. NGP
award may be withdrawn from all persistent defaulters.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 2.27)
The Committee would also like to comment on the matter of survey
on a different plane. They find it inexplicable as to why the Department
has categorized the report of the agency concerned as a draft Report.
They will appreciate a detailed clarification from the Department on
the said nomenclature as so details of the terms of reference of the
survey alongwith time and cost implications. They also expect the
Department to come and share their analysis of the “Draft Report”
with the Committee alongwith the correctives and other actions initiated
by them post Report.

39
Reply of the Government
The agency has since submitted its final report to the Ministry.
The same has already been posted on the website for better
dissemination and corrective measures by the concerned States.
The study covered 12 States of Kerala, West Bengal, Tripura,
Haryana, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Andhra
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Bihar, Chhattisgarh & Karnataka. 664 NGP
awarded GPs from 56 districts of the 12 States were surveyed with a
sample of 15 households in each GP over a period of approximately
4 months. The expenditure incurred on the study is to the tune of
Rs. 28 lakhs.
The analysis of the report reveals the following main findings:—
• Overall, around 81% of the total sample NGP-GP
households reported access to any type of latrine.
• 19.1% of the total sample NGP-GP-households reported lack
of access to any latrine. The worst performance was from
Bihar where only 48% households reportedly had access to
sanitation facilities in NGP villages at the time of survey.
Kerala had the best results with still reportedly maintaining
100% sanitation coverage.
• Overall, 91% of schools and 71% of anganwadis had
sanitation facilities
• 67% of surveyed households reported all members using
the latrine regularly
• Reason for not using toilet was related to poor quality
installations.
The complete report has already been posted on the website for
better dissemination and corrective measures by the concerned States.
Apart from the above, the findings of the report were also presented
before all the State Secretaries repeatedly in various meetings to
emphasis quick corrective actions to be taken by the respective States
to restore the Nirmal Status of slipped back GPs. Specific letters have
also been issued to all concerned to take corrective measures enclosing
the gist of findings.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]

40
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

41
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
In examining the Demands for Grants of the Department for the
ongoing fiscal, the Committee have discovered huge amounts of
unspent balances lying with States. As per the Outcome Budget
(2011-12) of the Department, as on 31 December, 2010, a sum of
Rs. 5,363.16 crore was lying as unspent balance in NRDWP and a sum
of Rs. 1,275.15 crore was lying unspent in TSC. The Department have
attributed this phenomenon to the procedural aspects of the two
Schemes. For instance, funds under NRDWP are released to the State
Governments in two instalments, the second one being released when
the States submit Audited Statements of Accounts (ASA) and Utilisation
Certificates for at least 60% of available funds. As most of the States
submit ASAs and UCs in November/December, the second installment
consisting of 50% of the allocation is released to them in December
leading to accretion of larger balances on 31 December. Some of the
unspent balances have also been attributed to many of the Schemes,
now under implementation, being large multi-village pipe water
Schemes which need more than one year for completion. Most of the
times, funds allocated to such Schemes in one year spill over to the
next fiscal leading to unspent balances at the end of the year. The
Committee find that the unspent balance under NRDWP was Rs. 4,523
crore at the end of February, 2011. As regards the Department’s
endeavour to control this problem, the Committee find that a specific
provision exists in NRDWP that excess closing balance of more than
10% of available funds is deducted while releasing the second
installment of subsequent year. They further note that during 2010-11,
an amount of Rs. 75 crore was withheld from release to two States as
their closing balance was exceeding the permissible amount. The
Department also monitors the expenditure being reported by the States
through review meetings, video-conferences, review visits to States and
pursues the same with the States to ensure financial progress. In so
far as TSC is concerned, the Committee note that as the Scheme is
implemented in a demand-driven mode, the eligibility of the States
holding higher unspent balance automatically reduces their eligibility

42
for fund releases in the subsequent year. According to the Department,
due to this specific modality and inbuilt provision in the TSC
guidelines, States observe better financial discipline. Indeed, the
Committee are of the view that TSC should not be treated as a demand-
driven Scheme but pro-actively pursued by all concerned with
particular emphasis for the primacy of Panchayats and Gram Sabhas
in planning and implementation.
Notwithstanding the justifications provided by the Department for
the unspent balances, the safeguards built within NRDWP and TSC,
and the measures taken by the Department to control them, the
Committee are of the opinion that the problem of unspent balances
still remains a formidable one. While the Department have justified
additional accretions to the unspent balances in December-end as a
procedural matter, the Committee feel that an unspent amount of
Rs.2,533 crore in NRDWP at the end of March, 2009 can neither be
explained by the logic extended by the Department nor wished away.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry monitors the financial expenditure on the NRDWP
and TSC through the Integrated Management Information System
(IMIS). Care is taken to ensure that the release of funds to the States
is done only after they have utilized 60% of the funds available with
them. Regular review meetings are being held, letters sent and visits
made to lagging States to ensure that States utilize funds expeditiously
and reduce the unspent balances.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.14 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee would also like to express their concern over the
performance of NRDWP in NE States. In most of these States, the
Department have not acquitted themselves well in physical as well as
financial achievements. To cite a few, the reported expenditure in
Arunachal Pradesh was 46 odd percent of all released funds till
February, 2011 end. On the physical achievement side against targets
of 270 and 264 respectively for the slipped back and Quality-affected
habitations, the achievements during the corresponding period had

43
been 145 and 135 respectively. In the case of Assam, the reported
expenditure upto the end of January, 2011 was about 36%. Their
achievement against the respective targets of 4,642 for slipped back
and 3515 for Quality-affected habitations were 2,862 and 2,120
respectively upto February, 2011 end. Manipur has reported almost
74% of funds utilization upto January, 2011, but has lagged behind in
physical achievements. Against targets of 305 and 25 for slipped back
and Quality-affected habitations, the State has achieved coverage of
226 and 01 only. Meghalaya has reported almost 42% utilization of
funds till 31 January, 2011. However, against the target of 738 and 102
for slipped back and Quality-affected habitations, their achievement
have been 363 and 17 respectively . Mizoram has utilized about 55% of
the total funds released upto February, 2011 and they have achieved
a target of 121 habitations out of 124 in slipped back category. In case
of Nagaland, the fund utilization has been to the extent of 32% upto
December, 2010. The physical achievement being 43 slipped back
habitations against a target of “zero” and only 03 Quality-affected
habitations out of a target of 105. Sikkim has reported utilisation of
about 55% of funds released upto February, 2011. Against this
expenditure, they have an achievement of 100 slipped back habitations
out of the targeted 175. Tripura has been able to spend upto February,
2011 almost 69% funds released to them. On the physical achievement
side, against the target of 516 and 309 respectively for slipped back
and Quality-affected habitations, the State has been able to cover 105
and 871 habitations respectively.
North Eastern States have remained continuously neglected and
deprived of the fruits of development in the past. Precisely for these
very reasons the Union Government had made a 10% allocation of all
Scheme funds to the NE States mandatory. The above narrated
performance of the NE States is not at all reflective of seriousness and
purposefulness that the Region demands and deserves. The
Department's plea that difficult hilly terrains, scattered habitations, low
accessibility of the habitations and water sources and even rains, all
add up to the cost of delivery and, therefore, low achievements cannot
be accepted. These conditions are well known about NE States for all
these years. Therefore, these are invariably factored into cost and time
schedules for all projects to be carried out by any Ministry/
Department.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that rather than seeking
alibis in remediable situations the Department should improve its
monitoring and coordination mechanism in NE Region so that funds
utilization and physical achievements are regularly tracked. Once this

44
is done, the Department will be able to ensure that the State
Governments are rendered timely advices for adhering to cost and
time schedules with due promptitude and in more professional manner.
To this end, the Committee urge the statutory role of the North-
Eastern Council in planning programmes for the North-East and
monitoring implementation. The Committee urge the Department to
more closely and effectively coordinate action in this regard with NEC
and the Ministry of DONER.
Reply of the Government
Under the NRDWP , in addition to earmarking 10% of the National
allocation for the North-eastern States, the matching State share has
also been brought down to 10%, as compared to 50% of Central
allocation for other States. This amendment has smoothened the flow
of Central funds to the NE States, as well as making it easier for the
States to utilize these allocated resources. The Ministry is regularly
monitoring the funds utilization and physical achievements under
NRDWP , so as to optimize them. The Ministry shall coordinate with
DoNER in complementing each others programme.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 2.22)
The Committee note that Central Rural Sanitation Programme was
launched 25 years back in 1986 with a view to have a nationwide
focus on rural sanitation. Based on the recommendations of National
Seminar on Rural Sanitation, CRSP was revised in 1992. From a supply
driven model of past, the new programme aimed at an integrated
approach to rural sanitation. TSC came into being on 1 April, 1999
under the restructured CRSP . The new programme is based on a
community led and people centric approach and instead of previous
supply driven mode works on a demand driven one. TSC is presently
being implemented in 607 rural Districts of the Country. The Committee
further note that as of December, 2010, according to Department, 70%
families in rural areas have access to sanitation facilities. The
Department also intend to cover all the rural households with sanitary
facilities by the end of 2015. The projection of the Department are

45
based on the logic that the last three years have seen an annual increase
of 7% to 8% in rural sanitation coverage with physical coverage being
1.2 crore households per annum. In this context, the Committee while
sharing the optimism of the Department, would like to proffer a word
of caution to them. The Department has based their projection on a
base population of 74 crore or so. By 2015, many more crore would
have been added to this base figure. The average annual coverage of
1.2 crore household would then not suffice. The Committee, therefore,
desire that entire scenario needs to be worked out with the incremental
figures of population in view, so that a more precise deadline and
accordingly a need based strategy for total rural coverage is worked
out and put in place. While doing so, the Department may also keep
in mind the existing toilets that become non-functional routinely and
those destroyed due to natural calamities.
Reply of the Government
The Working Group constituted by the Planning Commission
reviewed the entire scenario and has made its detailed
recommendations in the report submitted to the Planning Commission.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report)

46
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee would also like to highlight an important aspect
which seems to have escaped their due attention, hitherto. The
Department, as per their own admission, do not have information on
independent rural sanitation programmes being run by various States/
UTs. The Department’s plea that attempts were made in the past to
get the information on such programmes from States/UTs having
Districts not covered under TSC no information could be received is
not tenable. The Committee, therefore, desire that the said information
be collected by the Department forthwith and further necessary action
taken accordingly.
Reply of the Government
As desired by the Committee, a renewed effort has been made to
collect the information again by taking up the matter with the
respective districts/UTs.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.17)
On account of growing industrialization, unhealthy agricultural
practices, pollution, over exploitation of ground water, etc., the quality
of water as well as availability of water has suffered significantly. The
Committee have been informed that the country has achieved its MDG
goal in the field of rural drinking water supply and 90% of rural
populace has access to improved source of drinking water. The
Committee are not convinced of this data as during their various on
the spot visits in rural areas, they noticed that the adequacy of water,
particularly, its quality, requires lot of upgradation and coverage.
The Committee would like to express their highest concern in the
matter of quality of drinking water. We have fixed standards for water

47
which are not legally enforceable but recommendatory. The quality
specifying authority is also not the Water Resources Department but
the Environment and Forest Department. Therefore, the views of the
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, which is a major player
in the entire water scenario, are not getting the requisite importance.
The continued exploitation and pollution of ground water by industry
and agri-sectors is wreaking havoc on the quality of ground water.
The Committee are, therefore, one with the Department about having
an integrated approach to the quality of water. They, therefore, desire
that the Department should raise the matter forcefully before the Group
of Ministers, who in turn should finalise their views on this crucial
aspect with utmost urgency to ensure a quick solution to the problem
of quality of water. The Committee also strongly recommend that as
a first step to ensure quality water, the Government should first
quantify the minimum standards for quality of drinking water.
Reply of the Government
In order to provide safe drinking water to the people, it is necessary
to standardize all laboratories at various levels so that they become
capable of analyzing the quality parameters correctly and consistently.
For this purpose, the Ministry has constituted an Expert Team headed
by the Director, National Environmental Engineering Research Institute,
Nagpur for formulation of Uniform Drinking Water Quality Monitoring
Protocol. This protocol will then be discussed with the State
Governments and then forwarded to the Water Quality Assessment
Authority constituted by the Ministry of Environment and Forests under
the Environment (Protection) Act, 1981, that is empowered to lay down
standards on water quality in the country. The WQAA has also been
requested to consult all concerned, including MoDWS & MoUD on
the issue of mandating drinking water quality standards in a phased
manner keeping in view the financial and human resources
implications.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 2.18)
The Committee would also like to express their grave concern
over the reported detection of uranium contamination in two Districts
of Punjab. In their initial assessment, the Bhabha Atomic Research

48
Centre have opined that there might be uranium contamination, the
Department have, thereafter, sanctioned Rs. 3.5 crore to BARC to
conduct a hundred percent survey of the entire State of Punjab. The
Department intend to follow a similar policy for other places having
similar problems. The Committee feel that this is a very serious
situation warranting action on top priority basis. Uranium, being a
radio-active substance, can cause incalculable damage to the health of
human beings, livestock, environment and bio-safety. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Government should give a clear cut mandate
to BARC to give their Report in a highly time bound manner. The
Government should, thereafter, get down to taking remedial measures
without any loss of time.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has noted the observation of the Committee and has
requested BARC to speed up the testing of uranium in drinking water
sources in all affected districts of Punjab State and submit their Report.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 2.23)
The Committee note that typically TSC does not have any targets
but only achievements, thus it is an extremely difficult task to evaluate
their achievements under the well laid down norms of target and
achievements. However, the Committee feel that this typical way of
delivery of TSC would have been decided by the Government after
evaluating the pros and cons of the system in vogue before going for
the achievements only way. The Committee, with a view to come to
holistic conclusions in the matter would recommend a thorough
evaluation of TSC as undertaken and implemented during the Eleventh
Plan on achievements only basis. The evaluation may, apart from
analyzing the achievements of TSC during the Eleventh Plan also take
into account even if on theoretical plane a comparison of these
achievements, if the conventional targets and achievements system was
in place. Both for fixing targets and achievements, a bottom up
approach beginning with the Panchayats and Gram Sabhas is essential.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the results of such an
evaluation at the earliest.

49
Reply of the Government
The suggestion of the Committee is noted, however, it may also
be brought to the notice that Programme Evaluation Office (PEO) of
Planning Commission is already in the process of evaluating TSC.
As per the last status intimated during the month of April, 2011, the
survey has since been completed. Data entry work is in progress in
PEO. The Committee would be apprised of the finding after receiving
the report from Planning Commission.
[O.M. No. H.11011/05/2011-DWS(Coordn.) dated 19 December, 2011,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation]
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
21 March, 2012 Chairperson,
1 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

50
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF
THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 22 FEBRUARY, 2012
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
3. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
4. Shri P . Kumar
5. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
6. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
8. Shri Hussain Dalwai
9. Shri P . Rajeeve
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Smt. Maya Singh
12. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
3. Shri Raju Srivastava — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the
Committee to the sitting convened to discuss *** consideration and

51
adoption of draft Action Taken Reports on action taken by the
Government on recommendations of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2011-12) in respect of Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation,
***.
3. *** *** ***
4. Thereafter, the Committee considered draft Action Taken Reports
on action taken by the Government on recommendations contained in
19th, ***, and *** reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2011-12) of the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation, *** and ***
respectively. After detailed discussion, the Committee adopted draft
Reports without any modifications. The Committee also authorized
the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and present the same to
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portion of the Minutes not related with the subject have been kept separately

52
APPENDIX II
[Vide Introduction of Report]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINETEENTH
REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
I. Total number of recommendations: 27
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government:
Serial Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16,
19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26 and 27
Total: 20
Percentage: 74.07%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Total: 0
Percentage: 0%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Serial Nos: 9, 13 and 22
Total: 03
Percentage: 11.12%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 11, 17, 18 and 23
Total: 04
Percentage: 14.81%