THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 18.12.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 080
Price : Rs. 40.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-2013) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government ............................................................ 9
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .............................................................................. 23
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee ............................................................... 25
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ......... 26
A
PPENDICES
I. Extracts of Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the
Committee held on 14 December, 2012 ............................. 30
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh
Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development .................................................................. 32
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013)
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Thangso Baite
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
5. Shri Premchand Guddu
6. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique
7. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
8. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
9. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
12. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy
13. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
14. Dr. Sanjay Singh
15. Shri Uma Shankar Singh
16. Smt. Supriya Sule
17. Smt. Annu Tandon
18. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar
19. Smt. Usha Verma
20. Shri P . Viswanathan
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Munquad Ali
23. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay
(iii)

25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Shri C.P . Narayanan
30. Shri Mohan Singh
31. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma — Director
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Satish Kumar — Committee Assistant
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2012-2013) having been authorised by the Committee to
present the Report on their behalf, present the 34th Report on the
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the 27th Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Drinking Water & Sanitation.
2. The 27th Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 2 May, 2012. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 13 September, 2012.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 14 December, 2012.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 27th Report of the Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
14 December, 2012 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2012-13) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty-Seventh
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry
of Drinking Water & Sanitation for the year 2012-2013.
2. The Twenty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
02.05.2012 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date.
The Report contained 13 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been examined and categorised as
follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
Total: 08
Chapter-II
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government:
Serial No. 5
Total: 01
Chapter-III
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Serial No. 6
Total: 01
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 3, 4 and 13
Total: 03
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of
recommendations for which only interim replies have been submitted
by the Government included in Chapter-V of this Report and replies
to recommendations made in the Chapter-I of this Report may be
furnished to the Committee expeditiously.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that
require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Coverage of National Rural Drinking Water Programme
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
6. The Committee in aforesaid para of the Report had recommended
as under:—
“The Committee are aware that water is a State subject and
NRDWP (erstwhile ARWSP) is a scheme of the Union Government
which is meant to supplement the efforts of the State Governments.
In Committee’s view, the objective of accessibility of drinking water
along with the availability of quality drinking water in rural areas
of the country has undergone a radical change to the extent that
the ‘sustainability of sources’ have become all the more important
in the present context. The Committee, however, are surprised to
note that even after infusing sizeable funds under the NRDWP
programme, the Ministry are not in possession of any reliable data
on the basis of which it can be conclusively stated that all the
sources of drinking water, be it piped water, tap connections, hand
pumps, wells etc., are available throughout the year. The Committee
are of the opinion that the efforts of the Ministry to attain the
objective of NRDWP would bear fruits only when the end-users
are getting water supply from secured sources regularly. The
Committee, therefore, urge the Government to work out modalities
to ascertain the sustainability of sources in the form of measuring
service standard levels in terms of number of hours and number
of days of water supply on priority basis so as to take corrective
policy initiatives.”
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“Sustainability of drinking water sources and schemes is possibly
the most important challenge that exists in the water supply sector
in rural areas. Ensuring that the rural population are provided
standard services sustainably at designated levels also makes sure

3
that investments made in setting up water supply systems are not
wasted. Ideally this would mean that every source of drinking
water in the country, be it piped water, tap connections, hand
pumps, wells etc., are monitored throughout the year with regular
inspections and data from the same generated and scrutinized on
a concurrent basis. This data is available from the sample survey
conducted by NSSO in 2008-09. According to this Survey Report
85.7% of rural households get sufficient drinking water from tap
source throughout the year, 89.6% of those using handpump/
tubewell and 79.2% of those using protected well got it throughout
the year. While this is being done at local levels in many States.
The Ministry accepts the recommendation of the Committee to
measure service standard levels as timely and necessary. This has
also been recommended by the Working Group for the 12th Five
Year Plan period. The Ministry shall strive to initiate steps to
develop a system capable of such monitoring on a priority basis.”
8. While considering that the sustainability of water sources was
becoming all the more important alongside the accessibility of
drinking water and availability of quality drinking water in rural
areas, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to work out
modalities to ascertain the sustainability of water sources in the form
of measuring service standard levels i.e. in terms of number of hours
and number of days of water supply on priority basis so as to take
corrective policy initiatives. The Ministry while accepting the
recommendation of the Committee has called it as timely and
necessary and has stated that the Government shall strive to initiate
steps to develop a system capable of such monitoring on priority
basis. While noting that the Working Group for the 12th Five Year
Plan has also recommended the same, the Committee would like the
Ministry to make vigorous efforts in this regard and apprise the
Committee of the steps taken to develop a system capable of
measuring service standard levels to enable the end users to get
regular water supply from secured sources.
B. Physical performance of NRDWP
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
9. With regard to physical performance of NRDWP , the Committee
recommended as under:—
“The Committee noted that the physical performance of NRDWP
consists of three aspects, namely, progress made on uncovered
habitations, reducing the slipped back habitations and improving

4
the quality affected habitations. The details of physical performance
on these three parameters during the fiscal year 2011-12 have not
been encouraging. As against the targets of 1,15,379 and 29,790
fixed for slipped back habitations and quality affected habitations,
the rate of achievement, under these categories were 87,653 and
16,591 respectively. On the aspect of uncovered habitations, the
Committee noted that all uncovered habitations originally identified
under Bharat Nirman have been covered and there are no such
uncovered habitations to be covered. The Committee found it
difficult to give credence to the information furnished by the
Ministry on this count as it tantamount to a situation which is
better than the most urbanized places in the country. The
Committee, accordingly, urged the Ministry to revisit the overall
position of uncovered habitations at the ground level and apprise
the Committee of the outcome of such exercise.”
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“Uncovered habitations are those habitations where no drinking
water sources exist at all. States have reported that all habitations
identified as Uncovered at the inception of Bharat Nirman have
been provided with some drinking water facility and are no longer
Uncovered. The States update the overall status of coverage of
habitations at the ground level every year. As on 1.4.2012, there
are still 2,92,138 Partially Covered habitations where drinking water
facilities are present but are not adequate i.e. they are supplied
with less than 40 litres per capita per day. There are also 99,380
habitations reported with quality problems. As regards the
achievement of coverage of habitations in 2011-12, against targets
of 1,15,379 and 29,790 Partially Covered and Quality Affected
habitations, 1,16,246 PC and 22,121 QA habitations were covered.”
11. While finding it difficult to believe that there were no
uncovered habitations originally identified under Bharat Nirman, the
Committee had recommended to revisit the overall position of
uncovered habitations at the ground level. The Committee are
surprised to note from the action taken reply that all habitations
identified as uncovered at the inception of 'Bharat Nirman' have
been provided with some drinking water facility and are considered
no longer uncovered. The Ministry at the same time has also admitted
that as on 1.04.2012, there are still 2,92,138 Partially Covered
Habitations where drinking water facilities are present but are not
adequate i.e. they are supplied with less than 40 litres per capita per
day.

5
The Committee find it unfortunate, that while tackling the
problem of drinking water supply, the Ministry has mainly focused
on fully covering the uncovered habitations rather than paying
attention to improve the water delivery systems and quality of water.
The Committee, therefore, feel that coverage of habitations becomes
meaningless without ensuring adequate quantity and quality of water
being provided to people from secured sources on a sustainable
basis. The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to take
concrete steps in this regard and apprise the Committee accordingly.
C. Total Sanitation Campaign
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
12. In the aforesaid para of the Original Report, the Committee
had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that, in line with the recommendation of the
Committee in their 19th Report (2011-12), convergence between
the Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) and the Total Sanitation Campaign
(TSC) has been under implementation since 2006. However, since
“convergence” has not resulted in IAY houses being furnished with
toilets, the Committee recommend that the Ministry set up an
Expert Committee to examine the possibility of moving from
“convergence” to “integration” with a view to ensuring that all
IAY houses, retrospectively and prospectively, are provided with
in-house or attached toilets. The Committee also wish to be
informed of the details of number of houses constructed under
IAY which have been provided with toilets and those which are
without toilets.”
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“As per provisions in NBA Guidelines, all houses constructed by
the beneficiaries under Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) or any other State
rural housing scheme which did not have toilets shall also be
eligible for the incentive for creation of sanitation facilities for the
targeted groups under NBA. States are being pursued to ensure
that all IAY houses are provided with toilet facilities by ensuring
appropriate fund flow mechanisms so that financial assistance under
both the schemes of NBA and IAY can be channeled to the
beneficiaries. The MDWS and Ministry of Rural Development are
working on a model for integration of a toilet with IAY dwelling
unit against the current practice of convergence.”

6
14. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to set up an
Expert Committee to examine the possibility of moving from
“convergence” to “integration” with a view to ensuring that all IAY
houses retrospectively and prospectively, are provided with in-house
or attached toilets. The Committee find from the action taken reply
furnished by the Government that as per provisions of guidelines
of Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) earlier known as ‘Total Sanitation
Campaign’, all houses constructed by the beneficiaries under IAY or
any other State Rural Housing Scheme which did not have toilets
shall also be eligible for the incentive for creation of sanitation
facilities for the targeted groups under NBA. The Committee also
find that the MDWS and Ministry of Rural Development are working
on a model for integration of a toilet with IAY dwelling unit against
the current practice of convergence. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the details of such model.
The Committee had also desired to be informed of the details of
number of houses constructed under IAY which have been provided
with toilets and those which are without toilets. The Committee
express their strong unhappiness to note that the reply of the
Ministry is silent on this aspect. The Committee would expect the
Government to consider their recommendations seriously for
implementation. Similarly, they expect proper and complete replies
to their recommendations. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Government to furnish the relevant data to them expeditiously.
D. Human Resource Development
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
15. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“In Committee’s view, adequate manpower is pre-requisite in any
organization particularly responsible for implementing the social
schemes like the drinking water and sanitation. The Committee,
however, find that the actual personnel strength of the Ministry, as
of now, is 77 as against the sanctioned strength of 108. There are
as many as 31 posts lying vacant. As a result of shortage of
manpower, the Committee feel that not only the overall monitoring
of the flagship schemes has been affected, but also the impact is
even more severe in conducting the day-to-day operations of the
Ministry, especially when the coverage of these schemes is
throughout the country requiring constant liaison with the State
Government officials and other stakeholders. The Committee are
also not sure whether any O&M study has been undertaken after

7
upgrading the Department as full-fledged Ministry where all Wings
are required to work as a unified Ministry. The Committee,
accordingly, recommend to carry out a manpower study to assess
the requirements and take follow-up action to upgrade the human
resources of the Ministry. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the follow up action in the matter.”
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“So far as 31 posts lying vacant in this Ministry are concerned, the
matter has been taken up with Department of Personnel & Training
and the cadre controlling authority  i.e.  Ministry of Rural
Development to fill up the posts. Pending the filling up of posts
on regular basis by cadre authorities, retired officials have been
engaged keeping in view their experience in Government Service
and some outsourced personnel have also been deployed to manage
the work of the erstwhile Department.
Consequent upon upgradation of Department of Drinking Water
and Sanitation to the level of a Ministry, the need for strengthening
and restructuring of existing set up to meet the requirements of
the Ministry has been felt immediately. Accordingly, a detailed
proposal for strengthening and restructuring of the Ministry
indicating the requirement of additional wings, divisions, branches
and sections with assessed requirement of 81 additional posts was
submitted to Ministry of Finance with the approval of Hon’ble
Minister, DW&S.
Department of Expenditure has returned the file with the following
observation:—
‘Since Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation propose to create
80% more posts than the present sanctioned strength, they are
advised to have a scientific study conducted by SIU before the
Ministry of DWS arrive at the number of posts to be created.
Considering the total ban on creation of posts issued by this
Department vide our OM dated 31.5.2012, Ministry of DWS may
submit the proposal along with SIU’s recommendations after
the ban on creation of posts is lifted.’
Action will be taken for a work study by SIU.”
17. The Committee note from the action taken reply that to fill
up 31 posts lying vacant in the erstwhile Department of Drinking
Water & Sanitation now upgraded to Ministry, the matter has been

8
taken up with the Department of Personnel & Training and the
cadre controlling authority i.e. Ministry of Rural Development. The
Committee have been apprised that pending filling up of posts on
regular basis, experienced retired Government officials and
outsourced persons have been engaged to manage the work of the
Ministry. The Committee desire that to ensure smooth and efficient
functioning of the Ministry, all out efforts need to be made regarding
filling up of 31 posts lying vacant and, therefore, the matter should
be vigorously pursued with the Department of Personnel & Training
and the Ministry of Rural Development.
The Committee also find from the reply that consequent upon
upgradation of Department to a full-fledged Ministry, the proposal
for requirement of 81 additional posts was submitted to Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure), who in view of 80% more
posts to be created, have advised the Ministry to have a scientific
study conducted by SIU and then submit the proposal along with
recommendations of SIU after the ban on creation of posts is lifted.
The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated that the action
will be taken for a work study by SIU. The Committee desire the
Ministry to conduct the study by SIU to arrive at the number of
posts to be created and thereafter pursue the matter with the Ministry
of Finance at the appropriate time to overcome the staff crunch.
They also desire to be apprised of the findings of study conducted
by SIU and follow up action thereon.

9
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
Considering the importance of supply of drinking water and
providing sanitation in rural areas, the erstwhile department of
Drinking Water and Sanitation was converted into a full fledged
ministry viz. the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation with effect
from 13 July, 2011. The Committee’s examination has revealed that
vital sector of rural drinking water supply and rural sanitation has
not received adequate allocation as demanded by the Ministry during
the Eleventh Plan (2007-12). For instance, for the Eleventh Plan, the
Ministry has proposed an allocation of around Rs. 58,000 crore, whereas,
the Planning Commission had allocated Rs. 46,690 i.e., a decrease of
around 20 percent. The committee also note that the allocation of
Rs. 14,000 crore proposed for the fiscal year 2012-13 is not
commensurate with the herculean task of providing safe drinking water
and sanitation facilities to 740 million rural population of the country.
Considering the fact the expenditure to fight common diseases borne
out of contaminated water and open defecation account for about 6%
of the GDP , allocation of Rs. 14,000 crore for the sector which is less
than 1% of the annual budget of Rs. 15 lakh crore is hardly adequate
to address the problem in a holistic manner. The Committee could
very well estimate that attainment of the objectives of providing safe
drinking water and open defecation free rural areas would remain a
distant dream until and unless realistic funds are allocated to the
Ministry. While endorsing the Demand for Grants of the Ministry, the
Committee recommend that more funds should be made available to
the Ministry by the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance to
achieve the objectives set for the sector.
Reply of the Government
Provision of Drinking Water Supply and Sustainable Sanitation
amenities in rural areas are priority areas for the Government. This
has been reflected in the upgradation of the Department of Drinking
Water and Sanitation into a full Ministry. It is true that these sectors
require large investments for accomplishments of long term goals. This
is reflected in the recommendation of the Working Group on Domestic
Water and Sanitation for an allocation of Rs. 1,22,750 crore for rural
water supply in the XII Plan. The Ministry has been requesting the

10
Planning Commission to provide higher allocation during the
12th Five Year Plan period. In the first year there has been a significant
increase in allocation for rural drinking water supply for 2012-13, which
is Rs. 10,500 crore as against RE of Rs. 8500 crore in 2011-12 (24%
increase). As regards sanitation, the Ministry has been consistently
persuading the Planning Commission for higher allocation of funds
under rural sanitation programme. The Planning Commission has
agreed to provide sufficient funds and for the year 2012-13, an amount
of Rs. 3500 crore have been allocated for Total Sanitation Campaign
(TSC) now Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) as against Rs. 1500 crore
during the previous year. Ministry has proposed an allocation of
Rs. 44116 crore during the XIIth Five Year Plan to the Planning
Commission and is pursuing the matter.
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS (Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
Though the Ministry has incentivized awareness campaign by
instituting the Nirmal Gram Puraskar and thus the involvement of the
panchayats, the Committee are disappointed to note that,
notwithstanding Entries 11 and 23 of the Eleventh Schedule, the
Ministry have not yet prepared a Model Activity Map, covering
functions, finances and functionaries, in regard to role of PRIs,
Municipalities and District Planning Committees under the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes relating to Drinking Water and Sanitation. The
Committee strongly recommend that such an exercise be undertaken
without delay so that these entries in the Eleventh Schedule are
operationalized. Moreover, until the planning of Drinking Water and
Sanitation schemes are brought within the framework of the
Constitution, particularly Articles 243 G and W, and Articles 243 ZD
and ZE, the involvement of the elected, democratic institutions of local
self-governance will not match the Constitutional requirements.
Accordingly, the Committee recommend that the Ministry establish an
Expert Committee to examine ways in which PRIs, Municipalities and
District Planning Committees become central to the planning and
implementation of Drinking Water and Sanitation Schemes. This will
also clarify the accuracy of data relating to these schemes.
Reply of the Government
The Working Group for the 12th Five Year Plan period on Rural
Domestic and Sanitation setup by the Planning Commission in its
recommendations has highlighted the role of local bodies in planning
and implementation of programme. Based on the recommendations of
the working group, scheme of Total Sanitation Campaign has been
revised as the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan.

11
The Ministry is carrying out the Activity Mapping Exercise with
the objective of covering functions, finances and functionaries in regard
to the role of the PRIs etc., under the NRDWP , so as to ensure that
the entries in the Eleventh Schedule are operationalised. The revised
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP), being
implemented from 1.4.2009, has specific provisions delineating the role
of PRIs in the rural water supply sector. The modified policy
recommends supporting the transfer of management and financial
responsibility to the lowest level of the PRIs, i.e. to the Village Water
and Sanitation Committees formed as Standing Committees of the Gram
Panchayat. The transfer of responsibilities requires provision of
management and financial autonomy to the PRIs, VWSC and
community organisations. The paradigm shift brought about in this
programme, is to transfer the same to the PRIs (GPs) so as enable the
community to plan, implement, manage, operate and maintain their
own water supply systems. This decentralised system is the basis on
which water security has to be aimed for Para 9.1 of the guidelines
focuses on this decentralisation in which the in-village water supply
system has to be managed by the local community and the Government
has to assist in building the capacities of local communities for this.
It also provides for the transfer of existing schemes to the PRIs for
O&M Para 12.5 of the Guidelines provides for the involvement of the
District level Panchayats under the ambit of which the District Water
and Sanitation Mission shall function.
To promote the devolution of functions, funds and functionaries
with regards to rural water supply from State Governments to PRIs,
the NRDWP allocation criteria of funds to States gives 10% weightage
to ‘Rural Population Managing Rural Drinking Water Schemes’. In 2011,
the Cabinet amended this provision and a Management Devolution
Index (MDI) was formulated which could measure the extent of such
devolution by various States. The 10% component has thus now been
weighted by the MDI. This MDI measures the extent of devolution of
funds, functions and functionaries that have actually been made by
individual States. The indicators that are included in the MDI are:
1. Transfer of Functions to PRIs
1.1 The State Acts and/or executive orders/MoUs defining the
transfer of responsibility for infrastructure creation of
handpumps to PRIs.
1.2 The State Acts and/or executive orders/MoUs defining the
transfer of responsibility for infrastructure creation of Single
Village Piped Water Schemes to PRIs.
1.3 The State Acts and/or executive orders defining the transfer
of responsibility for O&M of hand pumps to PRIs.

12
1.4 The State Acts and/or executive orders defining the transfer
of responsibility for O&M of Single Village Piped Water Supply
Schemes to PRIs.
1.5 Proportion of Handpumps whose O&M have been transferred
to PRIs.
1.6 Proportion of Single Village Piped Water Schemes whose O&M
have been transferred to PRIs.
1.7 The VWSCs should be Standing/Sub-Committees of GPs under
the State Act/Rules.
1.8 Proportion of Drinking Water sources for which water quality
testing done during the previous years as per the IMIS.
Total for Functions
2. Availability/Transfer of funds to PRIs
2.1 Proportion of NRDWP (Coverage and Quality) funds (Central
+ State share), transferred to PRI*/DWSM subordinate to ZP
accounts.
2.2 Proportion of NRDWP (O&M) (Central + State share)
transferred to Gram Panchayats accounts.
2.3 Whether untied grants from State Plan/non-plan have been
transferred to all GPs in preceding financial year.
2.4 Whether untied grants from State Finance Commission have
been transferred to all GPs in preceding financial year.
2.5 Whether unit charges of electricity for pumping in drinking
water supply schemes by PRIs equal to or lesser than lowest
slab of unit charge for domestic consumers.
2.3 Percentage of water charges demand collected by PRIs.
Total for funds transfer to PRIs.
3. Functionaries made available to Support PRIs
3.1 Proportion of blocks where block level Diploma/Graduate
engineers are available in PHED/PRED/ZP/BP @ one for
1 lakh rural population exclusively for rural water supply and
sanitation.
3.2 Proportion of filled up DWSM Consultants positions.
3.3 Proportion of filled up BRC Coordinators positions.
3.4 Proportion of VWSC members trained in RWS functions for at
least two days.
3.5 Proportion of NRDWP Support funds spent on IEC and HRD
activities.
Total for functionaries support to PRIs

13
4. Good management indicators
4.1 Proportion of households in State provided with household
connections.
4.2 Proportion of villages with bulk water supplies metered.
The Ministry has from 2011-12 started assessing States on their
performance on the above indicators, and on that basis, allocating
funds to them under this component. This has now incentivised States
to move towards devolution, and we have started to see progress in
this regards in many States.
The Working Group on Domestic Water and Sanitation consisting
of Experts in the field set up by the Planning Commission for the
XIIth Plan has looked into the issue. The report submitted by the
Working Group makes the following specific recommendations:—
1. All States should have a State O&M policy for rural
drinking water supply focusing on roles of VWSCs, GPs,
etc. developed with their involvement. Standard operating
procedures for O&M of handpumps and piped water
schemes are needed and specific responsibilities identified.
2. VWSCs should be set up in all villages with 50% women
members as a sub-committee or standing committee of the
GP. All water supply schemes within the GP should be
maintained by the Gram Panchayat and managed by VWSC,
with metered supply, partial recovery of O&M cost and
provision of O&M corpus fund to the VWSC/GP should
form the basis of sustainable service delivery. Zilla
Panchayats should have a Water Supply O&M Wing to
provide continuous technical support to GPs in managing
their water supply schemes. Incentives may be provided to
the GPs for collecting user charges from the beneficiaries.
3. Block or District Panchayats and Joint Scheme Level
Managing Committees consisting of heads of VWSCs/GPs
benefited by the scheme should be responsible for
overseeing multi-village schemes.
4. The State should focus on creating awareness and building
capacities including those of the local population in
managing the water supply schemes given to them.
5. The Block Resource Centres that are being newly set up by
the States should provide motivation, training, and
handholding support etc. to the GP/VWSC, on planning

14
implementing and managing their water supply schemes
and on other issues related to drinking water supply and
sanitation.
6. The role of the Gram Sabha has to be institutionalized to
be able to obtain peoples participation in water
management. It should be obligatory to obtain the approval
of the Gram Sabha at different stages of planning,
implementing and managing rural water supply schemes.
The Ministry is looking at the above recommendations as a guide
to the implementation of the rural water supply programme in the
XII Plan.
The Guidelines of Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) under the heading
“Role of Panchayati Raj Institution” in para 8.1 states: “as per the
Constitution 73rd Amendment Act, 1992, Sanitation is included in the
11th Schedule. Accordingly, Gram Panchayats have a pivotal role in
the implementation of NBA. The programme will be implemented by
the Panchayati Raj Institutions at all levels. They will carry out the
social mobilization for the construction of toilets and also maintain a
clean environment by way of safe disposal of wastes. PRIs may engage
suitable NGOs for inter-personal IEC and training. Community
Complexes constructed under the NBA will be maintained by the
Panchayats/Voluntary Organizations/Charitable Trusts. Panchayats can
also contribute from their own resources for School Sanitation over
and above the prescribed amount. They will act as the custodian of
the assets such as the Community Complexes, environmental
components, drainage etc. constructed under NBA. GPs can also open
and operate the Production Centers/Rural Sanitary Marts.” Para 17.3.2
gives details of the role of Gram Panchayats in convening and
conducting meeting of Gram Sabha for planning and implementation
of NBA, as following:—
“A Gram Sabha will be convened by the Secretary, Gram Pnachayat
as ‘Gram Swachchhata Sabha’ (GSS) every six months to undertake
mandatory review of progress made under various Month Plans
and proceedings of Swachchhata Diwas that were held in the GP .
At these meetings, information as prepared by GP Secretary, will
be read out by a responsible person from the Community preferably
a school teacher/ex-serviceman and displayed publicly, and people
will be given opportunity to question officials, seek and obtain
information, verify financial expenditure, examine the list of
beneficiaries, discuss the priorities reflected in choices made, and
critically evaluate the quality of work as well as the services of
the programme officials.”

15
Para 8.2 states: “….. GPs must also play a role in the monitoring
of the NBA programme. Both Block level and District level PRIs must
regularly monitor the implementation along with the concerned
officials.”
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS (Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee note that with a view to providing safe and clean
drinking water to children studying in water deficient rural schools,
an ambitious programme in the form of ‘Jalmani’ was introduced by
the Ministry in November, 2008. The target, under the programme,
was to provide clean drinking water to one lakh schools by March,
2012. The Committee also find that since the inception of the scheme,
a total of 75,207 schools have been provided with stand alone water
purification systems which includes coverage of 11,867 schools during
the fiscal year, 2011-12. As a matter of fact, for the fiscal year 2012-13,
a sum of Rs. 100 crore has been proposed for the said scheme. The
Committee trust that the remaining 24,793 schools would be covered
during this fiscal year. However, the Committee require further
clarification on two major aspects of the scheme — one, whether the
Ministry have reliable data to show that rural schools where the Jalmani
scheme has been implemented are having regular supply of water and
electricity to run the water purification system. The Committee also
wish to recall its earlier recommendation made in the 19th Report
(2011-12) inter alia regarding installation of water purification systems
that work without electricity, given the erratic power situation in most
of the rural areas. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
the apprehensions of the Committee may be urgently taken up in the
right earnest so as to make the scheme user friendly, easily-accessible
with low maintenance technology.
In the context of erratic power supply which hinders the operation/
working of water purifiers, the Committee would like to emphasize
that solar energy/wind energy could be conveniently used as an
alternative source of energy which is renewal and eco-friendly. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that efforts should be made
by the Ministry to explore the viability of using solar/wind energy for
not only operating the water purification systems in the rural schools
but also in other systems such as water supply through overhead
tanks, sewage disposal etc., where electricity is used for booster pumps
and other electrical devices. For this purpose, the Ministry should take
up a pilot project, on priority basis, and after evaluating the outcome
the same may be replicated in all the schemes. The Committee would
also like the Government to initiate action in the right earnest so as
to make the scheme user friendly, easily-accessible with low
maintenance technology.

16
Reply of the Government
As regards Jalmani, the technologies and products suggested under
the scheme have been clearly indicated as recommended for (a) rural
schools with electricity or (b) rural schools without electricity. Therefore
while selecting the technology and product to be installed in each
school, the States have to consider the availability of electricity in the
schools. It is stated that against the target of providing 1,00,000
standalone water purification systems in water deficient rural schools
under Jalmani, as on 18.7.2012, about 86,827 rural schools have been
provided with the same. It is targeted to cover the remaining rural
schools during the current financial year, 2012-13.
The Ministry had conducted a third party independent Evaluation
Study on the performance of Jalmani Programme and the
recommendations of the study were sent to the States for taking up
necessary improvements.
As per guidelines of Jalmani Programme, the five year O & M
costs have to be inbuilt along with capital cost while procuring the
standalone water purification system. This is to ensure that the systems
will get adequate maintenance.
Under National Rural Drinking Water Programme, there is a
sustainability component under which 10% of funds are released to
the States for creating sustainability structures of water sources. Under
this component, funding for use of solar/wind energy for providing
safe drinking water is allowed.
As regards usage of solar energy for rural water supply systems,
the Ministry has proposed a project for installing solar powered pump
based piped water supply schemes in 10,000 rural habitations of 82
Integrated Action plan districts with funding from NRDWP and the
National Clean Energy Fund.
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS (Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee, in their 19th Report (2011-12), expressed their
concern over the reported detection of uranium contamination in Punjab
and strongly recommended that the Ministry should give a clear cut
mandate to Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) to give their report
in a highly time bound manner and take remedial measures without
loss of time. The Committee was astonished to hear from the Secretary
of the Ministry that BARC is not capacitated to do 100 per cent testing
and , they are now working on training the people of Punjab and also

17
getting their laboratories equipped in a way that they can test this
sort of contamination. The Committee are constrained to mention that
on the entire issue of taking remedial measures to curb the serious
problem of uranium contamination, the Ministry have not shown the
desired level of urgency and seriousness. The Committee, therefore,
would like to reiterate their earlier recommendations for not only
identifying the areas having uranium contamination but also taking
remedial measures to secure the rural areas of Punjab from getting
contaminated with highly toxic radioactive material. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should intervene on
this highly sensitive issue which if remained unabated may cause
incurable damage to the health of human beings, livestock, environment
and bio-safety. The Committee also expect the Ministry to work with
the Government of Punjab in set timelines and appraise them of the
progress made in containing the hazard.
Reply of the Government
It may be stated that Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) has
already been given clear-cut mandate to give their report. A total of
1690 samples were sent to BARC for analysis for Uranium
contamination. Against this BARC has sent back 1686 test reports. As
per the report, 261 samples recorded uranium levels in excess of AERB
standard of 60 g/l.
On the request of Government of Punjab the Ministry has permitted
utilization of NRDWP funds to set up R.O. systems wherever alternate
safe groundwater or surface water sources are not available taking
due precautions for proper reject management.
It may also be stated here that an Expert Committee consisting of
specialists from Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of
Drinking Water and Sanitation and Government of Punjab has been
constituted to finalize technological interventions for uranium removal
in drinking water sources.
Government of Punjab is setting up a new Advanced Water quality
testing laboratory in Mohali SAS Nagar for testing of uranium and
heavy metals contamination in drinking water sources. The Hon’ble
Minister for Rural Development and Drinking Water and Sanitation
has laid the foundation stone for setting up of this State of art
laboratory on 6.7.2012 and has announced that this will be a Regional
Centre catering to the needs of other States in the region also. BARC
has been requested to assist the State in this regard.
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS (Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]

18
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee note that the Central Rural Sanitation Programme
(CRSP) launched in 1986 was restructured in 1999 and thereafter, the
Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) was launched with effect from April,
1999. The total sanitation campaign is aimed at overall coverage and
access to toilets by all in the rural areas by the year, 2017. The
Committee also find that the scheme include a range of activities/
schemes viz., construction of Individual Household Latrines, Community
Sanitary Complex, School Toilet Units, toilet units for Balwadis/
Anganwadis and Rural Sanitary Marts. The Ministry have informed
that as per data of September 2011, 11.53 crore households have access
to toilets leaving a balance of 4.08 crore households without access to
toilets. The Ministry have also informed that the total allocation received
by them in 11th Plan was Rs. 6540 crore. The Budget Estimates for the
fiscal year 2012-13 stands at Rs. 3500 crore. The Committee note the
intention of the Ministry to free all rural areas of the country from
open defecation by the year 2017, but are skeptical of the real possibility
of achieving this objective in view of the fact that whereas it has
taken 25 years from 1986 to 2011 to provide access to toilets to 11.35
crore households, the balance of over 4 crore houses is to be covered
with a Plan allocation over the 12th Plan period which is no more
than double the Eleventh Plan allocation. Also, without the full
involvement of the Panchayats, Municipalities and District Planning
Committees, it is unlikely that planning and implementation would so
dramatically improve as to achieve in five years the stated objective.
Moreover, it is doubted that water supply would be so augmented as
to keep the toilets in serviceable condition.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has recast the Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) as
Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) with modified approaches for
comprehensive sanitation coverage. The strategy is to transform rural
India into ‘Nirmal Bharat’ by adopting in a phased manner community
saturation approach. It lays emphasis on awareness creation of entire
community for sanitary facilities in all households and public
institutions for a clean environment in the entire Gram Panchayat. The
provision of incentives for individual household latrine units to the
households has been widened to cover households under identified
APL categories along with all BPLs, so as to attain community
outcomes. Ensuring facilities for availability of water in the Gram
Panchayat has been made an important factor for creating and
sustaining sanitation facilities. Rural School Sanitation remains a major
component focusing on children for inculcating good practices from a
young age. Technology options are being provided to meet the customer
preferences and location-specific needs. Intensive IEC Campaign is the
corner stone of the programme involving Panchayati Raj Institutions,

19
Co-operatives, ASHA, Anganwadi workers, Women Groups, Self-Help
Groups, NGOs etc. More transparent system involving social audit
and active people’s participation in the implementation process of NBA
has been introduced. The guidelines provide for Gram Swachchhata
Sabha to be convened by Gram Panchayats for mandatory review of
sanitation activities. Convergence with MNREGS has been worked out
to facilitate more fund availability for construction of toilets by the
rural households. The programme is to be implemented by the
Panchayati Raj Institutions at all levels. They are to carry out the
social mobilization for the construction of toilets and also maintain a
clean environment by way of safe disposal of wastes. With these
measures, it is expected that objective of access to toilets to 50% of the
rural households as per census 2011 would be achieved by the year
2017 and to the entire rural areas of the country by the year 2022.
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS (Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee note that, in line with the recommendation of the
Committee in their 19th Report (2011-12), convergence between the
Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) and the Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC)
has been under implementation since 2006. However, since
“convergence” has not resulted in IAY houses being furnished with
toilets, the Committee recommend that the Ministry set up an Expert
Committee to examine the possibility of moving from “convergence”
to “integration” with a view to ensuring that all IAY houses,
retrospectively and prospectively, are provided with in-house or
attached toilets. The Committee also wish to be informed of the details
of number of houses constructed under IAY which have been provided
with toilets and those which are without toilets.
Reply of the Government
As per provisions in NBA Guidelines, all houses constructed by
the beneficiaries under Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) or any other state
rural housing scheme which did not have toilets shall also be eligible
for the incentive for creation of sanitation facilities for the targeted
groups under NBA. States are being pursued to ensure that all IAY
houses are provided with toilet facilities by ensuring appropriate fund
flow mechanisms so that financial assistance under both the schemes
of NBA and IA Y can be channeled to the beneficiaries. The MDWS
and Ministry of Rural Development are working on a model for
integration of a toilet with IAY dwelling unit against the current practice
of convergence.
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS (Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]

20
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee find that Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) has been
conceptualized as a ‘Demand Driven Programme’ and therefore the
yearly targets cannot be determined. However, the Committee have
experienced that by transforming the programme from ‘rights based’
to ‘demand driven’, the responsibilities of the executing/implementing
organisation could be conveniently shifted to the beneficiaries. In other
words, there would not be any pre-determined targets and, therefore,
whatever deliveries are attained by an organisation within a specified
time frame are regarded and brought under the category of
achievements. The accountability of optimum utilisation of scarce
resources also gets vitiated due to the fact that lower utilisation of
funds is often co-related with the reported lower generation of demand.
The Committee are constrained to point out that in order to camouflage
the administrative inefficiency and/or fundamental conceptual flaw in
the schemes, almost every centrally sponsored scheme of the
Government are now being transformed to a demand driven approach.
The Committee are of considered view that Total Sanitation Campaign
would not be able to deliver the desired results if the scheme continue
to be operated on demand driven mode. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a quick study should be initiated by the Ministry to
pragmatically analyse the shortcomings of the demand driven approach
of TSC so that timely action for re-transforming the scheme to target-
oriented approach may be taken. The Committee urge the Government
to take the necessary action and apprise the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
As per the recommendations of the Working Group set up by
Planning Commission, the restructured scheme of NBA adopts a phased
saturation approach that looks at Nirmal Grams as the outcome where
every household in the community constructs and uses a toilet. NBA
focuses on shift from creation of individual demand for toilets to
community coverage of sanitation facilities of whole Gram Panchayats
thorough appropriate area-specific IEC to trigger community outcomes.
Under the revised programme all states are required to identify Gram
Panchayats for achieving ‘Nirmal’ outcomes. Provision has also been
made in NBA for adequate funding of solid and Liquid Waste
Management in Gram Panchayats with allocation being made on basis
of number of households to ensure that the entire Gram Panchayat
becomes open defecation free with a hygienic and clean environment.
Outcomes would be assessed on the basis of Nirmal Gram Panchayats
created.
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS (Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]

21
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee are disappointed to note that even after persistent
recommendations of the Committee, there have been huge amounts
lying unspent in both the flagship programmes of the Ministry  viz.,
NRDWP and TSC. In this connection, the Committee note that at the
end of 2010-11, under NRDWP , Rs. 3766.55 crore was lying unspent
which further swelled to Rs. 4893.94 crore as on 31.12.2011. Similarly,
under TSC, the unspent balances at the end of 2010-11 was Rs. 1176.56
crore which further increased to a whopping Rs. 1637.54 crore as on
31.12.2011. The Committee have been informed that during the Annual
Action Plan discussions with the States, the Ministry have insisted on
proper planning to ensure liquidation of unspent balances. The Ministry
are also reviewing the expenditure pattern of States on a regular basis
through review meetings, visits to States and video conferences with
State representatives. It has also been informed that usage of 60% of
available resources is a pre-requisite for release of second installment
to States. In view of the acute problem of accumulation of unspent
balances, the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to devise a
practical solution to this perennial problem and make every possible
efforts to ensure that the problem is tackled at the earliest lest there
could be a situation in the coming years, where the unspent balances
would surpass the total budgetary allocation of the Department. The
concept of incentives to the best performing States as far as liquidation
of unspent balances is concerned could also be thought of on the lines
of Nirmal Gram Puraskar being implemented by the Ministry. The
Committee wish to be apprised of the innovative steps taken by the
Department in this regard.
The Committee also recommend that a scheme/programme may
be conceptualized with a view to introducing fund allocation/
utilization electronically under the aegis of PRIs so as to ensure that
data is available on the internet, village-wise/panchayat-wise.
Reply of the Government
The opening balance under TSC as on 1.4.2011 was Rs. 1176 crore
which increased to Rs. 1291 crore on 1.4.2012 in absolute terms.
However, in terms of percentage of total release to the States the
opening balance was around 17.5% on 1.4.2011 which actually reduced
to 15.7% on 1.4.2012. Thus the opening balance has reduced in
comparative terms with the efforts put in by the Ministry in speeding
up utilization. However, to bring down the opening balance further
down, the Ministry has adopted some changes in the release procedure
of Grant-in-aid to States under NBA. Utilization of 60% of the available
funds with the SWSM i.e. opening balance, funds released as first
installment of Grant-in-aid under NBA during the year and interest
earned thereon, Central Share and State Share separately has been

22
made mandatory before release of further installments to a State. In
addition, the fund to be released to a State shall be reduced by the
amount of opening balance in excess of 10% of the previous year’s
release to the State. Thus the States will have to be prudent in spending
funds for getting additional funds under the programme. The measure
is likely to further reduce the opening balances available with the
States.
The unspent balance under the NRDWP , as on 1.4.2011, was
Rs. 3901.61 crore. The unspent balance as on 1.4.2012 was Rs. 3376.85
crore, a reduction of about 15%. This reduction has been possible due
to the efforts put in by the Ministry in pushing States to utilise funds
on time. While the requirement of the State having to utilise at least
60% of available funds before they are released the second installment
is strictly followed, certain other initiatives have been taken up earnestly
by the Ministry. In the regular meetings and video conferences being
held to constantly review the pace of expenditure by the States, they
are being urged to utilise their available funds quickly so that they
can receive the second installment early in the year. One of the main
reasons of the high closing balances as on 31.3.2012 is the late release
of second installment to States, almost towards the fag end of the
year, due to the late utilisation of available funds and subsequent late
submission of proposal for the second installment.
A new initiative that has been implemented in 2012-13, is that the
OB available with the State as on 1.4.2012, is being taken into account
before the first installment is released. This has been done by reducing
the amount released to the State as first installment, by the amount in
excess of permissible OB, ( i.e. 10% of previous years releases to the
State). This has also helped to push States to utilise the available
funds quickly. Further, as suggested by the Committee, States are being
incentivised to perform better by making available additional funds in
the form of a third installment, if they wish to claim for the same,
after using up 60% of the funds available (OB + 1st instt. + 2nd
instt.). This is released from the savings with the Ministry at the
national level at the end of the year. Another initiative of the
Government of India is the setting up of the Central Plan Scheme
Monitoring System (CPSMS) of the Ministry of Finance, through which
the Government has tied up with the Banks to monitor the actual
balances available in the various bank accounts of the programme
implementing units at various levels in the States. While the system
will take sometime to become fully functional, it shall be an effective
system of monitoring expenditure.
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS (Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]

23
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that the financial performance of NRDWP
has also not been encouraging. For the fiscal year 2011-12, Rs 9350
crore was allocated at BE stage which was subsequently slashed to
Rs.8500 crore. The Committee are further dismayed to find that the
Ministry was able to utilize only a sum of Rs. 7289 crore upto 20.3.2012
which is 22 percent less than the funds allocated at BE stage. This
leads to believe that the desired level of financial prudence in
expenditure has not been adhered to by the Ministry. The Committee
are of considered opinion that keeping in view the poor track record
of the Ministry in utilizing the scarce resources, the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance have been reducing the allocation at
RE stage. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that from
the fiscal year 2012-13 onwards, the Ministry should ensure fullest
utilization of funds allocated to them. A road map for the said purpose
may be drawn by the Ministry under intimation to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry would like to submit that Rs. 9350 crore was the BE
for the NRDWP for 2011-12. The expenditure benchmarks fixed by the
Ministry of Finance was to utilise 67% of BE by 31.12.2012, which was
achieved by the Ministry. At the RE stage the allocation was revised
to Rs. 8500 crore, against which the Ministry recorded an expenditure
of Rs. 8493.15 crore (99.91%) by 31.3.2012. Further, for every year of
the XIth Five year plan, beginning 2007-08, the Ministry has made all
efforts to ensure fullest utilization of funds allocated to it and this is
evidenced by the fact that the utilization of funds allocated for the
NRDWP (ARWSP) by the Ministry has been close to 100%.
(Rs. in crore)
Year Budget Revised Utilisation % of RE
Estimates Estimates
2007-08 6500.00 6400.00 6442.76 100.66
2008-09 7300.00 7300.00 7298.79 99.98
2009-10 8000.00 8000.00 7989.72 99.87
2010-11 9000.00 9000.00 8986.74 99.85
2011-12 9350.00 8500.00 8493.15 99.91
40150 39200 39211.16 100.03

24
It is therefore submitted that the Ministry’s track record for
utilization of funds for rural water supply is not poor. Like in previous
years, for 2012-13, the Ministry has a definite road map in place to
ensure that funds provided are utilised. The Ministry has prepared a
Monthly Expenditure Plan as per which it plans to utilize 15% of the
allocated funds in the first quarter, 25% in the second quarter, 27% in
the third quarter and the balance 33% in the last quarter. The Ministry
is also continuously monitoring expenditure by State Governments
through the IMIS and regular review meetings with State Governments
to ensure that an expenditure plan is prepared by every State and
implemented.
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS (Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]

25
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee note that the physical performance of NRDWP
consists of three aspects, namely, progress made on uncovered
habitations, reducing the slipped back habitations and improving the
quality affected habitations. The details of physical performance on
these three parameters during the fiscal year 2011-12 have not been
encouraging. As against the targets of 1,15,379 and 29,790 fixed for
slipped back habitations and quality affected habitations, the rate of
achievement, under these categories were 87,653 and 16,591 respectively.
On the aspect of uncovered habitations, the Committee are surprised
to find that all uncovered habitations originally identified under Bharat
Nirman have been covered and there are no such uncovered habitations
to be covered. The Committee find it difficult to give credence to the
information furnished by the Ministry on this count as it tantamount
to a situation which is better than the most urbanized places in the
country. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to revisit the
overall position of uncovered habitations at the ground level and
apprise the Committee of the outcome of such exercise.
Reply of the Government
Uncovered habitations are those habitations where no drinking
water sources exist at all. States have reported that all habitations
identified as Uncovered at the inception of Bharat Nirman have been
provided with some drinking water facility and are no longer
Uncovered. The States update the overall status of coverage of
habitations at the ground level every year. As on 1.4.2012, there are
still 2,92,138 Partially Covered habitations where drinking water
facilities are present but are not adequate  i.e. they are supplied with
less than 40 litres per capita per day . There are also 99,380 habitations
reported with quality problems. As regards the achievement of coverage
of habitations in 2011-12, against targets of 1,15,379 and 29,790 Partially
Covered and Quality Affected habitations, 1,16,246 PC and 22,121 QA
habitations were covered.
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS (Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report)

26
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee are astonished to find that since the First Five
Year Plan (1951–56), more than 1,55,000 crore have been invested by
the Union and State Governments for achieving the objective of
providing safe and adequate drinking water to rural populace of the
country. However, even after 60 years of implementing the drinking
water programme with different nomenclature and delivery mechanism,
there is no uniformity on the figures of coverage. On the one hand,
the Ministry claim that 74.88 per cent habitations are getting safe and
adequate drinking water supply and on the other hand, the NSSO
survey proclaim that 90.2 per cent of rural households have access to
water from safe sources. A third dimension on the overall coverage of
drinking water in the rural areas has been added when Secretary,
during evidence before the Committee, clarified that 90.2 per cent
coverage includes piped water, tap connections, hand pumps and all
protected wells. Keeping in view the absence of uniformity in the data
of coverage of drinking water, the Committee recommend that an
independent evaluation study may be carried out to determine the
actual coverage of drinking water in the rural areas so that the planning
process may be properly calibrated for taking corrective measures to
cover the entire populace at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Regarding the fact mentioned that the Ministry claims on the basis
of the IMIS data that 74.88% of rural habitations are getting safe and
adequate drinking water supply, it is again clarified that these are the
rural habitations which are reported as fully covered and not rural
households. Whereas the NSSO survey gives coverage of rural
households showing 90.2% of the population getting water from safe
sources. As regards the averment of Secretary DWS that 90.2 per cent
coverage includes piped water, tap connections, hand pumps and all
protected wells, this is exactly the definition of “improved sources”
used by the Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) of UNICEF and WHO,
which monitors the achievement of the MDGs by countries. The Census
2011 which has independently assessed access to drinking water

27
facilities of all rural households in the country also reveals that 84.02%
of the rural households have tap water, covered well water and
handpump/tubewell water as the main source of drinking water. Since
the Census 2011 figures are now available these are the most authentic,
complete and independent assessment of coverage. States have been
addressed to identify habitations without safe drinking water sources
and also those where the drinking water source is more than 500
metres away from households and include them in their Annual Action
Plans for taking corrective measures to cover them at the earliest.
However it is definitely conceded that the data on the IMIS needs to
be continuously evaluated and improved. The Ministry has in 2012-13
commissioned an independent evaluation study of the data entered on
the IMIS by States, the report of which is expected to be available by
the beginning of 2013-14.
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS (Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee are aware that water is a State subject and NRDWP
(erstwhile ARWSP) is a scheme of the Union Government which is
meant to supplement the efforts of the State Governments. In
Committee’s view, the objective of accessibility of drinking water along
with the availability of quality drinking water in rural areas of the
country has undergone a radical change to the extent that the
‘sustainability of sources’ have become all the more important in the
present context. The Committee, however, are surprised to note that
even after infusing sizeable funds under the NRDWP programme, the
Ministry are not in possession of any reliable data on the basis of
which it can be conclusively stated that all the sources of drinking
water, be it piped water, tap connections, hand pumps, wells etc., are
available throughout the year. The Committee are of the opinion that
the efforts of the Ministry to attain the objective of NRDWP would
bear fruits only when the end users are getting water supply from
secured sources regularly. The Committee, therefore, urge the
government to work out modalities to ascertain the sustainability of
sources in the form of measuring service standard levels in terms of
number of hours and number of days of water supply on priority
basis so as to take corrective policy initiatives.
Reply of the Government
Sustainability of drinking water sources and schemes is possibly
the most important challenge that exists in the water supply sector in
rural areas. Ensuring that the rural population are provided standard

28
services sustainably at designated levels, also makes sure that
investments made in setting up water supply systems are not wasted.
Ideally this would mean that every source of drinking water in the
country, be it piped water, tap connections, hand pumps, wells etc.,
are monitored throughout the year with regular inspections and data
from the same generated and scrutinized on a concurrent basis. This
data is available from the sample survey conducted by NSSO in
2008-09. According to this Survey Report 85.7% of rural households
get sufficient drinking water from tap source throughout the year,
89.6% of those using handpump/tubewell and 79.2% of those using
protected well got it throughout the year. While this is being done at
local levels in many States. The Ministry accepts the recommendation
of the Committee to measure service standard levels as timely and
necessary. This has also been recommended by the Working Group for
the 12th Five Year Plan period. The Ministry shall strive to initiate
steps to develop a system capable of such monitoring on a priority
basis.
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS(Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
In Committee’s view, adequate manpower is pre-requisite in any
organization particularly responsible for implementing the social
schemes like the drinking water and sanitation. The Committee,
however, find that the actual personnel strength of the Ministry, as of
now, is 77 as against the sanctioned strength of 108. There are as
many as 31 posts lying vacant. As a result of shortage of manpower,
the Committee feel that not only the overall monitoring of the flagship
schemes has been affected, but also the impact is even more severe in
conducting the day-to-day operations of the Ministry, especially when
the coverage of these schemes is throughout the country requiring
constant liaison with the State Government officials and other
stakeholders. The Committee are also not sure whether any O&M study
has been undertaken after upgrading the Department as full-fledged
Ministry where all Wings are required to work as a unified Ministry.
The Committee, accordingly, recommend to carry out a manpower
study to assess the requirements and take follow-up action to upgrade
the human resources of the Ministry. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the follow up action in the matter.

29
Reply of the Government
So far as 31 posts lying vacant in this Ministry are concerned, the
matter has been taken up with Department of Personnel and Training
and the cadre controlling authority  i.e. Ministry of Rural Development
to fill up the posts. Pending the filling up of posts on regular basis by
Cadre authorities, retired officials have been engaged keeping in view
their experience in Government Service and some Outsourced personnel
have also been deployed to manage the work of the erstwhile
Department.
Consequent upon upgradation of Department of Drinking Water
and Sanitation to the level of a Ministry, the need for strengthening
and restructuring of existing set up to meet the requirements of the
Ministry has been felt immediately. Accordingly, a detailed proposal
for strengthening and restructuring of the Ministry indicating the
requirement of additional wings, divisions, branches and sections with
assessed requirement of 81 additional posts was submitted to Ministry
of Finance with the approval of Hon’ble Minister, DW&S.
Department of Expenditure has returned the file with the following
observation:—
“Since Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation propose to create
80% more posts than the present sanctioned strength, they are
advised to have a scientific study conducted by SIU before the
Ministry of DWS arrive at the number of posts to be created.
Considering the total ban on creation of posts issued by this
Department vide our OM dated 31.5.2012, Ministry of DWS may
submit the proposal along with SIU’s recommendations after the
ban on creation of posts is lifted.”
Action will be taken for a work study by SIU.
[O.M. No. H.11011/03/2012-DWS(Coord.) dated 13 September, 2012,
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
14 December, 2012 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

30
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF
THE COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 14 DECEMBER, 2012
The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in Committee Room
No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
3. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy
4. Dr. Sanjay Singh
5. Smt. Supriya Sule
6. Smt. Annu Tandon
7. Smt. Usha Verma
8. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
10. Dr. Chandan Mitra
11. Shri C.P . Narayanan
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
4. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary

31
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee convened for consideration of Memoranda
containing draft Reports of the Committee on action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in fourth Reports on
Demands for Grants (2012-13).
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Action Taken Reports:—
(i) Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report
on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Drinking Water and Sanitation;
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** *** ***
4. Draft Reports were taken up seriatum. After detailed discussions,
the Committee adopted the Reports with minor modifications. The
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid
Reports and present the same to the Parliament.
5. *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

32
APPENDIX II
[Vide Introduction of Report]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA)
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
I. Total number of recommendations: 13
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
Total: 08
Percentage: 61.55%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Serial No. 5
Total: 01
Percentage: 7.69%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Serial No. 6
Total: 01
Percentage: 7.69%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 3, 4 and 13
Total: 03
Percentage: 23.07%