STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                     (2009-2010) 
 
          
 
       FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
             MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
   (DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Second Report of 
the Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]  
 
ELEVENTH REPORT  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
11 


ELEVENTH  REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2009-2010) 
 
                
       (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
   (DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Second Report of 
the Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.07.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.07.2010 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2010/Sravana, 1932 (Saka) 
  


CRD No. 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
© 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and C onduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha. 

CONTENTS 
 
       Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) ......................................   (iii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................   (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................   1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................   20 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply .............................................................................   35 
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee .....................................................   37 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited .....    40 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
held on 7 July, 2010…………………………………  46 
 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the  
recommendations contained in the Second Report  
of the Committee (15th Lok Sabha)........................  49 
  

(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2009-2010) 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
   Members 
Lok  Sabha  
1. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
2. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
5. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
6. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
7. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
8. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
9. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
10. Shri Rakesh Pandey 
11. Shri P.L. Punia 
12. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
13. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
14. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu 
15. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
16. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
17. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
18. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh 
19. Shrimati Usha Verma 
20. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
Rajya  Sabha 
21. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar* 
22. Shri Ganga Charan 
23. Shri Silvius Condpan** 
24. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
25. Dr. Ram Prakash 
26. Shri P.R. Rajan 
27. Shri Arjun Singh 
28. Vacant@ 
29. Shrimati Maya Singh 
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.K. Grover  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah  - Additional Director 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
*    w.e.f. 15 April, 2010 
**    Re-nominated w.e.f. 3 May, 2010 
@  Consequent upon retirement of Shri Bhagwati Singh, MP, Rajya Sabha from membership of  Rajya Sabha w.e.f.  4 July, 2010.  
 

(iv) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2009 -
2010) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present the Eleventh Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the 
Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development).  
2.  The Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on          
17 December, 20 10. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 12th February,2010. 
3.  The replies of t he Government were examined and the  draft Report was 
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 7th July, 2010. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
  NEW DELHI;                SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
20 July, 2010                         Chairperson, 
29 Asadha, 1932 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 

1 
 
 
 
       CHAPTER I 
 
         REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2009 -10) deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their Second Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural 
Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 December, 2009. 
 
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 27 
recommendations which have been categorised as follows: 
 
(i) Chapter II   Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Para Nos.: 2.6, 3.3, 3.4, 3.17, 3.22, 4.18, 4.19, 4.28, 4.29, 
4.30, 4.35, 5.8, 5.9, 5.10, 5.11, 5.12, 5.22 and 
5.24 
(ii) Chapter III   Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government‟s replies : 
Para Nos.:  3.16 and 4.31 
(iii) Chapter IV  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government  have not been accepted by the Committee :  
Para Nos.: 4.43 and 5.23 
(iv) Chapter V   Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited : 
Para Nos. : 3.23, 4.6, 4.38, 4.39 and 5.25 
 
3. The Committee would like the Department to expedite the action and furnish final 
replies in respect of r ecommendations which have been categorized under interim 
category, within three months of the presentation of the Report.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
these recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  

2 
 
 
 
A. MONITORING OF ON-GOING PROJECTS   
[Recommendation Serial Nos. 2, 11, 12 and 13 (Para Nos. 3.3, 4.28, 4.29 and 
4.30)] 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
“The Committee are also dismayed to learn that wastelands in the country 
as on today is as high as 55.27 million hectare in spite of implementation 
of three area development programmes of IWDP, DPAP and DDP over 
the last twenty years. The Committee, therefore, doubt the uti lity of these 
programmes as the achievements have not been on expected lines over 
the years. The Committee recall that in the previous Thirty -sixth Report 
para 3.34 the Committee had underlined the need for monitoring of 
different projects under IWDP, DPAP  and DDP.  In view of the above the 
Committee recommend that the ongoing schemes be implemented in a 
more focused manner so that something tangible is discernible at ground 
level.”  
  [Recommendation Serial No. 2 (Para No. 3.3)] 
 
“The Committee are constra ined to note that during the last fifteen years 
i.e. from 1995 -1996 to 2008 -2009 out of the total of 45,062 projects 
sanctioned in IWDP, DPAP and DDP projects involving a cost of around 
Rs.17,918 crore with Central share of Rs.14,299 crore the actual releases 
have been only around Rs.9936 crore. The Commit tee are not convinced 
with the reasons advanced for the lower releases that under the above 
programmes projects are sanctioned for a period of 5 years and funds are 
spread over 5 to 7 installments. The Committee are also constrained to 
note that out of the  45,062 projects sanctioned, only 14,687 have been 
completed which is less than one -third of total projects sanctioned.  
Remaining projects have been shown as on -going. The Department is 
stated to have been impressing upon the State Governments at the review 
meetings the urgency to complete ongoing projects in 2 -3 years time.  Yet 
the Committee feel that the completion of projects of as low as one-third of 
the total projects sanctioned indicates that necessary urgency for 
completion of projects as claimed b y the Department is not realized at 
ground level in different States.”  
  [Recommendation Serial No. 11 (Para No. 4.28)] 
 
“In this connection, the Committee have been impressing upon for proper 
monitoring of projects in their previous Reports presented to the 

3 
 
 
 
Parliament from time to time. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that concerted and persistent efforts should be made not only 
by the Department of Land Resources but also by all the 
authorities/agencies involved in execution of these projects.” 
  [Recommendation Serial No. 12 (Para No. 4.29)] 
 
“The Committee after going through the State -wise figures of projects 
sanctioned vis-à-vis projects completed find that the major States where 
large number of sanctioned projects are awaiting completion  are 
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Karnataka etc.  In Rajasthan out of 8,775 projects 
sanctioned only 2,934 projects have been completed, in Gujarat out of 
5,590 projects sanctioned only 1,657 have been completed, in Karnataka 
out of 4,038 projects sanctioned only 1 ,296 have been completed.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the bottlenecks if any, in the 
completion of projects in such States should be removed and concrete 
efforts be made for expeditious completion of pending projects.” 
  [Recommendation Serial No. 13 (Para No. 4.30)] 
 
6. The Department in the action taken reply have stated as under :-  
“As per the recommendations of Standing Committee, DoLR has made 
following concerted efforts to monitor the Watershed schemes in a more 
focused manner: 
 The Department has been continuously reviewing the ongoing projects 
which are overdue for completion.  As a conscious strategy for the first 
two years of the 11 th Plan, viz., 2007 -08 & 2008 -09, no new projects 
were sanctioned in 2007 -08 & 2008 -09 and funds wer e released only 
for completion of projects.  This resulted in completion of 2465 projects 
in 2008-09, compared to 516 in 2006-07 and 1221 in 2007-08. 
 In compliance of the recommendations of the Committee, the 
Department has formulated and conveyed to the S tates, the following 
policy to ensure completion of ongoing and overdue projects: 
(i) The Pre -Hariyali projects* where only 1 or 2 installments have 
been released so far shall be closed and the States shall refund 
the unspent balance with the interest accr ued thereon and furnish 
Utilization Certificates for the funds spent. 
*   (projects sanctioned up to 2002 -03 and which should have been 
completed by 2007-08) 
 (ii) In case of Hariyali projects where one installment has been 
released in 2003 -04 or 2004 -05 a nd the State Government has 

4 
 
 
 
not requested for the release of next installment, the State 
Government shall close such projects and intimate to the 
Department of Land Resources, the untreated area of these 
projects. The State Government may consider taking u p such 
areas under the Integrated Watershed Management Programme 
(IWMP). However, documents as indicated in Para (i) above shall 
be submitted to the Department.  
(iii) In cases, where the State Government has requested for release 
of 2 nd installment within  4 years of release, the release of 2 nd 
installment in such cases would be considered on a case to case 
basis. The reckoning of the period of 4 years for not requesting for 
the next installment shall be counted from the financial year in 
which the funds were first released by the Department.  
(iv)  In projects, where no work has been executed in the field and the 
projects are closed by the State Government, the Secretary of the 
Nodal Department implementing watershed programmes in the 
State may certify the same to the Department of Land Resources. 
The State Government may consider taking up such areas under 
IWMP. However, documents as indicated in Para (i) shall be 
submitted to the Department.  
(v) The cut -off dates for completion of the Pre -Hariyali and Har iyali 
projects are March, 2011 and December, 2012 respectively 
except in the projects located in snow bound areas where actual 
working season is limited to 3 -4 months in a year. For these 
areas, a grace period of 3 years beyond the cut -off dates would 
be considered on furnishing a certificate to this effect by the State 
Government. 
 In the Regional Review Meetings held with the State Officials, it 
was pointed out by various State representatives that the funds 
released to the DRDAs do not reach the projects in time. They, 
therefore, suggested that the fund flow be routed through the 
dedicated State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA) constituted under 
IWMP. The matter was taken up with NRAA for change in 
Common Guidelines for Watershed Development Projects, 2008, 
which was agreed by the Executive Body and accordingly the 
fund flow is now being routed through the SLNAs. 
 A scheme of Area Officers has been implemented in the 
Department and the officers are visiting States for effective 
monitoring.” 
[Reply to Recommendation Serial Nos. 2 and 11 (Para Nos. 
3.3 and 4.28)]  

5 
 
 
 
“…….. the Department is taking all necessary steps to expedite 
completion of ongoing projects. Letters have been sent to the Chief 
Secretaries of all the States conveying the concern of the Co mmittee for 
taking necessary steps at their end.” 
   [Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 12 (Para No. 4.29)] 
 
“Each watershed project has a project duration of 5 years. The projects 
which have completed their project period become due for completion.  
Completion of projects in the scheduled timeframe is being pursued 
with the States. State -wise projects sanctioned, projects due for 
completion and projects completed in Gujarat, Karnataka & Rajasthan are 
as under: 
 
Name of the 
State 
No. of projects 
sanctioned  
No. of projects due 
for completion 
No. of projects 
completed (as on 
31.12.2009) 
Gujarat 5,590 3621 2082 
(57%) 
Karnataka 4,038 2643 1777 
(67%) 
Rajasthan 8,775 5287 3396 
(64%) 
 
In the regional review meetings, States have informed that the main 
bottleneck is delay in fundflow from DRDA/ZP to implementing agencies 
and requested for release of central assistance directly to State Level 
Nodal Agencies (SLNA) under IWMP. The issue wa s taken up with 
National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) by the Department of Land 
Resources on 24.08.2009. NRAA discussed the matter in its executive 
committee meeting held on 03.11.2009 and recommended for release of 
funds directly to SLNAs under IWMP. Acc ordingly, NRAA has issued 
amendment to Common Guidelines, 2008 on 24.11.2009. As per the 
amendment made by the NRAA in the Guidelines, Department of Land 
resources revised the policy of release of funds under IWMP on 
9.12.2009. Now, the funds are being dir ectly released to SLNAs, who may 
release funds to the respective Project Implementing Agencies, as the 
case may be. 
 
Besides, the Department has also formulated and conveyed policy 
interventions to States for timely completion of overdue projects as 
indicated in para 3.3 above. The matter is also being pursued with the 
State Governments.” 
  [Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 13 (Para No. 4.30)] 
 

6 
 
 
 
7. The Committee find that in regard to their recommendation about more 
focused implementation of on -going projects a number of measures have been 
undertaken which inter-alia include non-sanctioning of new projects in initial two 
years of the Eleventh Plan, release of funds only for completion of projects etc. 
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2010 -2011) of the 
Department they also notice that as a result as large as 2465 on -going projects of 
IWDP, DPAP and DDP have been identified for closure. They also recall that in 
their previous Report viz. Seventh Report (Para No. 4.27) they have recommended 
that before taking final decision on closure of as large as 2465 projects spreading 
over big States like Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa etc. the concerned State 
Governments be consulted on case to case b asis as closure of such large 
number of projects at one go would not be in consonance with over all planning 
and implementation. In view of the foregoing they would like to reiterate their 
recommendation made in this regard. 
8. The reply of Government to the Committee’s recommendation for making 
concrete efforts by the Department and by the implementing agencies in 
execution of projects, does not deal at all with over -all planning and 
implementation except mentioning that funds a re now being directly released to 
State Level Nodal Agencies (SLNAs) who may release it to the Project 
Implementing Agencies (PIAs) and implementation of Area Officers Scheme. The 
Committee regret to note that the reply is silent about the State specific problems 
coming in the way of on-going watershed projects like weak institutional support, 
pathetic on-line monitoring of different watershed projects under IWDP, DPAP 

7 
 
 
 
and DDP, absence of their post launch care etc. and  the extent to which these 
have been addressed. They, therefore, desire that a comprehensive reply  
covering such important aspects  be furnished to them so as to arrive at a logical 
conclusion. They would also like to be apprised about the tangible impact, the 
funds being released directly to SLNAs.   
 
B. EXPEDITIOUS CLEARANCE OF BIO-FUEL PROGRAMME   
[Recommendation Serial Nos. 7 and 18 (Para Nos. 3.23 and 4.43)]  
 
9. The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under : 
 
“The Committee note  that for IWMP against the outlay of Rs.1968 crore 
during 2009-2010, the releases so far are Rs.1003.98 crore, whereas for 
NLRMP against the outlay of Rs.400 crore the releases are Rs.135.52 
crore only. The Committee are constrained to learn that Rs. 30 cr ore for 
bio-fuel may go unutilized. The Committee recommend that the 
Department should strive hard to increase pace of releases in the 
remaining half of the current year particularly in respect of NLRMP to 
ensure full utilization of funds.  Besides, it sho uld also be ensured that the 
funds utilized lead to achievement of corresponding physical targets. 
Besides, the Committee also recommend that the Department should 
make all out efforts for obtaining clearance for the bio -fuel programme 
from the Group of Mi nisters for its finalization  after taking into account 
necessary impact assessment study of plantation work already done on 
Jatropa, so that Rs. 30 crore earmarked for this programme does not go 
unutilized.”  
  [Recommendation Serial No. 7 (Para No. 3.23)] 
 
“The Committee are unhappy to note that prolonged delay in finalization of 
the Bio -diesel programme for one reason or another has occurred since 
the programme was started way back in April, 2003.  The Committee also 
recall that this issue has been const antly pursued in their examination of 
Demands for Grants in the previous years.  It has also figured in their 
Thirty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2007 -2008).  The Committee 
have now been informed that the programme has been approved by 
Group of Mini sters at their sitting held on 24 February 2009 in principle, 
subject to three conditions.  One of these relates to prior assessment of 
plantation work and positive feedback before initiating the demonstration 
phase.  The Committee have also been informed that the Department is in 

8 
 
 
 
the process of carrying out an Impact Assessment Study of Jatropha and 
Pongamia plantations in India by an independent agency. The Committee 
recommend that the Department should complete the above impact 
assessment study without a ny loss of time for taking final view on the 
issue. While recommending for expeditious clearance of National Mission 
on Bio -diesel, the Committee would like to emphasise that the Jatropha 
and Pongamia cultivation in the country should be done without affec ting 
the food security and agricultural land of the country.”  
   [Recommendation Serial No. 18 ([Para No. 4.43)] 
 
10. The Department in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“Under the IWMP, the BE of Rs.1968 crore was reduced to Rs.1819.80 
crore at  the RE stage. By the end of January 2010,  Rs.1427 crore, i.e., 
78.4% of the funds have already been sanctioned and released.  The 
Department will make all out efforts to utilise this amount within this 
financial year.  Under NLRMP, the BE of Rs.400 crore was reduced to 
Rs.199.99 crores at RE stage.  This entire amount will be utilized within 
this financial year.  Regarding bio-fuel, the Department made all out efforts 
to get the clearance from Group of Ministers.   The matter thereafter was 
taken to the Ca binet.  As per the decision of the Cabinet, study is to be 
conducted on impact of plantation already taken up in the country and if 
positive feedback is received, then only demonstration phase can be 
taken up.  Action has already been initiated to comply w ith the decision of 
the Cabinet.” 
 [Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 7 (Para No. 3.23)] 
 
“The Group of Ministers (GoM) gave a conditional 
recommendation for the demonstration phase of Bio-diesel Programme in 
its meeting held on 24 th February 2009.  The GoM recommendations 
were submitted to the Cabinet by Ministry of New & Renewable Energy.  
As per the Cabinet decision, the Bio -diesel Mission has been given only 
“in principle” approval subject to receipt of positive feedback of the 
assessment of the plant ations work already carried out in the country.  
Necessary action has been taken in the matter.” 
 [Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 18 (Para No. 4.43)] 
 
11. The Committee note with dismay that endless s tatus-quo is prevailing on 
the issue of clearance of Bio-diesel programme from Group of Ministers (GoM). 

9 
 
 
 
They are also constrained to note the action taken reply of the Department is 
silent on crucial issue of impact assessment study by an independent agency 
necessary for in itiating the demonstration phase which the Department was in 
the process of carrying out l ast time also. They are also unhappy to find that 
instead of giving latest update on the issue, the Committee have been given old 
position on the subject matter that hardly serve any purpose. They, therefore, 
recommend that required information be furnished t o the Parliamentary 
Committee in future in order to arrive at the logical conclusion.  The concerns of 
the Committee in this regard should appropriately be placed, while pursuing the 
issue by the Ministry with Group of Ministers.  
 
C. EXPEDITING DATA REGARDIN G CONVERSION OF WASTELAND INTO 
AGRICULTURE LAND  
[Recommendation Serial No. 8 (Para No. 4.6)]  
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“The Committee are constrained to note that there is no updated data 
about wastelands in the country.  The Committee are also anguished to 
note that whatever data that has been relied upon by the Department of 
Land Resources is based on Wastelands Atlas of India brought out by the 
Department of Land Resources in collaboration with National Remote 
Sensing Agency (NRSA) Hy derabad dating back to 2005, i.e. four years 
old. The Secretary, Land Resources candidly admitted before the 
Committee that in spite of repeated requests to different State 
Governments, the States are unable to inform the Department about exact 
area of was teland utilized by them.  The Department has also furnished 
varying data of wastelands as referred to in Parthasarthy Committee 
Report.  The Committee feel that these data also do not serve the purpose 
of getting accurate area of wastelands in the country.   According to, the 
Secretary, Land Resources, NRSA, Hyderabad has been asked to bring 
out another Atlas of Wasteland showing updated position. The Committee 
are dismayed to note that in the age of satellite imaginary, the country is 
bereft of the basic da ta of wasteland in the country.  The Committee, 
wonder how in the absence of basic data the ambitious programme of 

10 
 
 
 
Integrated Watershed Management Programme can be implemented in a 
result oriented manner in the country in the coming years.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should take up the 
matter of bringing out the updated wasteland Atlas urgently with NRSA, 
Hyderabad.  At the same time States should be asked to report the 
utilization of wastelands in their respective States.  The Committee also 
recommend in the wasteland Atlas there should be clear data regarding 
wastelands as also those under rain -fed area in order to have a clear 
picture in the matter. The concrete action in this regard should be 
communicated to the Committee.” 
  [Recommendation Serial No. 8 (Para No. 4.6)] 
 
13. The Department in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“NRSC has been assigned the task of updating the Wasteland Atlas 2005 
and it is in the process of updating Wasteland Atlas. The issue of bringing 
out clear data regarding rainfed wastelands has been taken up with the 
NRSC. Further, all the States have been requested to furnish district-wise 
details of wastelands converted to cultivable land.” 
 [Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 8 (Para No. 4.6)] 
 
14. The Committee are constrained to note that updated Wasteland Atlas and 
details regarding conversion of wasteland s into cultivable land in the country are 
not available in the country as on today. The Committee are also dismayed to find 
that Department of Land Resources is still in the process of updating the 
aforesaid Atlas with National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC)  and have requested 
all the States th e district-wise details of wastelands converted into cultivable 
land. Meanwhile they also recall that this issue has also been dealt with by them 
in their Seventh Report (Para No. 4.13) wherein after having learnt that a separate 
study has been sanctioned to NRSC, Hyderabad in February, 2010 to complete 
the job within six to eight months time, they had recommended that NRSC, 
Hyderabad be given necessary assistance for the purpose. However, on the issue 

11 
 
 
 
of collecting district-wise information from various States they  observe that their 
recommendation has not been given desired level of attention. They also opine 
that had the Department been a little active by working on day -to-day basis , 
required information should have been made available by now , considering the 
importance of the two vital documents/details, they recommend that required 
information be made available to them without any further delay in order to arrive 
at a logical conclusion.  
 
D. IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMON GUIDELINES  
[Recommendation Serial Nos. 19 and 22 (Para Nos. 5.8 and 5.11)] 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“The Committee note that Integrated Watershed Management Programme 
(IWMP) being implemented from 1 st April, 2008 under „Common 
Guidelines, 2008‟ aims to restore the ecological balance by harnessing, 
conserving and developing degraded natural resources such as soil, 
vegetative cover and water so as to prevent soil run off, regenerate natural 
vegetation an d for recharging of ground water and for rain water 
harvesting.  The Committee have been informed that keeping in view the 
aforesaid diverse nature of subjects encompassing the jurisdiction of 
various Ministries/ Departments viz. Agriculture, Drinking Wate r Supply, 
Environment etc. the „Common Guidelines‟ have been approved at the 
level of National Rain -fed Area Authority (NRAA) under Ministry of 
Agriculture, in order to have a co -ordinated approach. However, the 
Committee are constrained to note that imple mentation mechanism both 
at Central as also at State level for implementing IWMP is not moving on 
expected lines.” 
  [Recommendation Serial No. 19 (Para No. 5.8)] 
“The Committee further note with dismay that the eight States which have 
constituted necessar y SLNAs are yet to submit their State Perspective 
and Strategic Plans to the Department of Land Resources. Likewise, the 
Committee are surprised to note that in Uttarakhand, proposals worth Rs. 
75 crore covering 50,000 hectare of area has been appraised an d cleared 
by the Steering Committee at the Central level but are still awaiting 
necessary sanction from concerned SLNA.  The Committee have also 
been informed that some States are facing difficulty in flow of funds from 
DRDAs to Project Implementing Agenci es (PIAs).  In order to resolve 

12 
 
 
 
these, the NRAA is being approached for necessary changes in „Common 
Guidelines, 2008‟.  In view of the above, the Committee recommend that a 
pro-active role on the part of Steering Committee is need of the hour for 
constitution of SLNAs in Bihar and West Bengal and for obtaining 
necessary State Perspective and Strategic Plans from the eight States 
which have constituted SLNAs but have not  submitted these to Steering 
Committee.  The Committee would also like to be informed a bout the 
States which are yet to submit such plans.  The Committee recommend 
that the Department should take necessary action early on other issues 
highlighted above for expeditious implementation of IWMP.” 
  [Recommendation Serial No. 22 (Para No. 5.11)] 
 
16. The Department in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“The implementation mechanism required for IWMP has been put in place 
both at Central and State levels. At Central level, Steering Committee has 
members from Planning Commission, NRAA, techn ical experts from 
different scientific institutions, voluntary organizations, related 
departments of the Central and State Governments. At State level, 26 out 
of 28 States have constituted State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA), the 
dedicated institution with pro fessional support, for implementation of 
IWMP. Remaining two States (Bihar & West Bengal) have been 
repeatedly reminded to set up SLNA. 
The formats for State Perspective and Strategic Plan (SPSP), 
Preliminary Project Report (PPR) and formats for Management  
Information System have been prepared in consultation with the State 
Governments and circulated to all the States.  As a result, SLNAs have 
prepared SPSP and PPRs and submitted to the Department of Land 
Resources for appraisal of the Steering Committee.  
Formally, every Wednesday and Thursday was set aside for the 
meeting of the Steering Committee.  However, in the course of 
discussions, members requested that these meetings may be held as and 
when the proposals are received from the States. While appraisin g 
projects, members raise queries on technical issues of the proposals and 
give valuable suggestions. With this arrangement, no State proposal, 
complete in all respects, is pending in the Department.  
The Steering Committee has appraised the State Perspect ive & 
Strategic Plans of 20 States and cleared projects for a total area of 6.25 
million ha for implementation during 2009-10.  
As indicated in para 4.30, the Department is now releasing funds 
directly to SLNAs, who may release funds to the respective Proj ect 
Implementing Agencies, as the case may be.  This will ensure that the 

13 
 
 
 
time-gap between the release of funds from the Central Government and 
the receipt of the same by the PIA will be considerably reduced.”  
  
[Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 19 (Para No. 5.8)] 
 
“The Department has pursued the matter with the States which have not 
submitted State Perspective and Strategic Plan (SPSP). Consequently, 
Jharkhand, Kerala, Mizoram and Uttar Pradesh have furnished SPSP. 
These SPSPs have been appraised by the Steering Comm ittee during 
December 2009 – January 2010. Remaining 4 States viz. Goa, Haryana, 
Jammu & Kashmir and Manipur have been reminded to submit SPSP for 
appraisal of the Steering Committee. In the case of Uttarakhand, the 
sanction has been issued by the SLNA on 22/12/2009 which had earlier 
been appraised by the Steering Committee.  
The issue of fundflow was taken up to National Rainfed Area 
Authority (NRAA) by the Department of Land Resources on 24/08/2009. 
NRAA discussed the matter in its executive committee mee ting held on 
03/11/2009 and recommended for release of funds directly to SLNAs 
under IWMP. Accordingly, NRAA has issued amendment to Common 
Guidelines, 2008 on 24/11/2009. As per the amendment made by the 
NRAA in the Guidelines, Department of Land resource s revised the policy 
of release of funds under IWMP on 9.12.2009 and funds are being directly 
released to SLNAs, who may release funds to the respective Project 
Implementing Agencies, as the case may be. 
 
Regarding setting up of SLNA, the Chief Secretaries  of Bihar and 
West Bengal have again been reminded to constitute SLNA.” 
 
 [Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 22 (Para No. 5.11)] 
 
17. The Committee note with satisfaction that fundamental requirements under 
the ‘Common Guidelines’  of constitution of State Lev el Nodal Agencies (SLNAs) 
and preparation of State Perspective and Strategic Plan (SPSP)/Preliminary 
Project Report (PPR) for watershed projects have been met by way of setting up 
of SLNAs and preparation of SPSP/PPR barring a few exceptions. About 
constitution of SLNAs they recall that during the course of examination of 
Demands for Grants (2010 -11) they have been already informed that SLNA in 

14 
 
 
 
West Bengal has been set up and constitution of SLNA in Bihar is in the process. 
They also recall that  in their Seventh Report (Para No. 5.13) they had 
recommended that expeditious constitution of SLNA in Bihar should be pursued 
vigorously so that the process of constitution of SLNAs in all States is 
completed. The Committee, therefore, wish to reiterate the ir recommendation and 
urge the Department to apprise the latest update in this regard.   
18. On the issue of submission of SPSP s by remaining States , the Committee 
are constrained to note that four States of Goa, Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir 
and Manipur are yet to submit the necessary SPSPs and the Committee have 
been informed that these States have also been reminded to do so. In this 
connection they recall that in their Seventh Report (Para 5.18)  they had also dealt 
with this issue and had felt of a need to hav e an independent assessment of the 
problem with regard to the affected States for submission of their SPSPs/DPR s. 
They, therefore, while reiterating their recommendation urge upon the 
Department to apprise them follow up action if any taken in this regard.  They also 
recommend the Department to persuade the aforesaid States for submission of 
stipulated SPSPs under IWMP programme.  
 
E. SPEEDIER AND TIME BOUND IMPLEMENTATION RECOMMENDED FOR 
NATIONAL LAND RECORD MANAGEMENT PROGRAMME (NLRMP) 
[Recommendation Serial Nos. 25 and 26 (Para Nos. 5.23 and 5.24)] 
 
19. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
“The Committee are dismayed to note that implementation of the NLRMP 
so far in the country is also far below the expectations.  As against the 
target of 210 districts as on 31.10.2009, the actual coverage was as low 

15 
 
 
 
as 102 districts for this programme. The Committee apprehend that with 
this slow pace the target of covering 455 districts in the country by 2011 -
12 is unachievable by any stretch of imagination. The Committee,  
therefore, recommend that all out efforts be made to speed up NLRMP 
coverage as per targets drawn in this behalf.” 
[Recommendation Serial No. 25 (Para No. 5.23)] 
 
“The Committee note that Department has delineated ladder like approach 
for securing conclus ive titles of land records in the country ranging from 
computerization to automated mutation of property after its registration.  
The Committee have been informed that as a result of the review of 
NLRMP held on   18-19 August 2009 various revelations have been made 
available from different States in this regard.  These relate to various flaws 
like delay in release of amount, non -reporting of progress, non -utilisation 
of funds under NLRMP etc.  In view of the serious revelations reflected 
above, the Committe e feel that ladder like approach as also other details 
may be communicated to these States so as to eliminate the bottlenecks 
being faced by these States.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
a time -bound approach is very necessary for securing the go als of 
NLRMP during the designated period.”  
[Recommendation Serial No. 26 (Para No. 5.24)] 
 
20. The Department in the action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“The programme envisaged that in each State and UT,  begin with 1 or 2 
districts, then to scale up to 3 -4 districts per State/UT, and to cover the 
entire country by the 12th Plan period.  Accordingly, 69 districts in the 
States/UTs were covered under the programme during 2008 -09, the first 
year.  In the yea r 2009 -10, so far, funds have been released for 35 
districts, and the Project Sanctioning Committee has approved another 17 
districts under the NLRMP.  Proposals for more districts are expected 
during the rest of the financial year.   
 
The Department has i nitiated a number of measures to speed up 
the coverage of NLRMP in various States/UTs.  One of the important 
initiatives has been to bring the stakeholders from both the Govt. side as 
well as the private sector together on one platform for a free and 
meaningful interaction and transfer of technology, in the form of the 
NLRMP Technical Fair -2009, organized from 15th to 17th December, 
2009 at the Indian Habitat Centre, New Delhi.  The private sector 
organizations active in the relevant field, the apex level t echnical agencies 
of the Government of India (GoI) and all the State and UTs were invited to 
participate in the Fair.    

16 
 
 
 
There  were 62 stalls including 6 stalls by the Govt. agencies: (1) 
NIC HQ, (2) Survey of India, (3) NRSC/ISRO, (4) Government of West  
Bengal, (5) NIC Andhra Pradesh State Unit, and (6) the Stock Holding 
Corporation of India Ltd. (SHCIL).  Prominent among the private sector 
participants included the Infosys Technologies Ltd., the Tata Consultancy 
Services Ltd., the WIPRO Ltd., the IL&FS Technologies Ltd., the HCL 
Infosystems Ltd., the Genesys International Corp. Ltd., the HTC Global 
Services, the NIIT GIS Ltd., the Leica Geosystems, Pitney Bowes (from 
the UK), SALMAT (from Northern Territory, Australia), FENO (from 
France), CADASTEC from Australia, among others.   
 
In addition to the stalls, the Fair had an interaction area, which 
facilitated exchange of ideas and information on the requirements of the 
States and UTs vis -à-vis the offerings of the vendors, contact information, 
etc.  Also, concurrently, presentations were arranged in two halls, where 
64 presentations were made by 47 private sector organizations, 3 
technical agencies of the GoI as well as the State Governments of 
Gujarat, Kerala, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal.  All th e 
participating organizations from abroad made presentations.   
Technical Fair has been highly appreciated by various participants.  
Some of the feedback received in this regard is as follows:- 
 
1. Micronet Solutions, Nagpur 
“Congratulations on the success of NLRMP 2009.  You have laid 
the foundation for „effective‟ governance.  This program will have a 
cascading effect.  I am overwhelmed by the thought of an 
integrated system of land records (Map based), ROR (Right of 
Records), Titling (Deeds & ownership). Just thinking about an 
integrated system like this makes me smile. Who thought that this 
could be implemented in India. But you‟ve have sown the seed 
whose benefit shall be reaped by the generations to come. 
The immediate and tangible benefits would be transparency, 
efficiency, effectiveness and peace of mind for the land owners.  
The intangible benefits starts with decreased pressure on judicial 
system owning to integration of these three functions, Increase in 
Tax Revenue s, uncovering Mass & unlawful land holdings by 
miscreants (Benami Properties, dual ownerships etc.)” 
 
2. RMSI, NOIDA 
“The event, the first of its kind in the history of land reforms 
in India, is a classic example of bringing together the Public and the 
Private Sector for development, better governance and public 
welfare”. 
I would like to also thank you for giving us an opportunity to 
exhibit at the Fair.  Exhibiting at the Fair and interacting with 
delegates from different states helped us immensely in 

17 
 
 
 
understanding the needs of different State land departments that 
will help us in creating solutions as per needs of different States 
leading towards optimum success of the NLRMP programme.” 
 
3. Capital Business systems Limited, New Delhi 
“It was indeed a privi lege for CBSL to be part of immensely 
successful NLRMP Technical Fair, 2009.   My congratulations to 
you and all in NLRMP management.” 
I am confident that the very idea of NLRMP Technical Fair 
and mutually enriching discussion and dialogue amongst all stak e 
holders will make direction setting contributions towards successful 
implementations under NLRMP.” 
  
[Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 25 (Para No. 5.23)] 
“The ladder-like approach has been communicated to the States/UTs from 
time to time and has also been discussed in the meetings, workshops 
organized by the Department on the NLRMP.  Further, this has also been 
included in the Guidelines and Technical Manuals for implementation of 
the programme. The Guidelines and the Technical Manuals formulated for 
implementation of the programme include all components of the 
programme in detail. 
Efforts will be made by the Deptt. to act upon the recommendation 
of the Committee to develop a time -bound approach for the NLRMP, in 
consultation with the States/UTs.”     
 
[Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 26 (Para No. 5.24)] 
 
21. The Committee had recommended for speeding up of National Land 
Record Modernisation Programme (NLRMP) coverage in the country with time 
bound approach for securing the goal of the NLRMP programme in  the light of 
slow progress on coverage and in view of various other flaws like delay in release 
of amount , non-reporting of progress in NLRMP etc. from different States. 
However they find that the action taken replies are too general and interim in 
nature in as much as these merely state that process of coverage under the 
NLRMP programme commences with 1 to 2 districts initially in each State to be 
extended to 3 to 4 States afterwards. Further, it also mentions about coverage 

18 
 
 
 
done during 2008 -09, funds released/approv al accorded and proposed work 
during 2009 -10. In this connection they recall that during the course of 
examination of Demands for Grants (2010 -11) the actual NLRMP coverage has 
gone upto 141 districts across the country. The Committee would like to know the 
latest update in this regard.  
22. As regard s all out efforts taken by the Department to speed up the 
coverage, the Committee note with dismay that the action taken reply nowhere 
indicates as to how the initiative taken by the Departmen t of public -private 
partnership that was discussed in the NLRMP Technical Fair, 2009 held in New 
Delhi had resulted in accelerating the pace of coverage of NLRMP programme in 
different States. They therefore, desire whether the aforesaid idea of public 
private partnership also influenced the Government policy of NLRMP coverage in 
the country.  
23. On the issue of implementation of ladder like approach for implementation 
of NLRMP programme and in the process elimination of various bottlenecks 
being faced by diff erent State Governments, the Committee are constrain ed to 
note that here also action taken reply is too general and does not at all spell out 
remedial measures taken to address various flaws like delay in release of amount, 
non-reporting of progress etc. b eing encountered by different States. They, 
therefore, desire that a comprehensive reply be fu rnished to them in this regard 
so as to arrive at a logical conclusion.  
 
      

19 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.6) 
The Committee note that direction 73 A of the „Directions by the Speaker‟ is not 
being followed in the right spirit. This is evident from the considera ble delay in making 
the Statement by the Minister in the House regarding status of implementation of 
recommendations contained in Thirty -Sixth Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants (2008-2009) in respect of the Department of Land Resources.  In Com mittee‟s 
opinion the Department has not shown the desired urgency and will to make the 
Statement within the stipulated period.  The Committee desire that in future the 
Statement under direction 73 A should be made within the prescribed time limit. The 
Committee are, however, glad to note that their recommendations made in their 
previous Reports regarding enhancing the per hectare cost norms for wasteland 
development and finalization of guidelines of the restructured programmes of land 
record management have found favours from EFC in the Ministry of Finance as well as 
the Cabinet Secretariat that resulted in finalization of cost norms as also NLRMP.   
  Reply of the Government   
   As per direction 73A of Speaker, Lok Sabha & rule 266 of Rules of Procedure &  
Conduct of Business in the Council of States & following the direction by Hon‟ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, Hon‟ble Minister of Rural Development was to make a 
statement in both Houses of Parliament on implementation of recommendations 
contained in thirty si xth report of Standing Committee on Rural Development pertaining 
to Department of Land Resources within six months of presentation of Report to 
Parliament.  The Report was presented to Parliament on 17.4.2008.  Action Taken 
replies were sent to Standing Co mmittee on 26.08.2008.  Accordingly Speaker, Lok 
Sabha & Chairman, Rajya Sabha were requested by Minister of Rural Development for 
giving dates to him for making the statement and on receipt of such dates he made the 
statement on 12.12.2008 in Lok Sabha & on 17.12.2008 in Rajya Sabha.  Second 
Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development on Demands for Grants 
(2009-10) in respect of Department of Land Resources has been presented to 
Parliament on 17.12.2009.  Every effort will be made to ensure that  Minister of Rural 
Development makes the statement on the Action Taken on the 2 nd Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development during Budget Session 2010-11. 
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 3.3) 
The Committee are also dismayed to learn that wastelands in the country as on 
today is as high as 55.27 million hectare in spite of implementation of three area 
development pro grammes of IWDP, DPAP and DDP over the last twenty years. The 
Committee, therefore, doubt the utility of these programmes as the achievements have 
not been on expected lines over the years. The Committee recall that in the previous 
Thirty-sixth Report para 3.34 the Committee had underlined the need for monitoring of 
different projects under IWDP, DPAP and DDP.  In view of the above the Committee 
recommend that the ongoing schemes be implemented in a more focused manner so 
that something tangible is discernible at ground level.   
Reply of the Government  
As per the recommendations of Standing Committee, DoLR has made following 
concerted efforts to monitor the Watershed schemes in a more focused manner: 
 The Department has been continuously reviewing the ongoing projects which are 
overdue for completion.  As a conscious strategy for the first two years of the 11 th 
Plan, viz., 2007-08 & 2008-09, no new projects were sanctioned in 2007 -08 & 2008-
09 and funds were released only for completion of projects.  Th is resulted in 
completion of 2465 projects in 2008 -09, compared to 516 in 2006 -07 and 1221 in 
2007-08. 
 In compliance of the recommendations of the Committee, the Department has 
formulated and conveyed to the States, the following policy to ensure completio n of 
ongoing and overdue projects: 
(i) The Pre-Hariyali projects* where only 1 or 2 installments have been released so far 
shall be closed and the States shall refund the unspent balance with the interest 
accrued thereon and furnish Utilization Certificates for the funds spent. 
*   (projects sanctioned up to 2 002-03 and which should have been completed by 2007 -
08) 
 (ii) In case of Hariyali projects where one installment has been released in 2003 -04 or 
2004-05 and the State Government has not requested for the release of next 
installment, the State Government sh all close such projects and intimate to the 
Department of Land Resources, the untreated area of these projects. The State 
Government may consider taking up such areas under the Integrated Watershed 
Management Programme (IWMP). However, documents as indicat ed in Para (i) 
above shall be submitted to the Department.  
(iii)  In cases, where the State Government has requested for release of 2 nd installment 
within 4 years of release, the release of 2 nd installment in such cases would be 
considered on a case to ca se basis. The reckoning of the period of 4 years for not 
requesting for the next installment shall be counted from the financial year in which 
the funds were first released by the Department.  

21 
 
 
 
(iv)  In projects, where no work has been executed in the field  and the projects are 
closed by the State Government, the Secretary of the Nodal Department 
implementing watershed programmes in the State may certify the same to the 
Department of Land Resources. The State Government may consider taking up 
such areas unde r IWMP. However, documents as indicated in Para (i) shall be 
submitted to the Department.  
(v) The cut-off dates for completion of the Pre -Hariyali and Hariyali projects are March, 
2011 and December, 2012 respectively except in the projects located in snow  bound 
areas where actual working season is limited to 3 -4 months in a year. For these 
areas, a grace period of 3 years beyond the cut -off dates would be considered on 
furnishing a certificate to this effect by the State Government. 
 In the Regional Review Meetings held with the State Officials, it was pointed out by 
various State representatives that the funds released to the DRDAs do not reach the 
projects in time. They, therefore, suggested that the fund flow be routed through the 
dedicated State Level No dal Agency (SLNA) constituted under IWMP. The matter 
was taken up with NRAA for change in Common Guidelines for Watershed 
Development Projects, 2008, which was agreed by the Executive Body and 
accordingly the fund flow is now being routed through the SLNAs. 
 A scheme of Area Officers has been implemented in the Department and the officers 
are visiting States for effective monitoring. 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.7&8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 3.4) 
The Committee deplore  the way the planning for new schemes is being made. 
They are dismayed to note that to many policy interventions on wasteland development 
have been made from time to time.  For instance, consequent upon Hanumantha Rao 
Committee recommendations in 1994 the three area development programmes of 
IWDP, DDP and DDP were implemented on watershed basis; accordingly, the 
guidelines were framed on watershed basis.  In 2001 and 2003 these guidelines were 
further revised for making them more focused.  Finally in 2008 t he Department of Land 
Resources have come out with „Common Guidelines‟ based on the recommendations of 
Parthasarthy Committee Report. In Committee‟s view such frequent changes in policy 
for wasteland development may be one of the reasons for slow progress in this area.  
The Committee also feel that frequent changes not only lead to confusion among 
project implementing agencies (PIAs) about implementation of the programmes but also 
do not project a clear and true picture about the programmes among the benefi ciaries 
and public at large.  The Committee, therefore, desire that PIAs should be properly 

22 
 
 
 
educated in different States so that the on going projects are completed in time. The 
Committee would also like that all the corrective action should be taken so as to achieve 
the indicate objectives under the aforesaid schemes and also to ensure cent percent 
utilization under different schemes along with achieving the physical target. 
Reply of the Government  
 As recommended by the Committee, special attention will b e paid to capacity 
development of the stakeholders of the project especially PIAs.  The State 
Governments have already been requested to ensure intensive training for PIAs. 
 Further, in compliance of the recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
has formulated and conveyed to the States, a policy to ensure completion of ongoing 
and overdue projects. The details of this policy have been  given in reply to para 3.3 
above. 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 3.17) 
About NLRMP, the Committee feel  that there could not be a case of worse 
planning than in this case. It is surprising to find that against the Eleventh Plan 
allocation of Rs.581 crore, after release of Rs.188.76 crore during previous year i.e. 
2008-2009 and Rs. 400 crore as allocation fo r current year, the Department does not 
have any allocations available for remaining two years of the Eleventh Plan.  The 
Committee have been informed that the Planning Commission is now being requested 
in this regard for necessary funds. About Bio -fuel Programme the Committee find the 
Programme is still awaiting clearance. In Committee‟s opinion all these developments of 
reduction in targets under IWMP, lack of funds for NLRMP and uncertainty over bio -fuel 
do not speak well about the over all functioning o f the Department, particularly, when 
the utilization of Plan funds is only 30 per cent so far.  This definitely calls for renewed 
efforts to be made on the part of the Department in all these areas in order to fully utilise 
the allocation of the order of R s.17,205.49 crore for Eleventh Plan Period. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that concerted efforts should be made in these areas 
so as to utilise full outlay during remaining two years of the current Plan. The Committee 
also strongly recommend that ade quate allocation should be provided to NLRMP and 
the Department should make every effort to ensure that it is meaningfully utilized.  
Reply of the Government  
As observed by the Committee, renewed efforts have been made by the 
Department for adequate provi sion of funds under NLRMP so as to meet the targeted 
requirement in the balance period of the current Plan.  Planning Commission has been 
requested to increase the budgetary allocation for NLRMP from Rs.581 crores to 
Rs.1216 crores which includes additiona l allocation of Rs.635 crores for the next two 
years.  A provision of Rs.300 crores was requested for the year 2010 -11.  Similarly 

23 
 
 
 
under Watershed Programme also, an allocation of Rs.4995 crores was requested for 
allocation for the year 2010 -11 so as to ut ilize the full allocation of fund under IWMP for 
the 11th Plan in the balance two years.  Unfortunately, Planning Commission, against a 
total requirement of Rs.5330 crores, has only allocated Rs.2660 crores for the year 
2010-11.  However, the Department ha s requested the Planning Commission to 
increase allocation by at least Rs.2512 crores more for the next year, i.e., Rs.940 crores 
for committed liabilities and Rs.1572 crores for sanctioning new projects under IWMP.     
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.22) 
The Committee are constrained to note that there has been reduction of Plan 
funds at revised estimate stage during 2007 -2008 and 2008 -2009 to the extent on 
Rs.100 crore and  Rs. 600 crore respectively. Various reasons like slow expenditure on 
the schemes of „Professional Support‟ and non -receipt of proposals from the States for 
„Externally Aided Projects‟ during 2007 -2008 and d elay in Cabinet clearance for IWMP 
during 2008 -2009 have been given as reasons for such reduction at RE stage.  The 
Committee feel that these reasons were well within the control of the Department.  In 
their view, had the Department taken sufficient caution, huge aforesaid reduction in Plan 
Budget during 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 could have been avoided. 
Reply of the Government  
Under the IWMP, the BE of Rs.1968 crore was reduced to Rs.1819.80 crore at 
the RE stage. By the end of January 2010,  Rs.1427 crores,  i.e., 78.4%  of the funds 
have already been sanctioned and released.  The Department will make all out efforts to 
utilise this amount within this financial year.  Under NLRMP, the BE of Rs.400 crores 
was reduced to Rs.199.99 crores at RE stage.  This entir e amount will be utilized within 
this financial year.  Regarding bio -fuel, the Department made all out efforts to get the 
clearance from Group of Ministers.   The matter thereafter was taken to the Cabinet.  As 
per the decision of the Cabinet, study is to be conducted on impact of plantation already 
taken up in the country and if positive feedback is received, then only demonstration 
phase can be taken up.  Action has already been initiated to comply with the decision of 
the Cabinet.  
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 9 & 10, Para No. 4.18 and 4.19) 
The Committee are  unhappy to note that the impact of the huge investment of 
over Rs. 12000 crore made in land resources in the country since Seventh Plan (1985 -

24 
 
 
 
1989) has not been properly assessed throughout the country for the purpose of 
ascertaining its return in agriculture inputs, employment etc.   
In this connection, the Committee have been informed by the Department that 
various findings of the evaluations/studies like watershed programme undertaken 
indicate an increase in rural income by 58 per cent, agricultural inc ome by 35 per cent,  
employment generation by 154 days per hectare per year and improvement in ground 
water table by 3.2 metres etc.  Strangely, the above findings have not been verified by 
the Department.  In the absence of proper verification of data by the Department, the 
Committee wonder how the Department could rely on these ambitious findings in toto.  
In their view, these findings may be based on sporadic studies. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Land Resources should undert ake a 
comprehensive study at the earliest to ascertain the impact of the huge investment 
already made in watershed development activities on areas like agriculture, 
employment, increase in ground water recharge etc. The concrete action taken should 
be communicated to the Committee.  
Reply of the Government  
As recommended by the Committee, the Department has requested National 
Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) to undertake an impact assessment study to 
ascertain the impact of the investment made in watershed development activities. 
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 4.28) 
 The Committee are constrained to note that during the last fifteen years i.e. from 
1995-1996 to 2008-2009 out of the total of 45,062 projects sanctioned in IWDP, DPAP and 
DDP projects involving a cost of around Rs.17,918 crore with Central share of Rs.14,299 
crore the actual releases have been only around Rs. 9936 crore. The Committee are not 
convinced with the reasons advanced for the lower releases that under the above 
programmes projects are sanctioned for a period of 5 years and funds are spread over 5 to 
7 installments. The Committee are also constrained t o note that out of the 45,062 projects 
sanctioned, only 14,687 have been completed which is less than one -third of total projects 
sanctioned.  Remaining projects have been shown as on -going. The Department is stated 
to have been impressing upon the State G overnments at the review meetings the urgency 
to complete ongoing projects in 2 -3 years time.  Yet the Committee feel that the completion 
of projects of as low as one -third of the total projects sanctioned indicates that necessary 
urgency for completion of  projects as claimed by the Department is not realized at ground 
level in different States.  
Reply of the Government  
As per the recommendations of Standing Committee, DoLR has made following 
concerted efforts to monitor the Watershed schemes in a more focused manner: 

25 
 
 
 
 The Department has been continuously reviewing the ongoing projects which are 
overdue for completion. As a conscious strategy for the first two years of the 11 th 
Plan, viz. 2007-08 & 2008-09, no new projects were sanctioned in 2007 -08 & 2008-
09 and funds were released only for completion of projects.  This resulted in 
completion of 2465 projects in 2008 -09, compared to 516 in 2006 -07 and 1221 in 
2007-08. In 2009-10, 3235 projects have been completed as on 31.01.2010 resulting 
in completion of 1 7922 projects out of 29353 projects due for completion which is 
61%. 
 In compliance of the recommendations of the Committee, the Department has 
formulated and conveyed to the States, the following policy to ensure completion of 
ongoing and overdue projects: 
(i) The Pre-Hariyali projects* where only 1 or 2 installments have been released so far 
shall be closed and the States shall refund the unspent balance with the interest 
accrued thereon and furnish Utilization Certificates for the funds spent. 
*   (projects sanctioned up to 2002-03 and which should have been completed by 2007 -
08) 
(ii) In case of Hariyali projects where one installment has been released in 2003 -04 or 
2004-05 and the State Government has not requested for the release of next 
installment, the State Government shall close such projects and intimate to the 
Department of Land Resources, the untreated area of these projects. The State 
Government may consider taking up such areas under the Integrated Watershed 
Management Programme (IWMP). Ho wever, documents as indicated in Para (i) 
above shall be submitted to the Department.  
(iii) In cases, where the State Government has requested for release of 2 nd installment 
within 4 years of release of first installment, the release of 2 nd installment in  such 
cases would be considered on a case to case basis. The reckoning of the period of 4 
years for not requesting for the next installment shall be counted from the financial 
year in which the funds were first released by the Department.  
(iv) In projects , where no work has been executed in the field and the projects are 
closed by the State Government, the Secretary of the Nodal Department 
implementing watershed programmes in the State may certify the same to the 
Department of Land Resources. The State Gov ernment may consider taking up 
such areas under IWMP. However, documents as indicated in Para (i) shall be 
submitted to the Department.  
(v) The cut-off dates for completion of the Pre -Hariyali and Hariyali projects are March, 
2011 and December, 2012 respectively except in the projects located in snow bound 
areas where actual working season is limited to 3 -4 months in a year. For these 
areas, a grace period of 3 years beyond the cut -off dates would be considered on 
furnishing a certificate to this effect by the State Government. 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 

26 
 
 
 
 Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.7&8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 4.29) 
In this connection, the Committee have been impressing upon for proper 
monitoring of projects in their previous Reports presented to the Parliament from time to 
time. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend  that concerted and persistent 
efforts should be made not only by the Department of Land Resources but also by all 
the authorities/agencies involved in execution of these projects. 
Reply of the Government  
As indicated in reply to para 3.3 above, the Depar tment is taking all necessary 
steps to expedite completion of ongoing projects. Letters have been sent to the Chief 
Secretaries of all the States conveying the concern of the Committee for taking 
necessary steps at their end. 
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.7&8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 4.30) 
The Committee after going through  the State-wise figures of projects sanctioned 
vis-à-vis projects completed find that the major States where large number of 
sanctioned projects are awaiting completion are Rajasthan, Gujarat, Karnataka etc.  In 
Rajasthan out of 8,775 projects sanctioned only 2,934 projects have been completed, in 
Gujarat out of 5,590 projects sanctioned only 1,657 have been completed, in Karnataka 
out of 4,038 projects sanctioned only 1,296 have been completed.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the bottlenecks if a ny, in the completion of projects in such 
States should be removed and concrete efforts be made for expeditious completion of 
pending projects. 
Reply of the Government  
  Each watershed project has a project  duration of 5 years. The projects 
which have completed their project period become due for completion.  
Completion of projects in the scheduled timeframe is being pursued with the 
States. State -wise projects sanctioned, projects due for completion and pro jects 
completed in Gujarat, Karnataka & Rajasthan are as under: 

27 
 
 
 
 
Name of the State No. of projects 
sanctioned  
No. of projects due 
for completion 
No. of projects 
completed (as on 
31.12.2009) 
Gujarat 5,590 3621 2082 (57%) 
Karnataka 4,038 2643 1777 (67%) 
Rajasthan 8,775 5287 3396 (64%) 
 
In the regional review meetings, States have informed that the main bottleneck is 
delay in fundflow from DRDA/ZP to implementing agencies and requested for release of 
central assistance directly to State Level Nodal Agencies (SLNA) under IWMP. The 
issue was taken up with National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) by the Department of 
Land Resources on 24.08 .2009. NRAA discussed the matter in its executive committee 
meeting held on 03.11.2009 and recommended for release of funds directly to SLNAs 
under IWMP. Accordingly, NRAA has issued amendment to Common Guidelines, 2008 
on 24.11.2009. As per the amendment made by the NRAA in the Guidelines, 
Department of Land resources revised the policy of release of funds under IWMP on 
9.12.2009. Now, the funds are being directly released to SLNAs, who may release 
funds to the respective Project Implementing Agencies, as the case may be. 
 
Besides, the Department has also formulated and conveyed policy interventions 
to States for timely completion of overdue projects as indicated in para 3.3 above. The 
matter is also being pursued with the State Governments. 
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.7&8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 4.35) 
The Committee are constrained to note that even after the persistent 
recommendations by the Committee, there have been huge amounts lying unspent in all 
the three Area development programmes of IWDP, DPAP and DDP.  In this connection, 
the Committee are constrained to note that Rs.471.67 crore in IWDP Rs.444.45 crore in 
DPAP and Rs.390.59 crore in DDP have been lying as unspent as on 31.3.2009. The 
Committee have been  informed  that under the guidelines, it is provided that a project is 
entitled to claim next installment even if upto 50 per cent of previous amount released is 
unutilized. It is for this reason that there are large amount of unspent balances in 
Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka etc.  In view of the above, the Committee 
feel that in ord er to ascertain the exact position State -wise, a study be conducted in 
different on-going projects in order to ascertain whether this is the only reason for the 
funds remaining unutilized or there are other reasons like complacency on the part of 
the implementing authorities.  

28 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
As desired by the Standing Committee, the NIRD has been requested to take up 
impact assessment study. The issue of unspent balances lying with the States will also 
be investigated in the same study. 
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19 Para No. 5.8) 
The Committee note that Integrated Watershed Management Programme 
(IWMP) being implemented from 1 st April, 2008 under „Common Guidelines, 2008‟ aims 
to restore the ecological balance by harnessing, conserving and developing degraded 
natural resources such as soil, vegetative cover and water so as to prevent soil run off, 
regenerate natural vegetation an d for recharging of ground water and for rain water 
harvesting.  The Committee have been informed that keeping in view the aforesaid 
diverse nature of subjects encompassing the jurisdiction of various Ministries/ 
Departments viz. Agriculture, Drinking Wate r Supply, Environment etc. the „Common 
Guidelines‟ have been approved at the level of National Rain-fed Area Authority (NRAA) 
under Ministry of Agriculture, in order to have a co -ordinated approach. However, the 
Committee are constrained to note that imple mentation mechanism both at Central as 
also at State level for implementing IWMP is not moving on expected lines. 
Reply of the Government  
The implementation mechanism required for IWMP has been put in place both at 
Central and State levels. At Central lev el, Steering Committee has members from 
Planning Commission, NRAA, technical experts from different scientific institutions, 
voluntary organizations, related departments of the Central and State Governments. At 
State level, 26 out of 28 States have constit uted State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA), the 
dedicated institution with professional support, for implementation of IWMP. Remaining 
two States (Bihar & West Bengal) have been repeatedly reminded to set up SLNA. 
The formats for State Perspective and Strategic Plan (SPSP), Preliminary Project 
Report (PPR) and formats for Management Information System have been prepared in 
consultation with the State Governments and circulated to all the States.  As a result, 
SLNAs have prepared SPSP and PPRs and submitted to the  Department of Land 
Resources for appraisal of the Steering Committee.  
Formally, every Wednesday and Thursday was set aside for the meeting of the 
Steering Committee.  However, in the course of discussions, members requested that 
these meetings may be held as and when the proposals are received from the States. 
While appraising projects, members raise queries on technical issues of the proposals 
and give valuable suggest ions. With this arrangement, no State proposal, complete in 
all respects, is pending in the Department.  

29 
 
 
 
The Steering Committee has appraised the State Perspective & Strategic Plans 
of 20 States and cleared projects for a total area of 6.25 million ha for implementation 
during 2009-10.  
 As indicated in para 4.30, the Department is now releasing funds directly to 
SLNAs, who may release funds to the respective Project Implementing Agencies, as the 
case may be.  This will ensure that the time -gap between the release of funds from the 
Central Government and the receipt of the same by the PIA will be considerably 
reduced.   
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.17&18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 5.9) 
In this connection, the Committee note that at Central level at the initial stage 
itself there is a delay in transfer of NRAA from  Department of Agriculture & Cooperation 
to Department of Land Resources even after Cabinet Secretariat‟s  nod given in April, 
2009.  Not only that the decision of the Cabinet taken in February, 2009 regarding 
engagement of four technical experts i n the Department of Land Resources pending 
transfer of NRAA to this Department has not been implemented. The Committee have 
been informed that pending the NRAA‟s transfer Internal Monitoring Cell and a Steering 
Committees in the Department have started fun ctioning for necessary appraisal and 
clearance of projects under IWMP.  However, the Committee are constrained to note  
that the Steering Committee has met on only eight occasions and appraised State 
Perspective and Strategic Plans from 18 States only.  Th us, the Committee can only 
conclude that much is desired to be done with regard to implementation of IWMP at 
Central level. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the issue of transfer of NRAA 
should be taken up with Cabinet Secretariat seriously so that  necessary mechanism is 
put in place with the Department of Land Resources.  
 
Reply of the Government  
The concern of the Standing Committee on the issue of transfer of NRAA from 
Ministry of Agriculture to DoLR has been again taken up with the Cabinet Secretariat for 
expediting the decision. 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 

30 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 5.10) 
The Committee also note with constraint that the necessary dedicated institution viz. 
State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA) for sanctioning of watershed projects under IWMP 
programme has not come up in big States like Bihar and West Bengal as late as October, 
2009, particularly when the programme was started in April, 2009. 
Reply of the Government  
In pursuance of the recommendations of the Standing Committee, the 
Department has been continuously pursuing with State Governments of West Bengal 
and Bihar. Chief Secretaries of both the States have again been requested to personally 
look into the matter.  
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 5.11) 
The Committee further note with dismay that the eight States which have 
constituted necessary SLNAs are yet to submit their State Perspective and Strategic 
Plans to the Department of Land Resources. Likewise, the Committee are surprised to 
note that in Ut tarakhand, proposals worth Rs. 75 crore covering 50,000 hectare of area 
has been appraised and cleared by the Steering Committee at the Central level but are 
still awaiting necessary sanction from concerned SLNA.  The Committee have also 
been informed that  some States are facing difficulty in flow of funds from DRDAs to 
Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs).  In order to resolve these, the NRAA is being 
approached for necessary changes in „Common Guidelines, 2008‟.  In view of the 
above, the Committee recomm end that a pro -active role on the part of Steering 
Committee is need of the hour for constitution of SLNAs in Bihar and West Bengal and 
for obtaining necessary State Perspective and Strategic Plans from the eight States 
which have constituted SLNAs but hav e not  submitted these to Steering Committee.  
The Committee would also like to be informed about the States which are yet to submit 
such plans.  The Committee recommend that the Department should take necessary 
action early on other issues highlighted above for expeditious implementation of IWMP. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The Department has pursued the matter with the States which have not 
submitted State Perspective and Strategic Plan (SPSP). Consequently, Jharkhand, 
Kerala, Mizoram and Uttar Pradesh have furnished SPSP. These SPSPs have been 
appraised by the Steering Comm ittee during December 2009 – January 2010. 
Remaining 4 States viz. Goa, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir and Manipur have been 
reminded to submit SPSP for appraisal of the Steering Committee. In the case of 
Uttarakhand, the sanction has been issued by the SLNA on 22/12/2009 which had 
earlier been appraised by the Steering Committee.  

31 
 
 
 
The issue of fundflow was taken up to National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) 
by the Department of Land Resources on 24/08/2009. NRAA discussed the matter in its 
executive committee mee ting held on 03/11/2009 and recommended for release of 
funds directly to SLNAs under IWMP. Accordingly, NRAA has issued amendment to 
Common Guidelines, 2008 on 24/11/2009. As per the amendment made by the NRAA 
in the Guidelines, Department of Land resource s revised the policy of release of funds 
under IWMP on 9.12.2009 and funds are being directly released to SLNAs, who may 
release funds to the respective Project Implementing Agencies, as the case may be. 
 
  Regarding setting up of SLNA, the Chief Secretaries of Bihar and West Bengal 
have again been reminded to constitute SLNA. 
 
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No. 17&18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 5.12) 
The other important area that has invited the attention of the Committee is the 
role of multiple agencies of national reputation like ICRISAT, NIRD, TERI, IGNOU etc. 
for undertaking the work of awareness about IWMP, generation of proposals under 
IWMP and for impact assessment of watersheds across the country.  In this connection, 
the Committee feel that combined work of these organizations should be documented at 
one place at national level showing clearly their roles vis -à-vis achievements in their 
assigned areas. This will help the evaluator to understand the programme in a more 
holistic manner. 
Reply of the Government  
As suggested by the committee the work of documentation of studies done by 
different agencies like ICRISAT, NIRD, TERI, IGNOU etc. with regard to impact 
assessment of watersheds across the country is being entrusted to Centre for Rural 
Studies, Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration, Mussoorie. 
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC Dated: February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 5.22) 
The Committee note that the Departmen t of Land Resources has come out with 
a National Land Record Modernisation Programme (NLRMP) for making available 
updated land records in the country by use of modern methods of survey, re -survey and 

32 
 
 
 
through computerization etc.  The Committee are constrained to note that Eleventh Plan 
allocation for NLRMP of Rs.581 crore is hardly commensurate with the work involved. 
As pointed out by the Committee in an earlier Chapter, the Department does not have 
any allocations available from 2010 -2011 onwards.  The Co mmittee have been 
informed that Planning Commission is being requested to increase the Eleventh Plan 
allocation for NLRMP. The Committee are unable to comprehend as to how the 
Department has conceptualized the funding requirements for the mammoth work of 
updation and modernization of land records in the country particularly when the funds 
were only available for the programme in first three years of the current Plan. The 
Committee feel that this is a very sorry state of affairs and puts a big question mark on 
overall process of programme wise preparation of budget estimates and also on 
planning process for Eleventh Plan Period and beyond.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that a detailed reply about requirements of funds for the programme for the 
remaining p lan period and beyond be furnished to the Committee so as to reach at 
logical conclusion. 
Reply of the Government  
The NLRMP was approved by the Cabinet on 21 st August, 2008, which was late 
into the second year of the 11th Plan.  The total cost of the prog ramme is Rs. 5656.00 
crores including the State share. Cost to the Government of India is Rs. 3098 crores. 
The fund allocated in the year 2007 -08 was Rs. 145 crores, in the year 2008 -09 the 
allocation was Rs. 202.90 crores, and in the year 2009 -10 the allo cation is Rs. 199.99 
crores. Budget allocation for the year 2010 -11 is Rs.200 crores. The allocation for the 
12th plan will be requested after taking into account the allocations for the 11th Plan.   
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26 Para No. 5.24) 
The Committee note that Department has delineated ladder like approach for 
securing conclusive titles of land records in the country ranging from com puterization to 
automated mutation of property after its registration.  The Committee have been 
informed that as a result of the review of NLRMP held on   18 -19 August 2009 various 
revelations have been made available from different States in this regard.  These relate 
to various flaws like delay in release of amount, non -reporting of progress, non -
utilisation of funds under NLRMP etc.  In view of the serious revelations reflected above, 
the Committee feel that ladder like approach as also other details may  be 
communicated to these States so as to eliminate the bottlenecks being faced by these 
States.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a time -bound approach is very 
necessary for securing the goals of NLRMP during the designated period.  
Reply of the Government  
The ladder-like approach has been communicated to the States/UTs from time to 
time and has also been discussed in the meetings, workshops organized by the 
Department on the NLRMP.  Further, this has also been included in the Guidelines and 

33 
 
 
 
Technical Manuals for implementation of the programme. The Guidelines and the 
Technical Manuals formulated for implementation of the programme include all 
components of the programme in detail. 
 
Efforts will be made by the Deptt. to  act upon the recommendation of the 
Committee to develop a time -bound approach for the NLRMP, in consultation with the 
States/UTs.     
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.21, 22&23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

34 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 3.16) 
The Committee are glad to find that the Eleventh Plan (2007 -2012) outlay of 
Rs.17205.49 crore available to Department of Land Resources is almost three times the 
Plan allocations of Rs.6526 crore during Tenth Plan (2002 -2007).  The Committee find 
that enhanced allocation is mainly for on going watershed programme of IWDP, DPAP 
and DDP and projects under new programme of Integrated Watershed Management 
Programme (IWMP) and also  for new programmes viz. National Land Record 
Management Programme, Bio Fuel etc.  The Committee are unhappy to find that as 
against the huge allocations  of the order of Rs. 17,205.49 crore for Eleventh Plan 
Period, the expenditure up to 30.10.2009 i.e. by the mid of the Eleventh Plan is only 
4337.37 crore representing 30 per cent of t he total allocations. They are also distressed 
to learn that the Department has lowered the Plan targets for watershed development 
from original level of 25 million hectares to 22.65 million hectares for the remaining 
period of the current Plan. Such reduc tion in targets during the remaining part of the 
Eleventh Plan was not at all desirable keeping in view the monumental task assigned to 
the Department of Land Resources by the Parthasarthy Committee that envisages 
covering a total of 75 million hectares of rain-fed area in the country in fifteen years time 
at the rate of covering 25 million hectare in every five Year Plan from Eleventh Plan 
onwards with a huge expenditure of Rs.150,000 crore. The Committee desire a 
clarification from Department in this rega rd. Even though the Integrated Watershed 
Management Programme (IWMP) has been launched in 2009 -2010 itself, the 
Committee wish to point out that this is only a merger of the three programmes earlier 
being implemented by the Department viz. IWDP, DPAP and D DP. In view of this the 
reduction in physical targets is completely unjustified particularly when huge funds out 
of the Eleventh Plan allocations are still left with the Department.  
Reply of the Government  
For operationalization of Common Guidelines for Watershed Development 
Projects, 2008, the approval of EFC and Cabinet was required. However, the Cabinet 
approval for the IWMP was accorded on 26.02.2009 and therefore, the programme has 
been launched from 2009-10 onwards. 
The target for covering the area under IWMP in the remaining 11 th Plan period has, 
therefore, been revised to 22.65 million ha. However, against the target of covering 5.41 
million ha for 2009 -10, projects covering an area of 5.64 million ha (as on 31.01.2010) 
have been sanctioned under IWMP. 
The actual coverage under I WMP, however, would depend upon the Annual Budget 
Allocation to the Department by the Planning Commission in the remaining period of the 
11th Plan. 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 

35 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 4.31) 
After examining the details of mid -term evaluation done in respect of IWDP, 
DPAP and DDP projects, the Committee are constrained to note that such evaluation 
was done in respect of only a few projects.   For instance, in IWDP only 984 projects, in 
DPAP only 18789 projects and in DDP only 13143 projects were evaluated in the 
aforesaid mid-term evaluation.  The Committee, therefore, desire that all the on -going 
projects in all the three programmes be evalu ated in order to ensure their early 
completion.  
Reply of the Government  
The mid -term evaluation becomes due for release of 4 th instalment in case of 
pre-Hariyali projects and 3 rd instalment in case of Hariyali projects.  The mid -term 
evaluation of the project is mandatory for release of subsequent instalment after 45% of 
the project cost has been released.   
 
Under watershed projects, funds are being released in instalments. For pre -
Hariyali projects (projects sanctioned upto 2002 -03), funds are being rel eased in 7 
instalments (15% each of 6 instalments and 10% for 7 th instalment). For Hariyali 
projects (sanctioned from 2003 -04 to 2006 -07), funds are being released in 5 
instalments (15%, 30%, 30%, 15% & 10%). The subsequent instalment is released after 
utilization of 50% amount of last instalment released and 100% of all earlier instalments.  
 
As on 31.10.2009, 32916 projects (IWDP – 984, DPAP – 18789, DDP – 13143) 
had taken 45% funds and accordingly became due for mid -term evaluation. The 
remaining on-going projects are being evaluated as and when they are due for mid -term 
evaluation. 
 
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
  

36 
 
 
 
     Chapter IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 4.43) 
The Committee are unhappy to note that prolonged delay in finalization of the 
Bio-diesel programme for one reason or another has occurred since the programme 
was started way back in April, 2003.  The Committee also recall that this issue has been 
constantly pursued in their examination of Demands for Grants in the previous years.  It 
has also figured in their T hirty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2007 -2008).  The 
Committee have now been informed that the programme has been approved by Group 
of Ministers at their sitting held on 24 February 2009 in principle, subject to three 
conditions.  One of these relate s to prior assessment of plantation work and positive 
feedback before initiating the demonstration phase.  The Committee have also been 
informed that the Department is in the process of carrying out an Impact Assessment 
Study of Jatropha and Pongamia plant ations in India by an independent agency. The 
Committee recommend that the Department should complete the above impact 
assessment study without any loss of time for taking final view on the issue. While 
recommending for expeditious clearance of National Mi ssion on Bio -diesel, the 
Committee would like to emphasise that the Jatropha and Pongamia cultivation in the 
country should be done without affecting the food security and agricultural land of the 
country. 
Reply of the Government  
The Group of Ministers ( GoM) gave a conditional recommendation for the 
demonstration phase of Bio -diesel Programme in its meeting held on 24 th February 
2009.  The GoM recommendations were submitted to the Cabinet by Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy.  As per the Cabinet decision , the Bio -diesel Mission has been 
given only “in principle” approval subject to receipt of positive feedback of the 
assessment of the plantations work already carried out in the country.  Necessary 
action has been taken in the matter.   
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 

37 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 5.23) 
The Committee are dismayed to note that implementation of the NLRMP so far in 
the country is also far below the expectations.  As against the target of 210 districts as 
on 31.10.2009, the actual coverage was as low as 102 districts for this programme. The 
Committee apprehend that with this slow pace the target of covering 455 districts in the 
country by 2011 -12 is unachievable by any stretch of imagination. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that all out efforts be made to speed up NLRMP coverage as per 
targets drawn in this behalf.  
Reply of the Government  
  The programme envisaged that in each State and UT,  begin with 1 or 2 districts, 
then to scale up to 3-4 districts per State/UT, and to cover the entire country by the 12th 
Plan period.  Accordingly, 69 districts in the States/UTs were covered under the 
programme during 2008-09, the first year.  In the yea r 2009-10, so far, funds have been 
released for 35 districts, and the Project Sanctioning Committee has approved another 
17 districts under the NLRMP.  Proposals for more districts are expected during the rest 
of the financial year.   
 
The Department has initiated a number of measures to speed up the coverage of 
NLRMP in various States/UTs.  One of the important initiatives has been to bring the 
stakeholders from both the Govt. side as well as the private sector together on one 
platform for a free and meani ngful interaction and transfer of technology, in the form of 
the NLRMP Technical Fair -2009, organized from 15th to 17th December, 2009 at the 
Indian Habitat Centre, New Delhi.  The private sector organizations active in the 
relevant field, the apex level technical agencies of the Government of India (GoI) and all 
the State and UTs were invited to participate in the Fair.    
 
There  were 62 stalls including 6 stalls by the Govt. agencies: (1) NIC HQ, (2) Survey of 
India, (3) NRSC/ISRO, (4) Government of West  Bengal, (5) NIC Andhra Pradesh State 
Unit, and (6) the Stock Holding Corporation of India Ltd. (SHCIL).  Prominent among the 
private sector participants included the Infosys Technologies Ltd., the Tata Consultancy 
Services Ltd., the WIPRO Ltd., the IL&FS Technologies Ltd., the HCL Infosystems Ltd., 
the Genesys International Corp. Ltd., the HTC Global Services, the NIIT GIS Ltd., the 
Leica Geosystems, Pitney Bowes (from the UK), SALMAT (from Northern Territory, 
Australia), FENO (from France), CADASTEC from Australia, among others.   
 
In addition to the stalls, the Fair had an interaction area, which facilitated exchange of 
ideas and information on the requirements of the States and UTs vis -à-vis the offerings 
of the vendors, contact information, etc.  Also, concurrently, presentations were 
arranged in two halls, where 64 presentations were made by 47 private sector 
organizations, 3 technical agencies of the GoI as well as the State Governments of 
Gujarat, Kerala, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal.  All th e participating 
organizations from abroad made presentations.   
 Technical Fair has been highly appreciated by various participants.  Some of the 
feedback received in this regard is as follows:- 

38 
 
 
 
1. Micronet Solutions, Nagpur 
“Congratulations on the success  of NLRMP 2009.  You have laid the foundation for 
„effective‟ governance.  This program will have a cascading effect.  I am overwhelmed 
by the thought of an integrated system of land records (Map based), ROR (Right of 
Records), Titling (Deeds & ownership). Just thinking about an integrated system like this 
makes me smile. Who thought that this could be implemented in India. But you‟ve have 
sown the seed whose benefit shall be reaped by the generations to come. 
 
The immediate and tangible benefits would be t ransparency, efficiency, effectiveness 
and peace of mind for the land owners.  The intangible benefits starts with decreased 
pressure on judicial system owning to integration of these three functions, Increase in 
Tax Revenues, uncovering Mass & unlawful la nd holdings by miscreants (Benami 
Properties, dual ownerships etc.)” 
2. RMSI, NOIDA 
“The event, the first of its kind in the history of land reforms in India, is a classic example 
of bringing together the Public and the Private Sector for development, bett er 
governance and public welfare”. 
I would like to also thank you for giving us an opportunity to exhibit at the Fair.  
Exhibiting at the Fair and interacting with delegates from different states helped us 
immensely in understanding the needs of different State land departments that will help 
us in creating solutions as per needs of different States leading towards optimum 
success of the NLRMP programme.” 
3. Capital Business systems Limited, New Delhi 
“It was indeed a privilege for CBSL to be part of immens ely successful NLRMP 
Technical Fair, 2009.   My congratulations to you and all in NLRMP management.” 
I am confident that the very idea of NLRMP Technical Fair and mutually enriching 
discussion and dialogue amongst all stake holders will make direction sett ing 
contributions towards successful implementations under NLRMP.” 
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.21, 22&23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

39 
 
 
 
Chapter V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 3.23) 
The Committee note  that for IWMP against the outlay of Rs.1968 crore during 
2009-2010, the releases so far are Rs.1003.98 crore, whereas for NLRMP against the 
outlay of Rs.400 crore the releases are Rs.135.52 crore only. The Committee are 
constrained to learn that Rs. 30 cr ore for bio -fuel may go unutilized. The Committee 
recommend that the Department should strive hard to increase pace of releases in the 
remaining half of the current year particularly in respect of NLRMP to ensure full 
utilization of funds.  Besides, it sho uld also be ensured that the funds utilized lead to 
achievement of corresponding physical targets. Besides, the Committee also 
recommend that the Department should make all out efforts for obtaining clearance for 
the bio-fuel programme from the Group of Mi nisters for its finalization  after taking into 
account necessary impact assessment study of plantation work already done on 
Jatropa, so that Rs. 30 crore earmarked for this programme does not go unutilized.  
Reply of the Government 
Under the IWMP, the BE of Rs.1968 crore was reduced to Rs.1819.80 crore at 
the RE stage. By the end of January 2010,  Rs.1427 crores, i.e., 78.4%  of the funds 
have already been sanctioned and released.  The Department will make all out efforts to 
utilise this amount within this f inancial year.  Under NLRMP, the BE of Rs.400 crores 
was reduced to Rs.199.99 crores at RE stage.  This entire amount will be utilized within 
this financial year.  Regarding bio -fuel, the Department made all out efforts to get the 
clearance from Group of Ministers.   The matter thereafter was taken to the Cabinet.  As 
per the decision of the Cabinet, study is to be conducted on impact of plantation already 
taken up in the country and if positive feedback is received, then only demonstration 
phase can be taken up.  Action has already been initiated to comply with the decision of 
the Cabinet.  
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 4.6) 
The Committee are constrained to note that there is no updated data about 
wastelands in the country.  The Committee are also anguished to note that whatever 
data that has bee n relied upon by the Department of Land Resources is based on 
Wastelands Atlas of India brought out by the Department of Land Resources in 
collaboration with National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) Hyderabad dating back to 
2005, i.e. four years old. The Secretary, Land Resources candidly admitted before the 
Committee that in spite of repeated requests to different State Governments, the States 
are unable to inform the Department about exact area of wasteland utilized by them.  
The De partment has also furnished varying data of wastelands as referred to in 
Parthasarthy Committee Report.  The Committee feel that these data also do not serve 
the purpose of getting accurate area of wastelands in the country.  According to, the 
Secretary, L and Resources, NRSA, Hyderabad has been asked to bring out another 
Atlas of Wasteland showing updated position. The Committee are dismayed to note that 
in the age of satellite imaginary, the country is bereft of the basic data of wasteland in 
the country.  The Committee, wonder how in the absence of basic data the ambitious 
programme of Integrated Watershed Management Programme can be implemented in a 
result oriented manner in the country in the coming years.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the De partment should take up the matter of bringing out the updated 
wasteland Atlas urgently with NRSA, Hyderabad.  At the same time States should be 
asked to report the utilization of wastelands in their respective States.  The Committee 
also recommend in the wasteland Atlas there should be clear data regarding 
wastelands as also those under rain -fed area in order to have a clear picture in the 
matter. The concrete action in this regard should be communicated to the Committee.   
Reply of the Government  
NRSC has been assigned the task of updating the Wasteland Atlas 2005 and it is 
in the process of updating Wasteland Atlas. The issue of bringing out clear data 
regarding rainfed wastelands has been taken up with the NRSC.  Further, all the States 
have been request ed to furnish district -wise details of wastelands converted to 
cultivable land. 
  
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 4.38) 
The Committee wish to point out that like unspent balances, the issue of 
outstanding Utilisation Certificates (UCs) have been continuously pursued by the 
Committee for necessa ry liquidation.  Even after that the Committee find that large 

41 
 
 
 
number of UCs involving crores of rupees are visible in this year‟s budget also.  For 
instance, as many as 156 UCs in IWDP, 107 UCs in DPAP and 31 UCs each in CLR 
and SRA & ULR are lying outsta nding as on 31.3.2009.  Out of 269 outstanding UCs 
relating to watershed programmes, 60 UCs involving Rs.38.13 crore are stated to have 
been liquidated as on 31.10.2009.  The Committee recall that last year the figures of 
UCs in respect of IWDP, DPAP and D DP were 153, 115 and 24 respectively.  The 
Committee are anguished to find that desired progress on this issue has not been 
discernible. 
Reply of the Government  
In view of the observations of the Committee, a letter, along with details of 
pending UCs, has  been issued to the Chief Secretaries of respective States, with a 
request to review the position with concerned officials in the State and expedite 
submission of all pending UCs.   
 As for the CLR and SRA& ULR schemes, the Department has carried out 
intensive review of the fund utilization position, and as a result, the position regarding 
submission of UCs by the States/UTs has improved.     
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 4.39) 
About liquidating outstanding UCs in CLRs and SRA & ULR, the Committee have 
been informed that as high as Rs. 159.77 crore in CLRs and Rs. 183.97 crore in SRAs 
and ULRs are presently lying unspent and States have been directed to submit UCs for 
their settlement by 31.03.2010 and the matter was to be reviewed on 5 th and 26 th 
November, 2009.  The Committee would like to be informed about the outcome of these 
meetings. The Committee feel that although efforts have been made in this regard by 
the Department, yet the Committee apprehend that the desired results may not be 
achieved as was experienced during previous year. The Committee fail to understand 
why the St ate Governments are not submitting utilization certificates in time. The 
Committee strongly recommend that the Department should pursue with the State 
Governments in this regard. 
Reply of the Government  
With a view to reviewing the implementation of the N ational Land Records 
Modernization Programme in the States, Regional Review Meetings were organized by 
the Department on 5th, 12th, 19th and 26th November, 2009.  The agenda of the 
meetings included review of position of UCs under the schemes of CLR and SR A&ULR.  
The feedback received is at Annexure-A, which reflects that the amount of pending 
UCs as on 31.8.2009 under SRA&ULR was Rs.176.17 crores and the same was 
reduced to Rs.148.91 crores as on 31.12.2009.   The amount of pending UCs as on 
31.8.2009 under CLR was Rs.202.74 crores and the same was reduced to Rs.159.20 
crores as on 31.12.2009. In total, for both the schemes, the amount under pending UCs 

42 
 
 
 
has reduced from Rs.378.91 crores as on 31.8.2009 to Rs.308.11 crores as on 
31.12.2009, i.e., a reduction of Rs.70.80 crores. The State Governments have been 
requested to take effective steps for full utilization of the unspent balances under the 
CLR and SRA&ULR schemes by 31.3.2010 and for submission of remaining 
outstanding UCs.  
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 5.25) 
On the issue of funding pattern for NLRMP for different components like Survey 
of land, computerization of registratio ns and setting up Modern Record Rooms, the 
Department of Land Resources has informed that these require 100 per cent Central 
funds like other components of Programme. The Committee recommend that keeping in 
view the mammoth task, the Department should revi ew the funding pattern in respect of 
the aforesaid components under intimation to the Committee.  The Committee note that 
the thrust of the Government is on computerization of land records. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that ways and means s hould be found out through 
technological intervention to achieve the objective of having correct up -to-date land 
records so as to give the required security to the owner of the land. The Department 
should take the desired initiative in this regard and inform the Committee accordingly.  
Reply of the Government  
For revision in the funding pattern under the programme requests from some 
North-Eastern States have been received.  Further, some States have requested for 
revision in the unit cost norms of the comp onents of the programme.  Accordingly, it is 
proposed to consider the matter after some progress is made under the programme.       
  
The DoLR  is dedicated to the task of finding ways and means through 
technological intervention to achieve the objective of introducing titling system in the 
country, based on updated property records, giving better security to the landowners.  
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;      SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
20 July, 2010                  Chairperson, 
29 Asadha, 1932 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Rural Development 

43 
 
 
 
Annexure-A 
 
Referred to in reply to para 4.39 of the 2 nd Report of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development (2009-10) of the Department of Land Resources. 
 
 
19 Nagaland 49.91 49.91 45.15 45.15 
20 Orissa 1271.88 1189.19 1431.04 730.25 
21 Punjab 366.08 366.08 339.27 339.27 
22 Rajasthan 1224.54 854.79 933.93 479.00 
S.No. States/UTs 
SRA & ULR  CLR  
Amount involved in 
outstanding UCs as on  
Amount involved in 
outstanding UCs as on  
31.8.2009 31.12.2009 31.8.2009 31.12.2009 
1 Andhra Pradesh 836.98 807.30 2056.13 737.51 
2 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 22.78 1.00 0.00 0.00 
3 Assam 494.01 494.01 1660.43 1529.80 
4 Bihar  1163.75 829.92 3069.24 417.49 
5 Chhattisgarh 1305.27 784.98 180.09 0.00 
6 Gujarat 1197.72 1115.12 1108.29 1108.29 
7 Goa 191.59 13.15 90.00 3.07 
8 Haryana 1.36 1.36 394.53 309.09 
9 
Himachal 
Pradesh 214.50 214.50 415.95 415.95 
10 J&K 356.09 196.12 1562.73 1542.00 
11 Jharkhand 250.00 250.00 758.24 758.24 
12 Karnataka 1508.76 1508.76 1181.35 1181.35 
13 Kerala 546.44 546.44 308.23 182.71 
14 M.P. 1365.95 687.53 1088.10 506.85 
15 Maharashtra 790.09 167.25 290.09 290.09 
16 Manipur 60.03 60.03 199.77 199.77 
17 Meghalaya 24.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
18 Mizoram 0.00 0.00 127.00 0.00 

44 
 
 
 
23 Sikkim 123.01 69.46 3.50 3.50 
24 Tamil Nadu 496.36 371.92 1434.66 972.47 
25 Tripura 680.84 680.84 197.54 154.09 
26 Uttar Pradesh 1969.90 1969.90 1423.21 1423.21 
27 Uttarakhand 409.69 250.72 1539.73 1214.47 
28 West Bengal  1715.35 1232.99 1400.23 830.20 
29 A&N Islands  14.85 14.85 0.00 0.00 
30 Chandigarh 0.00 0.00 15.00 15.00 
31 D&N Haveli 75.74 6.00 12.16 12.16 
32 Delhi 17.74 17.74 96.82 96.82 
33 Daman & Diu 0.00 0.00 50.00 43.42 
34 Lakshadweep 10.52 10.52 25.00 25.00 
35 Puducherry 90.94 90.94 111.94 111.94 
Total 18846.64 14853.32 23574.35 15678.16 
 
 
[O.M. No. Z-16015/4/2009-GC  Dated : February, 2010 of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
         
  

45 
 
 
 
         APPENDIX I 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD 
ON WEDNESDAY, THE 07 JULY, 2010 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room „D‟, Ground Floor,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson   
 Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
3. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
4. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
5. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
6. Shri P.L. Punia 
7. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
8. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
9. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
10. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
11. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh 
12. Shrimati Usha Verma 
13. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Ganga Charan 
15. Shri P.R. Rajan 
16. Shimati Maya Singh 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah  - Additional Director 
 
2. The Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee convened for 
consideration of Memoranda containing draft Reports of the Committee on action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in  four Reports on Demands for Grants           
(2009-10).  

46 
 
 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following memoranda and draft action-
taken Reports :-  
(i)  ****   ****   ****   ****  
(ii)  Memorandum No. 4 and draft Report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Second Report on Demands for Grants 
(2009-10) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources);  
(iii)  ****   ****   ****   **** 
(iv)  ****   ****   ****   **** 
4. ****   ****   ****   **** 
5.  The Committee adopted the draft action-taken Reports at serial no. (iv) above with slight 
modification and those at serial nos. (ii) and (iii) above without any  modification.  
6.  The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid draft Reports 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned to meet on 20th July, 2010.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
**** Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately 

47 
 
 
 
   APPENDIX II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations      27  
   
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted     
  by the Government        
Para Nos. 2.6, 3.3, 3.4, 3.17, 3.22, 4.18, 4.19, 4.28, 4.29,   18 
4.30, 4.35, 5.8, 5.9, 5.10, 5.11, 5.12, 5.22 and 5.24     
 
Percentage to total recommendations           (66.66) 
   
III. Recommendations which the Committee do    
not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government‟s replies 
  Para Nos.:  3.16 and 4.31      2  
       
Percentage to total recommendation        (7.41) 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of   
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
Para Nos. : 4.43 and 5.23      2 
 
Percentage to total recommendations               (7.41) 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies   
of the Government are still awaited  
  Para Nos. : 3.23, 4.6, 4.38, 4.39 and 5.25    5 
  Percentage to total recommendation                 (18.52) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  