STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                         (2013-2014) 
      
 
        FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
   
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty Ninth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for 
the year 2013-14]  
 
FORTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
49
9
9
9
9
9
9 


 
 
FORTY NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2013-2014) 
          (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty Ninth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for 
the year 2013-14]  
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 04.01.2014 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.02.2014 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2014 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 January, 2014/ Pausa, 1935 (Saka) 


CRD No. 095 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-2014) .......................................  (ii)   
 
INTRODUCTION ...............................................................................................   (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................   1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ...........................................................   13 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies ...........................................................................  20 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee ..........................................................   21 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ....................  22 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I.      Compliance of State Panchayati Raj Acts …………………………………..  25   
II.  Compliance of State Subject Laws …………………………………………...  26 
III.  Allocation and Release of General Area Basic Grant (2010-15)…………...  27  
IV.  Allocation and Release of Special Area Basic Grant (2010-15)……………  28 
V.  Allocation and Release of General Area Performance Grant (2010-15)…… 29 
VI.  Allocation and Release of Special Area Performance Grant (2010-15)…….. 30 
VII.  Letter from Hon’ble Minister of Panchayati Raj to Deputy Chairman,  
 Planning Commission         ………………………………………………………… 31 
VIII.      Extracts of Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 17 December, 2013.. 33 
IX.      Analysis of Action taken by the government on the recommendations   
contained in the Thirty Ninth Report  (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing  
Committee on Rural Development ……………………….................................35 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(ii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
 
        Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
5. Shri Premchand Guddu 
6. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
7. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
8. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
9. Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy 
12. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy 
13. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
14. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
15. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
16. Smt. Supriya Sule 
17. Smt. Annu Tandon 
18. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar 
19. Smt. Usha Verma 
20. Shri P. Viswanathan 
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
23. Shri Munquad Ali 
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
28. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
29. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
30. Vacant*   
31. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma   - Director 
3. Shri A.K.Shah    - Additional Director 
4. Miss Melody Vungthiansiam   - Committee Assistant 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
*Vacancy caused on account of demise of Shri Mohan Singh from 22.09.2013 

 
 (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (20 13-2014) having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the 49th Report on the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 39th Report of the Standing Committee 
on Rural Development ( 15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (20 13-14) of the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj.  
2.  The 39th Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 April, 2013. Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 30 August, 2013. 
3.  The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 17 
December, 2013. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the          
39th Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Annexure-IX. 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;       SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
17  December, 2013                     Chairperson, 
26 Agrahayana , 1935 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

- 1 - 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I  
 
This Report of the Standing Comm ittee on Rural Development (201 3-14) deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their T hirty-Ninth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for the year 2013-2014. 
 
2. The T hirty-Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 30 April , 201 3 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 10 observations/recommendations. 
 
3. Action Tak en Notes in respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from the Government. These have been examined and categorised as 
follows: 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government : 
Sl. Nos.:  1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9 and 10 
Total: 07 
Chapter-II 
(ii)  Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government‟s replies : 
Sl. No.:  NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter-III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Sl No.:  NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter-IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited : 
Sl. Nos. :  5,7 and 8 
Total: 03 
Chapter-V 

- 2 - 
 
4. The Committe e desire that final replies in respect of recommendations for which only 
interim replies have been given by the Government included in Chapter V of this Report and 
replies to recommendations made in Chapter I of this Report may be furnished to the 
Committee expeditiously. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of the 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
I. Optimal utilization of enhanced funds during 2013-14  
Recommendation [Serial Nos. 1, 4 and 10, Para Nos. 2.2, 2.5 and 2.11) 
6.  With regard to non-utilisation of funds by Ministry of Panchayati Raj , the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
 
" The Committee note that during the Eleventh Plan BE of Rs. 24,724 crore was revised to   
Rs. 22,295 crore by the Ministry of Finance because of non -receipt of proposals in time 
accompanied with essential physical and financial reports etc. from State Governments. This 
issue was highlighted by the Committee while examining the Demands for Grants (2012 -13) 
of MoPR. The Committe e had recommended (Para 2.3 of Twenty -Ninth Report) that the 
Ministry of Finance should stop reducing the funds at RE Stage of MoPR which is directly 
dealing with functioning and strengthening of Panchayats. The Committee are constrained to 
note that inspi te of their strong recommendation the Ministry of Finance has reduced the 
funds at RE stage during 2012 -13 also from the level of Rs. 5350 crore to Rs. 4000 crore 
mainly on two counts, one, slow pace of expenditure upto October, 2012 and two, late 
submission of action plans by the States under BRGF. Considering the fact that there is a 
quantum jump in availability of funds i.e Rs. 7000 crores in  2013 -14 as compared to Rs. 
4000 crores (RE) in 2012 -13, the Committee expect the MoPR to make all out efforts to  
utilise the funds fully and to ensure that 11 th Plan trend for non -utilisation of funds is not 
repeated."  
(Recommendation Serial No.1, Para No. 2.2) 
" The Committee are constrained to note that MoPR has large amount of unspent balances 
and these were sur rendered during 2011 -12. For instance during 2011 -12, MoPR 
surrendered as huge as Rs. 1143.63 crore and during 2012 -13 the B.E of Rs. 5350 crore 
was reduced to Rs. 4000 crore on account of non -utilisation. The Committee recall that they 
had examined the is sue of unspent balances and surrender of funds while examining the 
Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of MoPR also and had recommended to devise a practical 
solution to this perennial problem. The Committee have been informed by MoPR that 
continuous monitoring of progress of BRGF and other schemes is being done to quicken the 
pace of expenditure and claim full entitlement. However, the latest figures made available to 
the Committee for 2012 -13 show that against the B.E of Rs. 5349.58 crore and RE of Rs. 
4000 crore, the fund released was only Rs. 2745.15 crore and fund utilised was barely Rs. 
118.42 crore. The Committee therefore recommend that MoPR should work hard for wiping 

- 3 - 
 
out unspent balances and do away with the practice of surrendering of funds altogether in  
future." 
(Recommendation Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.5) 
" The Committee deplore that most important scheme of Backward Region Grant Fund 
(BRGF) as Additional Central Assistance (ACA) to State Plans to bridge the regional 
imbalances in development by way of p roviding financial resources in identified backward 
districts has not been effectively implemented leading to non utilisation of entitled funds in 
these districts across the States. For instance as per latest available figures of State -wise 
releases vis-a-vis utilisation of BRGF funds during 2012-13 made available to the Committee 
by MoPR, the Committee are dismayed to note that as against the total annual entitlement of 
Rs. 5349.98 crore, the release was as low as Rs. 2745.15 crore out of which the utilisa tion 
reported was a meagre Rs. 118.42 crore. The Committee find this situation highly 
unsatisfactory. The Committee are also constrained to note that whatever small utilisation 
that has been reported was in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himac hal 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and West Bengal. In other 
States including Jammu and Kashmir, any utilisation was yet to be reported. In this 
connection, the Committee have been informed by the Secretary, MoPR that plans come  
from State Governments and Central Government does not impose any direction about the 
money spent.  The MoPR has also contended that BRGF grant are demand based and 
requirement of 60% utilisation of previous releases is an essentiality for further release s. 
Moreover, the State Governments have to devise its own mechanism for further release of 
funds. The Committee have also been informed that under the BRGF Guidelines funds are 
released to State Governments and not to individual BRGF districts and any revi sion of 
Guidelines is under the domain of the Planning Commission. In this connection, the 
Committee have been assured by the Secretary, MoPR to set up regular video conferencing 
with district magistrates in BRGF districts so as to keep an eye on speedy im plementation. 
Since the restructuring of BRGF is currently in progress in Planning Commission, the MoPR 
should place all necessary details and constraints in implementation of BRGF before the 
Planning Commission to make it more simple and implementable by the States so as to 
ensure that Government objective to supplement the State Governments to develop the 
backward Districts in the country is achieved fully. Since there are as many as 272 districts 
identified for BRGF scheme as of now, the scheme will help  in developing a substantial part 
of the country." 
(Recommendation Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.11) 
      7.       The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
 
" The Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has started making all out efforts to  utilize 
the funds for 2013-14 fully through inter alia the following steps: 
 
 (i) Information to the Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of all BRGF States intimating the 
 Annual Entitlements for 2013 -14 and requesting to submit the Annual Action Plans 
 urgently latest by 25-06-2013. Out of 272 Districts, 151 BRGF District plans for 2013-14 
 have been received and are under process for sanction. 

- 4 - 
 
 (ii) Review meeting with the Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of all BRGF States in end 
 May/ early June, 2013  and also in October, 2013. The first such Review Meeting was 
 held on 11-06-2013. 
 (iii)  Video Conference during 3rd Quarter of 2013 -14 with the States / Districts which lag 
 behind in sending Annual Action Plan. 
(iv)  Regular follow up through letters / telephones / e-mails. 
(v) Visit by officers of the Ministry to the BRGF States / Districts."  
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.2) 
 
  "In respect of the Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) Programme, during 2012 -13, 
against the B.E. of Rs. 5050 crore and R.E. of Rs. 3734 crore, the actual release as on 
31.3.2013 was Rs. 3720.19 crore, which comes to 99.63% of R.E. During the current 
financial year 2013 -14, MoPR is taking all possible steps to ensure utilization of unspent 
balances in the account of various State Governments, and to ensure maximum utilization of 
budget allocations for BRGF during 2013 -14. Active follow up with State Governments for 
submission of proposal under BRGF 2013-14 include 
 
 (i) Information to Principal Secretaries/ Se cretaries of all BRGF States intimating the 
Annual Entitlements for 2013 -14 and requesting to submit the Annual Action Plans urgently 
latest by 25 -06-2013. Out of 272 Districts, 151 BRGF District plans for 2013 -14 have been 
received and are under process for sanction.  
 
 (ii) Review meeting with the Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of all BRGF States in end 
May/ early June, 2013 and also in October, 2013. The first such Review Meeting was held 
on 11-06- 2013.  
 
 (iii) Video Conference during 3rd Quarter o f 2013-14 with the States / Districts which lag 
behind in sending Annual Action Plans. 
 
(iv) Regular follow up through letters / telephones / e-mails. 
 
(v) Visit by officers of the Ministry to the BRGF States / Districts." 
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.5) 
"The BRGF Programme has two components, namely, the Development Grant component 
and the Capacity Building component. BRGF allocation for the year 2012 -13 was fixed at 
Rs.5050 crores at the BE stage which was reduced to Rs. 3734 crore s at RE stage. At the 
end of the financial year 2012 -13, Ministry had released a sum of Rs. 3720.19 crore s, 
utilizing 99.63% of the RE allocation. BRGF is a process oriented and demand driven 
programme. Many States were not able to access their full entitleme nt due to late 
submission of proposals and also on account of the non - submission/ discrepancies in 
requisite documents like UCs, physical & financial reports and audit reports.   
To ensure full utilization of BRGF funds in 2013 -14, this Ministry is doing regular follow up 
with the State Governments by means of review meetings, video conferences. The first 
review meeting was held with the Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of all BRGF States on 

- 5 - 
 
11-06-2013. A video conference was held with the State Government of Madhya Pradesh on 
23-07-2013 wherein the progress of BRGF Programme was reviewed.  On 2 -08-2013, in a 
related meeting held with 12 of the States, timely claim of funds under BRGF Programme 
was emphasized. During the course of this year, officials fro m the Ministry also visited 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttrakhand, Guwahati, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh to facilitate the 
States to submit the BRGF proposals in time. During a recent workshop held at Assam 
Administrative Staff College, Guwahati on 18 -20 April, 20 13 on training and adoption of e -
Panchayat applications, the position of BRGF proposals was also discussed with the NE 
States. As a result of these efforts, out of 272 Districts, 151 BRGF District plans for 2013 -14 
have already been received and are under process. 
Hon‟ble Minister of Panchayati Raj has already written to Deputy Chairman, Planning 
Commission on 27-02-2013 suggesting to take „Block‟ or its variant (Taluka / Mandal) as unit 
of backwardness under the District component of the restructured BRGF." 
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.11) 
 
8.  Taking note of the twin issues of slow pace of expenditure upto October 2012 and 
delayed submission of action plans  under BRGF Scheme by the State Governments  as reasons 
for huge reduction of BE  2012-13 from Rs. 5350 crore to Rs. 4000 crore at RE stage and with 
releases as low as Rs. 2745.15 crore and an even lower utilisation of Rs. 118.42 crore, the 
Committee had recommended the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to make all out efforts to utilise the 
enhanced BE 2013-14  of Rs. 7000 crore and wipe out unspent balances altogether in the future. 
The Ministry  of Panchayati Raj  in their action taken replies has stated that the Ministry has 
started making all out efforts to utilise funds which inter -alia in clude intimating Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries of States with BRGF districts abo ut their annual entitlements with the 
advisory to submit annual action plans latest by 25 June, 2013, organising review meetings of all 
State officials on 11 June, 2013, Vi deo Conference with Government of Madhya Pradesh on 23 
July, 2013 and related meeting with 12 State officials on 2nd August, 2013 etc. The Committee 
have also been informed that out of 272 BRGF districts, 151 district plans for 2013 -14 have been 
submitted and are under process . Looking at the current scenario of receiving only 151 annual 
plans out of 272 BRGF districts leaving as large as 121 BRGF districts from where such plans 

- 6 - 
 
are still awaited, the Committee apprehend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj may not be able to 
utilise the  enhanced funds during 2013 -14 also. The Committee strongly recommend that  
special efforts should be made to ensure that funds allocated for North -eastern States are 
utilised fully. The Committee, therefore, desire the Minist ry of Panchayati Raj to expedite the 
approval of plans, getting more and more District plans  and reiterate that the Ministry should 
take all out efforts for full utilisation of funds during 2013-14.   
II.    Restructuring of Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para Nos. 2.3) 
 
9.  The Committee had recommended as under: 
 "The Committee are constrained to note that considerable long time has been taken by 
MoPR/ Planning Commission for moving on important findings of Mid Term App raisal of 
schemes of MoPR during Eleventh Plan (2007 -12) which inter -alia pertain to developing 
strategy for training and capacity building of Panchayats, restructuring of BRGF, pursuing 
the implementation of PESA etc. The Committee find that in the area o f developing 
strategy for training and Capacity building of Panchayats, the MoPR has come up with a 
mega programme of Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) which has 
been finally cleared as late as March 2013. The Committee are also constrai ned to note 
that progress on other two issues viz. restructuring of BRGF and pursuing implementation 
of PESA has not picked up with desired momentum. They, therefore, recommend that 
MoPR should take up the issue of completing the process of restructuring o f BRGF with 
Planning Commission as the issue is already badly delayed. The Committee also feel that 
as the implementation of PESA is one of the Constitutional mandate given to MoPR, the 
MoPR should move faster on this issue as almost status -quo is prevaili ng on 
implementation of PESA over the last several years." 
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply about BRGF have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“The Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) Programme has two components. The 
District component covering 272 backward Districts in 27 States and the State component 
which includes the Special Plan for Bihar, Special Plan for Kalahandi -Bolangir-Koraput 
(KBK) Districts of Odisha, Special Plan for West Bengal, Integrated Action Plan (IAP) for 
Selected Tribal and Bac kward Districts and the Bundelkhand Package for selected 
Districts in Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. The District component is administered by 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. However, administration of the State component as well as 
general policy issues of  BRGF like addition of new Districts, restructuring etc. is done by 
the Planning Commission. Hon‟ble Minister of Panchayati Raj has written a letter to 
Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission on 27 -02-2013 suggesting to take „Block‟ or its 
variant (Taluka / M andal) as unit of backwardness under the District component of 
restructured BRGF….” 

- 7 - 
 
11.  The Committee are not at all satisfied with the action taken replies furnished by 
MoPR wherein on the issue of restructuring of BRGF scheme instead of showing the actu al 
work done for completion of restructuring process subsequent to presentation of the report by 
the Committee, the MoPR has narrated the features of BRGF schemes indicating the role of 
MoPR and Planning Commission in implementation of BRGF and have submit ted before the 
Committee letter dated 27th February, 2013 sent by Hon'ble Minister of Panchayati Raj to Deputy 
Chairman, Planning Commission suggesting Block as a unit for backwardness under District 
component that was sent prior to examination of Demands for Grants (2013-14) of MoPR by the 
Committee. The Ministry’s reply is silent about restructuring of BRGF scheme. They, therefore, 
reiterate early completion of restructuring of BRGF and urge the Ministry  of Panchayati Raj and 
Planning Commission to chalk out a time table for completion of this work.  
III. Implementation of the Panchayats (Extension of Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA) 
Recommendation (Serial No.2 and 5, Para Nos. 2.3 and 2.6) 
12.  In response to the Committee‟s recommendation about urging the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to 
move faster on the issue of PESA as almost status quo is prevailing on the implementation of PESA over the 
last several years, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in action taken reply thereto stated as under: 
“PESA is being imp lemented in the nine States of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Rajasthan, 
where the following measures are being pursued on a continuous basis by the Ministry to 
ensure effective implementation: 
i. Preparation of Model Rules by all nine PESA States:  
MoPR has prepared and circulated Draft Model Rules for PESA to all the 
nine PESA States. Three States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and 
Rajasthan have framed their own PESA Rules. Odisha and Maharashtra 
Governments are in final stage of framing their PESA Rules. Rest of the states are 
at various stages of completion of process to frame the Rules. 
ii. Compliance of provisions in state Panchayati Raj legislation with PESA 
provisions: 
Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan have fully completed the exercise of 
amendment in their Panchayati Raj Act to bring these in consonance with PESA 
Act. States of Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Maharashtra have amended their State 

- 8 - 
 
Panchayati Raj Acts as per provisions of  PESA. Other States have also 
incorporated the provisions of PESA Act in their Panchayati Raj Acts to a large 
extent and are in process of amendment in their Act to make these PESA 
compliant.  
iii. Compliance of other subject laws with PESA provisions:  
All the States except Gujarat, Jharkhand and Maharashtra have modified 
some of the subject laws in accordance with the provisions of PESA Act. They are 
being pursued by this Ministry to amend their laws in conformity with PESA Act. 
Government of Jharkhand has inf ormed that they have set up a High Power 
Committee under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary of the State for 
implementation of PESA and they will finalise draft amendment of various laws for 
the consideration of the Government shortly.  
iv. Compliance of Central Laws with provisions of PESA:   
A Committee on Harmonization of Central Laws with provisions of PESA 
was set under the chairmanship of the Union Law Secretary, on the direction of 
Prime Minister‟s Office. This Committee has submitted its draft report i n July, 
2013. The Report is under finalisation.” 
13.  The Committee find that the Ministry with regard to Committee’s recommendation of 
urging the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to move faster on the issue of implementation of PESA in 
their action taken reply have broadly dealt with four areas viz. one, preparation of Model Rules 
by all nine PESA States;  two, compliance of provisions in State Panchayati Raj l egislation with 
PESA provisions; three,  compliance of other subject laws with PESA provisions and four, 
compliance of Central laws with provisions of PESA . In the case of preparation of Model Rules 
by all nine PESA States, the Committee find that four PESA States of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, 
Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh are yet to complete t he process of framing the rules. On the issue 
of compliance of provisions in State Panchayati Raj legislation with PESA provisions, the 
Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj that all the States have either 
amended or are in the process of amendment in  their Acts to make them PESA compliant. O n 
compliance of other subject laws with PESA provisions, the Committee find that three States of 
Gujarat, Jharkhand and Maharashtra are yet to modify their laws out of which Jharkhand is 
likely to finalise their draft amendment of various laws for consideration of Government shortly. 

- 9 - 
 
On the issue of compliance of Central laws with provisions of PESA, the Committee have been 
informed that a draft report has been submitted in July, 2013 by a Committee on Harmonisation  
of Central laws with the provisions of PESA under  the Chairmanship of the  Law Secretary and 
the same is under finalization. In view of the foregoing  status, the Committee urge the Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj to move faster for full implementation of PESA.  
14.  The Committee had observed that implementation of Section 4(a) and Section 4(d) to 4(m) of the PESA 
law that deal with empowerment of Gram Sabhas in Fifth Scheduled Areas in nine States has not been done 
in letter and spirit even though latest compli ance of State Panchayati Raj Acts has largely been don e, the 
actual empowerment of Gram Sabha has not been forthcoming. T he Committee , therefore,  had 
recommended the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to rethink with an open mind on the entire issue of 
implementation of PESA in coordination with concerned State Governments  to find solution to real problems 
at appropriate level stating as under: 
" The Committee find that implementation of the Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled 
Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA) within the mean ing of Section 4(a) of the Act and with reference 
to Section 4(d) to 4 (m) that deal with empowerment of Gram Sabha which makes the 
Gram Sabhas competent for functioning in wide variety of areas like safeguarding and 
preserving the traditions of the people in Scheduled Areas, approval of village plans, issue 
of utilisation certificates, mandatory consultation in matters of land acquisition, 
resettlement and rehabilitation, power to prevent alienation of land and restoring alienated 
land etc. in Fifth Schedu le Areas in nine States of Andhra Pradesh, Chhatisgarh, Gujarat, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Rajasthan has 
not been done in letter and spirit. The Committee feel that less development in Scheduled 
Areas mainly in Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra 
and Odisha may give rise to unrest. The latest available compliance of State Panchayati 
Raj Acts as indicated by MoPR shows that although necessary legislations have been 
enacted in six PES A States, actual empowerment of Gram Sabhas has not been 
forthcoming and seen at ground level. Further the Committee find that MoPR has also 
indicated State -wise position of compliance of subject laws showing varied degree of 
implementation across nine PES A States on important subjects ranging from land 
acquisition to money lending. The Committee are dismayed to note that barring Himachal 
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, none of the PESA States have complied with PESA with 
important issue of land acquisition and  position on other subjects is almost similar. On the 
other hand the Committee find that MoPR has claimed to have taken series of measures 
like circulation of Model Rules for PESA and related Guidelines to nine PESA States etc. 
However the ground reality s hows that efforts of MoPR have not actually contributed 
towards actual implementation of PESA laws in these States. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that MoPR should rethink with an open mind on the entire issue of 
implementation of PESA in coordination  with concerned State Governments to find 
solutions to the real problems at appropriate level." 
 

- 10 - 
 
15. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:  
“There is a system of continuous/ongoing review with PESA States on the implementation 
of the Act, including through visits to PESA States and holding regular meetings  with State 
Secretaries and concerned officials of PRIs and other relevant Departments . The PESA 
Act at present does not have any provision for making Rules by the Union/State 
Governments.  A proposal to amend the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) 
Act, 1996 (PESA) including, inter -alia, Rule making provisions and to clarify certain terms 
used in the Act is under examination in consultation with the concerned stakeholders.  
 To strengthen Gram Sabhas and increase awareness among its members on local issues 
and role of Gram Sabhas so as to enable its efficient functioning in areas under PESA, the 
Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) provides for engagement o f 
Mobilisers to every Gram Sabha  and coordinators at Block and District level. Funds are 
also being made available under the scheme  for orientation of the Gram Sabha as to 
generate awareness regarding the provisions of PESA Act.  
Training modules for capacity building of elected representatives and officials of the State 
Governments in Schedule V areas  has been prepared by State Institute s of Rural 
Development (SIRD ‟s). All the PESA States have carried out training programmes for 
elected representatives of PRIs and functionaries of State Government fo r better 
implementation of PESA. T he regular training programmes under RGPSA would also 
include a Module on PESA related matters." 
16.  The Committee are unhappy to note that the Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) 
Act, 1996, PESA that was enacted by Parliament seventeen years back is facing the major 
lacunae that it does not have any power for making rules by Union/State Governments. In this 
connection, the Committee have been informed by the Ministry of P anchayati Raj that a 
proposal to amend PESA is under examination in consultation with the concerned 
stakeholders. In view of the foregoing, while reiterating effective implementation of PESA, the 
Committee urge the MoPR to conclude the process of consultat ion with stakeholders at the 
earliest and bring out a rule making provision under the PESA by States/ Union Government by 
amending PESA for its effective implementation.  
 
 
 

- 11 - 
 
IV. Expediting the study by a Task Force set up by Ministry of Panchayati Raj for strengthening of 
 State Finance Commissions (SFCs) recommended. 
(Recommendation Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.8) 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee are also dismayed to note that State Finance Commissions (SFCs) are 
facing problems like  acute shortage of manpower, knowledgeable professionals, 
inadequate data etc. and their SFC's recommendations are not given due consideration by 
the State Governments. In this connection, the Committee find that MoPR have 
themselves highlighted the need f or strengthening of SFCs. As the recommendations of 
the SFCs play an important role in the award of Central Finance Commission, the 
Committee recommend the MoPR to take up the matter at the appropriate level wi th 
different State Governments.” 
18. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“Considering the importance and impact of the recommendations of the State Finance 
Commissions in the Award of the CFC, besides issuing detailed guidelines on 27.04.2009 
to Chief Secretaries of all States for strengthening and improving the working of SFCs and 
holding a review meeting with Chairpersons, State Finance Commissions and Secretaries, 
P.R Deptt. of States on 27.06.2011, the Ministry in August 2012, had constituted a Task 
Force under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, MoPR to study the present status  
of SFCs and to make recommendations for their strengthening to enable them to perform 
their functions as envisaged under Article 243-I(1) of the Constitution.  
As per the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA), States can access 
funds only if they fulfill certain essential conditions, which include: Constitution of SFC 
every five years, and placement of Action Taken Report on the recommendations of the 
SFC in the State legislations. This provides an important impetus for States to consider 
SFC recommendations seriously.” 
19.  The Committee find with dismay that no t much progress has been discernible for 
strengthening of State Finance Commission s (SFCs) even tho ugh the Detailed Guidelines for this 
purpose were issued way back on 25th April, 2009 to Chief Secretaries of all States and review 
meeting with Chairpersons of SFCs and Secretaries of PR Department and States held on 25 th June, 
2011, followed by constitut ion of a Task Force under the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to study the 
present status of SFCs and make recommendations for their strengthening to enable them to perform 
their functions  as envisaged under Article 243 -I(1) of the Constitution. The Committee h ave been 
informed that under Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA),  States can access 

- 12 - 
 
funds subject to fulfillment of certain essential conditions, like constitution of SFC s every five years, 
placement of action taken report on recommendatio ns of SFC s in the State legislatures.  The 
Committee while reiterating their recommendation of taking up the matter of problems being faced by 
SFCs like acute shortage of manpower, inadequate data etc. with different State Governments  at 
appropriate level, urge the Ministry for expediting the report of Task Force constituted by the Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj to study the present status of SFCs and making suitable recommendations thereon 
for strengthening of SFCs.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

- 13 - 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1) 
 The Committee note that the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (Demand No. 71) 
were presented to Lok Sabha on 22 March, 2013. The Demands makes a pr ovision for Rs. 7000.70 crore (Rs. 
7000 crore for Plan and Rs. 0.70 crore for Non -Plan). The allocated funds are higher by Rs. 1650 crore as 
compared to the budget provisions made during previous year viz. 2012 -13. The Committee endorse the same. 
The Committee have examined the Demands w.r.t priorities made and utilisation of funds during 11 th Five Year 
Plan and also during 2012 -13 which was the first year of the 12 th Plan. The recommendations of the Committee 
have been set out in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2) 
 The Committee note that during the Eleventh Plan BE of Rs. 24,724 crore was revised to   Rs. 22,295 
crore by the Ministry of Finance because of non-receipt of proposals in time accompanied with essential physical 
and financial reports etc. from State Governments. This issue was highlighted by the Committee while 
examining the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of MoPR. The Committee had recommended (Para 2.3 of Twenty-
Ninth Report) that the Ministry of Finance should st op reducing the funds at RE Stage of MoPR which is directly 
dealing with functioning and strengthening of Panchayats. The Committee are constrained to note that inspite of 
their strong recommendation the Ministry of Finance has reduced the funds at RE stag e during 2012 -13 also 
from the level of Rs. 5350 crore to Rs. 4000 crore mainly on two counts, one, slow pace of expenditure upto 
October, 2012 and two, late submission of action plans by the States under BRGF. Considering the fact that 
there is a quantum jump in availability of funds i.e Rs. 7000 crores in  2013 -14 as compared to Rs. 4000 crores 
(RE) in 2012-13, the Committee expect the MoPR to make all out efforts to utilise the funds fully and to ensure 
that 11th Plan trend for non-utilisation of funds is not repeated.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has started making all out efforts to utilize the funds for 2013 -14 
fully through inter alia the following steps: 
 
(i) Information to the Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of all BRGF States intimating the Annual 
Entitlements for 2013 -14 and requesting to submit the Annual Action Plans urgently latest by 25 -06-
2013. Out of 272 Districts, 151 BRGF District plans for 2013 -14 have been received  and are under 
process for sanction. 
 
(ii) Review meeting with the Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of all BRGF States in end May/ early June, 
2013 and also in October, 2013. The first such Review Meeting was held on 11-06-2013.  
 
(iii)  Video Conference during 3rd Quarter of 2013 -14 with the States / Districts which lag behind in sending 
Annual Action Plan. 

- 14 - 
 
 
(iv)  Regular follow up through letters / telephones / e-mails. 
 
(v) Visit by officers of the Ministry to the BRGF States / Districts. 
 [No.G-20012/4/2013-Parl. Dated: 26.8.2013, Ministry of Panchayati Raj] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No.2.3) 
 The Committee are constrained to note that considerable long time has been taken by MoPR/ Planning 
Commission for moving on important findings of Mid Term Appraisal of schemes of MoPR during Eleventh Plan 
(2007-12) which inter -alia pertain to developing strategy for training and capacity building of Panchayats, 
restructuring of BRGF, pursuing the implementation o f PESA etc. The Committee find that in the area of 
developing strategy for training and Capacity building of Panchayats, the MoPR has come up with a mega 
programme of Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) which has been finally cleared as la te 
as March 2013. The Committee are also constrained to note that progress on other two issues viz. restructuring 
of BRGF and pursuing implementation of PESA has not picked up with desired momentum. They, therefore, 
recommend that MoPR should take up the i ssue of completing the process of restructuring of BRGF with 
Planning Commission as the issue is already badly delayed. The Committee also feel that as the implementation 
of PESA is one of the Constitutional mandate given to MoPR, the MoPR should move fast er on this issue as 
almost status-quo is prevailing on implementation of PESA over the last several years.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) Programme has two components. The District component 
covering 272 backward Districts  in 27 States and the State component which includes the Special Plan for 
Bihar, Special Plan for Kalahandi -Bolangir-Koraput (KBK) Districts of Odisha, Special Plan for West Bengal, 
Integrated Action Plan (IAP) for Selected Tribal and Backward Districts an d the Bundelkhand Package for 
selected Districts in Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. The District component is administered by Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj. However, administration of the State component as well as general policy issues of BRGF like 
addition of new Districts, restructuring etc. is done by the Planning Commission. Hon‟ble Minister of Panchayati 
Raj has written a letter to Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission on 27 -02-2013 suggesting to take „Block‟ or 
its variant (Taluka / Mandal) as unit of backwardness under the District component of restructured BRGF (copy 
enclosed). 
PESA is being implemented in the nine States of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Rajasthan, where the  following measures are 
being pursued on a continuous basis by the Ministry to ensure effective implementation: 
i. Preparation of Model Rules by all nine PESA States:  
MoPR has prepared and circulated Draft Model Rules for PESA to all the nine PESA States.  Three 
States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan have framed their own PESA Rules. Odisha and 

- 15 - 
 
Maharashtra Governments are in final stage of framing their PESA Rules. Rest of the states are at various 
stages of completion of process to frame the Rules. 
ii. Compliance of provisions in state Panchayati Raj legislation with PESA provisions: 
Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan have fully completed the exercise of amendment in their Panchayati Raj 
Act to bring these in consonance with PESA Act. States o f Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Maharashtra have 
amended their State Panchayati Raj Acts as per provisions of PESA. Other States have also incorporated the 
provisions of PESA Act in their Panchayati Raj Acts to a large extent and are in process of amendment in their 
Act to make these PESA compliant. An updated status of compliance is at Annex I. 
iii. Compliance of other subject laws with PESA provisions:  
All the States except Gujarat, Jharkhand and Maharashtra have modified some of the subject laws in 
accordance with the provisions of PESA Act. They are being pursued by this Ministry to amend their laws in 
conformity with PESA Act. Government of Jharkhand has informed that they have set up a High Power 
Committee under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary of the S tate for implementation of PESA and they will 
finalise draft amendment of various laws for the consideration of the Government shortly. An updated status in 
this regard is at Annex II. 
iv. Compliance of Central Laws with provisions of PESA:   
A Committee o n Harmonization of Central Laws with provisions of PESA was set under the 
chairmanship of the Union Law Secretary, on the direction of Prime Minister‟s office. This Committee has 
submitted its draft report in July, 2013. The Report is under finalisation.  
                                                               [No.G-20012/4/2013-Parl. Dated: 26.8.2013, Ministry of Panchayati Raj] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
                   Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.4) 
The Committee are glad to note that MoPR has received significantly higher funds for Twelfth Plan (2012 -17) for 
its different Central Sector, Centrally Sponsored and Additional Central Assistance (ACAs) mainly for RGPSA 
and BRGF Scheme s. The Committee note that as against the Eleventh Plan (2007 -2012) outlay of Rs. 24,724 
crore, the MoPR has got Rs. 35,743 crore during Twelfth Plan (2012 -2017) indicating a jump of more than Rs. 
10,000 crore. The Committee also find that Rs. 6437 crore u nder Central Plan has been allocated to MoPR 
during Twelfth Plan as compared to Rs. 876.37 crore during Eleventh Plan. Similarly for Additional Central 
Assistance (ACAs), the MoPR has been allocated Rs. 29,306 crore for Twelfth Plan against Rs. 24,110 cror e for 
Eleventh Plan. Taking note of the fact that 2013-14 is the second year of the 12th Plan as also RGPSA has been 
approved very recently, the Committee would urge upon the MoPR to fix priorities, make sincere efforts in 
achieving the objectives/ goals/ targets of various activities so that apart from utilisation of full funds, PRIs 
across the country are strengthened in a big way. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is making all out efforts to utilize the increased budgetary allocati ons in 
the Twelfth Plan. Under Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF), Ministry of Panchayati Raj is pursuing with 
State Governments for early submission of Annual Action Plans and Utilisation Certificates for funds received in 

- 16 - 
 
2012-13 so that the 1 st instalments under BRGF is released against entitlements for 2013 -14, by 30 September, 
2013.  So far as a result of active follow up with State Governments, 151 plans out of total 272 BRGF Districts 
have been received and are under process.  
The States are also being actively pursued to access funds under RGPSA by identifying their needs in 
well thought out State Plans (Annual and Perspective) while ensuring that the essential conditions for accessing 
funds from Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) a re also complied with.  Two meetings of 
the Central Executive Committee of RGPSA to approve State Plans have already been held and approx. Rs. 
450 crores committed against the RGPSA budget for 2013-14.  
[No.G-20012/4/2013-Parl. Dated: 26.8.2013, Ministry of Panchayati Raj] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.5) 
The Committee are constrained to note that MoPR has large amount of unspent balances and these were 
surrendered during 2011 -12. For instance during 2011 -12, MoPR surrendered as huge as Rs. 1143.63  crore 
and during 2012-13 the B.E of Rs. 5350 crore was reduced to Rs. 4000 crore on account of non -utilisation. The 
Committee recall that they had examined the issue of unspent balances and surrender of funds while examining 
the Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of MoPR also and had recommended to devise a practical solution to this 
perennial problem. The Committee have been informed by MoPR that continuous monitoring of progress of 
BRGF and other schemes is being done to quicken the pace of expenditure and cla im full entitlement. However, 
the latest figures made available to the Committee for 2012 -13 show that against the B.E of Rs. 5349.58 crore 
and RE of Rs. 4000 crore, the fund released was only Rs. 2745.15 crore and fund utilised was barely Rs. 118.42 
crore. The Committee therefore recommend that MoPR should work hard for wiping out unspent balances and 
do away with the practice of surrendering of funds altogether in future. 
Reply of the Government 
 
In respect of the Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) Progra mme, during 2012-13, against the B.E. 
of Rs. 5050 crore and R.E. of Rs. 3734 crore, the actual release as on 31.3.2013 was Rs. 3720.19 crore, which 
comes to 99.63% of R.E. During the current financial year 2013 -14, MoPR is taking all possible steps to ensu re 
utilization of unspent balances in the account of various State Governments, and to ensure maximum utilization 
of budget allocations for BRGF during 2013 -14. Active follow up with State Governments for submission of 
proposal under BRGF 2013-14 include 
 
 (i) Information to Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of all BRGF States intimating the Annual 
Entitlements  for 2013-14 and requesting to submit the Annual Action Plans urgently latest by 25 -06-
2013. Out of 272  Districts, 151 BRGF District plans for 201 3-14 have been received and are 
under process for sanction.  
 
 (ii) Review meeting with the Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of all BRGF States in end May/ early 
June, 2013 and also in October, 2013. The first such Review Meeting was held on 11-06-2013.  
 
 (iii) Video Conference during 3rd Quarter of 2013 -14 with the States / Districts which lag behind in 
sending Annual Action Plans. 
 
 (iv) Regular follow up through letters / telephones / e-mails. 
 
 (v) Visit by officers of the Ministry to the BRGF States / Districts. 
                                                               [No.G-20012/4/2013-Parl. Dated: 26.8.2013, Ministry of Panchayati Raj] 

- 17 - 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl.No.6, Para No.2.7) 
 The Committee note that two prominent sources of Panchayat Finances are Thirteenth Finance 
Commission (TFC) Grants and State Finance Commissions Grants. The Committee also find that TFC has 
estimated Rs. 63,050 crore as Grants payable to PRIs for an award period of five years viz. 2010 -15 consisting 
of Rs. 41,225 crore as Basic Grant and Rs . 21,825 crore as Performance Grant. The Committee are dismayed 
to note that on Basic Grant as also on Performance Grant, both for General Area and Special A rea during 2011-
12 and 2012 -13, there are huge gaps between allocations and releases in different States. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that MoPR should take up the issue with concerned State Governments to take steps to 
utilise their share of allocations as per parameters of TFC recommendations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The release and utilization of both Basic and Performance Grant to Local Bodies as recommended by 
the XIII Finance Commission is based on the detailed guidelines issued by the Ministr y of Finance vide their 
letter no. 12(2) FCD/2010 dated 23.09.2010. 
  
The Central Monitoring Committee (CMC) has been constituted as per the Guidelines of the Ministry of 
Finance, under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, Panchayati Raj to monitor release of Basic Grants to PRIs and 
recommend release of Performance Based Grants to PRIs.  Performance Grants are recommended on 
compliance by States of the six stipulated con ditions recommended by XIII FC.  Three meetings of the CMC 
were held during the year 2012 -13 and in these meetings, General Area Performance Grant to 15 States and 
Special Area Performance Grant to nine States were recommended by the CMC. A statement showing t he 
releases of Grants during 2012-13 is at Annex- III to VI.  
Release of General area an d Special Area Basic Grants are subject to fulfillment of two conditions 
namely, existence of duly elected Panchayats in place and submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) for the 
previous instalment. Similarly, statements reflecting release of Perform ance Grants to the States is reflected in 
Annex –V & VI. General Performance Grants forfeited by States which have been unable to fulfill the stipulated 
six conditions for drawal of these Grants are further distributed amongst all States and those state ha ve 
complied with the stipulated conditions in the manner prescribed as per guidelines of Ministry of Finance based 
on recommendations of the Thirteenth Finance Commission.  
 
The Ministry of Panchayat i Raj actively pursu es with the States for compliance of the stipulated 
conditions to enable drawal of Performance Grants. In addition to regular follow up with the States by letter and 
telephone, the Ministry also holds review meetings to facilitate the States to sort out various issues relating to 
compliance of the Performance Grant conditions. During the year 2012 -13, three review meetings with States 
were conducted. 
 [No.G-20012/4/2013-Parl. Dated: 26.8.2013, Ministry of Panchayati Raj] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.10) 
 
 The Committee note that RGPS A has finally been approved by CCEA in March, 2013 and it paves way 
to implement from 2013 -14 an ambitious programme of RGPSA during Twelfth Plan period with a view to 
continue the process of strengthening of Panchayati Raj system and to address critical g aps that constrain it. 

- 18 - 
 
The Committee find that during 2012 -13 the MoPR could utilise Rs. 44 crore out of Rs. 50 crore allocated for 
RGPSA. The Commiittee note that for 2013 -14, Rs. 455 crore have been proposed and additional allocation of 
Rs. 200 crore if required will be made available for RGPSA making the total allocation of Rs. 655 crore. The 
Committee also find that overall direction of RGPSA will be provided by an empowered Central Steering 
Committee (CSC, RGPSA) headed by Union Minister for Panchayati  Raj with representation from Ministries of  
Rural Development , Drinking Water and Sanitation, Education, Health, Agriculture, Social Justice, Tribal Affairs, 
North East and Planning Commission etc. There is an empowered Central Executive Committee (CEC, RGPSA) 
headed by the Secretary, MoPR at the national level to oversee implementation. These two bodies have started 
functioning. The Committee feel that there is a huge challenge before MoPR to empower an estimated 28 lakh 
elected representatives of Pancha yats particularly when institutional support is grossly inadequate. In this 
connection, the MoPR has apprised that under RGPSA, activities of strengthening of SIRDs, establishment/ 
strengthening of District Resource Centres, Block Resource Centres and supp ort for Panchayat processes for 
Panchayats with low revenue base will be taken up and for Capability Building and Training requirement funding 
of RGPSA will be done as per National Capacity Building Framework (NCBF). The Committee, therefore, 
recommend tha t since all related issues have been clearly spelt out in RGPSA with multi -Ministerial 
representation, the MoPR should now move faster on empowerment of Panchayats through possible devolution 
of 3Fs and meeting other basic requirement of infrastructure and  training and capacity building needs of elected 
representatives and functionaries of Panchayats in a big way during Twelfth Plan period (2012-17). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry agrees with above recommendation of the Committee  and is actively pursuin g with States for 
submission of Annual/Perspective Plans for accessing funds under RGPSA during 2013-14.  
 
During the current financial year, the Central Executive Committee (CEC) of the RGPSA has considered 
the Annual Plans 2013 -14 of the States of Chha ttisgarh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh , Himachal Pradesh , 
Arunachal Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra, Jharkhand and Uttarakhand . An amount of approx.. Rs.450 crores 
has been committed under the RGPSA budget for 2013 -14 so far. Review Meetings to monitor the 
preparation/submission of State Plans under RGPSA are also being held from time to time. Last review meeting 
was held on 31.7.2013. 
 
  [No.G-20012/4/2013-Parl. Dated: 26.8.2013, Ministry of Panchayati Raj] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.11) 
 
 The Committee are deplored that most important scheme of Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF) as 
Additional Central Assistance (ACA) to State Plans to bridge the regional imbalances in development by way of 
providing financial resources in identified backward districts has not been effectively implemented leading to non 
utilisation of entitled funds in these districts across the States. For instance as per latest available figures of 
State-wise releases vis -a-vis utilisation of BRGF funds during 2012 -13 made available to  the Committee by 
MoPR, the Committee are dismayed to note that as against the total annual entitlement of Rs. 5349.98 crore, 
the release was as low as Rs. 2745.15 crore out of which the utilisation reported was a meagre Rs. 118.42 
crore. The Committee fin d this situation highly unsatisfactory. The Committee are also constrained to note that 
whatever small utilisation that has been reported was in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan  and West Bengal. In other States including 
Jammu and Kashmir, any utilisation was yet to be reported. In this connection, the Committee have been 

- 19 - 
 
informed by the Secretary, MoPR that plans come from State Governments and Central Government does not 
impose any direction about the money spent.  The MoPR has also contended that BRGF grant are demand 
based and requirement of 60% utilisation of previous releases is an essentiality for further releases. Moreover, 
the State Governments have to devise its own mechanism for further release of funds. The Committee have also 
been informed that under the BRGF Guidelines funds are released to State Governments and not to individual 
BRGF districts and any revision of Guidelines is under the domain of the Planning Commiss ion. In this 
connection, the Committee have been assured by the Secretary, MoPR to set up regular video conferencing 
with district magistrates in BRGF districts so as to keep an eye on speedy implementation. Since the 
restructuring of BRGF is currently in progress in Planning Commission, the MoPR should place all necessary 
details and constraints in implementation of BRGF before the Planning Commission to make it more simple and 
implementable by the States so as to ensure that Government objective to supple ment the State Governments 
to develop the backward Districts in the country is achieved fully. Since there are as many as 272 districts 
identified for BRGF scheme as of now, the scheme will help in developing a substantial part of the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The BRGF Programme has two components, namely, the Development Grant component and the 
Capacity Building component. BRGF allocation for the year 2012 -13 was fixed at Rs.5050 crores at the BE 
stage which was reduced to Rs. 3734 crore s at RE stage. At the end of the financial year 2012 -13, Ministry had 
released a sum of Rs. 3720.19 crores, utilizing 99.63% of the RE allocation. BRGF is a process oriented and 
demand driven programme. Many States were not able to access their full entitlement due to late submission of 
proposals and also on account of the non - submission/ discrepancies in requisite documents like UCs, physical 
& financial reports and audit reports.   
To ensure full utilization of BRGF funds in 2013-14, this Ministry is doing regular follow up with the State 
Governments by means of review meetings, video conferences. The first r eview meeting was held with the 
Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of all BRGF States on 11 -06-2013. A video conference was held with the 
State Government of Madhya Pradesh on 23-07-2013 wherein the progress of BRGF Programme was reviewed.  
On 2-08-2013, in a related meeting held with 12 of the States, timely claim of funds under BRGF Programme 
was emphasized. During the course of this year, officials from the Mi nistry also visited Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttrakhand, Guwahati, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh to facilitate the States to submit the BRGF proposals in 
time. During a recent workshop held at Assam Administrative Staff College, Guwahati on 18 -20 April, 2013 on 
training and adoption of e -Panchayat applications, the position of BRGF proposals was also discussed with the 
NE States. As a result of these efforts, out of 272 Districts, 151 BRGF District plans for 2013 -14 have already 
been received and are under process. 
Hon‟ble Minister of Panchayati Raj has already written to Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission on 
27-02-2013 suggesting to take „Block‟ or its variant (Taluka / Mandal) as unit of backwardness under the District 
component of the restructured BRGF (Annex VII). 
                                                                [No.G-20012/4/2013-Parl. Dated: 26.8.2013, Ministry of Panchayati Raj] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

- 20 - 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

- 21 - 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

- 22 - 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.6) 
 The Committee find that implementation of the Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 
(PESA) within the meaning of Section 4(a) of the Act and with reference to Section 4(d) to 4 (m) that deal with 
empowerment of Gram Sabha which makes the Gram Sabhas competent for functioning in wide variety of areas 
like safeguarding and preserving the traditions of the people in Scheduled Areas, approval of village plans, issue 
of utilisation certificates, mandatory consultation in matters of land acquisition, resettlement and rehabilitation, 
power to prevent alienation of land and restoring alienated land etc. in Fift h Schedule Areas in nine States of 
Andhra Pradesh, Chhatisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha 
and Rajasthan has not been done in letter and spirit. The Committee feel that less development in Scheduled 
Areas mainly in Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha may give 
rise to unrest. The latest available compliance of State Panchayati Raj Acts as indicated by MoPR shows that 
although necessary legislations have been enacted in  six PESA States, actual empowerment of Gram Sabhas 
has not been forthcoming and seen at ground level. Further the Committee find that MoPR has also indicated 
State-wise position of compliance of subject laws showing varied degree of implementation across nine PESA 
States on important subjects ranging from land acquisition to money lending. The Committee are dismayed to 
note that barring Himachal Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, none of the PESA States have complied with PESA 
with important issue of land acquisi tion and position on other subjects is almost similar. On the other hand the 
Committee find that MoPR has claimed to have taken series of measures like circulation of Model Rules for 
PESA and related Guidelines to nine PESA States etc. However the ground r eality shows that efforts of MoPR 
have not actually contributed towards actual implementation of PESA laws in these States. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that MoPR should rethink with an open mind on the entire issue of implementation of 
PESA in coor dination with concerned State Governments to find solutions to the real problems at appropriate 
level. 
Reply of the Government 
There is a system of continuous/ongoing review with PESA States on the implementation of the Act, 
including through visits to PES A States and holding regular meetings  with State Secretaries and concerned 
officials of PRIs and other relevant Departments . The PESA Act at present does not have any provision for 
making Rules by the Union/State Government s.  A proposal to amend the Panch ayats (Extension to the 
Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA) including, inter -alia, Rule making provisions and to clarify certain terms 
used in the Act is under examination in consultation with the concerned stakeholders.  
 To strengthen Gram Sabhas and increase awareness among its members on local issues and role of 
Gram Sabhas so as to enable its efficient functioning in areas under PESA, the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat 
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) provides for engagement of Mobilisers to every Gram Sabha and coordinators 
at Block and District level. Funds are also being made available under the scheme  for orientation of the Gram 
Sabha as to generate awareness regarding the provisions of PESA Act.  
Training modules for capacity building of elected representatives  and officials of the State Governments 
in Schedule V areas has been prepared by State Institute s of Rural Development (SIRD‟s). All the PESA States 

- 23 - 
 
have carried out training programmes for elected representatives of PRIs and functionaries of State Government 
for better implementation of PESA. The regular training programmes under RGPSA would also include a Module 
on PESA related matters. 
                                                               [No.G-20012/4/2013-Parl. Dated: 26.8.2013, Ministry of Panchayati Raj] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.8) 
 
The Committee are also dismayed to note that State Finance Commissions (SFCs) are facing problems like 
acute shortag e of manpower, knowledgeable professionals, inadequate data etc. and their SFC's 
recommendations are not given due consideration by the State Governments. In this connection, the Committee 
find that MoPR have themselves highlighted the need for strengtheni ng of SFCs. As the recommendations of 
the SFCs play an important role in the award of Central Finance Commission, the Committee recommend the 
MoPR to take up the matter at the appropriate level with different State Governments.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Considering the importance and impact of the recommendations of the State Finance Commissions in 
the Award of the CFC, besides issuing detailed guidelines on 27.04.2009 to Chief Secretaries of all States for 
strengthening and improving the working of SFCs a nd holding a review meeting with Chairpersons, State 
Finance Commissions and Secretaries, P.R Deptt. of States on 27.06.2011, the Ministry in August 2012, had 
constituted a Task Force under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, MoPR to study the presen t status  of 
SFCs and to make recommendations for their strengthening to enable them to perform their functions as 
envisaged under Article 243-I(1) of the Constitution.  
As per the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA), States can access fun ds only if 
they fulfill certain essential conditions, which include: Constitution of SFC every five years, and placement of 
Action Taken Report on the recommendations of the SFC in the State legislations. This provides an important 
impetus for States to consider SFC recommendations seriously. 
[No.G-20012/4/2013-Parl. Dated: 26.8.2013, Ministry of Panchayati Raj] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.9) 
  
 The Committee also note with dismay that not much progress has been made on the issue of ensuring 
Centrality of Panchayats in Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) that deal with subjects 
included in Eleventh Schedule in planning, implementation and monitoring of these Schemes. In this connection, 
the Committee have been informed by MoPR about various initiatives taken up under BRGF and earlier 
schemes of PEAIS and RGSY for necessary devolution for achieving Centrality of PRIs in CSSs etc. The 

- 24 - 
 
Committee have also been informed by MoPR that under RGPSA the process of incentivising States will be for 
non-BRGF districts also. The Committee have also been apprised by MoPR that various Central Ministries have 
now provided centrality of PRIs in their programme by way  of issuing Guidelines such as MGNREGA, NRLM, 
IWMP, NBA etc. The Committee also note that MoPR has set up an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship 
of Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, M.P (Rajya Sabha) on this issue and Expert Committee is expected to finalise th e 
report by April, 2013. Since the Expert Committee is already seized of the issue, they would await the outcome 
of the Report. 
Reply of the Government 
The Report of the Expert Committee headed by Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, M.P. (Rajya Sabha) has been 
finalised and released on National Panchayat Day held on 24.4.2013, at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi. Copy of 
Report has been circulated to all the State Governments and concerned Central Ministries for their examination 
of the recommendations contained in the Report  and necessary action. Ministry of Panchayati Raj on its part, is 
also pursuing with State Governments and the Central Ministries for a time bound implementation of the 
recommendations. An Inter -Ministerial Committee has also been set up under the Chair of  Secretary, 
Panchayati Raj, to review action being taken by various Line Ministries in respect of clarifying role and 
responsibilities of PRIs in Guidelines of Centrally Sponsored Schemes administered by them. 
  [No.G-20012/4/2013-Parl. Dated: 26.8.2013, Ministry of Panchayati Raj] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
17 December, 2013                     Chairperson, 
26 Agrahayana , 1935 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

- 25 - 
 
Annex-I 
Compliance of State Panchayati Raj Acts 
(as on 22.8.2013) 
States Clauses of section-4 of PESA Sub-clauses of section-4 (m) 
d e f h i j k l i  ii iii iv v vi 
Andhra Pradesh Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
Chhattisgarh Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y 
Gujarat Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N Y N Y Y N 
Himachal Pradesh Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y 
Jharkhand Y Y Y N N Y N N N N N Y N Y 
Madhya Pradesh Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N Y N Y 
Maharashtra Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Odisha Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y 
Rajasthan Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
 
Y= Yes, i,e, States that have made their concerned Panchayati Raj Act compliant with provisions of PESA. 
N= No, i.e, States that are yet to make their concerned Panchayati Raj Act compliant with provisions of PESA. 

- 26 - 
 
Annex-II 
 
Compliance of State Subject Laws 
States Land 
Acquisition 
Excise Forest 
Produce 
Mines & 
Minerals 
Village 
Market 
Money 
Lending 
Andhra Pradesh N Y N Y Y N 
Chhattisgarh Y Y N Y Y Y 
Gujarat N NA NA N N N 
Himachal Pradesh Y Y Y Y Y N 
Jharkhand N N N N N N 
Madhya Pradesh Y Y N Y Y N 
Maharashtra N N N N N N 
Odisha N Y Y Y N Y 
Rajasthan N N NA Y N Y 
 
Y= Yes, i,e, States that have made their concerned Panchayati Raj Act compliant with provisions of PESA. 
N= No, i.e, States that are yet to make their concerned Panchayati Raj Act compliant with provisions of PESA. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annex-III
Total releases Released up to 
Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release Instalment 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
1 Andhra Pradesh 48074.00 48074.00 61585.00 30470.00 69293.13 81669.45 78544.00 1st 2011-12
2 Arunachal Pradesh 2520.00 2520.00 3228.00 1614.00 3632.58 4281.39 4134.00 1st 2011-12
3 Assam 14511.00 7344.00 18589.00 16462.00 20915.88 30210.88 24651.62 54016.88 2nd 2012-13
4 Bihar 45569.00 45569.00 58377.00 58377.00 65683.40 65683.40 77414.99 38707.49 208336.89 2nd 2012-13
5 Chhattisgarh 15367.00 15367.00 19686.00 19686.00 22149.59 22149.59 26105.68 57202.59 2nd 2012-13
6 Goa 832.00 421.00 1066.00 411.00 1199.44 1413.66 832.00 2nd 2010-11
7 Gujarat 21461.00 21724.00 27493.00 27231.00 30934.03 14721.62 36459.09 63676.62 1st 2012-13
8 Haryana 9994.00 10116.00 12802.00 12680.00 14404.66 14404.66 16977.44 8488.72 45689.38 2nd 2012-13
9 Himachal Pradesh 5120.00 5120.00 6559.00 6559.00 7379.39 3511.88 8697.41 3867.51 19058.39 1st 2012-13
10 Jammu & Kashmir 8448.00 0.00 10823.00 10823.00 12177.13 12177.13 14352.07 23000.13 2nd 2012-13
11 Jharkhand 13948.00 13948.00 17868.00 17868.00 20104.83 20104.83 23695.72 11847.86 63768.69 2nd 2012-13
12 Karnataka 41433.00 41938.00 53077.00 52571.00 59720.49 59720.49 70387.05 35193.53 189423.02 2nd 2012-13
13 Kerala 17935.00 17935.00 22975.00 22975.00 25850.70 12302.44 30467.85 53212.44 1st 2012-13
14 Madhya Pradesh 37843.00 37842.00 48478.00 48478.00 54545.78 54545.79 64288.10 140865.79 2nd 2012-13
15 Maharashtra 50578.00 50578.00 64793.00 64793.00 72902.87 72902.87 85923.90 188273.87 2nd 2012-13
16 Manipur 2013.00 2013.00 2579.00 0.00 2901.49 1289.00 3419.72 3302.00 1st 2011-12
17 Meghalaya 2877.00 2877.00 3685.00 3686.00 4146.62 4887.24 6563.00 2nd 2011-12
18 Mizoram 1854.00 1855.00 2376.00 1188.00 2673.03 1188.00 3150.45 1336.51 5567.51 2nd 2011-12
19 Nagaland 2805.00 1420.00 3594.00 1386.00 4043.81 4766.07 2806.00 2nd 2010-11
20 Orissa 23831.00 23831.00 30529.00 30529.00 34349.56 34349.56 40484.67 88709.56 2nd 2012-13
21 Punjab 10350.00 10350.00 13259.00 0.00 14918.70 13259.00 17583.3 23609.00 2nd 2011-12
22 Rajasthan 36226.00 36668.00 46407.00 45965.00 52215.45 52215.45 61541.55 134848.45 2nd 2012-13
23 Sikkim 1696.00 858.00 2173.00 3011.00 2444.56 1163.38 2881.18 5032.38 1st 2012-13
24 Tamil Nadu 28364.00 28710.00 36336.00 35989.00 40883.63 40883.63 48185.78 105582.63 2nd 2012-13
25 Tripura 2695.00 2695.00 3452.00 3452.00 3883.89 1848.36 4577.58 7995.36 1st 2012-13
26 Uttar Pradesh 90030.00 91130.00 115333.00 114233.00 129767.56 129767.56 152945.09 335130.56 2nd 2012-13
27 Uttarakhand 5437.00 5437.00 6965.00 6965.00 7836.32 3918.16 9235.94 16320.16 1st 2012-13
28 West Bengal 38120.00 38120.00 48834.00 24161.00 54945.59 50821.81 64759.32 113102.81 1st 2012-13
Total 579931.00 564460.00 742921.00 661563.00 835904.11 713139.49 985203.31 99441.62 0.00 0.00 2038604.11
General Area Basic Grant
PRIs
Allocation and Release of grant of Local Bodies for PRIs During 2010-15 (as on 16.07.2013)
Rs. in Lakhs
Sl. No. States
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
2. 2nd instalment to other States was not released due to non submission of Ucs to the Ministry of Finance in respect of 1st instalment
1. State of Andhra Pradesh was not released General Area Basic Grant from 2nd instalment 2011-12 onwards due to non holding of elections to Panchayats
Note: 

Annex-IV
Rs in Lakhs
Total releases
Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
1 Andhra Pradesh 590.00 590.00 590.00 295.00 590.00 590.00 885.00 1st inst. 2011-12.
2 Assam 730.00 365.00 730.00 730.00 730.00 1095.00 730.00 2190.00 2nd  inst. 2012-13
3 Chhattisgarh 2110.00 2110.00 2110.00 2110.00 2110.00 2110.00 2110.00 6330.00 1st  inst. 2012-13.
4 Gujarat 1440.00 1440.00 1440.00 1440.00 1440.00 720.00 1440.00 3600.00 2nd  inst. 2012-13.
5 Himachal Pradesh 30.00 30.00 30.00 30.00 30.00 15.00 30.00 15.00 90.00 2nd inst. 2012-13.
6 Jharkhand 3500.00 1750.00 3500.00 1750.00 3500.00 3500.00 3500.00 1750.00 8750.00 1st inst. 2011-12.
7 Madhya Pradesh 2650.00 2650.00 2650.00 2650.00 2650.00 2650.00 2650.00 7950.00 2nd  inst. 2012-13.
8 Maharashtra 790.00 790.00 790.00 790.00 790.00 790.00 790.00 2370.00 2nd inst. 2012-13.
9 Manipur 180.00 180.00 180.00 0.00 180.00 90.00 180.00 270.00 1st  inst. 2011-12.
10 Meghalaya 460.00 460.00 460.00 460.00 460.00 460.00 920.00 2nd inst. 2011-12
11 Mizoram 180.00 180.00 180.00 90.00 180.00 90.00 180.00 360.00 2nd  inst. 2012-13.
12 Nagaland 400.00 200.00 400.00 200.00 400.00 400.00 400.00 1st inst. 2011-12.
13 Orissa 2160.00 2160.00 2160.00 2160.00 2160.00 2160.00 2160.00 6480.00 2nd  inst. 2012-13.
14 Rajasthan 360.00 360.00 360.00 360.00 360.00 360.00 360.00 1080.00 2nd  inst. 2012-13.
15 Tripura 240.00 240.00 240.00 240.00 240.00 120.00 240.00 600.00 1st inst. 2012-13.
16 West Bengal 160.00 160.00 160.00 80.00 160.00 160.00 160.00 400.00 1st  inst. 2012-13.
Total 15980.00 13665.00 15980.00 13385.00 15980.00 13860.00 15980.00 1765.00 0.00 0.00 42675.00
Sl. No. States
Note: 
Special Area Basic Grant
Allocation and Release of grant of Local Bodies Special Area During 2010-15 (as on 15.07.2013)
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
1.  State of Andhra Pradesh was not released Special Area Basic Grant from 2nd instalment 2011-12 onwards due to non holding of elections to Panchayats
2. 2nd instalment to other States was not released due to non submission of Ucs to the Ministry of Finance in respect of 1st instalment

Annex-V
PRIs Rs in Lakhs
Total releases
Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
1 Andhra Pradesh 0.00 21012.00 0.00 47489.50 55740.38 0.00
2 Arunachal Pradesh 0.00 1102.00 157.17 2489.56 2922.10 157.17
3 Assam 0.00 6342.00 5336.96 14334.53 17537.82 16825.03 22874.78
4 Bihar 0.00 19917.00 16869.38 45015.60 32465.87 52836.66 30328.86 79664.11 2nd inst 2012-13
5 Chhattisgarh 0.00 6716.00 5653.84 15180.04 10982.40 17817.44 16636.24
6 Goa 0.00 364.00 51.17 822.02 964.84 51.17
7 Gujarat 0.00 9380.00 1352.37 21200.39 24883.77 1352.37
8 Haryana 0.00 4368.00 5880.53 9872.12 9872.12 11587.31 15752.65
9 Himachal Pradesh 0.00 2238.00 3010.97 5057.40 5057.40 5936.08 8068.37
10 Jammu & Kashmir 0.00 3692.00 533.64 8345.50 9795.46 533.64
11 Jharkhand 0.00 6096.00 880.87 13778.69 13778.69 16172.61 14659.56
12 Karnataka 0.00 18109.00 24386.64 40928.97 20464.48 48040.01 20464.49 65315.61
13 Kerala 0.00 7839.00 6635.68 17716.58 12777.96 20794.67 19413.64
14 Madhya Pradesh 0.00 16540.00 14002.28 37382.52 26961.26 43877.40 40963.54
15 Maharashtra 0.00 22106.00 18606.48 49963.40 61129.61 58644.10 79736.09
16 Manipur 0.00 880.00 127.93 1988.52 2334.00 127.93
17 Meghalaya 0.00 1257.00 182.75 2841.85 3335.60 182.75
18 Mizoram 0.00 811.00 116.96 1831.94 2150.22 116.96
19 Nagaland 0.00 1226.00 175.44 2771.40 3252.90 175.44
20 Orissa 0.00 10416.00 1502.22 23541.20 27631.27 1502.22
21 Punjab 0.00 4524.00 650.60 10224.41 12000.81 650.60
22 Rajasthan 0.00 15833.00 21327.63 35785.45 35785.45 42002.85 57113.08
23 Sikkim 0.00 741.00 106.00 1675.36 1966.44 106.00
24 Tamil Nadu 0.00 12397.00 1787.32 28019.28 32887.37 1787.32
25 Tripura 0.00 1178.00 171.79 2661.79 1268.50 3124.25 1393.29 2833.58
26 Uttar Pradesh 0.00 39349.00 33117.91 88935.17 19876.20 104386.86 44467.58 97461.69
27 Uttarakhand 0.00 2376.00 343.57 5370.56 6303.64 343.57
28 West Bengal 0.00 16661.00 2401.36 37656.53 18828.26 44199.01 21229.62
Total 0.00 0.00 253470.00 165369.46 572880.28 286786.02 672413.08 96654.22 0.00 0.00 548809.70
General Area Performance Grant
3. In addition to their entitled share, some States have been released their share of the General Performance  Grants forfeited by  States which have been unable to fulfil the stipulated six conditions for drawl of  these Grants.  
Note: 
1. State of Andhra Pradesh was not released General Area Performance Grant from 2011-12 onwards due to non holding of elections to Panchayats
2. 2nd instalment to other States was not released due to non submission of Ucs to the Ministry of Finance in respect of 1st instalment
2013-14 2014-15
Allocation and Release of performance grant including forfeited During of PRIs 2010-15 (as on 15.07.2013)
Sl. No. States 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13

Annex-VI
Rs in Lakhs
Total releases
Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13.00
1 Andhra Pradesh 590.00 590.00 0.00
2 Assam 730.00 730.00 730.00 730.00
3 Chhattisgarh 2110.00 1055.00 2110.00 1055.00
4 Gujarat 1440.00 1440.00 0.00
5 Himachal Pradesh 30.00 30.00 30.00 30.00
6 Jharkhand 3500.00 3500.00 3500.00 3500.00
7 Madhya Pradesh 2650.00 1325.00 2650.00 1325.00
8 Maharashtra 790.00 790.00 790.00 790.00
9 Manipur 180.00 180.00 0.00
10 Meghalaya 460.00 460.00 0.00
11 Mizoram 180.00 180.00 0.00
12 Nagaland 400.00 400.00 0.00
13 Orissa 2160.00 2160.00 0.00
14 Rajasthan 360.00 360.00 360.00 360.00
15 Tripura 240.00 120.00 240.00 120.00 240.00
16 West Bengal 160.00 160.00 0.00
Total 0.00 0.00 15980.00 7910.00 15980.00 120.00 0.00 0.00 8030.00
Note: 
1. State of Andhra Pradesh was not released Performance Grant for Special Area from 2011-12 onwards due to non holding of elections to Panchayats
2. 2nd instalment to other States was not released due to non submission of Ucs to the Ministry of Finance in respect of 1st instalment
Allocation and Release of Performance grant of Local Bodies Special Area During 2010-15 (as on 15.07.2013)
Sl. No. States 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15

Annex-VIII 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 17 DECEMBER, 2013 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1540 hrs. in Committee Room  'C', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
         
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan  -             Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
4. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
5. Smt. Annu Tandon 
6. Smt. Usha Verma 
7. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
9. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
10. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
11. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 
   
          Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
 
     
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee convened for 
consideration of Memoranda containing draft Reports of the Committee on action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in three Reports on Demands for Grants (201 3-14) and one Report on 
'Working of Vigilance and Monitoring Committee in States/UTs'.  
 

 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
(i)  X X X X X X X X X X X 
(ii)  Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Thirty-Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj; 
(iii)   X X X X X X X X X X X  
(iv)   X X X X X X X X X X X  
 
4. Draft Reports were taken up seriatum.  After detailed discussions, the Com mittee adopted the 
Reports with minor modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid 
Reports and present the same to the Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
X Relevant portion of the Minutes not related with the subject have been kept separately. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex - IX 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY NINTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations:              10  
    
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted     
  by the Government :       7  
  Sl. Nos.:  1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9 and 10   
Percentage to total recommendations:    (70)       
     
III. Recommendation which the Committee do    
not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s replies:      - 
  Sl. No.:   NIL         
   
Percentage to total recommendations:        (-) 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of   
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee:        -   
Sl No.:  NIL           
 
Percentage to total recommendations:    (-) 
      
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies   
of the Government are still awaited :     3  
  Sl. Nos. :   5, 7 and 8 
 
  Percentage to total recommendations:           (30) 
 