STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND
SANITATION)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2010-2011)
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of
Drinking Water and Sanitation)]
17
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


SEVENTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2010-2011)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND
SANITATION)
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of
Drinking Water and Sanitation)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ..........................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ..........................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


RD No. 17
Price : Rs. 47.00
© 2011 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIA T
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. The Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
13
28
29
31
35
38
40
C
OMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2010-2011) .....................................
INTRODUCTION...........................................................................................
CHAPTER I Report...............................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government .....................................................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply..............
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee.........................................................................
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited .................................
APPENDICES
I. PWS Schemes (By date of completion).........................
II. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 6 January, 2011 ............................................................
III. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Eighth Report
of the Committee (15th Lok Sabha)............................
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2010-2011)
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit
7. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
10. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar
11. Shri Rakesh Pandey
12. Shri P.L. Punia
13. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
14. Shri Jagdish Sharma
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Jagdanand Singh
17. Dr. Sanjay Singh
18. Shri Makansingh Solanki
19. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh
20. Shrimati Usha Verma
21. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
23. Shri Ganga Charan
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Dr. Ram Prakash
26. Shri P.R. Rajan
27. Shri Arjun Singh
28. Shrimati Maya Singh
29. Shri Mohan Singh
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
31. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
4. Shri Ravi Kant Prasad Sinha — Committee Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2010-2011) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report
on their behalf, present the Seventeenth Report on the action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the
Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Drinking Water &
Sanitation (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to
Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2010. The replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 2 August, 2010.
3. The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee
at their sitting held on 6 January, 2011.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-III.
 N EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
25 February , 2011 Chairperson,
6 Phalguna , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2010-11) deals
with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in their Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department
of Drinking Water and Sanitation (Ministry of Rural Development) which was
presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2010.
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 26 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:—
(i) Chapter II Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Para Nos.: 2.3, 3.10, 3.13, 3.17, 3.21, 4.8, 4.10,
4.17, 4.19, 4.20, 4.21, 4.31, 4.32, 4.35, 4.36, 5.9,
5.15, 5.16 and 5.35
(ii) Chapter III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para No.: 4.18
(iii) Chapter IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para No.: 5.21
(iv) Chapter V Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. : 4.5, 4.27, 5.20, 5.22 and 5.31.
3. The Committee desire that final reply in respect of recommen-
dations (paragraph nos. 4.5, 4.27, 5.20, 5.22  and 5.31) for which only

2
interim replies have been given by the Government should be furnished
within three months after presentation of this Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of the recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Functioning of Steering Committee
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 3.21)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the
proposed Steering Committee which is to prepare the strategic plan
for the remaining two years of the current plan and also during the
12th and 13th Five Year Plans. The Committee also recommend that
this Steering Committee should also analyse the performance of the
Department so far during first three years of the current Five Year
Plan. The Department, therefore, should obtain Utilization Certificates
from all the States and Union territories and take suitable corrective
measures and inform the Committee accordingly.”
(Recommendation Para No. 3.21)
6. The Department in the action-taken reply have stated as under:—
“The Steering Committee of the Department headed by the
Secretary, DWS held it’s first meeting on 27/4/2010. Two Working
Groups, one for rural drinking water under the chairmanship of
Joint Secretary (DWS) and the other for sanitation under  Joint
Secretary (Sanitation) have also been constituted. The first
meetings of the two Working Groups were held on 3rd and 4th June,
2010 respectively. The Department has also decided to hold four
regional consultative workshops and a national workshop by
involving all stakeholders, viz. representatives of State Governments,
PRIs, civil society, experts, NGOs, VWSCs, etc. The first regional
workshop was held on 18th June, 2010 at Chandigarh and the
second on 9th July, 2010 at Bangalore. As recommended by the
Standing Committee, the Steering Committee is analyzing the

3
performance of the Department while laying down its future
strategies and implementation plan.
As regards the National Rural Drinking Water Programme, one of
the important conditions is submission of Utilization Certificates
of funds released in the previous year for the release of 2nd
installment to States. Without the UC, the 2nd installment cannot
be released to the States. However, some UCs are pending for
releases made under natural calamity component of NRDWP, water
quality monitoring & surveillance, Swajaldhara, etc. for which
concerned States are being requested through meetings, video-
conferences, letters etc.  to furnish the UCs.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.21)
7. The Committee  had specifically desired to be apprised of the
outcome of the Steering Committee proposed to be set up to prepare
strategic plan for the remaining period of the current Plan and also for
succeeding 12th Plan and 13th Plan periods. The Committee had further
recommended that the proposed Steering Committee should also analyse
the performance of the Department so far during the current Plan. The
Committee find it rather strange that the Steering Committee has held
only one meeting in April, 2010 and the Steering Committee is stated to
be in the process of analysing the performance of the Department while
laying down future strategies and implementation Plan. While stressing
the need for expeditious action on the part of the Steering Committee
in a time bound manner, the Committee would like to know the specific
plans formulated by the Steering Committee so far and its assessment
of the performance of the Department.
B. Coverage of Anganwadi toilets
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 4.8)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee learn that Anganwadi Kendras are sanctioned by
the Government of India and out of 13.56 lakh Anganwadi Kendras
in the Country, 1.23 lakh Anganwadi Kendras still do not have

4
facility of toilets. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department
to take up construction of Anganwadi toilets with the States which
are lagging behind and also provide funds for their construction in
Anganwadi Kendras which are being run in the private buildings
also as these Kendras are sanctioned by the Government.”
(Recommendation Para No. 4.8)
9. The Department in the action-taken reply have stated as
under:—
“As per the progress reported by States through online monitoring
system, 1.06 lakh Anganwadi Kendras in the country are yet to be
provided with sanitation facilities vis-à-vis project objectives as on
May 2010.  One of the reasons for non-completion of project
objectives was non-revision of assistance provided under the
campaign for construction of child friendly toilet since 1999.  The
same has since been revised from Rs.5,000 to Rs.8,000 (Rs.10,000
for hilly and difficult areas) since 1.4.2010.  The revision is
expected to accelerate the pace of sanitation coverage in Anganwadi
Kendras.
As regards funds for Anganwadi Kendras in private buildings, TSC
guidelines as provisions as follows:
…Those Anganwadis, which are in private buildings, the
owner must be asked to construct the toilet as per design, and,
he/she may be allowed to charge enhanced rent for the
building to recover the cost of construction. Alternatively, the
toilet may be constructed from revolving fund component
under the TSC and, suitable deductions made from the
monthly rental paid to the owner to recover the cost over a
period of time.
For new buildings, which are going to be hired for Anganwadis,
buildings having baby friendly toilet facility only should be
hired. ….”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 4.8)

5
10. Taking note of the fact that  as many as 1.23 lakh Anganwadi
Kendras lacked facility of toilets, the Committee had urged the
Department to take up the issue of construction of Anganwadi toilets
with those States which were lagging behind. The Department in their
Action Taken Reply have stated that as per the progress reported by the
States, 1.06 lakh Anganwadi Kendras in the country are yet to be
provided sanitation facilities as on May, 2010. The Department have also
stated that the revision in the quantum of assistance from Rs. 5000 to
Rs. 8000 (Rs. 10,000 for hilly and difficult areas) from 1 April, 2010
onwards under the campaign for construction of child friendly toilets is
expected to accelerate the pace of sanitation coverage in Anganwadi
Kendras. While appreciating this step taken by the Department though
belatedly, the Committee trust that effective steps would be taken
simultaneously to ensure sanitation coverage in all Anganwadi Kendras
in a time bound manner.
C. Survey to ascertain contamination of water
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 4.21)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee recommends that survey for contamination of
water be carried throughout the country and remedial measures i.e.
purification of contaminated water be taken up by the Department
on a priority basis.
(Recommendation Para No. 4.21)
12. The Department in the action-taken reply have stated as under :—
“The Committee’s recommendations for survey of quality-affected
habitations have been noted. States have been requested to take up
testing of all drinking water sources for chemical and bacteriologi-
cal contaminations in the Action Plan for 2010-11, update the
online figures and put them in the public domain for transparency.
The Department has also made provision for setting up of
sub-divisional level laboratories for which 100 % financial
assistance is available under NRDWP. In the Annual Action Plans
for 2010-11, the States have been requested to target the maximum

6
number of quality-affected habitations for coverage. States have
been given the flexibility to utilize upto 65% of NRDWP
allocations to cover quality affected habitations.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 4.21)
13. The Committee had recommended that a survey to ascertain
the extent of contamination of water be carried out throughout the
country and remedial measures taken on a priority basis. The
Department reply is silent as to what action has been initiated to conduct
the recommended survey. The Committee feel that the problem of
contamination of water can pragmatically be addressed only if the
Department have the actual data about the extent of contamination of
water throughout the country which will help in fixing realistic targets
and taking remedial measures. The Committee stress that action in this
regard should be taken without loss of time.
D. Survey to ascertain actual sanitation
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 5.21)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that the achievement under TSC is less
than 50 per cent in Andaman and Nicobar, Bihar, Dadar and Nagar
Haveli, Daman and Diu, Jharkhand, Orissa and Puducherry. The
Committee would like to know the reasons for non-achievement of
targets in these States. The Committee apprehend that the data of
63.15 per cent coverage of sanitation may not be correct in light
of the recent WHO-UNICEF report on India about open defecation
which says as many as 69 per cent of rural Indians defecate in the
open. The Committee, therefore, desire that an independent survey
be conducted to know about the actual sanitation coverage.”
(Recommendation Para No. 5.21)
15. The Department in the action-taken reply have stated as under:—
“TSC is a demand driven programme.  Some of the UTs like
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadar and Nagar Haveli do not have
any project under TSC despite repeated persuasion with the UT
administration. Therefore, the progress, if any, in respect of rural

7
sanitation coverage achieved through any other programme/
community on their own also does not get reported to the
Department. UTs of Daman and Diu and Puducherry have taken
district projects under TSC.  However, the progress is not regularly
reported to the Department. In order to improve the situation,
coordination meetings with the UTs and Ministry of Home Affairs
were recently held on 1st June and 21st June 2010 to review the
status and encourage UTs to take up projects under TSC and
regularly report progress.
Some of the reasons for slow progress of rural sanitation coverage
in the States of Bihar, Jharkhand and Orissa are:
• Lack of priority for sanitation
• Non-release of State share in time
• Lack of emphasis on innovative IEC suitable for local
conditions for effective demand generation.
• Inadequate capacity building at grass root level
• Lack of staff at State and District level.
• Implementation of the programme in engineering mode
through PHEs.
According to the information presented in the WHO/UNICEF
report on ‘Progress on sanitation and drinking water 2010 update’
the use of sanitation facilities as a percentage of population was
31% in rural areas of the country.  The information presented in
the reports includes data from household surveys and censuses
completed during the period 2007-2008 only.
As mentioned in the Report itself, the data in the report does not
reflect the efforts of the International Year of Sanitation 2008 and
beyond which mobilised renewed support to eliminate the practice
of open defecation and promote the use of toilets. Moreover, JMP
monitors usage while at present TSC figures speak of availability
of physical facility of toilet.”
(Recommendation Para No. 5.21)

8
16. Additional information on Para 5.21 of Eighth Report of the
Standing Committee:—
“The Millennium Development Goal (MDG) vide target 7(c) of
goal 7 targets to halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without
sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation.
The progress against MDG goals worldwide is being monitored by
World Health Organization (WHO) and United Nations Interna-
tional Children Education Fund (UNICEF).  For this purpose
WHO/UNICEF have Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) for water
supply and sanitation.  The JMP publishes report on progress made
against MDG goals worldwide every two years.  The first report
of JMP was published during August 2008 with progress on water
sanitation issues upto the year 2006.  The 2nd report of JMP has
been published during March 2010 titled as “Progress on Sanitation
and Drinking Water – 2010 Update”.  According to this report the
country had a sanitation coverage of 31% in rural areas as of the
year 2007-08.
Each JMP report assesses the situation and trends anew and so
supersedes the previous reports.  It has been mentioned in the latest
report that “The information presented in this report includes data
from household surveys and censuses completed during the period
2007-08.  It is important to note that the data in this report do not
yet reflect the efforts of the International Year of Sanitation 2008,
which mobilized renewed support around the world to stop the
practice of open defecation and to promote the use of latrines and
toilets”.
Following is also submitted in this regard:
1. The sanitation coverage reflected in the report is based on
achievements made upto the year 2007-08 only.
2. The report is based on the surveys conducted only.
3. The sanitation coverage reflected by the Department as
63.15% was based on progress report submitted by all the

9
States through the online-monitoring system maintained by
the Department. The data is therefore real-time data as on the
date of reporting.
As regards the special efforts made during the International Year
of Sanitation 2008 by the Department, following is submitted:
1. The Department organized South Asian Conference on
Sanitation (SACOSAN-III) where in all the 8 SAARC
countries participated.  The conference concluded with a
Delhi Declaration signed by all the member countries
renewing commitment towards eliminating open defecation
practice in the region.  This also helped in raising the profile
of the subject for according due priority by all stake holders.
2. The financial allocation for TSC was raised from
Rs.1060 crore in the year 2007-08 to Rs.1200 crore in the
year 2008-09.
3. Nirmal Gram Puraskar (NGP) function was decentralized for
the first time.  The same was organized at three places
namely – Hissar (Haryana), Guwahati (Assam) and Pune
(Maharashtra) wherein HE President of India gave away
awards to the qualifying Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs).
4. The Minister of Rural Development wrote to all the States
about International Year of Sanitation stating the main thrust
of the advocacy and promotional activities and the need of
personal efforts in achieving Universal Access to Safe
Sanitation facilities in rural areas.”
17. Keeping in view the slow progress of rural sanitation coverage
and the wide gulf between the data reported by the Department and
WHO-UNICEF Report in India about open defecation, the Committee
had desired that an independent survey should be conducted by the
Department to ascertain the extent of actual sanitation coverage in the
country. The Committee are distressed to find that the Department in
their Action Taken Reply have merely tried to explain away the issue by
stating that the data in the WHO-UNICEF Report does not reflect the

10
efforts of the International Year of Sanitation, 2008 and beyond. The
Committee would like the Department to take appropriate and
expeditious measures to conduct the survey on the extent of present
actual sanitation coverage in the country and also to find out any
shortcoming in the programme of the Department and take suitable
remedial measures.
The Department have further informed the Committee about the
special efforts made by them during the International Year of Sanitation,
2008, i.e., the Department organized South-Asian Conference on
Sanitation where Delhi Declaration towards eliminating open defecation
with the region was signed by the members countries; raised the
budgetary allocation from Rs. 1060 crore to Rs. 1200 crore during
2008-2009; decentralized Nirmal Gram Puruskar (NGP) and organized
it at three places namely, Hissar, Guwahati and Pune and the Minister
of Rural Development has written to all the States for giving special
attention to achieve universal access to safe sanitation facilities in rural
areas.  The Committee feel that the efforts made by the Department are
not complete if the issue of awareness generation is left behind in this
‘Demand Driven’ programme.  The Committee would be happy if
awareness programme is launched by the Department on war footing
in this regard. The Committee would like to be apprised of the follow
up action taken by the Department in pursuance to Delhi Declaration.
E. Coverage of schools in the rural areas under drinking water and
sanitation programmes
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 5.35)
18. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find from the data provided by the Department
that while the financial achievement under TSC during 2008-09
was 100 per cent, it was 95.96% during 2009-10 (upto 15.03.2010).
However, as against the target of 115 lakh household toilets and
3.44 lakh school toilet  blocks the achievement is only 1,01,27,928
and 1,17,952 respectively during these two years. Thus the

11
achievement in the physical target has not been up to the mark. It
is surprising that the Department itself fixes certain quantifiable
targets at the beginning of the year and when the same are not
achieved, the Department takes the excuse that it is a demand driven
programme. Since open defecation leads to many diseases apart
from environmental pollution, generation of demand through
vigorous IEC campaigns may be resorted to by the Department if
it has to achieve 100% sanitation coverage by 2012. The
Committee, therefore, urge the Department to undertake broad
intervention through targeted action for better and dignified living
conditions for rural population and for promoting environment
sustainability. The Committee have repeatedly been drawing the
attention of the Department in their respective reports to the need
for coverage of all the schools in the rural areas in the Country
under drinking water and sanitation programmes. Every year the
Government are setting the targets for full coverage but the targets
are being spilled over to the next year. The Committee reiterate to
make all out initiatives to ensure that all the schools in the Country
in the rural areas have the toilet facility.”
(Recommendation Para No. 5.35)
19. The Department in the action-taken reply have stated as
under:—
“The annual achievement against physical objectives for the year
2009-10 is as follows:
Component Objective Achievement
Household toilets 1,15,00,000 1,24,89,785
School toilets 3,44,000 1,44,538
Thus it can be seen that the Department has actually exceeded
anticipated objectives in terms of IHHL by almost 8.7%.  The 100%
achievement in school toilet units could not achieved till now due
to constraint of insufficient financial assistance and revision of
project objectives by States to ensure adequate sanitation facilities

12
in rural schools.  Since now the assistance has been revised upwards
as mentioned earlier, it is expected that balance objectives shall be
achieved by March 2012.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 5.35)
20. Keeping in view the recurring steep shortfalls in achievement
of targets with regard to providing toilets in all rural schools, the
Committee had emphasized that all out efforts be made to achieve full
coverage in this regard. The Department have in their Action Taken
Reply explained that 100% achievement in school toilet units could not
be achieved due to constraint of insufficient financial assistance. Since
the financial assistance in this regard has been revised upwards, the
Department expects that balance objectives shall be achieved by March,
2012. While taking due note of the action taken by the Department to
enhance financial assistance in the matter, the Committee hope that
earnest efforts would be made to ensure that 100% sanitation coverage
is achieved by March 2012 without fail.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee urge the Department to review the implementation
of all recommendations made by the Committee during Fourteenth
Lok Sabha. The Committee also desire that, in future, the Government should
review the previous recommendations made by the Committee and intimate
the Committee about the stage of their implementation before presentation
of the Demands for Grants for the next financial year. Further, they desire
that the Statement made under direction 73A should not be a mere
reproduction of the action taken notes and should reflect the effective
implementation made by the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee will be complied with in
future.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 3.10)
The Committee have been informed that despite having a low budget
as compared to the other Departments of the Government of India, the
Department has surrendered Rs. 9.40 crore during 2008-09. Although the
allocation of the Department as percentage to GDP has increased from 0.17
per cent in the year 2008-09 to 0.21 per cent in 2010-11, the Committee feel
that this share is too little as nearly seventy per cent of the population resides
in rural India. Further, Rs. 2581.27 crore was lying unspent with the
implementing agencies at the beginning of 2009-10. In the opinion of the
Committee the poor allocation of funds to the Department may be attributed
to the fact that the Department has not been able to utilize fully even the

14
meager funds allocated to it. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department
to utilize the full allocation provided by the Planning Commission so that
the physical targets do not suffer.
Reply of the Government
The actual amount surrendered is Rs. 8.46 crore (1.27 +7.19) which
is 0.10% of the total budget.
The minor savings in the form of Rs. 7.19 crore in TSC came to notice
after the completion of the financial year on account of reconciliation of
expenditure figures. However, the grant-in-aid component of total funds
allocated was fully utilized so that the physical objectives do not suffer.
As regards the unspent balance of Rs.1,470.75 crore,  as on 1.4.2009,
under ARWSP remaining with the States, these were on account of a number
of reasons viz. insistence by the Department  on States to utilize at least 60%
of the total available funds and  provide the State’s matching share before
release of 2nd instalment; restoration of cuts imposed  on the States and their
consequent release; release of additional grants out of savings to better
performing States at the fag end the financial year, non-transfer of funds to
implementing agencies in time by the State Government. The Department will
continue to make all efforts  including holding of Conferences of State
Secretaries, Video Conferences, review visits, letters etc. to expedite the
utilization of available funds by the States.
As regards opening balance with the implementing agencies under TSC,
with the remedial measures taken by the Department, the opening balance
as on 1.4.2010 has considerably reduced to Rs. 812.72 crore from Rs.1113.00
crore.  Intensive review will be conducted during the year regarding the
position so that money available is utilized quickly.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 3.13)
The Committee note that the non-Plan expenditure of the Department
is increasing continuously since 2008-09 which is not a healthy sign.  Another
disturbing feature is that the RE in respect of Non-Plan has always been
enhanced over the BE which shows that Department had not expected the
higher expenditure at the time of submitting the proposals at BE stage.  This

15
reflects lack of proper planning with regard to the non-Plan expenditure of
the Department. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to curtail
non-Plan expenditure to the barest minimum to do proper planning before
submitting the BE proposals so that the non-Plan expenditure does not
increase substantially over the BE proposal.
Reply of the Government
The increase in Non-Plan expenditure is on account of unexpected
developments like creation of MoS Office separately for D/DWS and creation
of posts for personal staff of MoS, resulting in increase of expenditure on
salaries and office expenses and introduction of MACPS in 2009 with
retrospective effect from 1.9.2008 resulting in increase of expenditure on
account of arrears, which it was not possible to plan at the time of B.E.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 3.17)
The Committee are constrained to note that vital sector of rural drinking
water supply and rural sanitation have not received adequate allocations as
demanded by the nodal Department i.e. Department of Drinking Water Supply
during the first four years of Eleventh Plan (2007-12) except for allocation for
sanitation during 2008-09. The Committee also note that whatever increase
in allocation has been done relates to only in 2010-11 that too representing
an increase of 12.5 per cent in rural drinking water supply and 31.7 per cent
increase for sanitation sector. The Committee are of the firm opinion that
aforesaid increase is not commensurate with the task in hand before the
Department during the period. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
desired level of funds be made available to them and urge the Planning
Commission to favourably consider their case for higher allocations.
Reply of the Government
Department has requested the Planning Commission for making
additional allocation of Rs. 325 crore (Rs. 200 crore for handpumps+
Rs. 125 crore for sustainability measures) for taking up new handpumps,
revival, rejuvenation and repair of  old wells, injection wells to recharge hand
pumps and tube wells, hydro-fracturing and creation of secondary aquifrs in
massive hard rock areas  through controlled blasting under the Integrated
Development Package for Bundelkhand region.

16
 The Department seeks allocations from Planning Commission based
on the projected requirement. However, Planning Commission allocates
funds to the sector within the over all budgetary support available. The
Department will continue to make earnest efforts to get more funds for the
sector.  The Committee’s observations will also be brought to the notice of
the Planning Commission during Plan discussions.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 3.21)
The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the
proposed Steering Committee which is to prepare the strategic plan for the
remaining two years of the current plan and also during the 12th and 13th
Five Year Plans. The Committee also recommend that this Steering
Committee should also analyse the performance of the Department so far
during first three years of the current Five Year Plan. The Department,
therefore, should obtain Utilization Certificates from all the States and Union
territories and take suitable corrective measures and inform the Committee
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The Steering Committee of the Department headed by the Secretary,
DWS held it’s first meeting on 27/4/2010. Two Working Groups, one for rural
drinking water under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (DWS) and the
other for sanitation under Joint Secretary (Sanitation) have also been
constituted. The first meetings of the two Working Groups were held on
3rd and 4th June, 2010 respectively. The Department has also decided to hold
four regional consultative workshops and a national workshop by involving
all stakeholders, viz. representatives of State Governments, PRIs, civil society,
experts, NGOs, VWSCs, etc. The first regional workshop was held on
18th June, 2010 at Chandigarh and the second on 9th July, 2010 at Bangalore.
As recommended by the Standing Committee, the Steering Committee is
analyzing the performance of the Department while laying down its future
strategies and implementation plan.
As regards the National Rural Drinking Water Programme, one of the
important conditions is submission of Utilization Certificates of funds
released in the previous year for the release of 2nd instalment to States.

17
Without the UC, the 2nd instalment cannot be released to the States. However,
some UCs are pending for releases made under natural calamity component
of NRDWP, water quality monitoring and surveillance, Swajaldhara, etc. for
which concerned States are being requested through meetings, video-
conferences, letters etc.  to furnish the UCs.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 4.8)
The Committee learn that Anganwadi Kendras are sanctioned by the
Government of India and out of 13.56 lakh Anganwadi Kendras in the
country, 1.23 lakh Anganwadi Kendras still do not have facility of toilets.
The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to take up construction of
Anganwadi toilets with the States which are lagging behind and also provide
funds for their construction in Anganwadi Kendras which are being run in
the private buildings also as these Kendras are sanctioned by the Government.
Reply of the Government
As per the progress reported by States through online monitoring
system, 1.06 lakh Anganwadi Kendras in the country are yet to be provided
with sanitation facilities vis-à-vis project objectives as on May 2010. One of
the reasons for non-completion of project objectives was non revision of
assistance provided under the campaign for construction of child friendly
toilet since 1999.  The same has since been revised from Rs.5,000 to Rs.8,000
(Rs.10,000 for hilly and difficult areas) since 1.4.2010. The revision is
expected to accelerate the pace of sanitation coverage in anganwadi kendras.
As regards funds for anganwadi kendras in private buildings, TSC
guidelines and provisions are as follows:
“… Those Anganwadis, which are in private buildings, the owner must
be asked to construct the toilet as per design, and, he/she may be
allowed to charge enhanced rent for the building to recover the cost of
construction. Alternatively, the toilet may be constructed from revolving
fund component under the TSC and, suitable deductions made from the
monthly rental paid to the owner to recover the cost over a period of

18
time. For new buildings, which are going to be hired for Anganwadis,
buildings having baby friendly toilet facility only should be hired. …”
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 4.10)
The Committee have been informed by the Department that it is upto
the States to provide the level of service to be delivered to habitations. The
Department at present do not have any scheme for providing piped water
supply. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to come out
with a properly structured central scheme for providing piped water supply
to all the habitations of the Country. Further, adequate funds should also be
provided for this purpose as it would require proper infrastructural set up and
trained people to maintain the infrastructure. The Department should also
make sincere efforts to fulfil their mandate of providing safe and adequate
drinking water which is central to the livelihood system of rural people.
Reply of the Government
While the minimum basic requirement of water per day per head for
purposes of comparability and reporting remains at 40 litres, as per the
new guidelines of National Rural Drinking Water Programme the State
Governments  decide on the level of service in each scheme, which could
be based on availability of funds, ground/surface water sources and demand
for services by the households and could be a multi village piped water supply
scheme, a single village piped water supply scheme, a hand pump or open
well etc. With regard to the recommendation to come out with a properly
structured central scheme for providing piped water supply to all the
habitations of the country, it is submitted that schemes for providing piped
water supply to rural habitations are already being taken up by the States
under ARWSP/NRDWP. Under the NRDWP Guidelines, the States can take
up piped water supply schemes with higher service provisions viz. 55 lpcd
or 70 lpcd and also design the scheme to provide individual household
connections. The State Governments are increasingly taking up piped water
supply schemes under NRDWP as seen from the information available
on the online monitoring system given at table annexed at Appendix–I.

19
The States have reported that 63073 piped water supply schemes are expected
to be completed in 2010-11 under NRDWP.
 The endeavour of the Department is to enable the PRIs and their sub-
committees i.e. Village Water and Sanitation Committees (VWSCs) to
manage, operate and maintain water supply systems. To achieve this goal,
10% of NRDWP allocation is earmarked to those States in proportion to the
rural population managing their own water supply, as an incentive fund. The
Department has focused on capacity building, training and other software
activities and has also enhanced funding for Support activities from 2% to
5% to build the capacities of local communities and PRIs to manage their
own water supply.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 4.17 )
The Committee observe that physical progress in respect of quality
affected habitations has been dismal. As against the target of
49,653 habitations during 2007-08, the achievement has only been 18,757.
Similarly as against the target of 99402 during 2008-09, the achievement is
only 21531. During 2009-10 also the achievement has been only 11,962 (upto
31.1.2010) against a target of 34,595. What is more surprising is the fact that
almost the entire funds allocated for the purpose are stated to have been
utilized during the respective years while in physical terms the achievement
has been only a fraction of the targets. The Committee would like to have
a clarification in this regard from the Department. The Committee are also
unable to comprehend the figures of 94,1360 and 2,05,930 habitations shown
to have been ‘addressed’  during  2007-08   and  2008-09  respectively.  There
is no corresponding figure for 2009-10.
Reply of the Government
Under Bharat Nirman, the Revised Sub-mission on Water Quality was
launched in 2006-07.  Since schemes to tackle water quality take 2-3 years
for completion, during the initial years, the focus was on ensuring that States
prepare water supply projects to address the water quality problems in the
affected habitations and get them approved by the State level Scheme
Sanctioning Committee. In this backdrop, the Department started monitoring
and reporting the figures about number of habitations for which projects were
sanctioned and it was termed as “addressed”. Thus, in 2007-08 and

20
2008-09, the number of habitations for which projects were approved, were
reported as ‘addressed’. Once the States prepared and approved the water
supply projects to provide safe drinking water in the quality-affected
habitations, the focus shifted to monitoring the completion and
commissioning of schemes and therefore from 2009-10 onwards, Department
is monitoring the number of habitations wherein schemes have been
completed, commissioned and people started getting safe drinking water. In
2009-10, as reported by the States, 32,129 quality-affected habitations were
covered against the target to cover 34,595 quality-affected habitations.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 11 & 12, Para Nos. 4.19 & 4.20)
It is needless to point out that contaminated harmful sources of water
in the rural areas in the Country may cause a severe crisis and trap the people
in vicious cycle of poverty and disease. The Committee would emphasize that
all efforts made with regard to improving the coverage of targets and bringing
about sustainability of sources as  the systems  become  meaningless in  the
absence  of clean and safe drinking water.
The Committee note that arsenic and fluoride contaminated water leads
to serious health hazards not only to the present generation but also to the
future generations.
Reply of the Government
The Department notes the observations of the Committee. The States
are being impressed upon to accord priority for tackling quality problems in
the affected habitations and give highest priority to provision of safe drinking
water in arsenic and fluoride contaminated habitations.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 4.21)
The Committee recommends that survey for contamination of water be
carried throughout the country and remedial measures i.e. purification of
contaminated water be taken up by the Department on a priority basis.

21
Reply of the Government
The Committee’s recommendations for survey of quality-affected
habitations have been noted. States have been requested to take up testing
of all drinking water sources for chemical and bacteriological contaminations
in the Action Plan for 2010-11, update  the online figures and  put them in
the public domain for transparency. The Department has also made provision
for setting up of sub-divisional level laboratories for which 100% financial
assistance is available under NRDWP. In the Annual Action Plans for
2010-11, the States have been requested to target the maximum number of
quality-affected habitations for coverage. States have been given the
flexibility to utilize upto 65% of NRDWP allocations to cover quality affected
habitations.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 4.31)
The Committee observe that an Evaluation Study was conducted by the
Economic and Monitoring Wing of Ministry of Rural Development for Sub-
Mission (Quality) Projects under ARWSP in States of Uttar Pradesh, Orissa,
Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal on the level of
community awareness on issues pertaining to drinking water initiatives taken
by households in the matter and infrastructure development and outputs. The
findings revealed that there was a near absence of community participation
in all stages from planning to implementation, despite it being very strongly
mentioned in the ARWSP Guidelines and the practice of safe water was not
very common. Another study that aimed at providing quantitative and
qualitative review of the status of implementation of the programme revealed
that slippage of habitations was widespread and only 37.53% of households
reported drawing water from ARWSP facility that were earlier drawing unsafe
water in pre-ARWSP period. However, households in the States like Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh
and Uttarakhand reported no change in the quality of water. The Committee
desire that urgent remedial measures be taken up to address the aforesaid
issues in order to ensure that the various schemes/programmes of the
Department actually benefit the rural population.

22
Reply of the Government
The findings of the Evaluation & Monitoring Study have been noted.
More emphasis is now given towards sustainability of sources and systems
to avoid slippages, on addressing water quality problems, community
participation and capacity building of various stakeholders especially PRIs
and the local community, to ensure not only their participation but to empower
them to take over the management, operation and maintenance of the water
supply systems. Emphasis has also been given for Support activities for which
allocation has been raised from 2% to 5% of NRDWP allocation to States.
In the NRDWP guidelines, provisions have been made for coordinating
all support activities through a State level Water and Sanitation Support
Organization (WSSO) and setting up of State Water and Sanitation Mission
(SWSM), District Water and Sanitation Missions (DWSMs), Village Water
and Sanitation Committees (VWSCs), etc. States have been requested to
prepare their action plan for the Support activities and implement the same
with the Support fund made available to them under the NRDWP.
To ensure long term sustainability of water supply systems, 20% of
NRDWP funds are allocated to States as 100% grant for taking up measures
for sustainability of sources and systems that include various rainwater
harvesting and recharge structures. Setting up of Block Resource Centres at
the block level for awareness generation, training and handholding of
Gram Panchayats/VWSCs to manage water supply, has also been approved.
Training has been accorded highest priority. States are being supported to
organize Training Needs Assessment workshops and based on the same, firm
up their Capacity building plan and Training calendar. To assist the States
in IEC activities, detailed IEC guidelines have been issued. Department has
also taken up awareness campaign on various aspects of safe drinking water
through radio and Doordarshan. Under the NRDWP, it is envisaged that Gram
Panchayats or their sub-committees i.e. Village Water and Sanitation
Committees or Pani Samitis, will be given the responsibilities and resources
to manage in-village water supply.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 4.32)
The Committee apprehend that the information provided by the
Department regarding the coverage (86.77 per cent) does not appear to be

23
based on the reality. While recommending for an independent survey, the
Committee desire that the terms of reference of the independent survey be
immediately made and the result of the findings be linked with BPL Census
and the General Census so as to have a real picture of the drinking water
scenario in rural areas in the country and the data on the IMIS. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the same.
Reply of the Government
The Department has already initiated action for taking up an
independent monitoring and evaluation survey.  While finalizing the ToR, the
points made by the Committee have been taken into account. For carrying
out survey, the survey schedule would be three types — household survey,
habitation survey and Gram Panchayat survey (if GP has more than one
habitation). The key variables while designing the survey schedules would
include: household coverage, access and use from different sources; time
taken for fetching water; location of water source; quality of drinking water;
adequate availability of water; coverage of scheduled caste/ tribe/ landless
population; involvement of community; operation and maintenance aspects;
status of different sub-mission projects; water quality surveillance and
training of  youth; sustenance aspects of water supply systems; satisfaction
level of beneficiaries; sanitation status and coverage of households;
technology inputs in construction of toilets; availability of sanitary wares;
awareness level of people about need for sanitation and involvement of
community in TSC programme.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 17 and 18, Para Nos. 4.35 and 4.36)
The Committee note that the period of Bharat Nirman-I (2005-09) has
ended in 2009. As against the target of 55067 uncovered habitations in the
four years time, the Department could cover only 54440 habitations of
the 28 targeted States under the slipped back category in 13 States of
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir,
Jharkhand, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu
and Uttarakhand, the Department has not achieved the targets. Further no
target was set for slipped back category in any of the Union territories.
The Committee are concerned to note that in the slipped back category
nearly half of the States could not achieve the target. The Committee

24
apprehend that it may put a question mark on the sustainability of the sources.
The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to immediately work on the
achievement of targets set under Bharat Nirman I. In the States where the
performance is found to be not satisfactory, specific reasons be found out and
remedial measures be taken without any further delay. The Committee would
like the Department to work out a strategy urgently to achieve the said targets
within stipulated timeframe.
Reply of the Government
During Bharat Nirman Phase–I, as against the target to cover 55,067
uncovered habitations, the actual coverage was 54,440 habitations, which is
98.86%. The remaining habitations could not be covered on account of
geographical conditions of the habitations such as difficulty in accessing the
habitations, scattered nature of the habitations which entailed huge
expenditure for the States to cover such habitations, etc. However these left
out uncovered habitations are given priority for coverage in Bharat Nirman
Phase–II. In the case of UTs, no target for slipped-back category of habitations
was fixed for coverage, as these UTs have not reported any slippages as on
1.4.2005 or even now.
Moreover, slippage being a dynamic phenomenon, the situation will
vary from season to season. It is quite possible that a habitation that has
slipped-back in a particular year improves to covered category during the
subsequent years due to good rainfall, improvement in water table, etc.
During Bharat Nirman Phase–I, 13 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Meghalaya, Nagaland,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand could not achieve
the target of covering slipped-back habitations. However, it may be noted that
against an overall target of coverage of 3,31,604 slipped-back habitations,
the coverage achieved was 3,58,362 habitations which was more than 100%.
However, endeavour would be to minimize the occurrences of slippage during
Bharat Nirman Phase–II. During the Annual Action Plan (2010–11)
discussions, States have been advised to accord priority to such habitations,
where population coverage is less than 100%. States have also been asked
to mark the habitations that are planned for coverage, in the online IMIS of
the Department. The Department is holding regular meetings and reviews
through video conferencing to review the progress of implementation.

25
As already submitted, 20% of the NRWDP funds are provided as 100%
Central grant for measures to achieve sustainability of sources and systems
to ensure that habitations once fully covered do not slip back.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 5.9)
The Committee observe that the allocation of funds under National
Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) has been made only for
28 States of the country and not for any of the Union Territory
Administrations. The Committee would like to know the justification for not
providing any funds to the UTs and how without any allocation of funds,
drinking water schemes are being implemented in rural habitations in these
Union territories.
Reply of the Government
Till 2006-07 allocations were made to UTs also in the State-wise
allocation of funds under NRDWP. However, these UTs did not draw their
allocated amount. At the end of the financial year, this necessitated
reallocation of this amount to other States. In view of this, UTs were not
allocated funds under NRDWP. However, during 2010-11, UTs have been
allocated funds. It may however be noted that as per the allocation criteria,
their share is very meagre. Nevertheless, the Department held two rounds of
meetings with the UTs to encourage them to prepare their annual action plan
and draw NRDWP funds. The Planning Commission is also allocating funds
to UTs for their plan, which inter alia includes drinking water supply also.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 20 and 21, Para Nos. 5.15 and 5.16)
The  Committee   find  from   the   information  provided  by  the
Department that Rs.8000 crore were provided for NRDWP for the financial
year 2009-10. Till mid March, 2010 Rs.7,005.87 crore have been released
which is 87.57 per cent of the total allocation for 2009-10. As against the
target of 1,58,589 habitations fixed for 2009-10, the achievement is only
88,443 which is 55.67 per cent of the target. Further, no target was set under
uncovered category except for the States of Punjab, Rajasthan and
Uttarakhand. Similarly no target was fixed for the slipped back category

26
except for Chhattisgarh, Goa, Orissa, Lakshadweep and Puducherry. The
Committee would like to know as to why no target was set for uncovered
and slipped back categories in other States and Union territories.
The Committee would like to emphasize that the financial performance
should match the physical performance. The Committee would like the
Department to shun their complacent approach and undertake concrete and
strict measures to ensure achievement of the targets by the States. The
Committee may be apprised of the concrete action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Against the allocation of Rs.8,000 crore provided for rural water supply,
the total amount released during 2009-10 was Rs.7,989.72 crore which is
99.87%.  Similarly, against the target of covering 1,58,589 habitations, the
actual coverage was 1,52,429 habitations, which is 96.1%. The States other
than Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand did not have uncovered habitations
remaining to be covered under Bharat Nirman.  Hence no targets were fixed
for other States. Chhattisgarh, Goa, Orissa, Lakshadweep and Puducherry had
no slipped-back habitations to be covered. Hence no targets were fixed for
these States. However, Chhattisgarh and Orissa had reported coverage of
slipped-back habitations that might be coverage of habitations not included
in the Bharat Nirman programme. To ensure physical performance, States are
requested to prepare their annual action plan, discuss with the Department
and then finalize the same as per NRDWP priorities. They have been asked
to mark the habitations to be covered during 2010-11 on the IMIS and take
up sustainability structures in the slipped back habitations.  The progress is
regularly reviewed through video-conferences, review meetings, etc. In some
of the poor performing States, State workshops are also being organized to
sensitize and motivate the State and district level officials.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 5.35)
The Committee find from the data provided by the Department that
while the financial achievement under TSC during 2008-09 was 100 per cent,
it was 95.96% during 2009-10 (upto 15.03.2010). However, as against the
target of 115 lakh household toilets and 3.44 lakh school toilet blocks the
achievement is only 1,01,27,928 and 1,17,952 respectively during these two
years. Thus the achievement in the physical target has not been up to the mark.

27
It is surprising that the Department itself fixes certain quantifiable targets at
beginning of the year and when the same are not achieved, the Department
takes the excuse that it is a demand driven programme. Since open defecation
leads to many diseases apart from environmental pollution, generation of
demand through vigorous IEC campaigns may be resorted to by the
Department if it has to achieve 100% sanitation coverage by 2012. The
Committee, therefore, urge the Department to undertake broad intervention
through targeted action for better and dignified living conditions for rural
population and for promoting environment sustainability. The Committee
have repeatedly been drawing the attention of the Department in their
respective reports to the need for coverage of all the schools in the rural areas
in the Country under drinking water and sanitation programmes. Every year
the Government are setting the targets for full coverage but the targets are
being spilled over to the next year. The Committee reiterate to make all out
initiatives to ensure that all the schools in the country in the rural areas have
the toilet facility.
Reply of the Government
The annual achievement against physical objectives for the year
2009-10 is as follows:
Component Objective Achievement
Household toilets 1,15,00,000 1,24,89,785
School toilets 3,44,000 1,44,538
Thus it can be seen that the Department has actually exceeded
anticipated objectives in terms of IHHL by almost 8.7%. The 100%
achievement in school toilet units could not achieved till now due to
constraint of insufficient financial assistance and revision of project
objectives by States to ensure adequate sanitation facilities in rural schools.
Since now the assistance has been revised upwards as mentioned earlier, it
is expected that balance objectives shall be achieved by March 2012.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of the Report)

28
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 4.18)
It is observed that no target during 2009-10 has been given for Andaman
and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Goa, Lakshadweep,
Manipur, Daman and Diu, Mizoram, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand.
This shows that no effort has been made by the Department of Drinking Water
Supply to solve the problem of quality affected habitations in the aforesaid
12 States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of the
rationale behind fixing NIL targets for these States/UTs during 2009-10 as
also the targets fixed in this regard State and Union territory-wise for
2010-11. The Committee desire that the Department should take all measures
to ensure that the remaining quality affected habitations are addressed on a
priority basis by chalking out an immediate action plan in this regard.
Reply of the Government
With regard to Andaman & Nicobar Islands, during the Bharat Nirman
period the UT had targeted to cover 26 water quality-affected habitations that
were subsequently covered. Further the UT had not reported any more water
quality-affected habitations. Hence no target was given to them under water
quality-affected habitations during 2009-10. Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar
Haveli, Goa, Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep, Sikkim and Uttarakhand had no
water quality-affected habitations remaining to be covered during Bharat
Nirman period. They do not have any water quality-affected habitations
remaining to be covered even now. Manipur, Mizoram and Tamil Nadu have
not reported any remaining uncovered quality-affected habitations during
2009-10 and therefore no target was fixed for these States.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 5.21)
The Committee observe that the achievement under TSC is less than
50 per cent in Andaman and Nicobar, Bihar, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman
and Diu, Jharkhand, Orissa and Puducherry. The Committee would like to
know the reasons for non-achievement of targets in these States. The
Committee apprehend that the data of 63.15 per cent coverage of sanitation
may not be correct in light of the recent WHO-UNICEF report on India about
open defecation which says as many as 69 per cent of rural Indians defecate
in the open. The Committee, therefore, desire that an independent survey be
conducted to know about the actual sanitation coverage.
Reply of the Government
TSC is a demand driven programme. Some of the UTs like Andaman
& Nicobar Island, Dadar and Nagar Haveli do not have any project under
TSC despite repeated persuasion with the UT administration. Therefore, the
progress, if any, in respect of rural sanitation coverage achieved through any
other programme/community on their own also does not get reported to the
Department. UTs of Daman and Diu and Puduchery have taken district
projects under TSC. However, the progress is not regularly reported to the
Department. In order to improve the situation, coordination meetings with
the UTs and Ministry of Home Affairs were recently held on 1st June and
21st June 2010 to review the status and encourage UTs to take up projects
under TSC and regularly report progress.
Some of the reasons for slow progress of rural sanitation coverage in
the States of Bihar, Jharkhand and Orissa are:—
• Lack of priority for sanitation
29

• Non-release of State share in time.
• Lack of emphasis on innovative IEC suitable for local conditions
for effective demand generation.
• Inadequate capacity building at grassroot level.
• Lack of staff at State and District levels.
• Implementation of the programme in engineering mode through
PHEs.
According to the information presented in the WHO/UNICEF report
on ‘Progress on sanitation and drinking water 2010 update’ the use of
sanitation facilities as a percentage of population was 31% in rural areas of
the country.  The information presented in the reports includes data from
household surveys and censuses completed during the period 2007-2008 only.
As mentioned in the Report itself, the data in the report does not reflect
the efforts of the International Year of Sanitation-2008 and beyond which
mobilised renewed support to eliminate the practice of open defecation and
promote the use of toilets.  Moreover JMP monitors usage while at present
TSC figures speak of availability of physical facility of toilet.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of the Report)
30

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 4.5)
The  Committee  find  that  the  coverage  of  Rural  Water  Supply
is only 84 per cent and 16 per cent of the households do not have access
to safe drinking water. Only 12 per cent are getting piped water supply. The
sanitation coverage is only 63.15 per cent. The Committee note that the
achievement in both the sectors is not satisfactory. Not only that the target
of achieving cent per cent rural sanitation coverage by March, 2012 does not
seem feasible and is expected to be achieved only by the year 2015. The
Committee are unhappy over this slippage in achieving the targets for cent
per cent rural sanitation. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Department to step up their efforts to achieve the full coverage in a time bound
manner. The Committee also recommend the Government to carry out an
independent and impartial survey on the coverage of water supply and
sanitation in the Country, State and Union territory-wise. They also
recommend that the Department should identify the number of toilets that
are currently being used and apprise the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The rural sanitation coverage as per progress reported by all the States
through online monitoring system maintained by the Department of Drinking
Water and Sanitation is 66.5% as of May, 2010. Programme Evaluation Office
(PEO) of Planning Commission is already carrying out an independent study
of TSC.  As recommended, the Department shall also make efforts to include
reporting on toilet usage through appropriate system.
In the Bharat Nirman Phase-I and Phase-II, the Department has targeted
the coverage of uncovered, slipped back and quality affected habitations so
that all habitations and households get access to safe drinking water. The rural
population covered with piped water supply schemes as in June, 2010 is
31

26.61 crore (more than 32% of the rural population) as per the online
monitoring system of the Department. The Department is making all efforts
to achieve full and universal coverage. The recommendation of the
Committee for carrying out an independent and impartial survey on the
coverage of water supply and sanitation in the country, State and UT-wise,
has been noted and action has been initiated to conduct such a survey.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 4.27)
The Committee note that the recommendation made by the Thirteenth
Finance Commission for putting up a supplement to the budget document for
local bodies, an audit system for all local bodies, system of independent
ombudsman for looking after complaints of corruption and maladministration
in local bodies, electronic transfer of funds, if strictly adhered to will help
the Department in not only achieving the targets in time but will also help
in smooth transfer of funds. Regarding rural sanitation, the recommendation
for provision of funds for garbage/solid waste management services and
sewage disposal will add a new dimension to the Total Sanitation Campaign
(TSC) of the Department which has been missing uptill now. The Committee
desire that these recommendations of the Thirteenth Finance Commission be
implemented immediately. The Committee further feel that the Department
need to undertake broad intervention through targeted action for better and
dignified living conditions for rural populace and for promoting environment
sustainability.
Reply of the Government
The Department has written to the Department of Expenditure and
Ministry of Panchayati Raj for taking necessary action on the recommenda-
tions of the Committee.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 5.20)
The Committee observes that 100 per cent achievement in
Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) has been made only in Haryana,
32

Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Mizoram, Sikkim and Tripura. The Committee
would like to know whether total sanitation in all its aspects has actually been
fully realized on date in the said six States. The Committee apprehend that
there may be existence of slipped back habitations as far as sanitation is
concerned. They would like to know the status of slipped back habitation in
these States.
Reply of the Government
As per the progress reported by the States through online monitoring
system, the State of Sikkim has reported 100% achievement against project
objectives. The State has since been awarded the status of ‘Nirmal State’ in
December, 2008. All other States are yet to achieve 100% project objectives.
The existence of slip back, if any, shall be known through the study being
carried out by Programme Evaluation Office (PEO), Planning Commission.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 5.22)
The Committee express concern on the inadequate access of large
number of rural households in the country to basic sanitation. Further with
a view to the spreading of awareness about hygienic and sanitation practices
to ensure that toilets constructed are actually used for the purpose, the
Committee recommend that the curriculum in schools and colleges may be
suitably modified to include good practices in water and sanitation habits.
This would create more awareness about the programme and generate more
demands which is crucial to the success of the programme.
Reply of the Government
The matter regarding inclusion of water and sanitation issues in the
curriculum in the schools was taken up with the Department of Elementary
Education and Literacy (DEEL), Ministry of Human Resource Development.
As recommended, the matter shall be pursued further.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
33

Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 5.31)
In pursuance of their  earlier recommendation the Department has
submitted  the  proposal  for  upward  revision  of  the  cost  of assistance
for  construction  of  toilets  in  schools  from  Rs.20,000  to Rs.32,000 and
for Anganwadi toilets from Rs.5,000 to Rs.8,000. But the Committee find
that there is no proposal for upward revision for Individual Household
Latrines (IHHL) which is Rs. 2200.00 being provided to BPL households
under the scheme. As per the reply, although a proposal was submitted to
the Ministry of Finance in this regard on 1.9.2009 no final decision has so
far been taken in the matter. Since the present assistance of Rs.2200 for IHHL
is insufficient, the Committee strongly recommend that the cost of assistance
for IHHL should also be raised substantially, so that the toilets constructed
become durable and are actually used for the purpose.
Reply of the Government
The assistance for creation of sanitation facilities for rural schools has
since been revised from Rs.20,000/- to Rs.35,000/- (Rs.38,500/- in case of
hilly and difficult areas).  Similarly for anganwadis, the assistance for creation
of sanitation facilities has been revised from Rs.5,000/- to Rs.8,000/-
(Rs.10,000/- in case of hilly and difficult areas) with effect from 1.4.2010.
As recommended, the matter regarding incentive for creation of sanitation
facilities for households under BPL category shall also be taken up
appropriately for upward revision.
[No. H-11011/04/2010-Drinking Water Supply (Coord.),
Dated 2nd August, 2010]
34
 N EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
25 February , 2011 Chairperson,
6 Phalguna , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Rural Development.

APPENDIX I
PWS Scheme (By date of completion)
Sl. State Name 2007-2008 2008-2009 2009-2010 (Expected date of
No. completion by)
2010-2011
No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of
Schemes Habs Schemes Habs Schemes Habs Schemes Habs
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
1. Andhra Pradesh 1027 1799 1 135 1396 3209 5179 4763 8314
2. Bihar 93 115 158 187 278 471 317 340
3. Chhattisgarh 193 181 327 2135 867 1189 2345 2336
4. Goa 7 16 5 7 0 0 2 47
5. Gujarat 4086 3799 4246 3732 2142 2037 1367 2205
6. Haryana 953 955 874 892 1053 1046 1413 1601
7. Himachal Pradesh 3222 5093 1301 3341 1594 4467 1143 5928
8. Jammu and Kashmir 179 218 241 331 377 899 635 1732
35

36
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
19. Jharkhand 223 211 37 3 3 26 33 1277 1497
10. Karnataka 7880 6643 8206 6659 11117 8635 15001 13944
11. Kerala 664 924 681 5949 84 1034 138 919
12. Madhya Pradesh 159 149 255 236 941 841 2096 2142
13. Maharashtra 2136 3087 2354 3480 6060 8898 7331 11237
14. Orissa 768 1437 1204 2136 1947 5505 3113 9217
15. Punjab 444 832 1379 2176 1311 1580 1388 1781
16. Rajasthan 654 714 973 1089 2541 4091 4315 6795
17. Tamil Nadu 10830 10147 10492 10218 11646 11675 9180 10692
18. Uttar Pradesh 180 344 291 519 93 181 350 1321
19. Uttarakhand 984 2144 895 1826 829 1581 1110 2318
20. West Bengal 47 203 69 1550 219 2038 793 4356
21. Arunachal Pradesh 640 616 1491 1240 1300 1070 1113 948
22. Assam 338 882 392 1017 1572 5549 1376 5269

12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
23. Manipur 78 111 121 120 432 374 468 435
24. Meghalaya 564 652 561 717 937 1103 1357 1675
25. Mizoram 88 87 34 32 115 113 130 121
26. Nagaland 69 73 42 42 88 88 112 104
27. Sikkim 0 0 280 269 275 163 234 172
28. Tripura 34 76 50 102 448 747 194 355
29. Andaman and Nicobar 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Islands
30. Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
31. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
32. Daman and Diu 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
33. Delhi 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
34. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
35. Puducherry 32 56 8 14 25 40 12 19
Total 36572 41564 38102 51445 51526 70627 63073 97820
37

38
APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2010-2011)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY , 6 JANUARY , 2011
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Pulin Bihari Baske
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavaliya
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy
6. Shri Govind Chandra Naskar
7. Shri Rakesh Pandey
8. Shri P.L. Punia
9. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
10. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
11. Shri Jagdanand Singh
12. Shri Makansingh Solanki
13. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Ganga Charan
15. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
16. Dr. Ram Prakash
17. Shrimati Maya Singh
18. Shri Mohan Singh
19. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
4. Shri Raju Srivastava — Deputy Secretary
2. The Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the
Committee and greeted them on the occasion of ‘New Year’. There were four
Memoranda regarding draft action taken Reports  *** *** ***.
3. The Committee first took up for consideration the following
memoranda one by one:—
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) Memorandum No. 8 regarding consideration and adoption of draft
action taken Report on the recommendations contained in the
Eighth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2010-11)
relating to Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation
(Ministry of Rural Development);
(iii) *** *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** *** ***
(v) *** *** *** ***
4 *** *** *** ***
5. The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted the draft action
taken Reports at Sl. No. (ii) of para 3 above without any modification and
*** ***   ***. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize
these draft action taken Reports and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
6. *** *** *** ***
7. *** *** *** ***
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
39
***Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

40
APPENDIX III
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
EIGHTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (15TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations: 26
II. Recommendations that have been accepted 19
by the Government:
Para Nos.: 2.3, 3.10, 3.13, 3.17, 3.21, 4.8,
4.10, 4.17, 4.19, 4.20, 4.21, 4.31, 4.32,
4.35, 4.36, 5.9, 5.15, 5.16 and 5.35
Percentage to total recommendations: (73.1)
III. Recommendations which the Committee 1
do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies:
Para No.:  4.18
Percentage to total recommendation (3.85)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which 1
replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee:
Para No.: 5.21
Percentage to total recommendations: (3.85)
V. Recommendations in respect of which 5
final replies of the Government are
still awaited :
Para Nos. : 4.5, 4.27, 5.20, 5.22 and 5.31
Percentage to total recommendation : (19.2)

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”