STANDING  COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
[Action  taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of  Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)]
SIXTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
16

SIXTEENTH REPORT
STANDING  COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2010-2011)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of  Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ..........................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ..............................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2011 /Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)

CRD No. 16
Price : Rs. 47.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-2011)......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v)
C HAPTER I Report................................................................................. 1
C HAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government ...................................................................... 11
C HAPTER III Recommendations which the  Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies................................................................................. 27
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee......................................................................... 30
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited............................. 31
A PPENDICES
I. Office Memorandum No. 14 (25)-B(PD)/2009
Dated 12 May, 2010.......................................................... 33
II. O.M. No. P-12021/2/2010-RD Dated 17 May, 2010 .... 35
III. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee
held on 6 January, 2011 ................................................... 37
IV. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the 7th Report
of the Committee (15th Lok Sabha).............................. 40

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2010-2011)
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan—Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit
7. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
10. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar
11. Shri Rakesh Pandey
12. Shri P.L. Punia
13. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
14. Shri Jagdish Sharma
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Jagdanand Singh
17. Dr. Sanjay Singh
18. Shri Makansingh Solanki
19. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh
20. Shrimati Usha Verma
21. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
23. Shri Ganga Charan
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Dr. Ram Prakash
26. Shri P.R. Rajan
27. Shri Arjun Singh
28. Shrimati Maya Singh
29. Shri Mohan Singh
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
31. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin— Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh— Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah— Additional Director

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2010-2011) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report
on their behalf, present the Sixteenth Report on the action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report
of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Land Resources
(Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to
Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2010. The replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 16 July, 2010.
3. The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee
at their sitting held on 6 January, 2011.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-IV.
N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
25 February, 2011 Chairperson,
6 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2010-11)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) which
was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2010.
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 26 recommendations which have been categorised
as follows:—
(i) Chapter-II Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Para Nos.: 2.2, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 3.15, 3.16, 3.19,
4.12, 4.13, 4.19, 4.33, 4.36, 5.4, 5.21, 5.23, 5.29,
5.35, 5.40, 5.45, 5.47 and 5.50
(ii)Chapter-III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos.: 4.27 and 5.46
(iii)Chapter-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para No.: 4.23
(iv) Chapter-VRecommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos.: 5.13 and 5.18
3. The Committee would like the Department to expedite the
action and furnish final replies in respect of recommendations which
have been categorised under interim category, within three months of
presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

A. Allocation of higher funds
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 2 and 3, Para Nos. 3.12 and 3.13)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that the Department of Land Resources has
not been getting required funds so far during the Eleventh Plan
(2007-2012) commensurate with the task of watershed development
and modernisation of land records in the country. As against total
Eleventh Plan allocation of Rs. 17205.48 crore, the actual allocation
made available during first four years (2007-08 to 2010-11) of the
Plan has been as low as Rs. 8960 crore at Budget Estimate
stage leaving a gap of Rs. 9245.49 crore. The allocation had further
been reduced to the level of Rs. 5220 crore at RE stage for the
years 2007-08 to 2009-10 leaving a gap of staggering amount of
around Rs. 12,000 crore. The Committee feel that a State of
uncertainty in availability of Plan funds is hampering the functioning
of the Department of Land Resources as the Department has not
been getting its share of plan funds as per overall allocations made
for it. The Committee also find that in view of the task of covering
22.65 million hectare of rainfed area to be covered by the Department
during remaining two years (2010-11 and 2011-12) of the current
Plan a total sum of Rs. 8831.72 crore for IWMP and Rs. 200 crore
for NLRMP is required to cover the targeted number of districts.
In view of this, the Committee strongly recommend that
adequate allocation should be provided to the Department to
achieve the set targets under different schemes. The Committee
would like the Department to convey the concerns of the Committee
to the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance in
this regard.”
(Recommendation Para No. 3.12)
“The Committee are unable to comprehend the rationale behind
allocating higher amount while approving Eleventh Plan (2007-12)
outlay for the Department than what was proposed by the
Department and then not making available the funds to the
Department afterwards during first four years of the current Plan.
The Committee, therefore, desire that a clarification may be obtained
from Planning Commission in this regard and the Committee
apprised accordingly.”
(Recommendation Para No. 3.13)
2

6. The Department in their Action Taken reply has Stated as
under:—
“The Concerns of the Standing Committee were conveyed to the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. Details of reply
received from the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission
are enclosed as Annexure-I and II respectively.
The Planning Commission has stated that in the beginning of
the 11th Five Year Plan, both the watershed development
programme and modernization of land records were taken up for
restructuring to be launched as Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP) and National Land Records Modernization
Programme (NLRMP) respectively. The Cabinet approval for the
restructured NLRMP/IWMP was given only in 2008/2009
respectively. In this backdrop, the allocation for these programmes
was decided.
The Ministry of Finance has suggested that the Department should
plan and accelerate the expenditure evenly during the course of
the year as also ensure timely utilization of the funds released to
the States/Implementing agencies, in order to avoid high unspent
balances with the entities.
In compliance with the direction of the Standing Committee, the
issue was taken up with State Governments, in earnest, to expedite
utilization of funds, in a two-day workshop with CEOs, SLNAs
and Nodal Secretaries of the States organized by the Department
on 20-21 May 2010.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para Nos. 3.12 and 3.13)
7. The Committee have been given to understand that the
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission have attributed the
reduction of allocation at the RE stage on account of slow pace of
achievement resulting in huge unspent balance with the Department.
To correct the course the Department held a two day workshop
with the Chief Executive Officers, (CEOs) and State Level Nodal
Agencies (SLNAs) and Nodal Secretaries of the States on 20-21
May 2010 to expedite the utilization of funds. The Committee
appreciate this step of the Department and would like the
Department to hold such workshops on a regular basis involving all
the stakeholders.
3

B. Undertaking a study for combining the work of multiple agencies
like ICRISAT, NIRD etc. on impact assessment on watershed
across the country
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 4.23)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that the progress in regard to the issue
of undertaking a study for the purpose of combining the work of
multiple agencies like ICRISAT, NIRD, TERI, IGNOU etc. on
awareness generation of IWMP, generation of proposal thereunder
etc. for enabling an evaluator to understand the programme in a
holistic manner has also not been encouraging except for a request
that has been made to Centre for Rural Studies (CRS), Lal Bahadur
Shastri National Academy of Administration. The response thereto
is still awaited. The Committee opine that the issue in question has
not attracted the desired level of attention by the Department of
Land Resources since considerable time of three months has elapsed
since presentation of the Report of the Committee. The Committee,
therefore, desire that they be apprised of the reasons for delay in
executing the task in order to arrive at a logical conclusion. At the
same time the Committee urge the Department to at least now deal
with the matter expeditiously.”
(Recommendation Para No. 4.23)
9. The Department in their Action Taken reply has Stated as
under:—
“The Centre for Rural Studies (CRS), Lal Bahadur Shastri National
Academy of Administration has been assigned the task of
documentation and analysis of the evaluation reports of multiple
agencies like ICRISAT, NIRD and TERI. Funds have been
placed with them with a request to complete the work in six
months.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 4.23)
10. The Committee have been informed that the Centre for Rural
Studies (CRS) Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration
(LBSNAA) has been assigned to undertake the study for the purpose
of combining the work of multiple agencies like Centre for Rural
Studies (ICRISAT), National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD),
TERI etc. though belated. However, the Department have also not
furnished the reasons for the delay as desired by the Committee. The
Committee therefore, would like to be informed the precise reasons
4

for delay and they may also be apprised of the terms of reference of
the proposed study being undertaken by the CRS and LBSNAA.
C. Progress of IWMP in different States
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 5.4)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the programme of Integrated Watershed
Management Programme (IWMP) that seeks to achieve a wide range
of objectives of restoring ecological balance, development of
degraded natural resources like soil, vegetation cover and water
etc. is in formative stage and as such as per the nodal Department
it would be too early to have its assessment keeping in view the
long project period ranging from four to seven years. Since the
Committee are already aware of these details they would like to
know from the nodal Department in a comprehensive manner as
to how the programme is progressing in different States bringing
out clearly the difficulties being experienced as also the good results
that are being achieved in implementation of the programme. The
Committee would also like that all corrective action should be taken
so as to achieve the indicated objectives under the aforesaid
schemes.”
(Recommendation Para No. 5.4)
12. The Department in their Action Taken reply has Stated as
under:—
“The comprehensive progress of IWMP in different States as on
30/06/2010 is as below:—
During 2009-10:
• The State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA) was set up in all the
28 States for overseeing the implementation of IWMP. 26 States
have submitted bank account details for releasing Central
assistance. Goa and West Bengal have been reminded to
furnish the bank account details. Central assistance of
Rs. 61.36 crore has been released to SLNAs for institutional
support.
• 22 States have furnished State Perspective and Strategic Plan
(SPSP) and Preliminary Project Reports (PPRs). The States of
Bihar, Goa, Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur and
West Bengal have been requested to furnish SPSP and PPRs.
5

• An area of 62.99 lakh ha. was sanctioned against a target of
54.1 lakh ha. by SLNAs of 20 States as per the projects
appraised by the Steering Committee.
• Central Assistance of Rs. 501.46 crore was released to SLNAs
for implementation of IWMP projects in 20 States.
During 2010-11 (as on 30.06.2010)
• A two-day Workshop on IWMP with CEOs, SLNAs and Nodal
Secretaries of the States was organised on 20-21 May, 2010
and various issues related to implementation of IWMP
including planning for 2010-11 were discussed.
• A tentative allocation of 85 lakh Ha. target for 2010-11 has
been conveyed to the States with a request to furnish proposals
for appraisal of the Steering Committee.
• Central assistance of Rs. 694.23 crore has been released to
SLNAs for implementation of ongoing IWMP Projects.
• Central assistance of Rs. 2.48 crore has been released to SLNAs
of Bihar and Haryana for institutional support.
• Entry point activities, capacity building activities and
community mobilisation etc., have been initiated in ongoing
IWMP projects.
• In 6 States viz., Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh,
Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura DPRs have been prepared
for the projects sanctioned during 2009-10. Preparation of
DPRs in other States is under progress.
The difficulties being faced by the Department
In spite of repeated reminders, Bihar, Goa, Haryana, Jammu and
Kashmir, Manipur, West Bengal have yet to submit their SPSP and
PPRs. Further, separate bank account details for receiving Central
assistance under IWMP are awaited from Goa and West Bengal.
However, the Department is hopeful that with continual pursuation,
these issues will be resolved.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 5.4)
13. The Committee feel that the progress with regard to
implementation of Integrated Watershed Management Programme
(IWMP) has been by and large satisfactory except for Goa and West
Bengal, who are yet to provide separate bank account details for
receiving Central fund, all States have provided the same for smooth
6

flow of funds. The Department has also held a two-day workshop on
IWMP involving CEOs, SLNAs and Nodal Secretaries of the States to
discuss the various issues in planning and implementation. The
Committee are, however, perturbed to note that some States are yet to
submit State Perspective and Strategic Plans (SPSPs) and Preliminary
Project Reports (PPRs). The Committee like the Department to hold
such workshops on regular basis to sort out the issues that hinder the
pace of achievement of the Programme and impress upon the defaulting
States to submit SPSPs and PPRs without any loss of time.
D. Revision of funding pattern to North-East Region
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 5.40)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that the States of Mizoram and Arunachal
Pradesh have come up with a request before the Department of
Land Resources for revising the funding pattern for two components
of Survey/Re-survey from 50:50 and for registration from 25:75
between Centre and States to 100% from Central funding. The
Committee have been informed that moving the Cabinet for revising
the funding pattern under the NLRMP to allow for 100 per cent
Central funding for all components under the NLRMP for North-
Eastern States is under consideration of Department of Land
Resources. The Committee recommend that the Department should
move expeditiously in the matter. The final decision taken in the
matter may be intimated to the Committee.”
(Recommendation Para No. 5.40)
15. The Department in their Action Taken reply has Stated as
under:—
“The Cabinet in its meeting held on 8th July, 2010 has approved
modification to the funding pattern for the North-Eastern States
under the NLRMP, to allow for Centre: State cost sharing on a
90:10 basis for survey/resurvey and updating of the survey and
settlement records (including ground control network and ground
truthing), computerization of registration and modern record rooms/
land records management centres at tehsil/taluk/circle/block level.
For rest of the components, viz., computerization of land records,
training and capacity building, etc. the provision of 100% Central
funding will continue.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 5.40)
7

16. The Committee are happy to note that the Department has
taken a positive view to the requests of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh
on the funding pattern and extending the revised funding pattern to
90:10 basis to the entire North-Eastern region. The Committee feel that
this will go a long way in achieving the goals enshrined in National
Land Records Modernisation Programme (NLRMP).
E. Easy access to computerised land records to common man
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 23 and 25, Para Nos. 5.45 and 5.47)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are constrained to note that updated computerized
land records are not available in the country even after more than
sixty years of independence. The Committee feel that computer-
ization of land records in the country is largely dependent on various
ancillary factors like availability of modern record rooms, State
level Data Centres, Survey of existing records, their registration,
capacity building of persons etc. involved in the work of updation
of land records. In this connection the Committee observe that in
the absence of these facilities common man has to depend on
procurement of their property related papers in most of the States
from concerned district and tehsil headquarters on manual basis.
The Committee also apprehend that out of 141 NLRMP districts
Stated to have been covered across the country in most of the
districts access to computerized records may not be available at all
to common man or his representatives.”
(Recommendation Para No. 5.45)
“The Committee, therefore, recommend that a study may be
undertaken to ascertain whether in all the 141 districts covered
under NLRMP programme the supporting wherewithal in the form
of Record Room, State level Data Centre etc. is available and if not
available, the time-frame within which these components will be
made available for availability of modern updated land records
across the country. The Committee wish to emphasize that the very
purpose of computerization of land records is defeated if the
common man does not have easy access to authentic land records
on computers. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that
ways and means should be found out through technological
interventions not only to achieve the objective of having correct
and up-to-date land records but also to give easy access to such
records to the common man. For this purpose kiosks may be set
8

up at tehsil or block level where the owner or his authorized
representative can have access to the computerized records on
payment of nominal fee.”
(Recommendation Para No. 5.47)
18. The Department in their Action Taken Reply have Stated as
under:—
“All the States and UTs except A&N Islands implemented the
erstwhile scheme of Computerization of Land Records, which
yielded good results, but not consistently across the country. Several
States have completed entry of basic land records data and are
distributing the records of rights (RoRs) through computers
(e.g., Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
West Bengal, A&N Islands, Delhi, Puducherry). Many States have
accorded legal sanctity to the computerized copies of the RoRs
(e.g., Assam, A&N Islands, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Orissa, Punjab, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura,
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, West Bengal). A number of States have
stopped manual distribution of the RoRs (e.g., Gujarat, Goa, Haryana,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Chandigarh, Puducherry). Several
States have begun effecting mutations using computers (e.g.,
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu,
Tripura, West Bengal, A&N Islands, Puducherry). Quite a few of
the States have also placed land records data on the Internet websites
(e.g., Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Haryana, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Puducherry, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand).”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 5.45)
“Funds are being provided under the programme for its various
components like computerization of land records, digitization of
cadastral maps, data centres at tehsil, sub-division and district levels,
inter-connectivity among revenue offices, survey/re-survey,
computerization of Sub-Registrar Offices, data entry of valuation
details, data entry of legacy encumbrance data, scanning and
preservation of old documents, connectivity of SROs with Revenue
Offices, modern record rooms at tehsil level and training and
capacity building. In fact funds were released for data entry of land
9

records to all the States/UTs except A&N Nicobar Islands and for
4434 tehsil-level data centres in 27 States/UTs, 1045 sub-division-
level data centres in 16 States/UTs, 392 district-level data centres
in 15 States and monitoring cells at State Hqrs. in 17 States under
the erstwhile programme of Computerization of Land Records.
Computerized copies of RoRs are being distributed by most of the
States from data centres at tehsil-level. In respect of the States/UTs
where such items were not sanctioned earlier under the CLR scheme,
the same are being sanctioned under the NLRMP. However, it is
proposed to conduct the study, as recommended by the Committee,
and the Centre for Rural Studies (CRS), Lal Bahadur Shastri National
Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), Mussoorie has been
requested for submission of a proposal for the purpose.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 5.47)
19. The Committee find from the reply of the Department that
19 States/UTs have started distributing Right of Records (RoRs), through
Computers, 20 States/UTs have accorded legal sanctity to the
computerized RoRs, 12 have stopped manual distribution of RoRs,
16 have started effecting mutations through computers and 14 have
also placed data on the internet. The Committee feel that the reply of
the Government is only informative in nature, since the Department
have provided the data furnished by the States who have done some
work but the reply of the Ministry is silent about the States who have
not started any work. The Committee desire that easier accessibility
of land records to all the people should be provided. While it is
heartening to see that some States have posted land records data on
the web, the Committee feel that the task would only be complete
when every individual of this Country gets the data through internet
websites and all the States/UTs have posted their respective data on
the internet.
10

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee find that in the light of the direction 73 A of the
‘Directions by the Speaker’ the Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development
has to make the required Statement in Parliament within six months i.e.
by 17th June, 2010. In this connection the Committee also observe that
the stipulated Statement should contain specific action taken on various
recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report and should
not reproduce action taken replies to various recommendations contained
in the Report that the Department used to furnish within three months
from the presentation of the Report as has been done while making such
Statement during the Fourteenth Lok Sabha. In view of the foregoing the
Committee recommend the Department of Land Resources to do the
needful in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The statement under direction 73 A of the ‘Directions by the
Speaker’, on Demands for Grants of Department of Land Resources,
Ministry of Rural Development for 2009-10 has been made as per direction
of the committee by the Minister of Rural Development in Lok Sabha
on 3rd May, 2010 and in Rajya Sabha on 4th May, 2010.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 2 and 3, Para Nos. 3.12 and 3.13)
The Committee find that the Department of Land Resources
has not been getting required funds so far during the Eleventh Plan
(2007-2012) commensurate with the task of watershed development and
modernisation of land records in the country. As against total Eleventh
Plan allocation of Rs. 17,205.48 crore, the actual allocation made
available during first four years (2007-08 to 2010-11) of the Plan has been
as low as Rs. 8960 crore at Budget Estimate stage leaving a gap of
Rs. 9245.49 crore. The allocation had further been reduced to the level
11

of Rs. 5220 crore at RE stage for the years 2007-08 to 2009-10 leaving a
gap of staggering amount of around Rs. 12,000 crore. The Committee feel
that a State of uncertainty in availability of Plan funds is hampering the
functioning of the Department of Land Resources as the Department has
not been getting its share of plan funds as per overall allocations made
for it. The Committee also find that in view of the task of covering
22.65 million hectare of rainfed area to be covered by the Department
during remaining two years (2010-11 and 2011-12) of the current Plan
a total sum of Rs. 8831.72 crore for IWMP and Rs. 200 crore for NLRMP
is required to cover the targeted number of districts. In view of this, the
Committee strongly recommend that adequate allocation should be
provided to the Department to achieve the set targets under different
schemes. The Committee would like the Department to convey the
concerns of the Committee to the Planning Commission and the Ministry
of Finance in this regard.
The Committee are unable to comprehend the rationale behind
allocating higher amount while approving Eleventh Plan (2007-12) outlay
for the Department than what was proposed by the Department and then
not making available the funds to the Department afterwards during first
four years of the current Plan. The Committee, therefore, desire that a
clarification may be obtained from Planning Commission in this regard
and the Committee apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The Concerns of the Standing Committee were conveyed to the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. Details of reply
received from the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission are
enclosed as Annexure-I and II respectively.
The Planning Commission has Stated that “In the beginning of the
11th Five Year Plan, both the watershed development programme and
modernization of land records were taken up for restructuring to be
launched as Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) and
National Land Records Modernization Programme (NLRMP) respectively.
The Cabinet approval for the restructured NLRMP/IWMP was given only
in 2008/2009 respectively. In this backdrop, the allocation for these
programmes was decided”.
The Ministry of Finance has suggested that the Department should
plan and accelerate the expenditure evenly during the course of the year
as also ensure timely utilization of the funds released to the States/
Implementing agencies, in order to avoid high unspent balances with the
entities.
12

In compliance with the direction of the Standing Committee, the
issue was taken up with State Governments, in earnest, to expedite
utilization of funds, in a two-day workshop with CEOs, SLNAs and Nodal
Secretaries of the States organized by the Department on 20-21st
May 2010.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 4 and 5, Para Nos. 3.14 and 3.15)
The Committee have been informed during the course of evidence
of the Department of Land Resources that in view of large gap between
funds agreed at initial stage and funds actually allocated year-wise during
first four years of the current Plan a demand of Rs. 5330 crore for 2010-
11 was made by the Department before the Planning Commission while
bearing in mind a similar demand of Rs. 6600 crore for 2011-12. However,
the Committee are constrained to note that Planning Commission has
allocated only Rs. 2660 crore for 2010-11. In this connection the Committee
have been informed by the Department that Planning Commission is
convinced with their view point and as such the Department is hopeful
of getting additional funds at Supplementary Grant stage. The Department
plans to utilise the available funds in coming six to seven months so as
to utilise the additional funds if made available to them. In the action
taken reply to the Second Report of this Committee also the Department
has expressed similar feeling that coverage of rainfed areas as targeted
during the Eleventh Plan under IWMP would depend on the availability
of funds from the Planning Commission.
In view of the foregoing the Committee desire that Planning
Commission should allocate the requisite funds as they are convinced
by the strategy drawn up by the Department so that the Eleventh Plan
targets both for IWMP and NLRMP are met during Eleventh Plan period
itself. The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should
vigorously pursue with the Planning Commission for adequate outlay
as the Committee have observed that the plan allocation is not sufficient
for the Department to accomplish the task.
Reply of the Government
The concern of Standing Committee has been conveyed to the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. The Department is
13

making all efforts to release the due central assistance to the States. The
Department has also taken up the matter of expeditious utilization of
funds with State Governments.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.16)
On the issue of adequate allocation for the programme of NLRMP
the Committee find that this programme has also been badly hit in all
four years of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee recall that the issue
was examined threadbare at the time of examination of Demands for
Grants (2009-10) of the Department in their Second Report and
the Committee had recommended for adequate allocation for this
programme also. However even after that the necessary enhancement
in allocation has not been made. The Committee would like the
Department to convey the concern of the Committee to Planning
Commission in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The concern of the Committee has been duly conveyed to the
Planning Commission.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 3.19)
The Committee find that the strategy for the 12th Plan would be
worked out after the targets for different programmes of the Department
for Twelfth Plan (2012-17) are formulated. The Committee would like to
be informed of the time frame for formulation and finalization of targets
for different programmes for Twelfth Plan. Keeping in view the experience
of lower allocations during the current Plan the Committee feel that
Department will have to cover the likely left over work of Eleventh Plan
in addition to Twelfth Plan work regarding achieving coverage of
25 million ha. of rainfed area in the country. The Committee, therefore,
are a little apprehensive about Department’s performance during Twelfth
Plan also which is roughly two years away. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the Department should chalk out its strategy for Twelfth Plan
bearing in mind all these issues once targets for the Plan are formulated
and finalized.
14

Reply of the Government
As recommended by the Standing Committee, the Department will
chalk out its strategy for Twelfth Plan once targets for the Plan are
finalized.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 8 and 9, Para Nos. 4.12 and 4.13)
Two main issues have come up before the Committee about
wastelands in the country, one relates to updation of Wastelands Atlas,
2005 and the other pertains to conversion of wastelands into cultivable
land. In connection with updation of Wasteland Atlas the Committee
have been informed that the required Atlas will be made available to the
country shortly since it is under print at present. The Committee hope
that the awaited Atlas will depict accurate data on wastelands in the
country although the Department has given the figures of wastelands in
the country of the order of 46.42 million with related details.
On the issue of data regarding conversion of wastelands into
cultivable land the Committee are constrained to note that requisite data
is not available with the Department and whatever latest data is available
with the Department dates back to Wasteland Atlas of 2005 based on one
Season data. The Committee also find that with a view to collect reliable
data, a three Season data that was undertaken in 2006 has to be matched
with another three Season data. The Committee also find that the
Department has sanctioned a separate study to NRSC, Hyderabad in
February, 2010 so as to complete the job within six to eight months. The
Committee recommend that NRSC, Hyderabad be given necessary
assistance to complete the comprehensive study on war footing basis so
that the requisite data are provided within the stipulated deadline.
Reply of the Government
Department of Land Resources (DoLR) has released Rs. 1.43 crore,
which is about 50% of the total project cost of Rs. 2.85 crore, to National
Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) in Feb., 2010. NRSC has indicated that
the study is expected to be completed by October, 2010. DoLR has again
written to NRSC vide letter dated 3.5.2010 to complete the study on war
footing basis by Oct., 2010. NRSC has also been informed that they would
be provided further assistance if needed from DoLR to complete the task
within the stipulated time.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
15

Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 4.19)
The Committee are unhappy to note that not much progress has
been made by the Department on the issue of impact assessment on
agriculture, employment etc. of the huge investment of the order of
Rs. 12,000 crore since Seventh Plan made on land resources in the country.
In this connection the Committee recall that this issue was examined by
the Committee last year also. The Committee have been informed that
National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) has been requested to
take up the study and necessary terms of reference and its due date are
being firmed up with NIRD. Some feedback is stated to have been received
by the Department and two rounds of discussions have been made on
the issue. The Committee conclude that tangible progress on the issue
as ought to have been made by the Department has not been made on
this vital area during the last three months time since presentation of the
previous Report of the Committee to the Parliament. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates that the Department should impress upon NIRD to
take up the task expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
After detailed discussion about the nature of evaluation/impact
assessment, focus and thrust of assessment, as per concern of the Standing
Committee, with detailed terms of reference, work has been assigned to
NIRD. NIRD has been impressed upon to take up the work expeditiously
and submit the report in nine months.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 4.33)
The Committee find with dismay that huge amount in respect of
on-going schemes of IWDP, DPAP, DDP, SRA&ULR have been shown as
unspent. Under IWDP, DPAP and DDP as high as Rs. 419.60 crore,
Rs. 325.47 crore and Rs. 398.83 crore respectively has been lying unspent
as on 31 December, 2009. Similarly for SRA &ULR and CLR Rs. 148.91 crore
and Rs. 159.20 crore have been shown as unspent. The Committee recall
that they have been repeatedly recommending in their previous reports
for utilization of the unspent amounts in different schemes. In their last
report on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Department of Land
Resources also the Committee had made recommendation in this regard.
The Committee after learning from the Department that a project is entitled
to claim next installment even if upto 50 per cent of previous amount
released remains unutilized, had recommended that a study be undertaken
to ascertain whether this is the only reason for funds remaining unutilized
16

or there are other reasons like complacency on the part of the
implementing agencies. From the action taken reply the Committee learn
that in compliance with the Committee’s recommendation NIRD has
been requested to take up the study and the issue is currently being
investigated by NIRD. Concurrently, the Committee have been informed
that the Chief Secretaries of the concerned States have been asked to take
necessary action in this regard and Department of Land Resources at its
own level has carried out an intensive review of the position with regard
to funds utilization in SRA &ULR and CLR schemes. From the comparative
unspent balances as on 31.03.2009 to 31.12.2009, the Committee find that
in respect of IWDP, the quantum of unspent amount has been reduced
from the level of Rs. 471.67 crore to Rs. 419.60 crore and under DPAP
programme it has decreased from the level of Rs. 444.45 crore to
Rs. 325.47 crore. However, the Committee are constrained to note that
in respect of DDP, the level of unspent balance has increased from
Rs. 390.59 crore to Rs. 398.83 crore. The Committee, therefore, suggests
that since the study by NIRD is already underway the increase in
UB may also be gone into by that study itself. The Committee desire
the Department to have the study expedited. At the same time, the
Committee urge the Department to continue their sincere efforts
with regard to utilization of unspent balances under different on-going
schemes and to strive hard to ensure cent per cent utilization under
different schemes.
Reply of the Government
A Study has been assigned to NIRD as indicated in reply to
Para 4.19. As part of this study, NIRD has been asked to examine issues
relating to unspent balances and reasons behind the same. The Department
has also taken up the matter of expeditious utilization of unspent balances
under different on-going schemes with the State Governments.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 4.36)
The Committee note that the meetings of the State Level and District
Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (V&MCs) are not being held
in different States/UTs as per the V&MCs’ Guidelines. The V&MCs’
Guidelines stipulate that V&MCs meetings are to be held once in three
months both at District and State level. The Committee are however
constrained to note that the stipulated Guidelines are not being followed
in letter and spirit as is evident from the details available on the website
of the Department showing that during 2006-07, 2007-08, 2008-09 and
2009-10 (upto 24 March, 2010) as low as 34, 35, 36 and 8 State level V&MCs’
17

meetings have taken place in 33 States/UTs. As regards holding of
District level V&MCs’ meetings a total of 596 V&MCs’ meetings
were held during 2008-09 in 33 States/UTs in 617 districts. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the nodal Department
should impress upon holding of V&MCs’ at State and District level as
stipulated in V&MCs’ Guidelines with a view to monitor various
programmes under its administrative control. For this purpose, the
conditions for holding such meetings may be relaxed wherever felt
necessary and feasible.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Standing Committee have been taken
up with the Nodal Department (i.e. Department of Rural Development)
in the Ministry of Rural Development for follow up action. The Nodal
Department has informed that V&MC provides crucial role to peoples’
representatives in the monitoring of implementation of the RD
programmes. As per Guidelines, V&MC meetings are to be held every
quarter. State level meeting held during the year 2008-09 and 2009-10
were 36 and 10 respectively. The nodal Department has informed that
“lesser number of meetings in 2009-10 could be due to the reason that
after the formation of XV Lok Sabha, Ministry issued Guidelines for
reconstituting V&MCs at State and District level on 26.8.2009. Thereafter,
the State/District Authorities started reconstituting the V&MCs and
holding their meetings”.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 5.4)
The Committee note that the programme of Integrated Watershed
Management Programme (IWMP) that seeks to achieve a wide range of
objectives of restoring ecological balance, development of degraded
natural resources like soil, vegetation cover and water etc. is in formative
stage and as such as per the nodal Department it would be too early to
have its assessment keeping in view the long project period ranging from
four to seven years. Since the Committee are already aware of these
details they would like to know from the nodal Department in a
comprehensive manner as to how the programme is progressing in
different States bringing out clearly the difficulties being experienced as
also the good results that are being achieved in implementation of the
programme. The Committee would also like that all corrective action
should be taken so as to achieve the indicated objectives under the
aforesaid schemes.
18

Reply of the Government
The comprehensive progress of IWMP in different States as on
30/06/2010 is as below:—
During 2009-10:
• The State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA) was set up in all the
28 States for overseeing the implementation of IWMP. 26 States
have submitted bank account details for releasing central
assistance. Goa and West Bengal have been reminded to
furnish the bank account details. Central Assistance of
Rs. 61.36 crore has been released to SLNAs for institutional
support.
• 22 States have furnished State Perspective and Strategic Plan
(SPSP) and Preliminary Project Reports (PPRs). The States of
Bihar, Goa, Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur and
West Bengal have been requested to furnish SPSP and
PPRs.
• An area of 62.99 lakh ha was sanctioned against a target of
54.1 lakh ha by SLNAs of 20 States as per the projects
appraised by the Steering Committee.
• Central Assistance of Rs. 501.46 crore was released to SLNAs
for implementation of IWMP projects in 20 States.
During 2010-11 (as on 30.06.2010)
• A two-day Workshop on IWMP with CEOs, SLNAs and Nodal
Secretaries of the States was organised on 20-21 May 2010
and various issues related to implementation of IWMP
including planning for 2010-11 were discussed.
• A tentative allocation of 85 lakh Ha.target for 2010-11 has
been conveyed to the States with a request to furnish proposals
for appraisal of the Steering Committee.
• Central assistance of Rs. 694.23 crore has been released to
SLNAs for implementation of ongoing IWMP Projects.
• Central Assistance of Rs. 2.48 crore has been released to
SLNAs of Bihar and Haryana for institutional support.
• Entry point activities, capacity building activities and
community mobilisation etc., have been initiated in ongoing
IWMP projects.
19

• In 6 States viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh,
Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura DPRs have been prepared
for the projects sanctioned during 2009-10. Preparation of
DPRs in other States is under progress.
The difficulties being faced by the Department:
Inspite of repeated reminders, Bihar, Goa, Haryana, Jammu and
Kashmir, Manipur, West Bengal have yet to submit their SPSP and PPRs.
Further, separate bank account details for receiving central assistance
under IWMP are awaited from Goa and West Bengal. However, the
Department is hopeful that with continual pursuation, these issues will
be resolved.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 5.21)
While reviewing the financial performance of the IWMP during the
last three years from 2008-09 onwards the Committee find that the Budget
allocation in the IWMP programme of Rs. 1825 crore in 2008-09 and
Rs. 1911 crore during 2009-10 have been substantially reduced to the
level of Rs. 1545 crore and Rs. 1762 crore respectively at the RE stage.
The Committee have been informed that reduction at revised estimates
stage during 2009-10 has been done by the Finance Ministry as per their
own assessment while according to the Department, it could have utilized
the amount Budgeted during 2009-10 for its programmes of IWMP and
NLRMP. In the light of the above the Committee desire a clarification
should be obtained from Ministry of Finance specifying reasons for
reduction at RE stage. Needless to State that the issue of avoiding reduction
at RE stage has consistently been taken up by the Committee in their
previous reports also. The Committee would like the Department to take
corrective measures in the light of the concern expressed by them while
examining Demands for Grants of the previous year and reiterate now
so that the funds allocated are fully utilized. The Committee also
recommend to take up the matter regarding lowering of allocation at RE
stage urgently with the Ministry of Finance.
20

Reply of the Government
Already covered under the reply to para 3.12 and 3.13.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 5.23)
The Committee find from the physical performance of IWMP during
the last three years from 2007-08 onwards that during first two years viz.
2007-08 and 2008-09 the emphasis of the Department has been on
completion of on-going projects whereas during 2009-10 the emphasis
is on new projects. The Committee have been informed that the
Department is hopeful to achieve the target for 2009-10 by 31.3.2010. The
Committee desire that actual achievement made by the Department as
on 31st March, 2010 be communicated to the Committee in order to
arrive at a logical conclusion since 2009-10 was the first year when new
projects have again been started to be sanctioned.
Reply of the Government
During the year 2009-10, the Department has not only achieved the
target of 54.10 lakh ha. of launching new projects under IWMP but
exceeded its target to achieve 62.9 lakh hectares.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 5.29)
The Committee find from the facts provided to them that the actual
progress in respect of on-line monitoring of three on-going projects of
IWDP, DPAP and DDP in different States is far from satisfactory.
For instance in IWDP as against the 464 Programme Districts in
28 States, only 117 districts are reporting on-line. Similarly, in DPAP
out of 183 programme districts in 16 States as low as 41 districts are
reporting on-line. Likewise in DDP out of 40 programme districts in
7 States, only 6 districts are reporting on-line. From the State-wise
details of on-line monitoring the Committee find that in almost all the
States the situation is very pathetic with large number of programme
districts not reporting on-line. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that Department of Land Resources should pay special
attention on this vital area and apprise the Committee about the steps
taken in this regard.
21

Reply of the Government
In the two-day Workshop with CEOs, SLNAs and Nodal Secretaries
of the States was organised on 20-21 May 2010 this issue was discussed
in detail and the representatives of the States were requested to ensure
regular online submission of progress reports.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 5.35)
The Committee are constrained to note that one of the prominent
programmes of Department of Land Resources viz. National Land Records
Modernisation Programme (NLRMP) could get as low as Rs. 581 crore
for Eleventh Plan (2007-2012) from the Planning Commission that was
barely sufficient only upto 2010-11. The Committee have been informed
that for 2011-12, Planning Commission has already been requested to
revise the Eleventh Plan allocation. The Committee recall that the issue
of inadequate provisioning of Plan outlay was also dealt with by them
in last year’s Report (Para No. 5.22). From the action taken reply thereto
the Committee learn that after the programme was approved by Cabinet
on 21st August, 2008 the total cost of the programme was Rs. 5656 crore
out of which Centre’s share was Rs. 3098 crore. Keeping in view the huge
cost involved for the programme and the fact that only 148 districts
Stated to have been covered by the end of 2009-10, the Committee
recommend that funds for this programme as demanded by the Nodal
Department may be made available for targeted coverage of 455 districts
during the current Plan. Besides, corrective action with regard to the
implementation of programme should be taken urgently so as to achieve
the objective of computerization of Land Records in all the States within
the stipulated timeframe.
Reply of the Government
Keeping in view the year-wise expenditure during the period 2007-08
to 2009-10, the Planning Commission has been requested to provide
additional allocation of Rs. 635.00 crore for the NLRMP for the 11th Plan.
Accordingly, it is expected that adequate funds would be provided by
the Planning Commission through the Annual Plan allocations. As regards
the coverage of districts under the programme, it has been as per the
expectations set by the DoLR for the first two years of implementation
i.e. during 2008-09 — 1 to 2 districts per State/UT and during 2009-10—
3 to 4 districts per State/UT as 69 districts and 72 districts have been
covered under the programme during 2008-09 and 2009-10 respectively.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
22

Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 5.40)
The Committee find that the States of Mizoram and Arunachal
Pradesh have come up with a request before the Department of Land
Resources for revising the funding pattern for two components of survey/
resurvey from 50:50 and for registration from 25:75 between Centre and
States to 100% from Central funding. The Committee have been informed
that moving the Cabinet for revising the funding pattern under the NLRMP
to allow for 100 per cent Central funding for all components under the
NLRMP for North-Eastern States is under consideration of Department
of Land Resources. The Committee recommend that the Department
should move expeditiously in the matter. The final decision taken in the
matter may be intimated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 8th July, 2010 has approved
modification to the funding pattern for the North-Eastern States under
the NLRMP, to allow for Centre:State cost sharing on a 90:10 basis for
survey/resurvey and updating of the survey and settlement records
(including ground control network and ground truthing), computerization
of registration and modern record rooms/land records management centres
at Tehsil/taluk/circle/block level. For rest of the components, viz.,
computerization of land records, training and capacity building, etc. the
provision of 100% Central funding will continue.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 5.45)
The Committee are constrained to note that updated computerized
land records are not available in the country even after more than sixty
years of independence. The Committee feel that computerization of land
records in the country is largely dependent on various ancillary factors
like availability of modern record rooms, State level Data Centres, Survey
of existing records, their registration, capacity building of persons etc.
involved in the work of updation of land records. In this connection the
Committee observe that in the absence of these facilities common man
has to depend on procurement of their property related papers in most
of the States from concerned district and tehsil headquarters on manual
basis. The Committee also apprehend that out of 141 NLRMP districts
23

Stated to have been covered across the country in most of the districts
access to computerized records may not be available at all to common
man or his representatives.
Reply of the Government
All the States and UTs except A&N Islands implemented the
erstwhile scheme of Computerization of Land Records, which yielded
good results, but not consistently across the country. Several States have
completed entry of basic land records data and are distributing the records
of rights (RoRs) through computers (e.g., Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, West Bengal, A&N Islands, Delhi, Puducherry). Many States
have accorded legal sanctity to the computerized copies of the RoRs (e.g.,
Assam, A&N Islands, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab,
Puducherry, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, West Bengal). A number of States have stopped manual
distribution of the RoRs (e.g., Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, West Bengal,
Chandigarh, Puducherry). Several States have begun effecting mutations
using computers (e.g., Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
Tamil Nadu, Tripura, West Bengal, A&N Islands, Puducherry). Quite a
few of the States have also placed land records data on the Internet
websites (e.g., Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Haryana, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand).
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 5.47)
The Committee therefore, recommend that a study may be
undertaken to ascertain whether in all the 141 districts covered under
NLRMP programme the supporting wherewithal in the form of Record
Room, State level Data Centre etc. is available and if not available, the
timeframe within which these components will be made available for
availability of modern updated land records across the country. The
Committee wish to emphasize that the very purpose of computerization
24

of land records is defeated if the common man does not have easy access
to authentic land records on computers. Therefore, the Committee strongly
recommend that ways and means should be found out through
technological interventions not only to achieve the objective of having
correct and up-to-date land records but also to give easy access to such
records to the common man. For this purpose kiosks may be set up at
tehsil or block level where the owner or his authorized representative
can have access to the computerized records on payment of nominal fee.
Reply of the Government
Funds are being provided under the programme for its various
components like computerization of land records, digitization of cadastral
maps, data centres at tehsil, sub-division and district levels, inter-
connectivity among revenue offices, survey/resurvey, computerization of
Sub-Registrar Offices, data entry of valuation details, data entry of legacy
encumbrance data, scanning and preservation of old documents,
connectivity of SROs with Revenue Offices, modern record rooms at tehsil
level and training and capacity building. In fact funds were released
for data entry of land records to all the States/UTs except A&N
Islands and for 4434 tehsil-level data centres in 27 States/UTs, 1045 sub-
division-level data centres in 16 States/UTs, 392 district-level data centres
in 15 States and monitoring cells at State Hqrs. in 17 States under the
erstwhile programme of Computerization of Land Records. Computerized
copies of RoRs are being distributed by most of the States from data
centres at tehsil-level. In respect of the States/UTs where such items were
not sanctioned earlier under the CLR scheme, the same are being
sanctioned under the NLRMP. However, it is proposed to conduct the
study, as recommended by the Committee, and the Centre for Rural
Studies (CRS), Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration
(LBSNAA), Mussoorie has bee requested for submission of a proposal
for the purpose.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 5.50)
The Committee are delighted to learn that NLRMP Fair, 2009
organised in New Delhi in December last year under the aegis of the
Department of Land Resources has resulted in dissemination of awareness
among various stakeholders on different aspects of the programmes like
25

technologies to be used, potential of Public Private Partnership (PPP) etc.
associated with speedier coverage of districts in different States under
the NLRM programme for making available updated land records in the
country. The Committee, however find that only two State Governments
of West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh participated in the aforesaid ‘NLRM
Fair’. The Committee feel that representation from States needs to be
broad based in such ‘NLRM Fairs’ for the success of the programme. The
Committee also feel that more and more such ‘Fairs’ be organized by the
Department for accelerating the implementation of the programme.
Reply of the Government
Representatives from 27 States/UTs participated in the Technical
Fair. Some of the States deputed a large number of their staff/officers for
participation in the Fair like Haryana (37 Nos.), Chhattisgarh (16 Nos.),
West Bengal (15 Nos.), Rajasthan (12 Nos.), Maharashtra (8 Nos.).
There were 62 stalls including 6 stalls by the Government agencies:
(1) NIC HQ, (2) Survey of India, (3) NRSC/ISRO, (4) Government of West
Bengal, (5) NIC Andhra Pradesh State Unit, and (6) the Stock Holding
Corporation of India Ltd. (SHCIL). Prominent among the private sector
participants included the Infosys Technologies Ltd., the Tata Consultancy
Services Ltd., the WIPRO Ltd., the IL&FS Technologies Ltd., the HCL
Infosystems Ltd., the Genesys International Corp. Ltd., the HTC Global
Services, the NIIT GIS Ltd., the Leica Geosystems, Pitney Bowes (from
the UK), SALMAT (from Northern Territory, Australia), FENO (from
France), CADASTEC from Australia, among others.
In addition to the stalls, the Fair had an interaction area, which
facilitated exchange of ideas and information on the requirements of the
States and UTs vis-à-vis the offerings of the vendors, contact information,
etc. Also, concurrently, presentations were arranged in two halls, where
64 presentations were made by 47 private sector organizations, 3 technical
agencies of the GoI as well as the State Governments of Gujarat, Kerala,
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal. All the participating
organizations from abroad made presentations.
One of the positive outcomes of the NLRMP Technical Fair 2009
has been that there has been a spectacular rise in the response to tenders
and EoIs floated by various State Governments. for the various processes
of the NLRMP, mostly from the participants of the Fair.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
26

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 4.27)
The Committee note that in compliance with their recommendation
made in their Second Report presented last year that on-going schemes
of IWDP, DPAP and DDP be implemented in a more focused manner
so that something tangible is discernible at ground level, the Department
of Land Resources has come out with a series of steps taken for monitoring
the ongoing watershed schemes. These include the decision taken for not
sanctioning of new projects for first two years of the Eleventh Plan viz.
2007-2008 and 2008-2009 and release of funds only for completion of
projects, closure of (a) pre-Hariyali projects sanctioned upto 2002-2003
and which were to be completed by 2007-2008 where only 1 or 2
installments have been released after refund of unspent balances,
(b) Hariyali projects where one installment has been released in
2003-2004 or 2004-2005 and State Government has not asked for release
of next installments etc. The Committee find that consequent upon these
measures a total of 2546 projects have been identified for closure in
different States across the country. From the State-wise details of projects
identified for closure the Committee find that major States where large
number of projects have been identified for closure are Jharkhand
(758 projects), Jammu and Kashmir (374 projects), Bihar (230 projects),
Maharashtra (274 projects), Orissa (216 projects) etc. In Committees’ view
closure of as large as 2546 projects at one go, many of which are in big
States may not be in consonance with the over-all planning and
implementation of on-going watershed projects in the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that before finally closing the projects
the concerned State Governments may once again be consulted on case
to case basis. The concrete action taken should be communicated to the
Committee.
27

Reply of the Government
A total of 2546 overdue and non-performing projects have
been identified in different States for closure. However, these projects
are to be processed for closure by the State Governments keeping in
view the progress made, amount utilised against Central assistance
released and the unspent balance to be refunded to Government of
India. The State Governments have also been advised to take up
the uncovered areas under Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP).
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 5.46)
In this connection the Committee visualize from the component
wise details of funds allocated to different States during 2009-10 as
furnished by the Department that although specified districts have been
covered under NLRMP yet no allocation has been made in associated
components like computerization, Modern Record Rooms, State level Data
Centres. For instance in States of Uttar Pradesh, Assam, Maharashtra as
many as 5 districts, 20 districts, 6 districts have been brought under
NLRMP, yet under Modern Record Rooms component no funds have
been shown to have been sanctioned to these States.
Reply of the Government
The NLRMP is a Centrally-sponsored scheme which is demand
driven and funds are released to the States/UTs in response to the
proposals received and keeping in view the funds provided for the same
item under the earlier schemes of Computerization of Land Records (CLR)
and Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land
Records (SRA&ULR).
2. In case of Uttar Pradesh, funds amounting to Rs. 150 lakh towards
Central share were sanctioned for modern record rooms at Tehsil level
during 2008-09 for four districts (Barabanki, Ghaziabad, Jaunpur and
Mathura) out of five districts covered under the NLRMP. For the fifth
district viz. Allahabad, funds were not sanctioned as funds were sanctioned
during 2007-08 (Rs.100 lakh towards Central share) under the SRA&ULR
Scheme. Similarly, in respect of Maharashtra, Rs. 925.00 lakh towards
28

Central share was sanctioned for modern record rooms at Tehsil level
for the 6 districts covered during 2008-09 under the NLRMP. In respect
of Assam, as indicated in the component-wise sanction of funds for the
year 2009-10, funds to the tune of Rs. 1587.50 lakh have been sanctioned
for modern record rooms at Tehsil level in 20 districts of the State covered
during 2009-10.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
29

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 4.23)
The Committee observe that the progress in regard to the issue of
undertaking a study for the purpose of combining the work of multiple
agencies like ICRISAT, NIRD, TERI, IGNOU etc. on awareness generation
of IWMP, generation of proposal thereunder etc. for enabling an evaluator
to understand the programme in a holistic manner has also not been
encouraging except for a request that has been made to Centre for Rural
Studies (CRS), Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration.
The response thereto is still awaited. The Committee opine that the issue
in question has not attracted the desired level of attention by the
Department of Land Resources since considerable time of three months
has elapsed since presentation of the Report of the Committee. The
Committee, therefore, desire that they be apprised of the reasons for
delay in executing the task in order to arrive at a logical conclusion. At
the same time the Committee urge the Department to at least now deal
with the matter expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
The Centre for Rural Studies (CRS), Lal Bahadur Shastri National
Academy of Administration has been assigned the task of documentation
and analysis of the evaluation reports of multiple agencies like ICRISAT,
NIRD and TERI. Funds have been placed with them with a request to
complete the work in six months.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
30

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 5.13)
The Committee note that various constraints in implementation of
IWMP have been highlighted by the nodal Department. These relate to
funds flow to States, progress on establishment of State Level Nodal
Agencies (SLNAs), Watershed Cell-cum-Data Centre in programme
districts and non-availability of bank accounts of SLNAs. In addition to
this certain other constraints have been outlined by the Department in
their Outcome Budget. The Committee find that considerable progress
is stated to have been made in regard to funds flow to project
implementing agencies through SLNAs for timely release of funds. About
establishment of SLNAs the Committee find that SLNA in West Bengal
has also now been set up and SLNA in Bihar is in progress. They
recommend that the matter regarding expeditious constitution of SLNA
in Bihar should be pursued vigorously so that the process of constitution
of SLNAs in all States is completed. The Committee also find that some
problem is being faced in setting up of Watershed Cell-cum-Data Centre
in programme districts in different States where DRDAs are not associated
with IWMP work and for this the Committee have been informed that
necessary modifications in the Cabinet decision is under process for
establishing WCDCs in DRDA/Zila Panchayat/District Level Implementing
Agency/Department as per the convenience of the State Governments.
The Committee desire that the same may be done expeditiously. As regards
non-availability of Bank Account details of SLNAs of three States of Goa,
Manipur and West Bengal the Committee feel that this should not be a
big issue, the matter should be taken up with concerned State Governments
urgently since in the absence of Bank Accounts these SLNAs may not
get the required releases under IWMP as per the revised mechanism. The
Department should take the desired steps immediately and the Committee
would like to be apprised about the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As a result of regular pursuance by DoLR, although all 28 States
have set up SLNAs, SLNA, Goa has not yet opened a bank account and
31

SLNA, West Bengal is yet to submit a separate bank account for
receiving funds.
Regarding necessary modifications in the Cabinet decision for
establishing WCDCs in DRDA/Zila Panchayat/District Level Implementing
Agency/Department as per the convenience of the State Governments,
the draft Cabinet Note is in the last stage of consultation.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 5.18)
The Committee have come across various implementation
constraints as highlighted in the Outcome Budget (2010-11) of the nodal
Department stating that achievement under IWMP may be affected by
delay in submission of State Perspective Strategic Plans (SPSPs)/Detailed
Project Report (DPRs) by States delay, in release of State share etc. The
problem in submission of SPSPs had emanated from States of Goa,
Haryana, J&K, Manipur and West Bengal whereas release of State share
is a problem common to majority of States. The Committee feel that there
is a need to have an independent assessment of the problem with regard
to the affected States for submission of SPSPs/DPRs. As far as arranging
State share is concerned the Committee feel that State Governments should
be persuaded to at least now release their share which under the Common
Guidelines has been reduced from earlier level of 25 per cent to existing
level of 10 per cent.
Reply of the Government
22 States have by now submitted SPSP. Matter is being pursued
at the highest level with the States which are yet to gear up work in
IWMP.
A two-day workshop on Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP) with CEOs, SLNAs and Nodal Secretaries of the
States was organized on 20-21 May, 2010 in Delhi and various issues
related to implementation of IWMP including need for timely submission
of SPSP and DPRs and release of State share were emphasized.
[O.M. No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC (Vol. II) 16 July, 2010]
N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
25 February, 2011 Chairperson,
6 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Rural Development.
32

APPENDIX I
File No. 14(25)-B(PD)/2009
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
North Block, New Delhi,
Dated the May 12, 2010
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2009-10) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development).
The undersigned is directed to refer to the Department of Land
Resources’ OM No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC, dated April 26, 2010 on the subject
cited above and furnish herewith the comments of Ministry of Finance
as below:—
(i) The statement of the Department of Land Resources to the
Standing Committee regarding reduction in revised estimate
during 2009-10 that it has been done by the Finance Ministry
as per their own assessment is not justifiable. While finalizing
the Revised Estimates of expenditure during the pre-budget
meetings with the various Ministries/Departments, the issues
relating to necessary approvals of competent authorities and
other factors viz. the institutional capacity of the implementing
agencies to implement the scheme as scheduled, the
constraints on spending by the spending agencies, thrust area
of the Government, off-take by State/UT Government, etc.
are also kept in view. Accordingly, the Budget Estimates are
corrected through mid-term review at the time of finalizing
the Revised Estimates. Most importantly, the quantum of
Government assistance lying with the recipients unutilised
etc. is taken in account while finalizing the estimates with
a view to minimising the scope for surrenders at a later stage.
Notwithstanding the above, efforts are always taken to keep
the variation to the minimum.
33

(ii) Two major factors were considered in the RE meetings with
the Department of Land Resources viz. pace of expenditure
upto September and the unspent balance with the States/
implementing agencies for finalisation of Plan RE ceilings,
as indicated below:
(Rs. in crore )
Year BE Expenditure Unspent balance reported Amount
upto by the Department of agreed to
September  LR at the time of in the RE
pre-budget meetings meeting
2007-08 1500.00 26.46% Rs. 1282.09 crore as on 1400.00
30.9.2007
2008-09 2400.00 23% Rs. 1379.81 crore as on 1800.00
1.8.2008
2009-10 2400.00 45% Rs. 1736.88 crore as on 2020.00
31.3.2009
(iii) The Department may accordingly plan and accelerate the
expenditure evenly during the course of the year as also
ensure timely utilisation of the funds released to the States/
implementing agencies, in order to avoid huge unspent
balances with the entities. These factors would ensure
utilisation of budgeted amount without any substantial
reduction at RE stage.
Sd/-
(Sant Ram)
Under Secretary to the Government of India
Tele. 2309 5177
Department of Land Resources,
(Shri D.P. Singh, Director)
‘G’ Wing, NBO Building, Nirman Bhavan,
New Delhi.
34

APPENDIX II
No.P-12021/2/2010-RD
Planning Commission
(Rural Development Division)
Yojana Bhavan, Sansad Marg,
New Delhi, the 17th May, 2010
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2009-10) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)—
Comments/Clarification of Planning Commission.
Please refer to your letter No. Z-18013/2/2008-GC, dated 26/04/2010
on the above subject. I am directed to forward herewith the para-wise
comments of Planning Commission on the recommendations of the
Committee which are given as under:
3.12 The Deptt. of Land Resources has been implementing two
major programmes, i.e., Water Shed Development Programme and
Modernization of Land Records in the country. The Five Year Plan
allocation to the department is only indicative which is split into Annual
Plans. It is true that the allocation of funds made during the first four
years of the 11th Five Year Plan were little less as compared to the outlay
proposed by the Deptt. The allocation of funds during the formulation
of Annual Plan depends on various factors such as actual requirement
of funds, capacity to utilize, availability of resources and the past
performance. In the beginning of the 11th Five Year Plan, both the Water
Shed Development Programme and Modernization of Land Records were
taken up for restructuring to be launched as Integrated Water Shed
Management Programme (IWMP) and National Land Records
Modernization Programme (NLRMP) respectively. The cabinet approval
for the restructured NLRMP/IWMP was given only in 2008/2009
respectively. In this backdrop, the allocation for these programmes was
decided. It may, however, be observed that the approved outlay for
the Deptt. which was Rs. 1500 crore in 2007-08 was increased to
Rs. 2400 crore in 2009-10 and further to Rs. 2660 crore in 2010-11.
35

However, there has been a small reduction in the outlay at the RE stage
on account of low utilization of available funds. Therefore, it may be
mentioned that mere allocation of funds may not result in achieving the
objectives unless the State Government, machinery is geared up to take
up the programmes at desired level.
3.13 The 11th Plan outlay was indicated keeping in view the certain
physical targets for both the programmes of Deptt. of Land Resources.
However, the process of restructuring the programmes consumed
considerable time. Therefore, the programmes have not been implemented
at the scale projected in the 11th Five Year Plan.
3.14 The achievement under the programmes does not entirely
depend upon on the availability of funds only. The capacity of line
departments of the State to implement the programmes is also a major
factor. There has been a significant increase in the allocation of funds
over the years. If the Deptt. is able to utilize the resources judiciously
for implementation of the programmes, it can always approach the
Planning Commission for additional funds at supplementary budget stage.
Further, it may not be prudent to park the funds with the programme
implementing agencies as the scarce resources has the opportunity cost.
3.15 The request of the Deptt. of Land Resources for additional
resources, if any, could be considered on the basis of merit at the
appropriate stage.
3.16 The implementation of National Land Resource Modernization
Programme (NLRMP) has not suffered on account of lack of resources.
The Deptt. of Land Resources may submit the detailed proposal with the
justification for allocation of additional resources for this programme for
the consideration of Planning Commission.
5.35 The 11th Plan allocation for NLRMP was indicated as Rs. 513.69
crore. However, during the first four years of the plan, i.e., 2007-08 to
2010-11, an outlay of Rs. 1223 crore was approved by the Planning
Commission. However, there has been a substantial reduction in the outlay
at R.E. stage on account of low utilization.
Sd/-
(T.V. Bhavadas)
Director (RD)
Shri D.P. Singh
Director (GC & Parl.) Deptt. of Land Resources,
Ministry of Rural Development
‘G’ Wing, NBO Building, Nirman Bhavan,
New Delhi-110011
36

APPENDIX III
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2010-2011)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 6 JANUARY, 2011
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan— Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Pulin Bihari Baske
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavaliya
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy
6. Shri Govind Chandra Naskar
7. Shri Rakesh Pandey
8. Shri P.L. Punia
9. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
10. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
11. Shri Jagdanand Singh
12. Shri Makansingh Solanki
13. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh
37

Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Ganga Charan
15. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
16. Dr. Ram Prakash
17. Shrimati Maya Singh
18. Shri Mohan Singh
19. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin—Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh —Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah —Additional Director
4. Shri Raju Srivastava —Deputy Secretary
2. *** *** *** *** ***
3. The Committee first took up for consideration the following
memoranda one by one:—
(i)*** *** *** *** ***
(ii)*** *** *** *** ***
(iii) Memorandum No. 9 regarding consideration and adoption
of draft action taken Report on the recommendations
contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2010-11) relating to Department of Land
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development);
(iv)*** *** *** *** ***
(v) *** *** *** *** ***
4. *** *** *** *** ***
5. The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted   ***  ***  ***
and draft action taken Report at Sl. No. (iii) with slight modifications.
*** Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately .
38

The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize these draft
action taken Reports and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
6. *** *** *** *** ***
7. *** *** *** *** ***
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately .
39

APPENDIX IV
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(15TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations: 26
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government: 21
Para Nos.: 2.2, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 3.15. 3.16, 3.19, 4.12,
4.13, 4.19, 4.33, 4.36, 5.4, 5.21, 5.23, 5.29, 5.35, 5.40,
5.45, 5.47 and 5.50
Percentage to total recommendations: (80.76)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies: 2
Para Nos.: 4.27 and 5.46
Percentage to total recommendations: (7.7)
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee: 1
Para No. 4.23
Percentage to total recommendations: (3.84)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited: 2
Para Nos. 5.13 and 5.18
Percentage to total recommendations: (7.7)
40