4
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2009-2010)
FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2009-2010)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 17.12.2009
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 004
Price : Rs. 120.00
© 2009 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................... (ix)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory .................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Status of Implementation of the recommendations
made by the Committee in the Thirty eighth
Report of the Committee presented to the House
on 12th April, 2008 on Demands for Grants
(2008-2009) Lok Sabha under Direction 73-A of
the Directions by the speaker , Lok Sabha ............ 3
C
HAPTER III General Analysis
(i) Utilisation during T enth Plan .......................... 5
(ii) Utilisation during Eleventh Plan .................... 6
(iii) Utilisation during Annual Plans ..................... 9
CHAPTER IV Major Issues
A. Ensuring effective, efficient and transparent
Panchayats ............................................................. 13
(i) Need for orderly Gram Sabha Meetings ..... 15
(ii) Need for equipping the Panchayats with
technical know how and personnel .............. 15
(iii) Need for proper remuneration and
accommodation to PRIs functionaries ........... 17
B. Capacity Building of Panchayats .................... 18
(a) Training .................................................................. 18
(i) Progress on training ........................................... 18
(ii) Requirement of Funds ....................................... 19
(i)

(iii) Constraints coming in the way of training
and feedback received from NIRDs/SIRDs .... 21
(iv) Work done on simplification of procedure
through Plan Plus software ............................. 22
(v) Strategy of training increased number of
women PRIs functionaries if legislation
providing 50% reservation for women in
PRIs is enacted .................................................... 24
(vi) Creation of National Institute of Panchayati
Raj ........................................................................... 26
(b) Infrastructure building of Panchayats ........... 26
C. Re-structuring of Centrally Sponsored
Schemes .................................................................. 28
D. Devolution of 3 Fs ............................................. 31
(i) Incentivizing States empowering PRIs .......... 34
E. Professionalizing DPCs ...................................... 36
F. Effective implementation of PESA ................. 38
G. Twelfth Finance Commission Grants ............. 42
C
HAPTER V Issues related with Backward Regions Grants
Fund (BRGF) .................................................................. 46
(i) Shortcomings in implementation .................... 47
(ii) Restructuring of BRGF ...................................... 49
(iii) Other issues .......................................................... 51
APPENDICES
I. Scheme-wise details during 2008-2009 ................................. 53
II. Details of elected representatives provided training
under the schemes of RGSY and BRGF (Capacity
Building Component) ............................................................... 54
III. Eleventh Schedule Lists 29 matters for Panchayats ........ 57
IV . Letter dated 19th January, 2009 regarding delineation of
role and responsibilities of Panchayati Raj Institutions
(PRIs) in CSSs/ACAs ............................................................... 58
PAGE
(ii)

V. The broad scheme-wise details of Centrally Sponsored
Schemes (CSSs) .......................................................................... 63
VI. Devolution of functions through Legislations and
Activity Mapping (Based on the information furnished
by the State Governments and records of the Ministry) ... 65
VII. Status of Devolution of funds to Panchayati Raj
Institutions in various States/UT s ........................................ 73
VIII. Status of Devolution of functionaries to Panchayati Raj
Institutions in various States/UT s ........................................ 81
IX. Indicators for Devolution Index Survey 2008-2009 .......... 85
X. Extracts of the Minutes of the third sitting of the
Committee held on 14 October , 2009 .................................. 87
XI. Extracts of the Minutes of the fifth sitting of the
Committee held on 9 November , 2009 ............................... 90
XII. Extracts of the Minutes of the seventh sitting of the
Committee held on 14 December , 2009 .............................. 92
XIII. Statement of Observations/Recommendations .................. 94
P
AGE
(iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit
7. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
10. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar
11. Shri Rakesh Pandey
12. Shri P .L. Punia
13. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
14. Shri Jagdish Sharma
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Jagdanand Singh
17. Dr. Sanjay Singh
18. Shri Makansingh Solanki
19. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh
20. Shrimati Usha Verma
21. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
(v)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ganga Charan
23. Vacant*
24. Shri Silvius Condpan
25. Shrimati Kanimozhi
26. Dr. Ram Prakash
27. Shri P .R. Rajan
28. Shri Arjun Singh
29. Shri Bhagwati Singh
30. Shrimati Maya Singh
31. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shri V .R. Ramesh — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
(vi)
*Consequent upon the resignation of Shri Ajay Singh Chautala from the membership
of Rajya Sabha w.e.f.  3rd November, 2009 vide  Notification No. RS10/2009-T,
dated 6 November, 2009.

(vii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2009-10) having been authorized by the Committee to
submit the Report on their behalf, present the Fourth Report on
Demands for Grants (2009-2010) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
2. Demands for Grants have been examined by the Committee
under Rule 331E (1) (a) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj on 9 November, 2009.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 14 December, 2009.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for placing before them the requisite
material and their considered views in connection with the examination
of the subject.
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them
by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
16 December, 2009 Chairperson,
25 Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

ABBREVIATIONS
ACA — Additional Central Assistance
BE — Budget Estimates
BRGF — Backward Regions Grants Fund
CSSs — Centrally Sponsored Schemes
DPC — District Planning Committee
DPR — Detailed Project Report
HLCs — High Level Committees
NARC — National Advisory-cum-Review Committee
NCAER — National Council for Advanced Economic Research
NCBF — National Capacity Building Framework
NIRD — National Institute of Rural Development
NGO — Non-Governmental Organisation
NREGA — National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
O&M — Operations and Maintenance
PD&T — Panchayat Development and Training Scheme
PEAIS — Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive
Scheme
PESA — Pr ovisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the
Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996
PRIs — Panchayati Raj Institutions
QRMs — Quarterly Review Meetings
RBH — Rural Business Hubs
RE — Revised Estimates
RGSY — Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana
RSVY — Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana
SIRDS — State Institute of Rural Development
SFC — State Finance Commissions
TFC — Twelfth Finance Commission
TSIs — Technical Support Institutes
UTs — Union Territories
(ix)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj came into existence on 27 May,
2004 after being carved out from the Ministry of Rural Development.
At present there are 24 lakh Panchayats in the country with 2.8 million
elected representatives. The representation of women, SCs and STs is
36.88%, 19.06% and 11.77% respectively. The enactment of Constitution
73rd (Amendment) Act, 1992, the Panchayats (Extension to the
Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA) and Constitutional provision in
the shape of Article 243ZD of Part IX-A concerning District Planning
Committees relating to the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) has over
the years revolutionalised the PRIs across the country. ‘The One
Hundred and Tenth Constitution’ (Amendment) Bill, 2009 (amending
article 249D of the Constitution) has also been introduced in
Lok Sabha on 26th November, 2009 for increasing reservation of
women in Panchayats from current 33% to 50%. In order to cater to
the training and infrastructure requirements of fairly large number of
elected functionaries of PRIs a sum of Rs. 4780 crore has been given
to Ministry of Panchayati Raj as annual budget.
Responsibility of the Ministry
1.2 The Ministry of the Panchayati Raj has the following
responsibilities:
(i) All matters relating to Panchayati Raj and Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs).
(ii) District Planning Committees (DPCs).
(iii) Implementation of Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled
Areas) (PESA) Act.
(iv) Formulation of laws, policies and programmes for above
three responsibilities.
(v) Building of systems, procedures and institutions for the
aforesaid purposes.
1.3 The Demands for Grants (2009-2010) relating to Ministry of
Panchayati Raj were laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th July,
2009 under Demand No. 69. These have made a provision of

2
Rs. 4780.71 crore both in Plan and Non-Plan. The broad provisions
are Rs. 4670 crore for Backward Regions Grants Funds (BRGF) and
remaining Rs. 110 crore has been given for other schemes like Rashtriya
Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY) (Rs. 45 crore) Mission Mode Project on
e-Panchayats (Rs. 23.00 crore) Panchayats Empowerment and
Accountability Incentive Scheme (Rs. 10.00 crore) etc. The Scheme-
wise details are in Appendix I.
1.4 In this Report the Committee have restricted its analysis of
the budgetary allocation and related matters in respect of BRGF and
various other Schemes of the Ministry in Tenth and Eleventh Plan
Periods, allocations vis-a-vis releases of Twelfth Finance Commission
(TFC) Grants, etc.

3
CHAPTER II
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS MADE
BY THE COMMITTEE IN THEIR THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009) OF THE MINISTRY OF
PANCHAYATI RAJ UNDER DIRECTION 73A OF THE
DIRECTIONS BY THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA
The Committee during Fourteenth Lok Sabha had presented five
original Reports and five Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants
of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. Under Direction 73A of ‘Directions
by the Speaker’ the Minister concerned is required to make within
six a Statement regarding the status of implementation of
recommendation contained in the Reports of the Committee. The
related Statements have already been laid on the Table of the House.
2.2 On being asked by the Committee whether the Department
reviews implementation of the recommendations made by the
Committee in all the States and Union Territories, in their earlier
Reports at regular intervals, the Ministry clarified:—
“Various issues arising out of recommendations of the
Parliamentary Standing Committees are being reviewed from time
to time. The Government has instituted an in-built review and
monitoring mechanism in the guidelines of each scheme to ensure
that the objectives of the schemes are achieved by their
implementation. The progress is regularly being reviewed by Union
Secretary of Panchayati Raj in the quarterly review meetings of
the State Secretaries of Panchayati Raj Departments. The Senior
Officers of the Ministry during their visit to the allotted States
also reviews the progress of Panchayati Raj in States from time to
time.”
2.3 The Committee are glad to note that the Statement by the
Minister under Direction 73A of ‘Directions by the Speaker’ showing
the status of implementation of recommendations of the Standing
Committee on Rural Development contained in the Thirty Eighth
Report has been made within the stipulated period. The Committee
trust that in future also the Ministry would be abiding by the above
Direction by the Speaker.

4
2.4 The Committee have been informed that the
recommendations of the Committee are reviewed from time to time
with the intent to ensure their implementation in review meetings
as also in Quarterly Review Meetings (QRMs) with State Panchayati
Raj Departments. The Committee, are, however constrained to find
that in the case of majority of the recommendations, the Statement
has merely reproduced from the action taken replies submitted three
months after presentation of the Report. The Committee feel that
this defeats the very purpose of the Statement which should depict
the progress made in the implementation of the recommendations
of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, desire that in future
instead of repeating the action taken replies in the Minister’s
Statement, the precise status of implementation of the
recommendations should be indicated in the Statement made under
Direction 73A. This will enable the Committee to understand the
progress of work done in a more focused manner.

5
CHAPTER III
GENERAL ANALYSIS
Allocation vis-a-vis utilization during Tenth Plan (2002-2007) and so
far Eleventh Plan (2007-2012)
The agreed Outlay vis-a-vis Actual expenditure during Tenth Plan
and so far during Eleventh Plan (2007-2012) of the Department is as
follows:—
(Rs. in crore)
Outlay Tenth Plan Eleventh Plan
BRGF Other Total BRGF Other Total
Schemes Schemes
Proposed — — — — 15,000
Agreed 3825 (Revised to 80.60 2,080.60 23,350 876.37 24,226.37
Rs. 2000 crore
at RE)
Actuals 1998.48 57.15 2055.63* 7489.74 191.07 7680.81**
(upto (upto
2008- 2008-
09 09)
* The Ministry has stated that since it was created on 29th May , 2004, thus no separate
allocations were made for Tenth Plan instead the allocation were given from year to
year.
**Actuals for BRGF for 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 were Rs. 3597.50 crore and Rs. 3889.76
crore respectively. Whereas actuals for other schemes for 2007-2008 and 2008-2009
were Rs. 91.31 crore and Rs. 103.99 crore respectively.
(i) Utilization of funds during Tenth Plan (2002-2007)
3.1 It came out during the course of examination that during
Tenth Plan the utilization position under BRGF was quite well.
However it was not so for other Schemes. On being asked about the
reasons for this under utilization under other Schemes during tenth
Plan the Ministry in a written note informed as under:—
“The Ministry was constituted in May, 2004. The schemes/
programmes are introduced progressively for strengthening of

6
Panchayati Raj from time to time. The expenditure during the Tenth
Plan was more than 90% except during the first year of the
Ministry. Low utilization during 2006-07 under Research was due
to want of proposals from the Research Institutions. The
expenditure under Media & Publicity was less because the scheme
was newly introduced and for want of sufficient number of quality
proposals for Media campaign.”
(ii) Utilization of funds so far during Eleventh Plan (2007-2012)
3.2 It came out during the course of examination that during
Eleventh Plan Period the utilization rate is deteriorating both for BRGF
and for Other Schemes. For instance, for BRGF as against the total
Eleventh Plan allocation of Rs. 23,750 crore, the actual expenditure
incurred was Rs. 7489.65 crore during first two years of 11th Plan.
3.3 On being asked as to how the Ministry sought to enhance
allocations under different schemes during the remaining period of
the 11th Plan period and beyond, the Secretary, Panchayati Raj while
dealing with possible enhancement under biggest scheme of the
Ministry i.e. BRGF clarified:—
“……Three aspects are there, first of all capacity building of
Panchayats i.e. infrastructure, manpower training etc. Second relates
to planning capacity of PRIs. In that we provide for professional
manpower in Panchayats. Third aspect is of development grant.
The proposal we have given is very modest. During the last three
years the allocation in the BRGF was Rs. 4670 crore. We have
proposed that next year it should be enhanced to Rs. 7300 crore.
Thereafter, by the end of the Eleventh Plan it should be Rs. 9300
crore.”
3.4 Giving similar details about the second big scheme of Rashtriya
Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY) the Secretary, Panchayati Raj also
submitted that:—
“In Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana applicable in 350 non-BRGF
districts in the country during this year, allocation of Rs. 40 crore
(including North East component of Rs. 5.00 crore) has been
provided, while in BRGF under capacity building we are providing
1 crore a year for each district. We think that under RGSY with
Rs. 40 crore we are taking care of 350 districts. The proposal with
which we have come before you is the existing allocation of Rs. 40
crore under RGSY should be increased to Rs. 1000 crore next year
and next to next year it should further be enhanced to Rs. 2000
crore.”

7
3.5 Unfolding the plans of the Ministry about future enhancement
in third major scheme of e-governance to Panchayats, the Secretary,
Panchayati Raj stated as under:—
“The third important scheme relates to e-governance in Panchayati
Raj Institutions. In that Rs. 23 crore (including North East
component of Rs. 2.40 crore) is the allocation. In that we have
done three things. First, what is the information and service needs
of Panchayats, State Departments and the Union Ministries. That
has to be assessed. The process that is available for computerization
like issuing of caste certificates, planning of programmes, their
implementation, monitoring etc. For that a business process re-
engineering is being done. For every State, a separate Detailed
Project Report (DPR) is required to be prepared so as to see how
e-governance is implemented in Panchayats in that State. We have
come to a stage that if the Government accords financial sanction,
we will be able to roll it out next year. Our preparations have
been completed. This year we have an allocation of around Rs. 23
crore. The total project cost we have estimated is Rs. 4500 crore.
We are requesting that next year Rs. 1000 crore and next to next
year Rs. 1500 crore may be allocated. Rest in third year and
subsequently in the Twelfth Plan we will get.”
3.6 In this connection the Ministry has also informed that they
are in the process of preparing a roadmap for Panchayats for next
five years.
3.7 The Committee are constrained to note that important
Ministry of Panchayati Raj that has been assigned the pioneering
role of looking after all the responsibilities of Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs) throughout the country covering around 24 lakh
Panchayats with 2.8 million elected Panchayati Raj representatives
has not been receiving necessary funds since its inception in 2004
commensurate with the task and challenges before the Ministry.
They find that an amount of Rs. 4780 crore has been made available
during 2009-10 to the Ministry even after the two historic legislations
of 73rd Constitution (Amendment) Act of 1992 and the Panchayats
(Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act (PESA) of 1996 have come into
operation in the country. The Committee observe that during the
Tenth Plan (2002-2007) the total funds to the tune of Rs. 2080 crore
were available to the Ministry. These have gone up to Rs. 24,226.37
crore during Eleventh Plan period (2007-2012). The Committee
recommend that keeping in view the stupendous task and
responsibilities of over 2.8 million elected representatives in the

8
country a countrywide study is necessary for making the Ministry
more purposeful and action oriented.
3.8 The Committee’s examination has revealed that the Ministry
is getting flow of funds under the two categories—one under
Backward Region Grant Funds (BRGF) and the Other Schemes like
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY), e-Panchayats etc. The
Committee also find that actual flow of funds for Panchayats in the
country started at the end of the Tenth Plan with the arrival of
Backward Region Grant Scheme in 2006-2007 with an outlay of
Rs. 1925 crore (RE) that has risen to the present level (2007-2008
onwards) of Rs. 4670 crore. Excluding this amount a small allocation
of Rs. 110 crore for Other Schemes is being made available to
Ministry to take care of 24 lakh of Panchayats. In Committee’s view
the total amount of Rs. 4780 crore provided during 2009-10 is
inadequate for the Panchayats in the country from any yardstick let
alone their upliftment in view of emerging demands. Since
Panchayats are being given more power, more funds need to be
released for infrastructural purposes. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that sufficient funds commensurate with the task
involved should be made available.
3.9 While the funds being made available to the Ministry are
not adequate in the opinion of the Committee, the trend so far
during Eleventh Plan shows that the utilization of even these funds
has not been encouraging as compared to Tenth Plan (2002-2007).
The Committee find that as against the total allocation of
Rs. 24,226.37 crore the actual expenditure during first two years of
the Plan viz. 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 is Rs. 7680.81 crore only. The
Committee apprehend that with the present rate of utilization the
Eleventh Plan outlay may not be utilized fully. They, therefore,
recommend that all efforts need to be made to utilize at least the
available funds fully.
3.10 The Committee have been informed that the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj now proposes to have the allocation for three big
schemes of BRGF, RGSY and e-governance enhanced in a big way
for the remaining years of the Eleventh Plan and beyond. For
instance for BRGF quantum of funds is proposed to be hiked from
present level of Rs. 4670 crore in 2009 to Rs. 7300 crore in 2010-2011
and Rs. 9300 crore in 2011-2012. Similarly, for RGSY the Ministry is
planning to have the existing allocation of Rs. 40 crore increased to
Rs. 1000 crore during 2010-2011 and doubling the same in 2011-2012.
Likewise for e-governance the Ministry has a proposal to increase
the present allocation of Rs. 24 crore in 2009-2010 to Rs. 1000 crore

9
in 2010-2011 and Rs. 1500 crore by 2011-2012. The Committee feel
that aforesaid enhancement of funds for one-two years in major
schemes of the Panchayats is not going to comprehensively address
the requirements of Panchayats in the country. The utilization of
available funds purposefully is most essential. The Committee also
desire that a long term perspective plan for Panchayats in the
country be drawn up bringing out clearly the present state of
Panchayats and their likely role and responsibilities by 2020.
(iii) Utilization of funds in Annual Plans
3.11 Budget Estimate, Revised Estimate and Actual Expenditure
during 2007-2008 and 2008-2009, and BE for 2009-2010 are as follows:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year BE RE Actual
BRGF Other Total BRGF Other Total BRGF Other Total
Schemes Schemes Schemes
2007-08 4670 100 4770 3597.50 102.50 3700 3597.50 91.31 3688.81
2008-09 4670 110 4780 3890 110.00 4000 3889.76 103.99 3997.75
2009-10 4670* 110** 4780 — — — 2501.44*** 26.07 2527.51
*Ministry proposed Rs. 6000 crore.
**Ministry proposed Rs. 720 crore.
***upto 8.12.09.
3.12 It came out during the course of examination that during
2007-08 there had been significant reduction in Estimates at Revised
Estimates stage in BRGF whereas there was under utilization in other
Schemes in for both the years.
3.13 On being asked about the reasons for drastic reduction of
Rs. 1073 crore during 2007-08 and Rs. 780 crore in 2008-09 for BRGF,
the Ministry has given the following reasons:—
(i) Under the Cash Management Scheme of the Ministry of
Finance, sixty seven per cent of the budgetary amounts
allocated under a programme should be spent by
31st December with the expenditure being evenly spread
out in each quarter. The reduction in the case of BRGF at
the RE stages in 2007-08 and 2008-09 was mainly because
of proportionately low expenditure by the second quarters
of 2007-08 and 2008-09.

10
(ii) Enough proposals for claiming BRGF funds from the States
could not be received by the Second Quarters as most of
the States had sent the proposals in the last quarters of the
Financial Years.
(iii) Consolidation of the local plans into the district plans by
the District Planning Committees (DPCs) is an essential
condition for funds release under the BRGF. The States,
like, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Uttarakhand, Punjab, etc. did not have DPCs in 2007-08
whereas the States, like Gujarat, Maharashtra and Punjab
could not constitute these Committees until the Third
Quarter of 2008-09. Uttarakhand has not constituted DPCs
even now.
(iv) Despite fulfilling/exemption of the conditions of DPC
constitution, the States like Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Jammu &
Kashmir, Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh did not submit
district plans in 2007-08 whereas Karnataka, Kerala and
Mizoram did not claim the grants in 2008-09.”
3.14 While examining the requirement of funds during the
previous two years viz. 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj, the Committee are constrained to note that funds
available under BRGF have been significantly lowered at RE stage
from Rs. 4670 crore to Rs. 3597.50 crore during 2007-2008 and from
Rs. 4670 crore to Rs. 3890 crore during 2008-2009. Non-receipt of
enough proposals for claiming BRGF funds from State Governments
and delay in constitution of District Planning Committees (DPCs),
a pre-requisite for claiming BRGF funds in different States like
U.P ., Gujarat, Maharashtra etc. have been attributed as reasons for
drastic reduction of funds at Revised Estimates stage. Besides,
non-submission of district plans by various States like Sikkim,
Tamil Nadu, J&K etc. in 2007-2008 and failure to claim grants in
2008-2009 by the States of Karnataka, Kerala and Mizoram have
been the reasons advanced by the Ministry for lowering of funds.
3.15 The Committee feel that the aforesaid reasons of non-receipt
of proposals/non-submission of district plans were very well within
the domain of the Ministry. In their opinion being the nodal
Ministry it is incumbent upon the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to
have track on above issues with the States. The Committee, therefore,
conclude that had the Ministry taken timely interventions, aforesaid
reduction could have been avoided. The Committee, therefore, feel
that a mechanism be evolved for taking care of these issues so that

11
no reduction of budgeted amount is required to be made at revised
estimates in future. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that such issues should be vigorously pursued with the State
Governments. The concrete action taken in this regard should be
communicated to the Committee.
Requirement of funds during 2009-2010
3.16 The Committee wanted to know whether Rs. 4780 crore is
sufficient to meet the target fixed for 2009-2010 by the Ministry, the
Ministry in a written note clarified as under:
“The extant allocation of Rs. 4670 crore under BRGF and
Rs. 110 crore under Central Plan Schemes for 2009-10 is considered
adequate to meet the commitments during the current year as it
stands now. The Ministry is contemplating a comprehensive
restructuring of the BRGF programme and upscaling of other
schemes such as Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability
Incentive Scheme (PEAIS), e-PRI, Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana
(RGSY), Rural Business Hubs (RBH) which, it approved, will require
a higher allocation.”
3.17 The Committee wanted to know whether the Ministry has
requested for higher funds to the Planning Commission for the
aforesaid purpose for 2009-2010. The Ministry submitted as under:
“The outlay proposed and approved by the Planning Commission
for the Annual Plan 2009-10 is given as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Name of the Scheme             Annual Plan 2009-10
Proposed Approved
12 3
A.
1. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana
(a) Training and Capacity Building 80.00 45.00
(b) Infrastructure Development
2. Mission Mode Project on e-Panchayats 78.00 23.00
3. Action Research & Research Studies 3.50 3.00

12
 4. Media & Publicity 8.00 6.90
 5. Rural Business Hubs 7.00 2.00
 6. Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan 4.50 4.00
 7. Panchayat Empowerment & Accountability 450.00 10.00
Incentive Scheme
 8. Secretariat Economic Service (Management Cell) 10.00 11.00
 9. UN Assisted Project 5.00 5.00
10. Contribution to CLGF 2.00 0.10
11.P rovision for North Eastern Areas 72.00 —
Total (A) 720.00 110.00*
B.
12. BRGF 6000.00 4670.00
Total (B) 6000.00 4670.00
Grand Total (A+B) 6720.00 4780.00
*10% of BE has been earmarked for the NE State.
3.18 As regards availability of funds before the Ministry during
the current year 2009-10, the Committee are constrained to note that
an amount of Rs. 6720 crore as proposed by the Ministry has been
drastically reduced to Rs. 4780 crore by the Planning Commission.
The Committee after perusing scheme-wise proposed vis-a-vis agreed
amount, are constrained to note that for BRGF as against the
proposed amount of Rs. 6000 crore only Rs. 4670 crore have been
approved. Similarly, for other schemes as against the proposed
amount of Rs. 720 crore only Rs. 110 crore has been approved. The
scheme of the Department have tremendous impact on increasing
capacity building thereby improving rural infrastructure. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to the Department to take
up the matter with the Planning Commission for providing adequate
allocation commensurate with the requirements with a view to
achieve inclusive growth so that the benefit are shared by the
poorest of poor in the country.
12 3

13
CHAPTER IV
MAJOR ISSUES
A. Ensuring effective, efficient and transparent Panchayats
During the course of briefing of the representatives of the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj, the Ministry has stated that ensuring effectiveness,
efficiency and transparency of the Panchayats was one of the major
priorities before the Ministry.
4.2 During the course of examination on the issue of ensuring
effective, efficient and transparent Panchayats in the country a fairly
large number of issues came up for discussion before the Committee.
These have been discussed in succeeding paragraphs.
(i) Need for orderly Gram Sabha Meetings;
(ii) Need for equipping the Panchayats with technical know
how and personnel; and
(iii) Pr ovision for remunerations, official accommodation to PRIs
functionaries and filling up of vacancies in Panchayats.
(i) Need for orderly Gram Sabha Meetings
4.3 The Committee wanted to know how it was ensured that
schemes conceived for implementation at grassroots level did not
remain on paper and far away from ground reality and that meetings
of Gram Sabha were held strictly according to the rules and regulations
in this regard. In this context the Committee also wanted to know
whether due importance is being given to ‘Gram Sabha’ as it has
been given a pivotal role in the scheme of things of self-Government
under the Constitution.
4.4 Replying to various related queries raised by the Committee
the Secretary, Panchayati Raj clarified:
“M’am first of all, the issue of Gram Sabha has come up for
discussion as to how its meetings are organized and how decisions
are arrived at because in all these the influence of local politics
will be visible. We have advised all States Governments that where
Gram Sabhas are quite large, these can be divided into Ward Sabhas

14
so that these can become manageable. We have circulated a model
Panchayati Raj Act to States wherein details regarding Constitution
of Ward Sabhas, its functions, all this has been clearly delineated.
Recently we have also sent a circular to the States about how to
run Gram Sabhas in an effective manner. The present functioning
of Gram Sabha is not at all desirable. When the Ministry came to
know about this, we thought over the issue for quite long time
and issued this circular.”
4.5 The Ministry has informed that Guidelines for conducting Gram
Sabha Meetings have been forwarded to different States for advisory.
The Guidelines are as under:
Conduct of the Gram Sabha Meetings
• The meeting of the Gram Sabha should be chaired as
designated in the State Act. The official so designated
should act as the Secretary.
• At the beginning of the meeting, the Chairperson or the
Secretary should read out the decisions of the Previous
Gram Sabha and explain the important activities/events in
the Panchayat. If something could not be done, the reasons
may also be explained.
• The main agenda items may subsequently be taken up one
by one.
• The Chairperson should take care to ensure that every one
is allowed to speak, and a few people do not dominate the
proceedings. Special care needs to be taken with respect to
women and marginalized groups.
• If the Gram Sabha is convened for planning, matters like
review of the previous year’s performance, success as well
as failures, new directions, deviations if any from the plan
and the reasons for that, resource mobilisation, allocation,
beneficiaries of each scheme, benefitting area, criteria,
activities, organization, funds etc. have to be discussed.
•A  time should be allotted for individuals or groups to
present proposals and resolutions.
• The Gram Sabha may, during the meeting, take a decision
to form its own committees to look into an issue and make
suggestions, or reports.

15
• People should also be encouraged to provide voluntary
labour or other contributions in the meeting.
• At the end of the meeting, the minutes should be read out
and signed by the persons designated to do so.
4.6 The Committee have been informed that various guidelines
with regard to conduct of Gram Sabha meetings in a proper manner
have been issued. However, they have a feeling that all of them are
not being followed in letter and spirit leaving much to be desired.
In this connection the Committee have also been informed about
various initiatives like sending of advisories to State Governments
in the form of circular issued in January, 2009 in this behalf. The
Committee recommend that in order to ensure proper
implementation of such Guidelines, some methodology like presence
of officials of the Panchayati Raj Ministry when Gram Sabha
meetings are in progress in some of the selective States be evolved.
This would also enable the Ministry to have an idea of the actual
activities of Gram Sabhas in the country and take further steps to
strengthen the Gram Sabha which is the backbone of democracy.
(ii) Need for providing the Panchayats with technical support and
personnel
4.7 During the course of evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj it was pointed out that a number of
complaints have been received against Sarpanchs in regard to
implementation of rural development schemes like NREGA. Some
times Sarpanchs do not know how to run different rural development
schemes. The Committee also pointed out that mega programmes of
rural development are given to Panchayats to implement. However in
the absence of technical knowhow and personnel available to
Panchayats are unable to perform their duties properly.
4.8 On the issue of training Gram Pradhans, the Secretary,
Panchayati Raj clarified:
“This is true that many Pradhans are not trained. As such, they
are not equipped with the required knowledge and in many
Panchayats the Panchayat Secretary misleads the elected
representatives. The Committee is right that unless Gram Pradhans
are trained the goal of Gram Swaraj will remain unfulfilled. Your
perception of Gram Sabha is also correct. Then in present set up,
there is lot of harassment at the hands of BDOs and Junior
Engineers. We are trying to give so much technical support to the

16
Panchayats that there will little need for roaming around the BDOs
and Junior Engineers. We are working on it.”
4.9 During the course of evidence the Committee wanted to know
whether technical manpower or knowhow available within the district
can be utilized for training elected Gram Pradhans. The Committee
also enquired whether any study/evaluation is available on this issue,
the Secretary, Panchayati Raj submitting candidly informed:
“Madam always this issue comes up that what is the capacity of
Panchayats? Whether these have technical manpower? We have
conducted a study through World Bank in eight States where there
are large number of BRGF districts. The finding of World Bank
was that it is a myth that Panchayats due to lack of technical
manpower are unable to function. It says that Panchayats without
technical manpower, without any support are doing better than
the Government agencies and are getting the work done in less
time. This is the finding of World Bank team. This the Committee
may judge whether it is true or false. They, after doing the survey,
have informed that the works done by Panchayats is better than
that of Government agencies.”
4.10 The Committee are constrained to note that in the absence
of proper technical knowhow and personnel the Sarpanchs in
different States are facing difficulties in running the different rural
development programmes like NREGA and that in many cases the
Panchayat Secretary generally does not guide the Gram Sabha
properly. Not only this the expected cooperation from Government
functionaries like BDOs/Junior Engineers is also not forthcoming
owing to large responsibility of covering more than one Gram
Sabhas given to these Government officers. All these revelations
have been candidly admitted before the Committee by the Secretary,
Panchayati Raj while assuring necessary remedial steps. The
Committee trust that these issues will be taken care of by the nodal
Ministry for appropriate action. They would like to be informed of
the precise remedial steps taken in this regard.
4.11 On the issue of making available technical support to
Panchayats the Committee have been informed that based on the
findings of World Bank team in eight States with problem of large
BRGF districts, a view has come up that Panchayats can perform
better independently without Governments’ support or other
technical support. In Committee’s opinion the findings of the World
Bank team may hold good for selective areas only. Considering

17
dismal infrastructure available with Panchayats in general in the
country, the Committee feel that desired technical knowhow and
personnel be made available to Panchayats so that these can function
in a vibrant manner.
(iii) Provision of remunerations, official accommodation to PRIs
functionaries and filling up vacancies in Panchayats
4.12 In order to ensure effective, efficient and transparent
Panchayats in the country, it came out during the course of
examination that though sweeping powers have been given to
Panchayats, the PRI functionaries are not being giving remuneration
as in the case of Members of other elected bodies. The Committee,
therefore, wanted to know whether the issue of payment of
remuneration to PRI functionaries has been examined with a view to
making Panchayats effective and efficient.
4.13 The Secretary, Panchayati Raj replied:
“Madam, one issue of providing remuneration to elected
representatives of PRIs was raised. This has to be given by the
State Governments even if we have given a submission before the
13th Finance Commission. It has to be seen that upto which extent
the 13th Finance Commission approves the issues of giving
remuneration to elected representative of PRIs……”
4.14 The Committee pointed out that there is no proper
accommodation available for PRI functionaries specially to Panchayat
Secretary in the absence of which these functionaries are not available
in the Gram Panchayats on permanent basis for solving day-to-day
problems of the Panchayats. The Committee also pointed out that
due to this reason many of the posts of Panchayat Secretary and
Gram Sewaks are lying vacant and as such these remain unattractive.
Besides, since one Panchayat Secretary has to look after the work of
two other villages, he is not able to handle the added responsibilities.
Replying to various queries by the Committee the Secretary , Panchayati
Raj clarified:
“This is correct that many posts are lying vacant and we are
holding regular meetings and interactions with principal Secretary,
Panchayati Raj about the need and financial obligations. The 13th
Finance Commission Award is also likely to be announced and we
have demanded comprehensively for each Panchayat wherein the
issues of remuneration, buildings for Gram Panchayats and
manpower have been included. How far the 13th Finance
Commission addresses these issues that we have to see. When it
is partially accepted, it will be a great achievement.”

18
4.15 The Committee find at present Panchayat functionaries like
Gram Pradhans and members of Panchayats are not being provided
remuneration as in the case of members of other elected bodies. In
this connection the Committee have been informed by the Secretary,
Panchayati Raj that this issue alongwith manpower and buildings
for Panchayat Ghars were among those submitted before the
13th Finance Commission whose award is yet to be announced. The
Committee have also been informed that financial implications have
been discussed with Principal Secretary, Panchayati Raj. The
Committee would await the 13th Finance Commission Report before
making detailed comments in this regard.
4.16 Another related issue that came up before the Committee
is of filling up of large number of vacancies of Panchayat Secretary
and Gram Sewaks in Panchayats. The Committee feel that this issue
can be suitably addressed by the nodal Ministry itself by taking up
the matter with the State Governments. They would, therefore, like
that the Ministry to take desired action in this regard.
B. Capacity Building of Panchayats
(a) Training
(i) Progress on training of functionaries of PRIs
4.17 Training of functionaries of PRIs has been a prominent feature
of Ministry’s annual budget. There are around 2.4 lakh Panchayats at
the three levels with 2.8 million elected representatives in the country .
The Ministry has been doing the work of training of functionaries/
officials of PRIs since its inception in May 2004. In the Outcome
Budget, it has been stated that 3.50 lakhs elected representatives have
been trained during 2007-2008. The Ministry in its Outcome Budget
has projected that 9.63 lakh representatives of PRIs are to be trained
during 2009-2010.
4.18 In this connection the Committee wanted to know how many
of the total elected representatives in the country have been imparted
training so far, the Ministry clarified:
“Training to the Elected Representatives of PRIs is provided under
BRGF Capacity Building Component in the 250 BRGF districts and
under the scheme of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY) in the
Non-BRGF districts. In RGSY, some NGOs have also been directly
funded on the recommendations of the respective State
Governments, for providing training to PRI members. State-wise

19
details of representatives trained during 2007-08 and 2008-09 has
been given in the enclosed Appendix-II. As may be seen in that
Appendix II, information in respect of some States is incomplete.
The Ministry is consolidating the information and shall submit to
the Hon’ble Committee.”
4.19 The Committee also wanted to know by when the remaining
representatives are likely to be trained, the Ministry informed:
“The Ministry pursues the objective of providing initial (basic)
training to all the Elected Representatives within one year of their
election, followed by subject matter training. However, with the
proposed engagement of NGOs/Private Sector Organisations as
partners, it is expected that from the next financial year, all the
Elected Representatives would be provided training within a period
of one year if the allocations for RGSY are enhanced.”
4.20 In this connection the Ministry has also informed that they
are in the process of preparing a roadmap for Panchayats for next
five years.
(ii) Requirement of funds
4.21 On being further enquired about the funds needed for their
training, the Ministry clarified:
“For the 250 BRGF districts, the allocation for Capacity Building is
@Rs. 1 crore per district per year. In the non-BRGF districts which
number above 350, the scheme of RGSY (TCB) with an allocation
of Rs. 40 crore (including Rs. 5 crore for North East component)
caters to the training requirements. This is grossly insufficient.
The Planning Commission was, therefore, requested to allocate
Rs. 1000 crore for the RGSY during the current year.”
4.22 Detailing out the holistic picture with regard to training and
capacity building of Panchayats in the country, the Ministry clarified:
“The total size of the Annual Plan of the Government of India is
of the order of Rs. 3 lakh crore, of which the Ministry handles
only about Rs. 5,000 crore. Within this small component, the
allocation for the Ministry is mainly for the BRGF, which covers
only 250 districts in the country. Therefore, the Ministry has advised
the Planning Commission to introduce the Integrated District
Planning in an effective way in the entire country encompassing
all the Centrally Sponsored Schemes and Programmes as well as

20
the State Sector Plans. The Ministry has assured the Planning
Commission of its fullest cooperation in the matter. Planning
Commission, on its part, has proposed to undertake a Scheme of
strengthening the planning Units at State and District levels and
the Scheme is at the stage of Inter-Ministerial consultation.”
4.23 The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj does not even have the basic data about the number
of elected representatives of Panchayats trained in different States.
In Committee’s opinion a sorry state of affairs is currently prevailing
over this vital aspect relating to training of Panchayat functionaries
in the country. The Committee find from the State-wise details made
available to them that in almost all the States figures are not
available with the Ministry. In the absence of necessary data, the
Committee would wonder how the claims of the Ministry that out
of 28.8 lakh elected representatives a total of 11.95 lakh elected
representatives have been trained can be relied upon. The Committee
expressed their concern over the under achievement of targets with
regard to the training of elected representatives. The Committee,
strongly recommend that all initiatives should be taken to ensure
that fixed targets for training of Panchayat functionaries in the
country are achieved and make the training programme more
effective.
4.24 In view of the foregoing the Committee feel that business
like approach is essential on the issue of training of elected
representatives in different States. The Committee are also of the
view that Ministry’s claim that within one year the remaining elected
representatives would be trained provided the enhanced funds of
Rs. 1000 crore are made available under RGSY is also not based on
any assessment particularly when everything is vague and
inconclusive on the issue of training in different States. The
Committee, therefore, feel that before asking for higher funds, the
Ministry has to put its own house in order to take care of higher
funds in future. They, therefore, desire that the Ministry should
without any delay make realistic assessment of the elected
representatives in PRIs who are yet to be trained so that it can gear
itself to the task accordingly. According to the Ministry it has
advised the Planning Commission to introduce integrated district
planning through Centrally sponsored Schemes/State Sector Schemes.
Planning Commission is stated to have proposed a scheme for
planning units at State and District level is for which the inter-
Ministerial consultations are in progress. They recall that more or
less a similar scheme was also floated by the Ministry last year but

21
it could not see the light of the day. The Committee, therefore, feel
that instead of charting out a flip-flop approach, a time bound
programme for training of PRI functionaries on the pattern of ‘Bharat
Nirman’ should be prepared so that Panchayats in the country can
work as a unit of self Government in the real sense.
(iii) Constraints coming in the way of training and feedback received
from NIRD/SIRDs
4.25 During the course of examination it came out that Panchayats
in the country have been facing various constraints in capacity building
component. These inter alia  include non-submission or delayed
submission of Capacity Building Plans, slow pace in utilization of
funds already received, delayed transfer of funds from State
Governments to nodal authorities, poor capacity of these nodal
authorities for slow implementation of plans etc.
4.26 With a view to address the issue of training of elected
representatives of PRIs, the Ministry has informed that the Ministry
on 1 December 2008 had held meetings with training Institutes and
State Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs) and State Governments
to formulate a strategy for implementing the National Capacity
Building Framework (NCBF). Various suggestions like networking of
NIRD/SIRD and other training Institutes for sustainable mechanism,
setting up District and Block Resources cum Training Centres, updating
of all training perspective Plans, alternative training system for training
of 42 lakh PRIs functionaries etc. were outlined.
4.27 In this connection during the course of evidence the Secretary,
Panchayati Raj also candidly admitted before the Committee stating
as under:
“As regards the framework for training, we already have the
National Capacity Building Framework. It is a nice framework;
but somehow we have failed to implement; failed in the sense
that it is such an ideal programme and implementation has not
been half of it. I have taken several meetings with the States, State
Institutes of Rural Development and national Institute of Rural
Development. Unfortunately, the progress is much below our
expectation.”
4.28 The Secretary, Panchayati Raj further added:
“What my colleague have done is we are going to also give this
option of training through public-private partnership. We have

22
floated a national tender, anybody, any agency who thinks himself
to be suitable as per the criteria laid by us can apply. We will
shortlist competent agencies and pass it on to the States. That
training becomes rapid and the training will have quality and
purpose.”
4.29 The Committee also wanted to know the details about any
feedback received from training Institutes like NIRDs and SIRDs, in
this regard, the Ministry informed:
“The Ministry obtains feedback from State Governments and
Training Institutes like SIRDs about the methodology and
approaches for imparting training through meetings, conferences
and other interactive communications. It circulates the best practices
to all others. For instance, the Integrated Perspective Plan for
Capacity Building and Training prepared by the G/o West Bengal
and the approach of the G/o Andhra Pradesh on “Training the
Large Members” have been circulated to all States and UTs, for
suitable adoption.”
4.30 The Committee regret to note that the important aspect of
training of elected representatives of PRIs is beset with various
constraints like non-submission or delay in submission of capacity
building plans, late arrival of funds at nodal agency level etc.
Besides the noble programme of ‘National Capacity Building
Framework’ (NCBF) has also not come up to the expectations. The
Committee have also been informed that in order to accomplish the
task, faster training would be done through private partnership basis.
The experience of States like West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh on
the training aspect have been forwarded to other States for their
benefit. The Committee appreciate the good work done by these
States. They, however, desire that nodal Ministry should first of all
address all constraints coming in the way of training and utilise
the NCBF for the above purpose of capacity building. The
Committee also recommend that a follow up from different States
be obtained on the extent to which they have adopted the approach
of West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh which has been circulated by
the Ministry. The Committee may also be apprised of the same.
(iv) ‘Plan Plus Software’
4.31 With regard to the implementation of capacity building of
PRIs and simplifying the procedure for decentralized planning, the
Ministry has informed that a Plan plus software has been prepared

23
with NIC and views of Planning Commission and State Governments
have been obtained thereon. As per Annual Report of the Ministry
for the year 2008-2009 more than 10830 units from different States
have started using the Plan Pus package in varying degrees and these
are currently available in the public domain at the web site
www.planningonline.gov.in. The Ministry also stated that for BRGF
details another website www.brgf.gov.in has been set up for showing
district-wise releases among other things.
4.32 The Committee wanted to know the response of the State
Governments and nodal authorities on new software, the Ministry
informed as under:
“The Plan Plus portal offers a transparent mode for effective
participatory planning commencing from the grassroots. It also
makes it easy to bring about convergence of the various schemes
and programmes. The Ministry organized State level Workshops
for District Level Functionaries for appreciation and use of Plan
Plus in various States during June-July 2009. This was followed by
District level Training Programmes. So far, 2534 persons have been
trained in the State level Workshops and 7545 at the District level
Workshops.
The Plan Plus enables the Panchayats and Municipalities to be the
units for planning. It also enables aggregation of these plans at
Block and District levels. So far, 70,000 Unit Plans are available in
public domain covering different years in various planning units.
At the District level, about 175 district Plans have been generated.
All these are available in public domain. The Plan Plus would be
used in a really effective way only if the resource envelope of all
the sectoral schemes are made available to the Panchayats and
Municipalities. Accordingly, the Ministry has been advising the
States to make available the resource envelope under various
schemes and programmes to the Panchayats well in time. As the
planning for sectoral schemes is done following the norms of the
respective schemes, the Ministry has advised the various Line
Ministries to involve the Panchayats in the Schemes through
Guidelines. The Ministry has also taken up the matter with the
Planning Commission. Thus, while there is improvement in
acceptability of the Plan Plus for planning in regard to BRGF, its
full potential will be realized once all the sectoral schemes are
routed through it, which the Ministry is pursuing with the other
Ministries, Planning Commission and State Governments.”

24
4.33 The Committee wanted to know whether using the software
by only 10,830 units across the country is adequate, the Ministry
clarified:
“As of now, Plan Plus is being adopted in the BRGF Districts
only. The use of the Plan Plus software by the Planning Units has
been increasing steadily . The current status is as follows:
Planning Unit Total No. (in Number of Unit Percentage
the BRGF using Plan Plus
Districts)
District Panchayat 250 175 70
Block Panchayat 3134 2352 75
Gram Panchayat 108416 68498 63
Urban Local Bodies 1623 836 51
Thus more than 70000 Planning Units in the 250 BRGF districts
have adopted the package relating to the years 2007-08, 2008-09
and 2009-10.”
4.34 The Committee are constrained to note that expected
progress has not been made on the issue of simplification of
decentralized planning under BRGF through introduction of the
software ‘Plan Plus’. In this connection the Committee are
constrained to note that only 70,000 planning units in 250 BRGF
have adopted the software in three years period from 2007-2008 to
2009-2010. The Committee have been informed that full potential of
the software will be realized once all sectoral schemes are routed
through it. The Committee feel that the initiative is quite good
however its coverage is far from satisfactory. They desire that the
matter of routing all the schemes through the software be taken up
expeditiously with all concerned for its optimal utilization.
(v) Strategy for training increased number of women PRI
functionaries if 50% reservation legislation is enacted
4.35 It came out during the course of examination that Union
Cabinet has given its nod for 50 per cent reservation of women in
Panchayats and a Bill in this regard has already been introduced in
Parliament for necessary enactment which would lead to large number
of women becoming Panchayati Raj members. The Committee wanted
to know the details of preparations made for the greater role of women

25
representatives in Panchayati Raj Institutions and how the Ministry
have planned to train these women Panchayati Raj members. The
Ministry clarified:
“In order to address the empowerment of Elected Women
Representatives and Elected Youth Representatives in a systematic,
programmatic manner, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has launched
a new scheme in September 2007. During 2007-08, 119 batches
each comprising 35 elected representatives (25 Women & 10 Youth)
representatives (25 Women & 10 Youth) were provided training/
sensitization under the scheme. During 2008-09, 288 batches of
elected representatives were provided training/sensitization under
the scheme.”
At present women elected members of PRIs constitute around 38%
of the total Elected Representatives. They are provided training
alongwith male members. After passage of the bill for reservation
of 50% of seats for women in Panchayats, it is anticipated that
large number of women who would mostly be first timers, would
become members of PRIs. They would require focused training on
specific aspects such as leadership, communications skills as also
literacy programmes. These aspects are covered under the national
Capacity Building Framework, which is implemented through the
BRGF and RGSY. The Ministry is also implemented through the
BRGF and RGSY. The Ministry is also implementing the scheme of
Panchayat Mahila Shakti Abhiyan which would be expanded to
cover the new entrants.”
4.36 During the course of evidence also this issue came up for
discussion. The Secretary , Panchayati Raj, while agreeing with the
Committee about huge task of training women elected representative
if the 50% reservation is enacted by Parliament, informed:
“Madam, you have rightly said that when we have 50 per cent
women in Panchayats, the task is going to be mammoth.”
4.37 On the issue of training of increased number of women
elected representatives in Panchayats in the country, if the legislation
relating to 50% reservation for women in PRIs is enacted, the
Committee have been informed that the increased number of women
members will be taken care of jointly under ‘National Capacity
Building Framework’ (NCBF) and Panchayat Mahila Shakti Abhiyan.
The Committee find that as admitted by the Secretary, Panchayati
Raj the task is mammoth. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that a study/survey be undertaken in advance to identify the correct

26
number of women representatives of PRIs in different States who
would be required to be trained as there is complete absence of
data in this regard.
(viii) Creation of National Institute of Panchayati Raj
4.38 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in its Annual Report 2008-
2009 has stated that to build up the capacity of elected representatives
and officials of the Panchayati Raj, a national level training and
resource centre is required. Accordingly, the Ministry has proposed to
set up the National Institute of Panchayati Raj and has taken up this
matter with the Ministry of Urban Development for allotment of
suitable space.
4.39 During the course of examination, the Ministry had advocated
that since national Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) is pre-
occupied with rural development work as an apex institution for
research, training and advisory services for Panchayati Raj the
proposed National Institute of Panchayati Raj will work as a think
tank and also play a major role in implementing National Capacity
Building Framework (NCBF). The Ministry has also informed that in
fact the Ministry of Rural Development has already proposed for such
an Institute when Panchayati Raj was under that Ministry.
4.40 The Committee appreciate the idea of setting up a National
Institute for Panchayati Raj for imparting training of PRI
functionaries across the country instead of individual efforts of
different SIRDs in this regard. The Committee recommend that in
order to have a coordinated approach on training of PRI
functionaries as well as officials involved in the implementation of
all rural development schemes, this kind of national level institute
be set up expeditiously as currently National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD) is already pre occupied with other works
relating to rural development.
(b) Infrastructural building of Panchyats
4.41 Infrastructural requirement of Panchayats are being taken care
of under the biggest scheme of the Ministry in Backward Regions
Grants Fund (BRGF) and in Infrastructure Development Component
of Rashtriya Grma Swaraj Yojana. Under BRGF infrastructure like Gram
Panchayat buildings, Anganwadi buildings etc. are built.

27
4.42 During the course of evidence the Secretary, Panchayati Raj
detailing out the current scenario of infrastructure available with
Panchayats clarified:
“According to available information received from States, about
68,000 Panchayats in the country are running without Panchayats
Buildings 58,000 Panchayats need major renovation/repairs of
Panchayat Ghars. We thought that if we ask State Governments,
the details about cost will be running into billions. So we have
prepared a model, based on that, a cost of Rs. 10,000 crore is
required for Panchayat Ghars for a period of three years so that
every Panchayat will have its own good building. When the
building will not be there, how the Panchayat can function? For
this our proposal is to spend Rs. 2000 crore for next two years
and in the subsequent year our plan is to spend Rs. 3000 crore.”
4.43 When the Committee desired to know the targets of Panchayat
Ghars for the coming three years, the Secretary, Panchayati Raj
clarified:
“…The target of Minister for Panchayati Raj is to that in coming
three years an attempt should be that every Panchayat will have
its own building.”
4.44 In reply to another query the Secretary, Panchayati Raj further
clarified:
“Madam, we are going to use scheme of BRGF in that all
Panchayats are at liberty to build their Panchayat buildings. In
fact, we have seen the trend how BRGF are being utilized. Largely
20% funds are being given for Anganwadis and 10% of funds are
being given for Panchayat buildings. Our Minsitry’s impression is
that Gram Panchayats prefer to construct Anganwadis to Panchayat
Bhavans. We have issued an advisory to State Governments that
in the case of BRGF funds that go to Gram Panchayats, it should
be tried that where there are no Panchayat Ghars, first of all the
Panchayat Ghars be constructed. Side by side BRGF Guidelines
are proposed to be amended.”
4.45 The Secretary, Panchayati Raj further added:
“Here another issue of Gram Panchayat which are functioning
without any Gram Panchayat buildings of their own was raised.
As a result Gram Panchayats meetings were held in the residence
of Gram Pradhans. We are trying that every Panchayat has its
own building, leaving no room for this issue.”

28
4.46 The Committee also wanted to know whether the Panchayat
Bhavan will be permitted under NREGA the Secretary, Panchayati Raj
clarified:
“As you are aware under NREGA Act as also in NREGA
Guidelines, Panchayats have been given central role. Since our
Minister is common, an effort is being made that NREGA should
be primarily handled by the Panchayats. In that sequence, it has
been decided to have one Rajeev Seva Kendra as NREGA office in
the Panchayats. In addition some preference should be given to
Panchayat Ghars.”
4.47 The Committee are unhappy to note that even after five
years of creation of the Ministry there are as many as 68000
Panchayats without their own Panchayat Buildings and another
58,000 Panchayat Bhavans across the country require major repairs.
The Ministry is stated to have come up with a three years plan to
build Panchayat Bhavans with increased funds. Simultaneously the
Ministry has been impressing upon the States to utilise the BRGF
funds first for building Panchayat Ghars. As recommended by the
Committee in a previous chapter, a holistic and long term plan is
necessary for solving this problem related with infrastructure of the
Panchayats in the country. The Committee desire that the
construction of Panchayat buildings in all the 68,000 Panchayats
which do not have a building should be taken up in the right
earnest so that each Panchayat in the country has a building of its
own within the next three years. The Committee have also been
informed assigning the Panchayats an exclusive role to handle the
NREGA scheme is being contemplated. The Committee welcome
this development and desire that further details in this regard be
furnished to them.
C. Re-structuring of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) for
providing centrality of PRIs for the purpose of convergence of
schemes
4.48 The Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution lists out 29 subjects
(Appendix III) which the different States may devolve to Panchayats
under Article 243 G of the Constitution. In the light of this provision
the Ministry in their Outcome Budget 2009-2010 has informed that it
has been advocating that for implementation of schemes necessary
devolution of subjects be done to Panchayats by way of giving them
necessary role in various Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) of
various Central Ministries/Departments. With a view to accelerate this

29
process, the Ministry have informed that the Committee under the co
-Chairpersonship of Secretary (co-ordination public grievances) and
Secretary, Panchayati Raj which was constituted in August, 2007 had
reviewed the institutional mechanism of 13 Central Ministries/
Departments. Certain measures were agreed for consideration for
ensuring the centrality of Panchayats in CSSs. The Ministry has
forwarded the same to Central Ministries/State Governments for
further action vide Secretary , Panchayati Raj letter No. N-11019/681/
08-Pol. I of 19 January, 2009 (Appendix IV) to the Union Ministries/
Departments. They have been requested to urgently undertake activity
mapping of the CSS/Additional Central Assistance (ACA) with which
they are concerned, and in conformity with the suggestions made in
the said letter, amend the scheme guidelines accordingly and give
effect to them from 1 April 2009. Pursuant to this letter, Secretary,
Planning Commission, vide D.O. letter dated 2 March 2009, has written
to the Union Ministries/Departments, urging them to take the required
action to ensure that revised guidelines become effective from 1 April
2009. The letter of 19 January, 2009, inter alia,  elucidates :
(a) Annual action plan of the scheme to flow out from the
participatory and holistic decentralized Plan of the
concerned tier;
(b) Every activity assigned to a specific level of Panchayat to
be supported with appropriate authority over functionaries
and powers to handle finances;
(c) Provision of sufficient untied/flexible funds for addressing
specific local needs and also for meeting the additional
administrative expenses of PRIs on account of the scheme;
(d) Specific mode and time line by which funds are transferred,
the entities that handle funds, and the system of utilization
report. Seamless and time bound flow of funds to the
expenditure levels or just-in-time delivery of funds would
both require IT for electronic tagging and tracking of funds;
(e) Specific measures to build competencies at the appropriate
level with training programmes, modalities of training, basic
core content and pedagogy. FAQs, self learning tools, IEC
literature, etc. 1-2 per cent of the total funds could be
earmarked as non-divertible for the purpose;
(f) The method by which accountability will be measured and
enforced;

30
(g) How data on the planning and implementation of the
scheme will be placed in the public domain through suo
moto disclosures, its process and periodicity;
(h) Details of the annual audits and evaluation mechanisms
prescribed;
(i) Systems for financial accountability, taking care not to
violate specific financial rules and guidelines;
(j) System of performance based rewards for Panchayats, as
done in the case of Rural Sanitation Programme (Nirmal
Gram Puraskar).
4.49 The Ministry has also informed that it has pursued and
discussed the issue with concerned Ministries and drafted Activity
Mapping matrices of large number of schemes during 2008-2009 with
the request that same may be incorporated in the relevant Guidelines.
The broad scheme-wise details of such Centrally sponsored Schemes
on which this query has been given is at Appendix V .
4.50 During the course of examination the Committee wanted to
know whether the CSSs/ACRs are being restructured for providing
Centrality to PRIs, the Ministry clarified:
“……It is because of the concerted efforts of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj that the Activity Mapping matrix of the Mid-Day
Meal Scheme has been incorporated in the Scheme guidelines.
Several schemes already accord a central role to PRIs in their
implementation, most notably the NREGS, where at least 50% of
the works are to be executed by the Gram Panchayats. Under the
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, the Village Education Committee has been
made a sub-committee of the Gram Panchayat. Under the IAY, the
identification of beneficiaries is done by the Gram Sabha. It has
been decided that Panchayats would be involved in the planning,
implementation and monitoring of the ICDS, the Rashtriya
Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan and Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan as also
the Sakshar Bharat Scheme for Adult Education.”
4.51 In this connection the Secretary, Panchayati Raj in reply to a
query from the Committee also clarified:
“The Committee had asked whether Planning Commission had
asked Ministries to give central role to Panchayats. In fact we
have issued a circular in January , 2009 to different Ministries about
what role to be given to Panchayats. Today’s the misconceptions

31
that are prevailing on this issue. We are trying to remove those.
How we are going to do activity mapping at the level of Gram
Panchayat, at the level of Gram Sabha or what powers should be
given to Block, Panchayat, State Government, Central Government
etc. do all. We are pursuing all. Many people are unwilling to
trust the Panchayats or whatever reasons may be. We are pursuing
and after recommendation of the Committee are received we will
be redoubling our efforts.”
4.52 The Committee are constrained to note that on the issue of
centrality of PRIs in Centrally Sponsored Schemes not much progress
has been made over the years. In this connection, the Committee
find that on 19 January, 2009 a circular has been issued by the
Ministry to different Ministries urging them to give Central role to
Panchayats in their different schemes run by these Ministries. In
this connection the Committee have been informed by Secretary,
Panchayati Raj that desirable headway has not been made on this
issue. The Committee recommend that a task force under the
Chairmanship of Secretary Panchayati Raj be set up on the issue of
giving central role to Panchayats in the different schemes run by
the Ministries. The Committee may hold inter-Ministerial
consultations with different Ministries as also with Planning
Commission and should submit their findings within three months
time suggesting specific action required on the part of all the
authorities/agencies involved in order to achieve this objective of
strengthening the Panchayats.
D. Devolution of Functions, Functionaries and Finances from State
Governments to Panchayats
4.53 Devolution of Functions, Functionaries and Finances from
State Governments to Panchayats so that Panchayats can run as a
unit of self-Government is one of the objective and spirit under Article
243 G of the Constitution. For such devolution the State Governments
may transfer 29 subjects like agriculture, land improvement, minor
irrigation, water management and watershed development, etc. as
shown in Appendix VI to Panchayats and simultaneously devolve
functionaries and finances also to the Panchayats. These are listed in
Appendix VII & VIII . The Ministry has also informed that Eleventh
Plan document also charts out among others the following two issues
at thrust areas for the Ministry during the Eleventh Plan period:
(i) States can no longer delay or side step ‘the devolution
process involving devolution of 3 Fs viz. Functions,
Functionaries and Finances from State Government to PRIs.

32
(ii) Identifying activities mapping, creation of a Panchayat
sector window in the State and Central Budgets and
effective utilization of taxation powers of Panchayats Keys
Step in PRIs empowerment.
4.54 Over the years this issue has been receiving the attention of
the Committee over the years and the committee have been persistently
pursuing the matter with the Ministry in their 12th Report (para 2.44)
21st Report (para nos. 2.45, 2.46) 30th Report (para nos. 2.44, 2.45,
2.46) and 38tth Report (para nos. 3.25, 3.26 and 3.27)
4.55 The devolution of 3 Fs to Panchayats is to be done through
an exercise of Activity Mapping and by way of incentivising States
for empowering Panchayats through PRI Empowerment Devolution
Index (DI) under Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability
Incentive Scheme (PEAIS).
Progress on Activity Mapping
4.56 Out of 27 States and 7 UTs the exercise of Activity Mapping
is undertaken only in 24 States as remaining four States of Mizoram,
Meghalya, Nagaland and J&k are exempted/excluded from this
exercise since these are Sixth Scheduled States and J&K has its own
Panchayat Act.
4.57 The Ministry has given the updated position with regard to
devolution of functions through legislations and Activity Mapping as
shown in Appendix VI. As per the information the progress of activity
mapping in terms of completed, partially completed etc. in 24 States
where the exercise is applicable is as under:
Name of the States Number of States
12
A. States where it has been completed
Kerala, Karnataka, West Bengal, 6
Sikkim, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh
B. States where it has been partially
completed
Assam, Bihar, MP , UP , Tamil Nadu, 12
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh,
Orissa, Punjab

33
C. States where approval awaited
Rajasthan and Uttarakhand 2
D. States where State Panchayat
Raj Act delineates functions 3
Maharashtra, Manipur and Goa
E. No Information
Jharkhand as there are no Panchayats 1
elections in the State
4.58 The Ministry has given the updated information with regard
to devolution of functions, functionaries and finances from State
Governments to PRIs in Appendix VI, VII & VIII .
4.59 The Committee wanted to know by when the exercise of
Activity Mapping will be over in States where it is partially completed.
The Ministry clarified:
“MoPR has undertaken detailed analysis of the Activity Mapping
done by the States through an analysis of the legislative provisions
and executive orders, notifications issued by the States. As some
of the States, e.g., Bihar and Kerala have expressed the desire to
revisit the Activity Mapping already undertaken by them, MoPR
has written to the SIRDs of all States requesting for research
proposals on Activity Mapping which would bring out the updated
position of the devolution of 3Fs including after field verification.
So far, we have received proposals from the SIRDs of Kerala,
Karnataka, west Bengal, Orissa, Uttarakhand, Andhra Pradesh and
common framework of the study is being formulated in
consultation with the SIRDs.”
4.60 During the course of evidence also the issue of activity
mapping came up for discussion. In this connection, the Secretary,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj submitted:
“The second issue is devolution of three Fs to Panchayats for their
actual empowerment. Here two things are necessary, one every
State Government should open a Panchayat window in their
budget. Several States have done this. Second issue is Planning
Commission should at least link to Panchayats a portion of their
Central Assistance to State Plans.”
12

34
4.61 The Committee are constrained to note that the two issues
of devolution of functions, functionaries and finances from different
States to Panchayats and Activity Mapping which have been outlined
by the Ministry as major areas during Eleventh Plan have not
progressed on expected lines as mandated by the Constitution and
as recommended by the Committee from time to time. The
Committee have analysed the position with regard to devolution in
their earlier reports and expressed serious concern on the slow pace
of devolution in the country. The analysis of the aforesaid data
reveals that no significant improvement has taken place and status
quo has been maintained for most of the States. The Committee are
dismayed to note that the progress on exercise of Activity Mapping
which started way back in 2005 in 24 different States could not
progress well during the last four years. For instance it has been
completed in only 6 States of Kerala, Karnataka, West Bengal,
Sikkim, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh. Further in another 12 States
of Assam, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and Punjab it is partially
completed. In remaining 5 States of Rajasthan, Uttarakhand,
Maharashtra, Manipur and Goa it is at interim stage. In this
connection the Committee have been informed by the Secretary,
Panchayati Raj that for necessary devolution of 3 Fs to Panchayats
two things are essentially required one every State has to open a
Panchayat window in their budget and second the Planning
Commission should link a portion of their central assistance to State
plans. In Committee’s opinion the views expressed by the Secretary,
Panchayati Raj are relevant and the matter should be taken up with
Planning Commission and with State Governments earnestly and
effectively in order to achieve devolution in remaining period of
the Eleventh Plan.
(i) Incentivising States empowering PRIs
4.62 Incentivizing States empowering PRIs is done under Panchayat
Empowerment and Accountability Incentive Scheme that is under
implementation since 2005-2006. Under the Scheme States are
incentivized based on devolution index as shown in Appendix IX .
Under the Scheme only States can get incentives based on two stage
assessment. First stage is the States which fulfill the four Constitutional
requirements viz. establishing State Election Commission, holding of
elections to PRIs, set up State Finance Commission (SFC) and
Constituting District Planning Committee (DPCs) become eligible for
evaluation in terms of indicators of Devolution Index. States are then
given incentives based on their scores in Devolution Index.

35
Performance of States and UTs
4.63 Evaluation of performance of 21 States that qualified the
Framework criteria, in respect of the 3 Fs criteria and for over all DI
is as under:
Rank States Score of Scor e of Scor e of Overall
functions finances functionaries score
1. Madhya Pradesh 4.52 4.08 4.71 4.44
2. West Bengal 5.00 3.68 4.43 4.37
3. Tamil Nadu 5.00 3.62 4.29 4.30
4. Kerala 5.00 2.82 4.29 4.04
5. Karnataka 5.00 3.29 3.64 3.98
6. Sikkim 5.00 3.20 3.29 3.83
7. Himachal Pradesh 3.83 2.97 4.14 3.65
8. Haryana 4.45 2.53 3.29 3.42
9. Chhattisgarh 4.31 2.89 2.86 3.35
10. Assam 4.60 2.47 2.64 3.24
11. Andhra Pradesh 3.72 3.29 2.14 3.05
12. Uttar Pradesh 3.83 3.01 2.00 2.95
13. Maharashtra 2.52 2.69 3.57 2.93
14. Arunachal Pradesh 5.00 1.53 1.93 2.82
15. Rajasthan 3.30 2.80 2.00 2.70
16. Goa 3.42 3.34 1.29 2.68
17. Tripura 3.86 0.93 2.21 2.34
18. Orissa 2.69 1.92 2.29 2.30
19. Bihar 3.60 0.73 2.43 2.25
20. Punjab 1.10 1.51 2.21 1.61
21. Manipur 0.54 2.20 1.64 1.46
Average 3.82 2.64 2.92 3.13

36
4.64 For the year 2008-09, the Ministry has awarded 10 prizes in
all, as follows:
First Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Rs. 1.50 crore
Prize Tamil Nadu & Kerala each
Second Karnataka, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh Rs. 75 lakh
Prize and Haryana each
Third Chhattisgarh and Assam Rs. 50 lakh
Prize each
4.65 The Committee are constrained to note that the Panchayat
Empowerment and Accountability Scheme that envisages
incentivizing States for Empowering PRIs based on devolution index
has also not progressed well. For instance only ten States of Madhya
Pradesh, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Sikkim,
Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Chhattisgarh and Assam could get the
benefit of this scheme, whereas the remaining States are far behind.
The Committee feel that in many States the nodal agencies might
not conceptually clear about the scheme. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that all necessary steps should be taken to encourage
the States to take benefit of the scheme. This would also help in
quickening the pace of devolution.
E. District Planning Committees (DPCs)
4.66 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has outlined the following
agenda with regard to District Planning Committees (DPCs):—
(i) Constitution of DPCs in two States of Uttarakhand and
Jharkhand;
(ii) Professionalizing DPCs for preparing truly integrated and
participatory plans;
(iii) Mass training in decentralizing planning.
4.67 During the course of examination the Committee wanted to
know in what way DPCs are being professionalized for the assigned
task. The Ministry clarified:
“Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has written to the Chief
Secretaries of the States and Union Territories concerned on 29th
May 2009 drawing their attention to the need for professionalizing
and activating decentralized planning. The Ministry of Panchayati
Raj has sanctioned funds to the National Institute of Rural

37
Development, Hyderabad for organizing training of trainers on
District Planning. Ministry of Panchayati Raj has also held a
National Orientation Programme for Technical Support Institutions
(TSIs) on the process of planning as per the Manual for Integrated
District Planning, on 8-9th October 2009. The States have been
requested to organize State Level Workshops to be followed by
District Level Workshops to train the state and District level
functionaries in the process of District Planning. Technical Support
Institutions would be part of the resource pool and would assist
the process of district planning.
Preparation of an integrated District Plan is being attempted for
the first time in the country under the BRGF programme. In view
of the complexity of the task and lack of previous experience by
the members of DPC, the Ministry in consultation with Planning
Commission has identified competent organisations and empanelled
them as Technical Support Institutions (TSIs). The States/districts
could avail the services of TSIs or similar organisations of their
choice for preparation of the district plan. For the first year, the
Ministry also extended a financial assistance of Rs. 10 lakh per
district for this purpose. For the subsequent years also, the State/
district can avail the services of such organisations, if necessary,
and meet the expenses under the BRGF Programme.
As per the guidelines issued by the Planning Commission in
August 2006, Integrated plans are to be prepared by all districts
and submitted by the State Governments as part of their 11th Plan
proposals. However, it is understood that several districts are not
able to meet this challenging task without the assistance of
competent institutions.
Now the Planning Commission has prepared a Scheme for
extending financial assistance to the States for strengthening of the
planning units at district and State levels. MoPR has already
conveyed its support on the proposal to the Planning Commission.”
4.68 The Committee find that with regard to District Planning
Committee’s (DPCs) there are three tasks before the Ministry. One
relates to constitution of DPCs in Uttarakhand and Jharkhand,
second pertains to professionalizing all the DPCs and third mass
training for decentralized planning. The Committee are constrained
to note that DPCs have not been constituted in Uttarakhand. The
Committee recommend that the matter of constitution of DPCs be
taken up with Uttarakhand Government. As for DPCs in Jharkhand,

38
the Committee were informed that the elections are to held in the
State. The Committee recommend that soon after the formation of
Government the issue of early constitution of DPCs should be taken
up with State Government of Jharkhand.
4.69 As regard, professionalizing DPCs, the Committee find that
the process of integrated planning at district level was started way
back in August, 2006. However, it took three years for the Ministry
to even sanction funds to the National Institute of Rural
Development for organizing training of trainers on District Planning
and for organizing orientation programme for Technical Support
Institutes (TSIs). The Committee are of the opinion that serious
efforts need to be made in this regard if the concept of Integrated
District Plan is to succeed. They also desire that details of work
done about professionalizing DPCs in terms of trainers trained,
empanelling of reputed organizations as Technical Institutes (TSIs)
etc. in different BRGF States be furnished to them.
F. Implementation of Panchayats (Extension of Scheduled Areas) Act,
1996 (PESA)
4.70 The Panchayats (Extension of Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996
(PESA) extends Part IX of the Constitution to the Fifth Schedule Areas,
namely Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh,
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa and Jharkhand
subject to certain exceptions and modifications.
Basic Features
4.71 The Act has defined a village a ordinarily consisting of a
habitation or a group of habitations or a hamlet or a group of hamlets
comprising a community and managing its affairs in accordance with
the traditions and customs. It has been laid down that every village
have a Gram Sabha, which will be competent to safeguard and
preserve the traditions and customs of the people, their culture identity,
community resource, and customary mode of dispute resolution.
Reservation for Scheduled Tribes
4.72 The manner of reservation of seats at each level of Panchayats
has been provided for in the Act. It has been stipulated that reservation
for the Scheduled Tribes will not be less than half of the total number
of seats and that all seats will be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes
(STs). Further, it has been provided that the State Government will
nominate persons belonging to such STs as have no representation in

39
the Panchayat at the intermediate level or the Panchayat at the district
level and that such number will not exceed one-tenth of the total
members to be elected in that Panchayat.
Functions and responsibilities of Gram Sabhas
4.73 Mandatory executive functions and responsibilities of Gram
Sabhas are as below:—
(a) Gram Sabha to approve plans, programmes and projects
for social and economic development before they are taken
up for implementation by the Panchayat at the village level;
(b) Gram Sabha to identify beneficiaries of pervert alleviation
and other programmes;
(c) Gram Sabha to issue certification of utilization of funds by
the Panchayat at the village level for the programmes;
(d) Planning and management of minor water-bodies will be
done by the Panchayats in consultation with Gram Sabha.
Overriding powers of Gram Sabhas
4.74 Before acqusition of land in the Scheduled Areas for
development projects and before resettling rehabilitated persons
affected by such projects, it is mandatory to consult the Gram Sabha
or the Panchayat at the appropriate level.
4.75 The recommendation of the Gram Sabha or the Panchayat at
the appropriate level is required prior to the grant of prospecting
license or mining lease for minor minerals. Similarly, prior
recommendation of the Gram Sabha or the Panchayat is required for
grant of concession of the exploitation of minor minerals by auction.
4.76 PESA enjoins the State Governments to endow Gram Sabhas
with the power to enforce prohibition, ownership of minor forest
procedure, power to prevent alienation of land and restore unlawfully
alienated land, power to manage village markets, power to exercise
control over money lending, power to exercise control over institutions
and functionaries in all social sectors.
Shortcoming noticed in implementation
4.77 During the course of examination the Committee wanted to
know as to what shortcomings have been noticed in the
implementation of PESA, the Ministry clarified:—
“While all States have enacted the requisite compliance legislations
by amending the respective Panchayati Raj Acts, certain gaps

40
continue to exist. Further, some States are also yet to amend the
subject laws, like those relating to money lending, forest, excise,
etc. Consequently, compliance remains incomplete, perfunctory, and
formal in most States. Vital issues, such as the ownership of Minor
Forest Produce, planning and management of minor water-bodies,
prevention of alienation of tribal lands, etc., which have been duly
recognised in PESA as the traditional rights of tribals living in the
Scheduled Areas, have still not received the warranted attention
and the necessary correctives remain unapplied. There are also
issues relating to powers statutorily devolved upon the Gram Sabha
and the Panchayats not being matched by a concomitant transfer
of funds and functionaries, resulting in the non-exercise of such
powers.”
Work done on PESA
4.78 When the Committee also wanted to know the steps that
have so far been taken for its effective implementation and with what
results, the Ministry informed:—
“The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has written to all the PESA States
in October, 2008 exhorting them to issue necessary executive
instructions for implementation of PESA. States have also been
urged to enact rules for implementation of PESA. The Ministry
itself is undertaking the exercise of drafting model rules for PESA.
Earlier, a draft PESA Code/Operational Guidelines for vesting Gram
Sabha with powers under PESA was circulated to the States and
Tribal Research Institutes (TRIs) for comments. States were urged
to include a section on the implementation of PESA in the Annual
Governor’s Report on Fifth Schedule Areas. At the Conference of
Governors held in September, 2008. Her Excellency, the President
had underlined the need for effective implementation of PESA and
urged the States to take necessary action in the matter. It may be
noted that the Ministry had commissioned a study of various State
subject laws relating to Excise, Forest, Revenue, Money Lending
etc. through Indian Law Institute (ILI) and amendments in these
laws were drafted and forwarded to the States. Some of the States
have made some amendments; however, the cooperation of the
line departments concerned is also required for making necessary
amendments. Towards this end, Consultation Workshops have been
held in three States, namely, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Orissa
wherein the proposed amendments were discussed with the line
Departments and objections if any were considered. States have
been asked to conduct similar workshops in the remaining PESA

41
States. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj also proposes to undertake
special training and capacity building of elected representatives,
officials as well as civil society representatives in the PESA areas
to enhance awareness of the provisions of PESA and to strengthen
the functioning of the Gram Sabha.”
4.79 About strengthening of PESA, the Secretary, Panchayati Raj
during the course of evidence also clarified:—
“PESA Act is very good law. Gram Sabhas have been given wide
powers by Parliament under this law. However, in practice Gram
Sabhas are unable to exercise these powers. PESA has to be
activated. Particularly you will visualize that in Central India where
naxalism is widely prevalent, it is concentrated in largely in PESA
areas or in their vicinity. Even if we deploy huge police force,
strengthen the administration, I have worked in Jharkhand, experts
have recommended, Planning Commission and Administrative
Reform Commission have recommended, all these have
recommended that unless you empower the Gram Sabhas and
Panchayats, this problem will continue or aggravate.”
4.80 The Committee find that Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled
Areas) Act (PESA), 1996 empowering Gram Sabhas with special
powers in 9 PESA States of Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Orissa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh,
Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh has not progressed on expected lines.
Some States are yet to amend the subject laws like those relating
to money lending, forest, excise etc. Consequently compliance
remains incomplete perfunctory and formal in most States as has
been admitted by the Ministry. Not only that, the Committee are
dismayed to learn that vital issues like ownership of minor forest
produce, planning and management of minor water-bodies etc. which
have been duly recognized in PESA as the traditional rights of
tribals living in the scheduled areas, have still not received the
required attention. Powers statutorily devolved upon Gram Sabhas
and Panchayats have also not been matched by corresponding
transfer of funds and functionaries, resulting in the non-exercise of
such powers. The Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has
contended before the Committee that empowerment of Gram Sabhas
and Panchayats is also necessary in order to solve the problem of
naxalism prevalent in Central India. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Ministry to follow up vigorously with the PESA
State Governments to take all measures necessary for implementation
of PESA in letter and spirit. The Committee would like to be
informed of the efforts made by the Ministry in this regard.

42
G. Twelfth Finance Commission Grants
4.81 The Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) has recommended
that a sum of Rs. 20,000 crore be made available as grants during the
period of 2005-2010 to augment the Consolidated Funds of States to
supplement the financial resources of the Panchayats.
Purpose
4.82 As per the recommendations of the TFC, the PRIs should be
encouraged to take over the assets relating to water supply and
sanitation and utilise the grants for repairs/rejuvenation and meeting
the operations and maintenance (O&M) costs. PRIs should also give
high priority to expenditure on creation of a database and maintenance
of accounts through the use of electronic management information
systems as far as possible.
4.83 Grants for local bodies are being released in two equal
installment in January and July every year. It is mandatory for States
to transfer the grants released by the Central Government to the PRIs
within 15 days of the same being credited to the States. In case of
delayed releases States have to pay interest to PRIs at the RBI rate.
Funds of TFC Grants are being released by the Ministry of Finance.
The Inter-State allocation recommended by TFC for PRI alongwith
grants released as on 31st March, 2009 is given below:—
Statement Showing Release of Grants of 12th Finance
Commission as on 31st March, 2009
(Rs. in lakh)
State Total Amount of one          2008-09 Total Grants
allocation installment 1st 2nd released by
(6 monthly) installment installment MoF so far
12 3 4 5 6
Andhra Pradesh 158700 15870 15870 0 111090
Arunachal Pradesh 6800 680 0 0 680
Assam 52600 5260 0 0 15780
Bihar 162400 16240 16240 16240 129920
Chhattisgarh 61500 6150 6150 6150 49200
Goa 1800 180 0 0 1080

43
Gujarat 93100 9310 9310 9310 74480
Haryana 38800 3880 3880 3880 31040
Himachal Pradesh 14700 1470 1470 1470 11760
Jammu and Kashmir 28100 2810 0 0^ 5286
Jharkhand 48200 4820 0 0^ 0
Karnataka 88800 8880 8880 8880 71040
Kerala 98500 9850 9850 0 68950
Madhya Pradesh 166300 16630 16630 0 116410
Maharashtra 198300 19830 19830 19830 158640
Manipur 4600 460 0 0 1272
Meghalaya 5000 500 500 500 4000
Mizoram 2000 200 200 200 1600
Nagaland 4000 400 400 400 3200
Orissa 80300 8030 8030 8030 64240
Punjab 32400 3240 0 0 19440
Rajasthan 123000 12300 12300 12300 98400
Sikkim 1300 130 130 130 1040
Tamil Nadu 87000 8700 8700 8700 69600
Tripura 5700 570 0 0 1710
Uttar Pradesh 292800 29280 29280 29280 234240
Uttarakhand 16200 1620 0 0 6480
West Bengal 127100 12710 12710 12710 101680
Total 2000000 200000 180360 138010 1451795
^Grant not being released due to non-holding of election.
MoF : Ministry of Finance
(i) Monitoring at Central Level
4.84 A Central Review Committee headed by Secretary, Ministry
of Finance, including representatives of Panchayati Raj, Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation, Home Affairs and Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure), has been constituted to review
the release and utilization of grants.
12 3 4 5 6

44
4.85 During the course of examination it came out that the last
meeting of the Committee was held on 16th April, 2007. On being
asked about the reasons for not holding any meeting after 16th April,
2007, the Ministry clarified as under:—
“A separate Committee for PRIs has been constituted to monitor
the mode of release of local body grants to Panchayats, which is
chaired by Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj. This Committee
is required to bring out the points of intervention by the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj and Ministry of Finance to ensure smooth flow
of funds to PRIs. The 10th and 11th Meetings of the Review
Committee were held on 7th November, 2008 and 24th March,
2009 respectively. The 12th meeting is scheduled to be held shortly.”
Monitoring at State Level
4.86 About monitoring of TFC grants at State level it has been
stated that High Level Committees (HLCs) at State level have been
constituted to ensure proper utilization of local bodies grants. These
are required to meet in every quarter to review the utilization of
grants. The Committee wanted to know whether the HLCs in all
States were meeting regularly. The Ministry clarified as under:—
“As per information received from the Ministry of Finance, every
State has constituted High Level Committee (HLC) to ensure proper
utilization of Local Bodies Grants. The Chief Secretary to the State
Government heads the HLC and Finance Secretary and Secretaries
of the concerned Departments are included as members.
HLC is responsible for the approval of the projects at the beginning
of every year to be undertaken in each sector, quantify the targets,
both in physical and financial terms and lay down a time-table for
achievement of specific milestones. It is also responsible for
monitoring both physical and financial target and ensuring
adherence to the specific conditionalities in respect of each grant,
wherever applicable. In all the States HLC meet at least once in
every quarter to review the utilization of grants and to issue
directions for mid-course correction, if considered necessary.”
4.87 The Committee are constrained to note that release position
in respect of Twelfth Finance Commission Grants to different States
for supplementing the resources of Panchayats has not been
encouraging as per latest figures. In this connection the Committee
note that out of the total of Rs. 20,000 crore recommended by the
Twelfth Finance Commission, the actual releases has been only

45
around Rs. 14,522 crore so far indicating a big gap of around
Rs. 5478 crore. The Committee find from the State-wise releases
during 2008-2009 that in respect of many States like Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Punjab, Tripura, Uttarakhand both 1st and
2nd Installments have not been released. Further, in respect of States
of Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, the second installment was not released.
In this connection the Committee recall that the issue of expeditious
releases of Twelfth Finance Commission Grant was also
recommended by the Committee last year also (para 3.57 of 38th
Report). In view of huge amount of Rs. 5478 crore lying unspent as
also non-release of 1st and 2nd installments in respect of States
referred above, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry
should adopt a pro-active approach in this regard so that unreleased
amount is made available to the Panchayats. If the grants are not
optimally used, the whole purpose is defeated. The Committee
would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take stringent
measures to ensure that cent percent funds are utilized to get the
intended results.

46
CHAPTER V
ISSUES RELATED WITH BACKWARD REGION
GRANT FUND (BRGF)
Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF)
BRGF comprises two funding windows one Capacity Building
Fund of Rs. 250 crore and second a substantially united grants of
Rs. 3500 crore totalling to Rs. 4750 crore in a year in 250 BRGF
districts in 27 States for supplementing financial resources and
converging existing developmental inflow in identified districts for
addressing regional imbalances in development. BRGF insists on
Integrated, Decentralised and Participatory Plans consolidated by
District Planning Committees (DPCs). The funding pattern under BRGF
is largely as follows: 25% for Anganwadis, 16% for schools, class
rooms, compound etc., 14% for drinking water and 10% for Gram
Panchayat Buildings, etc.
5.2 During the course of briefing of the representatives of Ministry
of Panchayati Raj on Demands for Grants (2009-2010) various issues
regarding implementation of BRGF came up for examination. Some
of the points are as under:—
(i) Need for taking up schemes from Gram Sabha level instead
of District level so that schemes on their own reflect the
ground reality;
(ii) Ignoring the proposals for BRGF from members of
Parliament at District level;
(iii) Need for change of Panchayati Raj Acts in different States
for electoral reforms at Gram Panchayat level;
(iv) Evaluation of BRGF Scheme for assessing actual removal
of regional imbalances;
(v) Need for transparency in implementing Projects under
BRGF.
5.3 Replying to the various queries of the Committee, it was
clarified by the Ministry that for addressing issues concerning Gram
Sabhas a Circular has been issued to State Governments for effectively
dealing with such matters. Besides on the issue of release of funds

47
States are at liberty to give funds to Panchayats. However approval
of scheme rests with Panchayats. On the issue of amending Panchayati
Raj Acts in different States it has been stated that a Model Panchayati
Raj Act has been circulated to all States as a guiding principle for
framing necessary laws as per their needs in different States. On the
issue of evaluation of BRGF, it has been informed that a report is
awaited by December, 2009.
5.4 The Committee wanted to know whether surveillance by the
Ministry on the Gram Sabhas is necessary for bringing about
improvement in the functioning of Gram Sabhas in different States,
the Ministry stated:—
“We agree.....”
(i) Shortcomings coming in implementation
5.5 In reply to a query from the Committee about shortcomings
coming in implementation of BRGF, the Ministry clarified:—
“The Ministry has faced the following shortcomings in the
implementation of the programme:
(i) Transfer of funds from State Governments to implementing
authorities is time consuming and delays the
implementation of approved projects.
(ii) The quantum of grant per Panchayat, which averages to
Rs. 2 to 3 lakh per year, is too small to have any significant
impact.
(iii) Even though the Constitution had mandated setting up of
the DPCs by the States as early as in 1993, most States did
not have the DPCs when the BRGF was launched, in later
part of the FY 2006-07. This did not let the programme
take off in several major States such as Uttar Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Gujarat, Uttarakhand etc. On the
persuasion of the MoPR, such States started constituting
the DPCs. However, two States, namely, Jharkhand and
Uttarakhand, are yet to constitute the DPCs.
(iv) The DPCs have now been constituted in most States without
any substantive technical support staff.
(v) Securing convergence of the large number of Central/State
schemes operational at the District/sub-district levels is
proving to be a huge challenge, especially when the DPCs
are functionally weak.

48
(vi) Absence of a clear policy at various levels to have
Panchayat-wise resource envelope under different schemes
has diluted the effectiveness of the planning process
envisaged under the Programme for the Panchayats,
Municipalities and the DPCs.
(vii) Lack of a clear policy at various levels in regard to the
decentralised planning mechanism has made the BRGF as
perhaps the only GOI programme which is mandated to
be placed before the DPC. This has seriously eroded the
attainment of integrated decentralised planning, which is
one of the core objectives of the BRGF.
(viii) Inadequate availability of infrastructure, man-power and
basic information required for integrated planning with the
Panchayats has made it difficult to secure a methodical
perspective plan to come from the local bodies.”
5.6 During the course of examination the Committee wanted to
know what measures are taken to ensure that cent percent funds are
utilized to get the intended results under the various sectors for which
the funds are meant, the Ministry clarified:—
“The following measures have been taken by the Ministry to ensure
cent per cent utilization of funds:
(i) All the States have been requested to expedite the planning
process right from the Gram Panchayat level to the State
High Powered Committee level in order to ensure
submission of the duly approved district plans for 2010-11
by January, 2010. This will facilitate BRGF funds release in
the first quarter of 2010-11.
(ii) The States have been advised to submit the schedule of
implementation along with their proposed monthly
expenditure at the beginning of the financial year.
(iii) The Ministry has also been vigorously pursuing matters
through several interactions at various levels with elected
representatives, programme managers, State secretariat
personnel, SIRD staff etc. These interactions have given an
impetus for district plan preparation in States.
(iv) Despite sustained efforts of the Ministry, some States delay
in releasing funds to the implementation authorities well
beyond 15 days, as stipulated in the programme guidelines
of the BRGF. This results in slow pace of implementation

49
of the programme and consequent utilization of the BRGF
funds. The Ministry has communicated to the States its
decision of imposing penal interest for delayed transfer of
BRGF funds from the Consolidated Fund of the States to
the implementation authorities.
(v) The Ministry helped the States in identifying the technical
support institutions for assisting Panchayats and
Municipalities to prepare plans and DPCs to consolidate
them.
5.7 The Committee note that BRGF is facing a large number of
constraints in implementation like time consuming process in
transfer of funds from State Governments to implementing agencies,
absence of technical staff of DPCs, difficulty in convergence of all
schemes at DPC level specially in the case of financially weak DPCs
etc. The Committee have been informed about various remedial
measures like faster transfer of funds to Panchayats, helping States
to identify the technical support to DPCs etc. The Committee desire
that Ministry should deal with the problems coming in the way of
implementation of BRGF in a more resolute manner.
(ii) Restructuring of BRGF
5.8 During the course of evidence the issue of re-structuring of
BRGF came up for discussion. In this connection the Committee
wanted to know the details in this regard, the Secretary, Panchayati
Raj clarified:—
“Madam, you wanted to know about the details of the proposed
restructuring of BRGF. It is only a proposal. As I had mentioned,
the President in Her Address to Members of Parliament mentioned
about this restructuring. That announcement emphasized two issues.
One was building capacity of Panchayats and Panchayat
representatives and secondly institutionalizing this planning
capacity. Accordingly, our restructuring proposal consists of three
parts. One is capacity building of Panchayats, provide building,
manpower, computer, infrastructure etc. and also very good
training. Second component is institutionalizing this decentralized
plan.”
5.9 In this connection the Ministry in a written note has further
submitted:—
“The Ministry has constituted a National Advisory-cum-Review
Committee (NARC) on BRGF under the chairpersonship of Sh. V .
Ramachandran, former Chief Secretary to the Government of Kerala.

50
The Committee is expected to give its first report in the month of
December 2009. The Term of Reference of Committee is given as
under:—
(i) Assess the extent to which objectives of BRGF (including
redressing backwardness and decentralized planning) have
been fulfilled.
(ii) Need for modification in the objective and design of BRGF
including the Block as the Unit for BRGF funding.
(iii) Review the quality of programme management at Central,
State and District levels; and adequacy of the monitoring
mechanism.
(iv) Assess the quality of district plans, frequently occurring
deficiencies, aspects of capacity building, planning process,
role of TSIs etc.”
5.10 During the course of evidence the Secretary, Panchayati Raj
also informed:—
“So far as programme component is concerned, the biggest
programme is BRGF. If someone says that with Rs. 4670 crore the
regional backwardness is to be removed, then it will be very big
thing. We have constituted a National Advisory Committee under
Shri Ramachandran. I am not going to read the term of reference
given to it. But that Committee has also been given the work that
on three things the Committee should give clear recommendations.
First of all that whether the design of BRGF is appropriate or not.
What is the shortcoming in its implementation? Whether it has
removed backwardness or not? If not why.... Hon’ble President
had announced that BRGF will be restructured. On these points
restructuring is being done. First of all capacity building of
Panchayats like infrastructure, manpower training etc. Second is
regarding enhancing planning capacity. In that professional
manpower and other facilities are involved. Third level is of
development grant. The proposal we have given is very modest.
During the last three years the allocation in the BRGF was
Rs. 4670 crore. We have proposed that next year it should be
enhanced to Rs. 7300 crore. Thereafter, by the end of the Eleventh
Plan it should be Rs. 9300 crore.”
5.11 The Committee’s examination has revealed that even the
achievement of major BRGF objective of removal of imbalances is
in doubt. The Ministry has concurred with the Committee’s view

51
that for proper implementation of BRGF scheme at Gram Sabha
level certain degree of surveillance from the Ministry is needed. In
this connection the Committee have been informed that a Committee
viz. Ramachandran Committee is already looking into various aspects
of BRGF including the issue of its restructuring. The Committee
have been informed that by December, 2009 the Committee was
likely to submit its Report. The Committee would like to be
informed of the findings of the Ramachandran Committee. They
also desire that expeditious action on these findings should be taken
including restructuring of BRGF, so that the various difficulties being
faced in the implementation of the programme can be removed.
(iii) Other issues
5.12 Various other issues relating to BRGF also came up for
examination. These include non-inclusion of proposals of MPs on
BRGF, BRGF districts getting higher funds compared to RGSY progress
of enactment of State Panchayati Raj on the pattern of model
Panchayati Raj Act, etc. On the issue of non-inclusion of proposal of
MPs on BRGF, the Committee wanted to know the reasons, the
Ministry clarified:—
“BRGF is an Additional Central Assistance (ACA) to the State Plans
and hence the Ministry cannot add any work to the Action Plans
prepared by the Local Bodies and consolidated/approved by the
DPCs/HPC. However, proposals for inclusion of works received
in the Ministry are brought to the notice of the State Governments
concerned.”
5.13 Likewise the Committee also wanted to know how many
States have enacted their Panchayati Raj Acts on the lines of the
Model Act circulated by the Ministry, the Ministry clarified:—
“The Model Panchayati Raj and Gram Swaraj Act has been
circulated to the States/UTs for necessary action. No State has so
far amended its PR Act on these lines as per our records.”
5.14 It also came out during the course of examination that
whether funds for capacity building under BRGF are higher than
similar funds under RSGY, the Ministry clarified:—
“.....for the 250 BRGF districts, the allocation for Capacity Building
is @ Rs. 1 crore per district per year. In the non-BRGF districts
which number above 350, the scheme of RGSY (TCB) with an
allocation of Rs. 40 crore caters to the training requirements. This
is grossly insufficient....”

52
5.15 The Committee note that funds are being given for capacity
building of Panchayats under BRGF at the rate or Rs. 1 crore
per district per year. Thus for 250 BRGF districts Rs. 250 crore are
being given. On the contrary in 350 non-BRGF districts for capacity
building, Rs. 40 crore only are being allocated. The Committee
concur with the Ministry’s view that amount given under RSGY is
grossly insufficient for training requirements. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the issue of up-scaling of funds for
non-BRGF districts be examined in consultation with the Planning
Commission.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
16 December, 2009 Chairperson,
25 Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

53
APPENDIX I
2008-2009
Sl.No. Name of Programme Financial
Targets Achievements Percentage
BE RE (Rs. in Crore) Achievement
Upto 31.3.09
 1. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana
Training & Capacity Building 30.00 41.85 41.84 99.97
 2. Mission Mode Project on e-Panchayats 5.00 5.00 5.00 100.00
 3. Panchayat Empowerment & 10.00 10.00 10.00 100.00
Accountability Incentive Scheme
 4. Media & Publicity 6.90 18.90 17.20 91.01
 5. Rural Business Hubs 2.00 2.00 1.92 96.00
 6. Panchayat Mahila Evam 4.00 4.00 4.00 100.00
Yuva Shakti Abhiyan
 7. Action Research and Research Studies 2.00 3.00 2.98 99.33
 8. Secretariat Economic Services 8.00 9.15 7.70 84.15
 9. UN Assisted Projects 5.00 5.00 5.00 100.00
10. Contribution to Commonwealth 0.10 0.10 0.05 50.00
Local Government Forum
11.P rovision for North Eastern Areas 11.00 11.00 8.30 75.45
12. Backward Regions Grant Fund 4670.00 3890.00 3889.76 99.99
13. Technical support for Capacity 25.00
óó ó
Building and Training of
Functionaries of DPCs
and Zilla Parishads
14. National Panchayat Fund 1.00
óó ó
Total 4780.00 4000.00 3993.75 99.84

54
APPENDIX II
DETAILS OF ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES PROVIDED TRAINING UNDER THE SCHEMES OF
RGSY AND BRGF (CAPACITY BUILDING COMPONENT)
SL.No. Name of Last Total ERs trained ERs trained ERs trained Total No. ERs trained ERs trained ERs trained Total No. Total No.
State/UT elections of ERs in 2007-08 in 2007-08 in 2007-08 of ERs in 2008-09 in 2008-09 in 2008-09 of ERs of ERs
to PRIs under RGSY under RGSY under BRGF trained in under RGSY under RGSY under BRGF trained in trained inheld in by State by NGOs 2007-08 by State by NGOs 2007-08 2007-08
Governments under Governments under and
RGSY+ RGSY+ 2008-09BRGF BRGF
12 3 4 5 6
78 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3
1. Andhra Pradesh August, 2006 224003 252368 NA 134417 386785 129268 NA NA 129268 5160532. Arunachal Pradesh April, 2008 8260 441 NA NA 441 3000 NA NA 3000 34413. Assam January 2008 25436 1840 NA 7985 9825 20885 NA 5619 26504 363294. Bihar June, 2006 130091 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA5. Chhattisgarh January, 2005 160548 11275 NA 62 11337 12067 NA NA 12067 234046. Bihar May, 2007 1559 1482 NA NA 1482 400 NA NA 400 18827. Gujarat December, 2006 114187 NA NA 52582 52582 NA NA NA NA 525828. Haryana April, 2005 69805 11270 NA NA 11270 39062 NA NA 39062 50332

55
 9. Himachal Pradesh December, 2005 24581 NA NA 915 915 23976 NA NA 23976 2489110. Jammuy and Kashmir N.A. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA11.
Jharkhand N.A. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
12. Karnataka February, 2005 96090 19849 NA NA 19849 68806 NA NA 68806 8865513. Kerala September, 2005 18482 NA NA 3955 3955 15223 NA NA 15223 1917814. Madhya Pradesh January, 2005 396516 NA 1669 47973 49642 16410 NA NA 16410 6605215. Maharashtra December, 2006 229740 NA NA 147893 147893 20530 NA NA 20530 16842316. Manipur September, 2007 1736 1558 6118 NA 7676 3068 NA NA 3068 1074417. Meghalaya N.A. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 18. Mizoram N.A. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA19. Nagaland N.A. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA20. Orissa February, 2007 92454 6246 5035 NA 11281 NA NA NA NA 1128121. Punjab May, 2008 90963 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 22. Rajasthan February, 2005 120247 37805 NA 3755 41560 58000 NA NA 58000 99560 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3

56
23. Sikkim October, 2007 986 1414 NA NA 1414 6679 NA NA 6679 809324. Tamil Nadu October, 2006 116488 NA NA NA NA 7516 NA NA 7516 751625. Tripura July, 2009 5733 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA26. Uttar Pradesh August, 2005 771661 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA27. Uttarakhand July, 2008 57500 1585 NA NA 1585 NA NA NA NA 158528. West Bengal May, 2008 58828 4999 NA NA 4999 NA NA NA NA 499929. Andaman & Nicobar September, 2005 856 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Islands
30. Chandigarh December, 2008 187 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA31. D&N Haveli October, 2005 125 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA32. Daman & Diu September, 2005 97 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA33. Lakshadweep January, 2008 110 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA34. Puducherry July, 2006 1021 213 NA NA 213 NA NA NA NA 213
Total 2818290 352345 12822 399537 764704 424890 NA 5619 430509 1195213
 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3

57
APPENDIX III
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE LISTS 29 MATTERS FOR PANCHAYATS
Agriculture, incl. extension Drinking Water Cultural activities
Land improvement, land Fuel and fodder Markets and Fairs
reforms, consolidation
soil conservation
Minor irrigation, water Roads, culverts, Health and sanitation
management watershed bridges, ferries, hospitals. Primary
development waterways other Health centres
means of dispensaries
communication
Animal husbandry, Rural electrification, Family welfare
dairying and poultry distribution of
electricity
Fisheries Non-conventional Women & Child
energy development
Social forestry Poverty alleviation Social Welfare,
farm forestry programme Welfare if handicapped
and mentally retarded
Minor forest produce Education, including Welfare of the weaker
primary and sections, in particular
secondary schools of SCs and STs
Small scale industries, Technical training Public distribution
food processing industries vocational education System
Khadi, village and Adult and non- Maintenance of
cottage industries formal Education community assets
Rural housing Libraries

58
APPENDIX IV
No. N-11019/681/08-POL. I
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF PANCHA YATI RAJ
KRISHI BHAVAN,
NEW DELHI-110 001
Dated: 19th January, 2009
From: A.N.P . Sinha,
Secretary
To Secretaries,
All Ministries/Departments of Government of India.
Subject: Delineation of role and responsibilities of Panchayati
Raj Institutions (PRIs) in CSSs/ACAs.
Sir,
According to Art. 243 of the Constitution, State legislatures are to
inter alia  endow Panchayats with such powers and authority as may
be necessary (i) to enable them to function as institutions of
Local Self Government (LSG), (ii) to prepare plans and schemes for
economic development and social justice, and (iii) implement them
including those in relation to 29 matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule
(Appendix-I). These Constitutional provisions have, however, not been
used as an effective trigger to make Panchayats function as institutions
of LSG. While most states have strong Panchayati Raj Acts that purport
to devolve extensive powers, functions and responsibilities on
Panchayats, there persists in many States, weak administrative action
in regard to actual transfer of Functions, Funds and Functionaries
(3Fs) to the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs).
2. The Union Government has a critical role to play in the
devolution of 3Fs upon the PRIs, because of its basic responsibilities
to ensure governance in accordance with the constitutional provisions
and also because of the increasingly large fiscal transfers it makes to
the States in the functional domain of the PRIs, mainly through
Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) and Additional Central Assistance
Schemes (ACAS). Every Scheme guideline is a potential vehicle to

59
carry the message of strengthening Panchayats as envisaged by the
constitution and the impact of such signals cannot be underestimated.
3. Doubts are often expressed about the capacity and accountability
of PRIs. This is a vicious circle since, unless 3Fs are devolved, the
PRIs would not be able to prove their comparative advantage.
Empowering Panchayats, with clear roles and authority assigned to
different levels through activity mapping, is a strong incentive to build
capacity and also to get other pre-requisites for effective performance
into place. This is amply proved by the implementation of NREGA
through the Panchayats, which after some initial difficulties has now
stabilized. This Ministry (MoPR) is working at addressing the
overarching elements of capacity for PRIs which include, inter alia ,
necessary trained manpower, a simple & robust accounting & auditing
system, providing IT facility & connectivity for all aspects of
e-Governance, seamless transfer of funds and real time tracking of
expenditure, and training elected representatives & official functionaries
on their roles & responsibilities including and especially in
implementation & monitoring of schemes. The memorandum submitted
by this Ministry to the 13th Finance Commission, even if partially
accepted, would go a long way in enabling PRIs financially,
administratively and otherwise to perform their functions meaningfully
and smoothly.
4. It is widely recognized that most of the schemes exist in silos,
planned and implemented as stand alone schemes, without any
horizontal convergence or vertical integration, resulting in multiple
district plans-unrelated to each other and often mutually conflicting-
prepared without any integrated vision or perspective. The existing
mechanism of implementation is also not very effective, efficient and
economical. Ownership, operation & maintenance of the assets &
services that are created, levy of user charges and such issues remain
unresolved.
5. The much needed convergence of related schemes & resources
is possible only through the mechanism of constitutionally mandated
decentralised and holistic planning through LSGs and the District
Planning Committees (DPCs). The Guidelines issued by Planning
Commission on August 25, 2006 go a long way in this direction. The
Eleventh Plan document also seeks to substantially empower and use
PRIs as the ‘primary means of delivery of essential services that are
critical to inclusive growth’ (para 1.147). It details several steps such
as activity mapping, creation of Panchayat sector windows in the
State & Central budgets, and IT enabling of Panchayats as key steps
in this direction.

60
6. Through his D.O. letter dated November 8, 2004, Cabinet
Secretary had conveyed to all Union Secretaries dealing with CSSs,
the Prime Minister’s directive that they should review their respective
schemes in the light of Article 243 (G) read with the Eleventh Schedule
with a view to incorporating the schemes, the import of the
constitutional provision in letter and spirit. MoPR was required to be
consulted in this exercise and the same was to be completed within
two months. Cabinet Secretary again reminded the Secretaries in 2005
and 2006. Since progress made by the Ministries/Departments in this
regard was not satisfactory, a Committee was set up by the Cabinet
Secretariat in August 2007 (Appendix-II) to review the existing
Guidelines so as to ensure and enhance the centrality of PRIs in the
planning and implementation of CSSs. The report of the Committee
has been furnished to the Ministries concerned. But the progress in
the matter is slow.
7. The departmental CSS and ACA guidelines have not taken a
consistent approach to institutional structures for implementation.
Therefore, they could be panchayat-friendly, panchayat-parallel,
panchayat-ignorant or panchayat-unfriendly, often depending upon the
personal experience of the designer rather than on the constitutional
position in regard to Panchayats. Quite often, they are ambivalent.
While on the one hand they might leave the engagement of panchayats
optional on the ground that local government is a state subject, on
the other hand, they also might contain rigid conditionalities such as
the setting up of district missions etc., which can turn the clock back
on Panchayati Raj. We also, however, have schemes that have
incentivized States to devolve more powers and responsibilities to the
Panchayats. We believe that if the scheme guidelines follow certain
key principles of devolution of 3Fs to the PRIs, States would follow
these in respect of their own schemes.
8. Any direct and upfront involvement of PRIs in the planning
and implementation of CSSs/ACAs, that is otherwise done through
departmental structures, does impact outcomes positively by making
interventions more appropriate, location-responsive and user-friendly.
The scheme guidelines, therefore, need to be modified to (a) provide
centrality to PRIs (which would also enhance the coverage & outreach),
and (b) specify roles & functions of different levels of Government,
including the three tiers of the PRIs, through detailed Activity
Mapping.
9. Improperly designed Activity Mapping, however, could leave
local governments both confused and ill equipped to perform functions
and open them to criticism. Activity Mapping implies that subjects
are not sought to be devolved wholesale. Subjects need to be
unbundled into activities and assigned to different levels of

61
government on the basis of clear principles of public finance and
public accountability, and above all, the governance principles of
Subsidiarity, Democratic Decentralisation, and Citizen-Centricity. The
result of good activity mapping would be clearly identify where
competency, authority and accountability lie. Contrary to persisting
notions, there is little gain or loss of power through Activity Mapping.
On the contrary, it helps the key players in understanding their
respective roles and responsibilities clearly. Good activity mapping
would permit higher levels of government to concentrate more on
policy making, legislation system building, addressing issues of equity
& regional imbalance and in more effectively discharging oversight
responsibilities.
10. An indicative model format of Activity Mapping is given at
Appendix-VI. Once the Activity Mapping is conceptualized, the scheme
guidelines need to address the following aspects:
(a) Annual action plan of the scheme to flow out from the
participatory & holistic decentralised Plan of the concerned
tier.
(b) Every activity assigned to a specific level of Panchayat to
be supported with appropriate authority over functionaries
and powers to handle finances.
(c) Provision of sufficient united/flexible funds for addressing
specific local needs and also for meeting the additional
administrative expenses of PRIs on account of the scheme.
(d) Specific mode and time line by which funds are transferred,
the entities that handle funds and the system of utilisation
report. Seamless and time bound flow of funds to the
expenditure levels or just-in-time delivery of funds would
both require IT for electronic tagging and tracking of funds.
(e) Specific measures to build competencies at the appropriate
level with training programmes, modalities of training, basic
core content and pedagogy, FAQs, self learning tools, IEC
literature etc. 1-2% of the total funds could be earmarked
as non-divertible for the purpose.
(f) The method by which accountability will be measured and
enforced.
(g) How data on the planning and implementation of the
scheme will be placed in the public domain through suo
moto disclosures, its process and periodicity.

62
(h) Details of the annual audits and evaluation mechanisms
prescribed.
(i) Systems for financial accountability taking care not to violate
specific financial rules and guidelines.
(j) System of performance based rewards for Panchayats, as
done in the case of Rural Sanitation Programme (Nirmal
Gram Puraskar).
11. Often, Parallel Bodies (PBs) are created for supposedly speedy
implementation and greater accountability. However, there is little
evidence to show that such PBs have avoided the evils including that
of partisan politics, sharing of spoils, corruption and elite capture.
‘Missions’, in particular often bypassing mainstream programmes,
create disconnect, duality, and alienation between the existing and the
new structures and functions. In addition, there are issues of continuity
beyond the life of CSSs/ACAs, subsequent operation & maintenance
and continued accountability. PBs usurp the legitimate space of PRIs
and demoralize the PRIs by virtue of their superior resource
endowments, though such resources are available only during the
lifetime of schemes. Arguments such as protection of funds from
diversion have now weakened since advances in core banking systems,
treasury computerization and connectivity can enable instantaneous,
seamless and just-in-time transfer of funds directly to the implementing
PRI. Expenditures by PRIs can also be monitored on a real time basis
thus doing away with the need for intermediate parallel bodies to
manually transfer funds and collect, pool and analyse data on
expenditures. Ministries should, therefore, rapidly phase out such PBs
from their schemes. If necessary, the technical & professional
component of these PBs could be retained as Cells or Units within
the PRIs, for carrying out their technical & professional functions.
12. In conclusion, it is requested to kindly do the activity mapping
urgently in conformity with the above suggestions amend scheme
guidelines accordingly and give effect to these from 1.4.09. We are
available for any assistance in the matter. Action taken may be
conveyed to us at the earliest.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(A.N.P . Sinha)
Copy to:
(a) Chief Secretaries, All States/UTs
(b) Principal Secretaries/Secretaries, Department of Finance/
Planning/Panchayati Raj, All States/UTs.

63
APPENDIX V
THE BROAD SCHEME-WISE DETAILS OF CENTRALLY
SPONSORED SCHEMES (CSS)
Sl.No. Name of the Scheme
12
(A) Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
1. National Horticulture Mission (NHM)
2. Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA) Scheme
3. Micro Irrigation
(B) Ministry of Human Resource Development
4. Sarva Shiksha Abhyan (SSA)
5. Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA)
6. Strengthening of Boarding and Hostel facilities for girls’
students for secondary and Higher Secondary Schools.
(C) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
7. National Rural Health Mission (NRHM)
(D) Department of Land Resources
8. Integrated Watershed Management Programme (DAP , DDP
& IWDP)
(E) Department of Rural Development
9. National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme (NREGA)
10. Rural Housing/IAY
11. SGSY
12. PMGSY
(F) Ministry of Women and Child Development
13. Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)
14. Rajiv Gandhi National Creche Scheme

64
15. Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls
16. Dhanalakshmi Conditional Cash Transfer Scheme
(G) Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
17. Pre-Matric Scholarships for OBC Students
18. Post-Matric Scholarships for OBC Students
19. Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana (effective from
1.1.2008)
20. Hostels for Other Backward Classes (OBCs)
21. Coaching and Allied Assistance for weaker sections, including
Scheduled Castes, Other Backward Classes and Minorities
22. Integrated Programme for Older Persons
23. Deen Dayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme (formerly Scheme
to Promote Voluntary Action for Persons with Disabilities)
24. National Scheme of Incentive to Girls for Secondary
Education
(H) Ministry of Environment and Forests
25. National Environment Policy
26. Integrated Development of Wild Life Habitats
27. Gram Van Yojana Scheme
12

65
APPENDIX VI
DEVOLUTION OF FUNCTIONS THROUGH LEGISLATIONS AND ACTIVITY MAPPING(Based on the information furnished by the State Governments and records of the Ministry)
Sl.No. State T
ransfer of matters listed
Subjects Cover
ed Comments
in the Eleventh Schedule under Activity
to the 
Panchayats
Mapping/State
through Legislation Government Orders
12 3 4 51. Andhra Pradesh Zila Mandal
Gram ZP MP GP
On the State Panchayati Raj Act:
 The AP Panchayat Raj
Parishad Parishad Panchayat Act 
has established the Panchayat system as a hierarchy,
with the ZP at the top. Therefore, although only one
12
32
1
original power relating to a matter listed in the EleventhSchedule has been given to the ZP (to establish, maintainor expand secondary, vocational and industrial schools),it has also been given approval, coordination, planning
12 10 12 and supervision powers over Mandals and powers to
advise the government.Comments on activity mapping: 
Government issued
9 Orders between January-March, 2008, devolvingactivities to the three levels of Panchayats as indicated.
The State act also containsgeneral provisions that enables it to entrust throughrules, powers and functionsrelating to all matters in theEleventh Schedule.

66
2. Assam Zila Anchalik Gaon ZP AP GP
The State undertook a revised activity mapping
Parishad Panchayat Panchayat exer
cise and published it 
vide 
its Notification bearing
number PDA 336/2001/Pt-III/32 dated 25th June 2007.
25
27
28
21
21
21
As per this notification, 21 functions listed in the 11thSchedule have been devolved to the 3 tier PRIs. It hasalso made provision in the State Budget to providesubstantial funds to PRIs through a new budget line.
3. Arunachal Zila Anchal Gram
The Arunachal Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act, 1997
Pradesh Parishad Samiti Panchayat
devolves all the 29 subjects, listed in the EleventhSchedule, to at least one of the tiers of Panchayats inthe State.
25
28
28
29
The executive order for devolution of 29 subjects ofActivity Mapping was issued on 21st October, 2008for devolution of 29 subjects covering 20 departments.There is overlap of some of the functions devolved todifferent tiers of Panchayats.
4. Bihar Zila Panchayat Gram Zila Panchayat Gram As per the Bihar Panchayati Raj Act, 2006, all the
Parishad Samiti Panchayat Parishad Samiti Panchayat
functions of the Eleventh Schedule have been devolvedto either of the tiers of Panchayats.
25
26
25
23
24
27
The State Government had issued executive orders inrespect of 28 matters and only the subject “Technicaltraining and vocational education has been executed”.The State propose to revisit the activity mapping aimedat greater devolution of functions, functionaries andfunds to the Panchayat.
12 3 4 5

67
12 3 4 55. Chhattisgarh 29 27
The Activity Mapping has been prepared for 27 subjectsexcluding drinking water supply and forests. Theexecutive orders with respect to operationalizingActivity Mapping are yet to be issued in Chhattisgarh.
6. Goa Zila Village Out of 29 
subjects to be devolved to Panchayats, 6
Panchayat Panchayat
subjects have been transferred through legislation and18 subjects have been covered under Activity Mapping.18 mattes are devolved to the Gram Panchayats while
78
18 seven matters are devolved to the Zila Panchayats.
There is an overlap in assignment of responsibilitybetween the two tiers.
7. Gujarat 15 19
Following the process of Activity Mapping in Gujarat,out of 29 matters listed in the 11th Schedule, 14 havebeen fully transferred, 5 matters have been partiallytransferred.
8. Haryana Zila Panchayat Gram ZP PS GP
On the State Panchayati Raj Act:
 The Haryana
Parishad Samiti Panchayat
Panchayat Raj Act has established the Panchayat systemas a hierarchy, with the ZP at the top. It states, 
inter
Only advisory, 27 25 10 9 8
alia
 that ZP shall advise, supervise and co-ordinate the
supervision and functions of the Panchayat Samits in the district.coordination
On Activity Mapping:
 In February 2006, an activity
powers
mapping was released by the Government through

68
which activities of 10 departments, namely, Irrigation,Food and Supplies, Education, Public HealthDepartment, Women and Child Development, SocialJustice and Empowerment, Health Department, AnimalHusbandry, Agriculture and Forest Department. Theten departments cover ten matters listed in theEleventh Schedule.
9. Himachal Zila Panchayat Gram ZP PS GP
On the State Panchayati Raj Act:
 In respect of ZPs
Pradesh Parishad Samiti Panchayat and PSs, the 
Act gives specific powers to the General
body and its Standing Committees. Both have been
17
16
11
22
23
24
reckoned in the overall devolution to the body.On Activity Mapping:
 A 
general notification on
devolution of functions issued for 15 departments inJuly, 1996. However, only 8 departments have issuedorders in 2001-02.
10. Jharkhand Zila Intermediate Gram
No elections held to Panchayats.
Panchayat Panchayat Panchayat
27 27 27 0
11.
Karnataka Zila Taluk Gram ZP TP GP
Activity Mapping has been completed in accordance
Panchayat Panchayat Panchayat with the 
recommendations of the GOI task force, in
August 2003.
26 27 25 29 29 29
12 3 4 5

69
12. Kerala District Block Gram ZP TP
GP Activity mapping (Responsibility mapping) has been
Panchayat Panchayat Panchayat
incorporated into the law through an amendment andmatches legislative devolution. The responsibility
21 18 26 21 18 26 mapping undertaken is now being revisited by the
State.
13. Madhya Zila Janpad Gram
On the State Panchayati Raj Act:
 The MP Act, apart
Pradesh Parshad Panchayat Panchayat from devol
ving powers and responsibilities to the three
Panchayat levels has also devolved 18 matters to Gram
71
78
25 Sabhas.
On activity mapping:
 Executive orders have been
issued for 25 matters. The State is revisiting activitymapping.
14. Maharashtra 28 28
Devolution in Maharashtra is derived from the BombayVillage Panchayats Act, 1958 and the Maharashtra ZilaParishads and Panchayat Samitis Act, 1961. Except thesubject Non-Conventional Energy Sources, all othersubjects of XIth Schedule are broadly covered in theselegislations.It was reported that activities devolved to Panchayatsare listed in the legislations itself.
12 3 4 5

70
15. Manipur 29 16
The State Panchayati Raj Act of 1994 details thedevolution of functions to the PRIs, all the subjectslisted in Schedule 11 of the Constitution have beendevolved to the PRIs. The Activity Mapping approvedby the State Cabinet in September 2005 lists only 16of these subjects. The State Government issued orderson Activity Mapping in September, 2005. Subsequentlyfunds were also transferred in respect of only 5departments.
16. Orissa Zila Panchayat Gram ZP PS GP
Activity Mapping document was issued in October
Parishad Samiti Panchayat 2005. It covers activities relating to 11 departments.
Subsequently, the schemes of water supply and
16
52
11
81
81
8
sanitation have also been devolved to PRIs.
17. Punjab Zila Panchayat Gram V
arious notifications were issued by the State
Parishad Samiti Panchayat
Government between 2003 and 2006 for devolving13 subjects pertaining to 7 Departments.
27 27 26 13
18. Rajasthan Zila Panchayat Gram
Executive Orders have been issued between 2001 and
Panchayat Samiti Panchayat
2003 devolving subjects, however, these have been heldin abeyance for one subject, 
i.e., 
roads, culverts, bridges,
22
25
26
24
waterways and other means of communication. TheState Government has revisted the issue and hasfinalized its report on activity mapping. A final decisionis awaited.
12 3 4 5

71
19. Sikkim Zila Gram ZP GP
Activity mapping completed and notified by the
Panchayat Panchayat
Government in November 2006. Executive orders havebeen issued for all 29 matters, a number of them for
15
18
17
19
promotional activities.
20. Tamil Nadu District Panchayat Gram DP IP GP
On the State Panchayati Raj Act:
 There is no
Panchayat Union Panchayat
unequivocal mandate contained in the State PR Actregarding functional devolution. The act only enables
21
11
22
92
92
9
the State Government to do so by official notification.Concrete and definite powers have been devolved inrespect of 2, 11 and 12 matters in case of DistrictPanchayat, Intermediate Panchayat and GramPanchayat, respectively in the Act.The Government had issued orders for devolution offunctions pertaining to all 29 matters, but these arelargely restricted to planning and promotionalresponsibilities.
21. Tripura 29 29
Activity Mapping was completed in 2005. This covers29 subjects mentioned in the 11th Schedule of theConstitutional and applies to 21 departments. TheGovernment of Tripura has taken a decision toimplement the Activity mapping in phases. Till now,irrigation Schemes, Primary Schools, Institutionsrelating to WCD have been transfered to thePanchayats through executive orders.
12 3 4 5

72
22. Uttar Pradesh Zila
Panchayat Gram The UP 
Panchayati Raj Act 1947 and the UP Kshetra
Panchayat Samiti Panchayat
Panchayats and Zila Panchayats Act, 1961 provide fordevolution of functions.
29
29
29
16
Functions relating to 12 departments have beentransferred to Panchayats. Activity mapping is stillunder the consideration of the Government.
23. Uttarakhand Zila Panchayat Gram The 
UP Panchayati Raj Act 1947 and the UP Kshetra
Panchayat Samiti Panchayat
Panchayats and Zila Panchayats Act, 1961 providingfor devolution of functions are applicable in the State
29 29 29 14 as the State legislation on Panchayati Raj is under
preparation. The Activity Mapping of 11 departments related to 14subjects was released in August 2005. However, theGovernment has not issued the necessary notificationsto operationalize the Activity Mapping. Cabinet Sub-Committee has been constituted to consider the ActivityMapping and the outcome is awaited.
24. West Bengal Zila Panchayat Gram The 
State Government has devolved all 29 functions
Parishad Samiti Panchayat
included in the 11th Schedule to the 3 tier PRIs.Activity Mapping has been completed for 28 subjects
18
29
28
18
accepting technical and vocational education. As perorders dated 7.11.05, 25.7.06 and 29.10.07, 9departments have so far issued necessary matchingorders. 3 departments have opened separate PanchayatWindow for transferring funds to the PRIs.
12 3 4 5

73
APPENDIX VII
STATUS OF DEVOLUTION OF FUNDS TO PANCHAYATI RAJ
INSTITUTIONS IN VARIOUS STATES/UTs
Name of the State Status of Devolution of Funds
      1 2
Andhra Pradesh Grants are being released by State
Governments to Panchayats either (a) directly
transferred through the treasury, or
(b) transferred by the GOI directly to the
parallel bodies at the district level. Funds,
including State contribution to Centrally
Sponsored Schemes are sent by the line
department concerned into the personal
accounts of the Panchayats either to treasury
accounts or Bank Accounts as the case may
be. TFC grants are also being released to PRIs
as per guidelines.
Arunachal Pradesh The schemes of the Department of Rural
Development i.e. IAY, SGSY, NREGS and Total
Sanitation Programme are implemented
through DRDA. Under NREGS, GPs prepare
project proposals and send them to block level
at which projects are also prepared and
combined with GPs plans and sent to DRDA.
The governing body of DRDA places these
project proposals before Zilla Parishad after
approval. DRDA is concerned with monitoring
of the scheme.
Assam Funds of schemes such as MPLAD, Member
of Legislative Assembly Constituency
Development, Self Sufficiency Scheme and
Central Rural Sanitation Procaine Schemes,
implemented through Anchalik Panchayats.
Development grants under various Government
sponsored programmes implemented through
Gaon Panchayats. TFC grants are also being
released to PRIs as per guidelines.

74
Bihar The funds of Centrally sponsored schemes like
the NREGS are transferred to Panchayats as
per instruction of the Schemes. 50% of the total
fund is made available to the GP , 30% to
Panchayat Samities and 20% to Zilla Parishad.
TFC grants are also being released to PRIs as
per guidelines.
Chhattisgarh The allocations of funds are based on the 1998
order by which each department whose
functions are devolved, have been earmarking
schemes relating to these functions and
devolved funds relating to these schemes into
the concerned budget head. The funds of
Rs. 103674.61 millions for 12 departments have
been earmarked for the year 2008-09.
Goa Matching grants linked to tax collection, grants
in lieu of octroi, salary/establishment grants,
grants to weaker Panchayats for strengthening
administration, grant-in-aid for rural
infrastructure, DRDA grants, Centrally
sponsored schemes grants are devolved to
PRIs. TFC grants are also being released to
PRIs as per guidelines.
Gujarat The funds pertaining to functions devolved are
being transferred to PRIs. In all, Panchayats
were devolved Rs. 2880.40 crore, which also
include Rs. 293 Crore of additional devolution
consequent to the State Finance Commission’s
recommendation. TFC grants are also being
released to PRIs as per guidelines.
Haryana The funds pertaining to functions devolved to
PRIs, Centrally Sponsored Schemes i.e. DDP
and IWDP are being transferred to PRIs. TFC
Grants are also being released through banking
channels to PRIs as per guidelines.
Himachal Pradesh The funds pertaining to Centrally Sponsored
Schemes and Member of Legislative Assembly
Constituency Development fund are being
      1 2

75
released to PRIs. TFC grants are also being
released to GP, PS & ZP in the ratio of 75:15:10
on the basis of per capita population as per
guidelines.
Jammu and Kashmir TFC grants is being released to PRIs as per
recommendation of Finance Commission.
Funds under SGRY are being earmarked to the
extent of 50% of the total availability of
individual Panchayats. The State Government
has been contributing matching share under
various Centrally Sponsored Schemes like IAY,
SGSY, NREGA, IWDP & DPAP , where
consequently the schemes are being
implemented through PRIs.
Jharkhand Panchayat elections have not been held in the
State due to court case pending in Supreme
Court. However, it is reported that there is a
strong system of traditional Panchayats
functioning in other areas in the form of
Manki-Munda and the Parha system. During
2005-06, the State Government decided to allot
Rs. 50,000/- each to the traditional Panchayats.
In the absence of elected Panchayats, the issue
of sending of untied funds to Panchayats does
not arise. TFC grants are not being given to
Panchayats, as election to Panchayats have not
been held.
Karnataka The funds pertaining to functions devolved to
PRIs, Centrally Sponsored Schemes i.e. NREGA
and other Centrally Sponsored Schemes are
being transferred to PRIs. TFC grants are also
being released through banking channels to
PRIs as per guidelines.
Kerala The State initiatives of devolving Funds to
Local Self Government Institutions (LSGIs) are
a significant initiative towards fiscal
decentralization. The untied funds allocated
under three main categories are Development
      1 2

76
expenditure, Maintenance of assets and
Traditional Functions to LSGI. Developments
funds are released in 10 equal instalments on
the first working day of the month from May
to February. Funds for implementing Centrally
Sponsored Schemes i.e. PMGSY, Rural Health
Mission, Sarva Siksha Abhiyan, Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana, NREGA and TFC grants
are also being released to PRIs.
Madhya Pradesh The funds pertaining to functions devolved are
being transferred to PRIs. The funds under
Centrally Sponsored Schemes i.e. NREGA, mid
day meal, old age pension, Indira Awas Yojana
etc. are being released to PRIs directly and all
such programmes have a direct accountability
of the Sarpanch. DRDA continue to exist as
separate and distinct bodies with the President
of ZP as its Chairman. Funds pertaining to
rural development programmes are channelised
through the DRDA. The schemes like SGSY,
IAY , PSYSVBY & SSPY are being handled by
DRDA. TFC grants are also being directly
transferred to PRIs through Electronic Clearing
System wherever possible.
Maharashtra The funds pertaining to function devolved to
PRIs, Centrally Sponsored Schemes and TFC
grants are being released to PRIs.
Manipur The funds pertaining to functions devolved to
PRIs, development schemes like Mahila Shakthi
Abhiyan, Hariyali Scheme etc. and NREGA and
TFC grants are also being released to PRIs as
per guidelines.
Orissa The funds pertaining to functions devolved to
PRIs, State Plan Schemes (for development of
rural poor, unemployed youth &
accommodation to poor people through Rural
Housing Programme), Centrally Sponsored Plan
Schemes (NREGA etc.), Central Plan Schemes
(IYA etc.) and TFC grants are also being
released to PRIs as per guidelines.
      1 2

77
Punjab The funds pertaining to functions devolved to
PRIs, Centrally Sponsored Schemes, Gram
Panchayat have little or no control and
independence in utilization of their funds
because lack of control over function and
functionaries at Gram Panchayat level. Gram
Panchayat simply follow the instructions from
Block Development Officer & Panchayat
Officer. TFC Grants are also being released to
PRIs as per guidelines.
Rajasthan The funds pertaining to function devolved to
PRIs & Centrally Sponsored Schemes & State
grants are being released to PRIs. TFC grants
also being released through banking channels
to PRIs as per guidelines.
Sikkim Budget of Rs. 1818 lakh were earmarked to
Panchayats in 18 departments during the year
2007-08. Each Gram Panchayat and Zilla
Panchayat receives the untied block grant of
Rs. 10 lakh and Rs. 60 lakh respectively. The
State has secured only ist instalment of Rs. 1.30
crore for the year 2005-06. High Level
Committee constituted as per guidelines of
Finance Commission has approved to utilize
the grant i.e. Rs. 20 lakh for creation of Data
base, Rs. 10 lakh for maintenance of Accounts
of PRIs and Rs. 1270 lakh for O&M cost for
civic services.
Tamil Nadu The funds pertaining to function devolved to
PRIs are being released. To ensure adequate
fund to weaker Village Panchayats, State
Government has proposed to allocate a
minimum grants of Rs. 3 lakh to each Village
Panchayat. The Panchayat Union Council can
sanction and excecute works up to Rs. 10 lakh
from their general funds without any external
approvals. However, for Centrally Sponsored
and State Schemes, prior administrative
approval of DC is necessary. TFC grants are
also being released to PRIs as per guidelines.
      1 2

78
Tripura Devolution of funds of line departments, only
parts funds relating to Lift Irrigation Scheme
of the PWD (Water Resource) Deptt. have been
transferred to PRIs. Some funds of Primary
Schools of the School Education Deptt., Social
Welfare and Social Education Deptt. and
Pension funds were being transferred to PRIs.
Untied funds are renamed as Panchayat
Development Fund and are transferred to three
tier PRIs in the ratio of 20:30:50. DRDAs
implement the programmes of the Ministry of
RD and CSS after the approval of Gram
Panchayats. The State has secured only Ist
Instalment of Rs. 5.70 crore for the year
2005-06 of TFC grants. TFC grants are also
being transferred to PRIs similarly to Panchayat
Development Funds.
Uttar Pradesh The funds pertaining to function devolved to
PRIs, Centrally Sponsored Schemes & State
grants are being released to PRIs. TFC grants
are also being released to PRIs as per
guidelines.
Uttarakhand The funds pertaining to minor irrigation and
watershed departments have completely been
devolved to PRIs. Untied funds are being given
to Gram Panchayats, Keshetra Panchayats and
Zilla Panchayats. TFC grants are also being
released to PRIs as per guidelines.
West Bengal The State Government provides financial
support to the Panchayat bodies to discharge
the responsibilities entrusted upon them. Funds
are provided by the State Government for
meeting establishment cost including salary
and pension of the employees of Panchayat
bodies and honorarium or remuneration and
travelling allowance of elected functionaries.
The other major source of fund available to
the Panchayats is those, which are released by
the Centre and State Government for
implementation of various Programmes/
Schemes. TFC grants are being released to
Gram Panchayats, Panchayat Samitis and Zilla
Parishad in ratio of 60:20:20.
      1 2

79
Dadar and Nagar Funds are being transferred to Panchayats as
Haveli grants-in-aid. Only Village Panchayats are
empowered to collect taxes and also utilize
completely. Panchayats have received Rs. 46.85
lakhs as untied funds in 2006-07.
Daman and Diu Matching with the devolution of function to
the district Panchayat, simultaneous devolution
of finances for implementation at the Panchayat
level has been carried out. A separate sector
for District Panchayat has been carved out in
the annual budget of UT, which contain both
plan and non-plan heads. In addition the funds
received under the Central plan schemes
concerning the 29 matters of the 11th Schedule
are also directly transferred to the district
Panchayat for implementation.
Lakshadweep The funds pertaining to functions devolved to
PRIs are being received by Panchayats from
various departments over the last 5 years.
Village Panchayats receive annual untied grants
of Rs. 5 lakhs which can be utilized only after
Panchayats have submitted their plan for the
same and the Director of Panchayat have
approved the plan. The District Panchayats
receives annual untied grant of Rs. 20 lakhs
which can be spent only after the DPC chaired
by Collector approves the plan for the same.
However, District Panchayats can spend, at
their discretion, upto Rs. 25 lakhs from the tax
revenue.
Andaman and T ied and Untied funds provided by A&N
Nicobar Islands Islands are utilized by the Panchayats with
flexibility in case of untied funds. Untied funds
are released in the ratio of 15:15:70 to Zilla
Parishad, Panchayat Samitis and Gram
Panchayat. Sectoral Funds for road and water
are distributed in the ratio of 1/3rd of the total
provision to all the three tiers. Grant-in-aid
released by the Administration is used for all
the developmental activities, maintenance of
created assets, infrastructure, office expenses
etc.
      1 2

80
Chandigarh There are only 13 villages with 12 Gram
Panchayats in UT Chandigarh. Therefore,
activity mapping could not be undertaken for
Panchayats. However, schemes of Rural
Development Department are being
implemented through the Panchayats and
funds for implementing these schemes are
released to Panchayats by drawing from the
State exchequer and then the Panchayats utilize
the funds by maintaining their own bank
accounts.
Puducherry Financial assistance in the form of tied and
untied grants-in-aid are being given to PRIs.
With respect to financial autonomy, the
Commune Panchayats have been empowered
to incur expenditure toward the execution of
civil works upto a limit of Rs. 10 lakhs for
each work and Village Panchayats are
empowered to incur expenditure of Rs. 1 lakh
towards the execution of civil works for each
work. For Centrally Sponsored Schemes i.e.
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Village Education
Committees and School Level Committees have
be re-constituted for implementation of the
scheme by appointing Village Panchayat
President as the President of the Committee.
Under NRHM, UT Health & Family Welfare
Department have constituted four Committees
which, inter alia,  include Commune Panchayat.
Councillor as the representative of the
Commune Panchayats. National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme is proposed to
be implemented w.e.f. 1.4.2008 through Village
Panchayats.
      1 2

81
APPENDIX VIII
STATUS OF DEVOLUTION OF FUNCTIONARIES TO
PANCHAYATI RAJ INSTITUTIONS IN VARIOUS STATES/UTs
Sl.No. State Devolution of Functionaries
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh Only General staff given, departmental
staff answer to departments.
2. Assam Activity Mapping Notification issued by
the State provides for devolution of
functionaries matching to the devolution
of functiions to Panchayats.
3. Arunachal Pradesh Only skeleton staff given.
4. Bihar Only General staff given, departmental
staff answer to departments.
5. Chhattisgarh Sahayak Gram Panchayat Adhikari,
Gram Panchayat Adhikari, Clerical and
Class IV cadres of Education Tribal
Health and 7-8 other departments
declared as dying cadres and new
recruitment to these cadres is undertaken
directly by the Panchayats. Chhattisgarh
has been particularly successful in
recruitment of new Shiksha Karmis at the
level of the Janpad Panchayats. More
than 30,000 teachers have been so
recruited into local level cadres.
6. Goa Village Panchayats can appoint
employees other than Secretary or Gram
Sevak using Panchayat funds. In ZPs,
CEO and Adhyaksha of ZP have full
control over ZP staff.
7. Gujarat 2.2 lakh employees devolved to
Panchayats, mainly on deputation from
State Government to Panchayat level
post, covering 11 departments.

82
 8. Haryana Activity mapping of February 2006
devolves staff through deemed
deputation in respect of 3 departments.
 9. Himachal Pradesh Staff is with State Government.
Panchayats are appointing authority for
6 types of employees of group C&D
category. In addition, Panchayats can
report on physical attendance in respect
of 2 categories of people.
10. Jharkhand No elections held to Panchayats.
11. Karnataka Staff of all departments for which
functional devolution undertaken,
devolved to Panchayats on deputation.
GPs can appoint Panchayat staff, except
Panchayat secretary. All transfers within
the district done by committee headed
by CEO of ZP .
12. Kerala Staff of 14 departments transferred to
Panchayats, with disciplinary control and
career review (through CRs) transferred
to them.
13. Madhya Pradesh All Class III village level functionaries
converted into dying cadres and fresh
recruitments undertaken by Panchayats.
These include Panchayat secretaries,
primary school teachers, anganwadi
workers etc.
14. Maharashtra All Group III and IV Panchayat level
functionaries to be appointed by Zilla
Panchayats. New amendment in 2003
brings all village level officials under the
Village Panchayats.
15. Manipur Staff of the Government are posted to
Panchayats and continue under the
control and superintendence of the
Government.
 12 3

83
16. Orissa Officials of departments are to report to
Panchayats in respect of transferred
schemes. Panchayats do not make any
appointments of their own.
17. Punjab Seven departments propose to delegate
powers of supervision to Panchayats. In
health department, the powers of
outsourcing the running of PHCs has
been devolved to Panchayats. Recently.
In education department, powers of
recruitment of teachers has been given
to Panchayats.
18. Rajasthan Officials of 8 departments placed with
each Panchayat through deputation from
Government.
19. Sikkim Staff on deputation from the Government.
Panchayat secretary elected by the
members. Draft Panchayati Raj service
rules prepared by the State and is under
examination by line departments.
20. Tamil Nadu At GP level, part-time clerks can be
appointed by the Panchayat president.
ZPs and Block Panchayats have no
control over line department staff.
21. Tripura Staff in respect of 21 departments
deputed to Panchayats from the
Government, with Panchayats exercising
powers of payment of salaries, grant of
leave, writing of CRs and disciplinary
action.
22. Uttar Pradesh GPS have power of verification of
attendance of all village level workers.
Village level functionaries of some
departments were transferred to Gram
Panchayats in 1999, but they were
subsequently withdrawn.
12 3

84
23. Uttarakhand In January 2005, executive orders were
issued transferring powers of seeking
information and supervision over
employees of 14 departments to
Panchayats.
24. West Bengal EO of the ZP made appointing authority
for all posts except group D posts at GP
level, for which EO of Panchayat samiti
is the appointing authority. This has been
done by the WB Panchayat amendment
Act 2006. Each GP has 6 sanctioned
posts.
12 3

85
APPENDIX IX
INDICATORS FOR DEVOLUTION INDEX SURVEY 2008-09
Functions Finances Functionaries
12 3
1. De facto transfer of 29
functions listed in
11th Schedule.
2. Detailed Activity
Mapping conducted
for these 29 functions.
3. Whether DPC is
involved in the
preparation of District
Plan?
4. Are GP implementing
the major Flagship
Programmes?
5. All GP fully
empowered to
prepare plans for
expenditure?
6. Authorisation of PRIs
to collect taxes,
duties, tolls etc.
7. PRIs own revenue as
% of PRIs
expenditure.
8. Timely action on
latest SFC’s major
recommendations.
9. Percentage of funds
devolved to PRIs that
are untied (Plan).
10. Percentage of funds
devolved to PRIs that
are untied (Non-
Plan).
11.P romptness with
which Twelfth
Finance Commission
Funds transferred to
PRIs.
12. Allocation of funds to
PRIs based on
apportionment
formula.
13. Are GP fully
empowered to
sanction expenditure?
14. Whether there is a
separate budget line
for PRIs in the State
Budget for 2007-08?
21. Expert Institutions
and entities to
support PRIs for the
preparation of their
Annual Plans
specified.
22. Expert institutions
and entities ofsupport
capacity building/
training of elected
officials of PRIs
specified.
23. Amount of money
provided for the
capacity building/
training of elected
officials of PRIs.
24. Amount of money
provided for the
capacity building/
training of appointed
officials of PRIs.
25. Annual Report for
last fiscal year
released.
26. Functionary wise
accountability to PRIs
: GP .
27. Functionary wise
accountability to PRIs
: IP .

86
12 3
15. Devolution of
finances corresponds
to functions?
16. Percentage of PRIs
whose accounts are
audited (GP).
17. Percentage of PRIs
whose accounts are
audited (BP).
18. Percentage of PRIs
whose accounts are
audited (DP).
19. Specify the registers
in which the accounts
of GP are updated.
20. Do any funds directly
go to the GP with
respect to the
functions?
28. Functionary wise
accountability to PRIs
: DP .
29. Average days of
training of
Functionaries :
Elected Officials; GP
30. Average days of
training of
Functionaries :
Appointed Officials;
GP
31. Average days of
training of
Functionaries :
Elected Officials; IP
32. Average days of
training of
Functionaries :
Appointed Officials;
IP
33. Average days of
training of
Functionaries :
Elected Officials; DP
34. Average days of
training of
Functionaries :
Appointed Officials;
DP

87
APPENDIX X
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY,
THE 14 OCTOBER, 2009
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1800 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘139’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
6. Shri Rakesh Pandey
7. Shri P .L. Punia
8. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
9. Shri Jagdish Sharma
10. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
11. Shri Jagdanand Singh
12. Dr. Sanjay Singh
13. Shri Makansingh Solanki
14. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh
15. Shrimati Usha Verma
16. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
Rajya Sabha
17. Shri Ganga Charan
18. Shri Silvius Condpan
19. Dr. Ram Prakash
20. Shri P .R. Rajan
21. Shri Bhagwati Singh
22. Shrimati Maya Singh
23. Miss Anusuiya Uikey

88
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shri V .R. Ramesh — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
4. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Shri A.N.P . Sinha — Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Mayaram — Additional Secretary &
Financial Advisor
3. Shri Sudhir Krishna — Additional Secretary
4. Shrimati Rashmi Shukla — Joint Secretary
5. Shri D.K. Jain — Joint Secretary
6. Shri Avtar Singh Sahota — Joint Secretary
*** *** ***
2. *** *** ***
3. *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***
[The representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj were then called in.]
5. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Panchayati
Raj highlighted the need for improving the performance of Backward
Regions Grant Fund (BRGF). Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of
Panchayati Raj gave a power point presentation to the Committee
giving details of implementation of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana
(RGSY), Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF), Panchayat
Empowerment and Accountability Incentive Scheme (PEAIS), Panchayat
Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan (PMEYSA), Rural Business Hubs
(RBH), Action Research & Research Studies (AR&RS), etc.

89
6. Thereafter, the members raised queries which were responded
to by the Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The Chairperson
thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for
briefing the Committee on the different schemes of the Ministry.
The Committee then adjourned.
A record of the verbatim proceedings has been kept.
***Relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

90
APPENDIX XI
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON MONDAY, THE 9 NOVEMBER, 2009
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Rakesh Pandey
6. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
7. Shri Jagdish Sharma
8. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
9. Shri Jagdanand Singh
10. Shrimati Usha Verma
11. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Ganga Charan
13. Dr. Ram Prakash
14. Shri P .R. Rajan
15. Shri Bhagwati Singh
16. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shri V .R. Ramesh — Director
3. Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Director
4. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Under Secretary

91
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Shri A.N.P . Sinha — Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Mayaram — Additional Secretary &
Financial Adviser
3. Shri Sudhir Krishna — Additional Secretary
4. Shri J.M. Pathak — Additional Secretary
5. Smt. Rashmi Shukla Sharma — Joint Secretary
6. Shri D.K. Jain — Joint Secretary
7. Shri Avtar Singh Sahota — Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the witnesses to the
sitting of the Committee convened for taking oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj on Demands for
Grants (2009-2010).
3. Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker was read out.
Thereafter, the Secretary, Department of Rural Development with the
prior permission of Chairperson showed a video film on empowerment
of Panchayats. The Committee, thereafter, took oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj on Demands for
Grants (2009-2010). The main issues that came up for discussion
include activating Gram Sabhas in the country, ensuring central role
to Panchayats in all central sector schemes, quantum enhancement of
funds for Panchayats from current level for the purposes of training,
e-governance and capacity building, restructuring of Backward Regions
Grant Fund (BRGF) Scheme for addressing the emerging needs to
Panchayats in the country etc. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of
Panchayati Raj replied to various queries by members. The Chairperson
thanked the representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

92
APPENDIX XII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE
14 DECEMBER, 2009
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
6. Shri Rakesh Pandey
7. Shri P .L. Punia
8. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
9. Shri Jagdish Sharma
10. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
11. Shri Jagdanand Singh
12. Dr. Sanjay Singh
13. Shri Makansingh Solanki
14. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh
15. Shrimati Usha Verma
16. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
Rajya Sabha
17. Shri Ganga Charan
18. Shri Silvius Condpan
19. Shrimati Maya Singh

93
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shri V .R. Ramesh — Director
3. Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Director
4. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Under Secretary
2. *** *** ***
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the Draft
Reports on Demands for Grants (2009-2010) of the following
Departments/Ministry:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) Ministry of Panchayati Raj
The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports without any
modifications.
4. *** *** ***
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalise the
aforesaid Draft Report on the basis of factual verification from the
concerned Ministry/Department and present the same to both the
House of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

94
APPENDIX XIII
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Sl. Para Recommendations/
No. No. Observations
12 3
1. 2.3 The Committee are glad to note that the
Statement by the Minister under Direction 73A
of ‘Directions by the Speaker’ showing the
status of implementation of recommendations
of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development contained in the Thirty Eighth
Report has been made within the stipulated
period. The Committee trust that in future also
the Ministry would be abiding by the above
Direction by the Speaker.
2. 2.4 The Committee have been informed that the
recommendations of the Committee are
reviewed from time to time with the intent to
ensure their implementation in review meetings
as also in Quarterly Review Meetings (QRMs)
with State Panchayati Raj Departments. The
Committee, are, however constrained to find
that in the case of majority of the
recommendations, the Statement has merely
reproduced from the action taken replies
submitted three months after presentation of
the Report. The Committee feel that this defeats
the very purpose of the Statement which
should depict the progress made in the
implementation of the recommendations of the
Committee. The Committee, therefore, desire
that in future instead of repeating the action
taken replies in the Minister’s Statement, the
precise status of implementation of the
recommendations should be indicated in the
Statement made under Direction 73A. This will

95
enable the Committee to understand the
progress of work done in a more focused
manner.
3. 3.7 The Committee are constrained to note that
the important Ministry of Panchayati Raj that
has been assigned the pioneering role of
looking after all the responsibilities of
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) throughout
the country covering around 24 lakh
Panchayats with 2.8 million elected Panchayati
Raj representatives has not been receiving
necessary funds since its inception in 2004
commensurate with the task and challenges
before the Ministry. They find that an amount
of Rs. 4780 crore has been made available
during 2009-10 to the Ministry even after the
two historic legislations of 73rd Constitution
(Amendment) Act of 1992 and the Panchayats
(Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act (PESA) of
1996 have come into operation in the country.
The Committee observe that during the Tenth
Plan (2002-2007) the total funds to the tune of
Rs. 2080 crore were available to the Ministry.
These have gone up to Rs. 24,226.37 crore
during Eleventh Plan period (2007-2012). The
Committee recommend that keeping in view
the stupendous task and responsibilities of over
2.8 million elected representatives in the
country a countrywide study is necessary for
making the Ministry more purposeful and
action oriented.
4. 3.8 The Committee’s examination has revealed that
the Ministry is getting flow of funds the under
two categories—one under Backward Region
Grant Funds (BRGF) and the Other Schemes
like Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY),
e-Panchayats etc. The Committee also find that
actual flow of funds for Panchayats in the
country started at the end of the Tenth Plan
with the arrival of Backward Region Grant
12 3

96
Scheme in 2006-2007 with an outlay of Rs. 1925
crore (RE) that has risen to the present level
(2007-2008 onwards) of Rs. 4670 crore.
Excluding this amount a small allocation of
Rs. 110 crore for Other Schemes is being made
available to Ministry to take care of 24 lakh of
Panchayats. In Committee’s view the total
amount of Rs. 4780 crore provided during
2009-10 is inadequate for the Panchayats in the
country from any yardstick let alone their
upliftment in view of emerging demands. Since
Panchayats are being given more power, more
funds need to be released for infrastructural
purposes. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that sufficient funds commensurate
with the task involved should be made
available.
5. 3.9 While the funds being made available to the
Ministry are not adequate in the opinion of
the Committee, the trend so far during
Eleventh Plan shows that the utilization of
even these funds has not been encouraging as
compared to Tenth Plan (2002-2007). The
Committee find that as against the total
allocation of Rs. 24,226.37 crore the actual
expenditure during first two years of the Plan
viz. 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 is Rs. 7680.81
crore only. The Committee apprehend that with
the present rate of utilization the Eleventh Plan
outlay may not be utilized fully. They,
therefore, recommend that all efforts need to
be made to utilize at least the available funds
fully.
6. 3.10 The Committee have been informed that the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj now proposes to
have the allocation for three big schemes of
BRGF, RGSY and e-governance enhanced in a
big way for the remaining years of the
Eleventh Plan and beyond. For instance for
12 3

97
BRGF quantum of funds is proposed to be
hiked from present level of Rs. 4670 crore in
2009 to Rs. 7300 crore in 2010-2011 and
Rs. 9300 crore in 2011-2012. Similarly, for RGSY
the Ministry is planning to have the existing
allocation of Rs. 40 crore increased to Rs. 1000
crore during 2010-2011 and doubling the same
in 2011-2012. Likewise for e-governance the
Ministry has a proposal to increase the present
allocation of Rs. 24 crore in 2009-2010 to
Rs. 1000 crore in 2010-2011 and Rs. 1500 crore
by 2011-2012. The Committee feel that aforesaid
enhancement of funds for one-two years in
major schemes of the Panchayats is not going
to comprehensively address the requirements
of Panchayats in the country. The utilization
of available funds purposefully is most
essential. The Committee also desire that a long
term perspective plan for Panchayats in the
country be drawn up bringing out clearly the
present state of Panchayats and their likely role
and responsibilities by 2020.
7. 3.14 While examining the requirement of funds
during the previous two years viz. 2007-2008
and 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj, the Committee are constrained to note that
funds available under BRGF have been
significantly lowered at RE stage from Rs. 4670
crore to Rs. 3597.50 crore during 2007-2008 and
from Rs. 4670 crore to Rs. 3890 crore during
2008-2009. Non-receipt of enough proposals for
claiming BRGF funds from State Governments
and delay in constitution of District Planning
Committees (DPCs), a pre-requisite for claiming
BRGF funds in different States like U.P .,
Gujarat, Maharashtra etc. have been attributed
as reasons for drastic reduction of funds at
Revised Estimates stage. Besides, non-
submission of district plans by various States
like Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, J&K etc. in 2007-2008
12 3

98
and failure to claim grants in 2008-2009 by the
States of Karnataka, Kerala and Mizoram have
been the reasons advanced by the Ministry for
lowering of funds.
8. 3.15 The Committee feel that the aforesaid reasons
of non-receipt of proposals/non-submission of
district plans were very well within the domain
of the Ministry. In their opinion being the
nodal Ministry it is incumbent upon the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj to have track on
above issues with the States. The Committee,
therefore, conclude that had the Ministry taken
timely interventions, aforesaid reduction could
have been avoided. The Committee, therefore,
feel that a mechanism be evolved for taking
care of these issues so that no reduction of
budgeted amount is required to be made at
revised estimates in future. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that such issues
should be vigorously pursued with the State
Governments. The concrete action taken in this
regard should be communicated to the
Committee.
9. 3.18 As r egards availability of funds before the
Ministry during the current year 2009-10, the
Committee are constrained to note that an
amount of Rs. 6720 crore as proposed by the
Ministry has been drastically reduced to
Rs. 4780 crore by the Planning Commission.
The Committee after perusing scheme-wise
proposed vis-a-vis agreed amount, are
constrained to note that for BRGF as against
the proposed amount of Rs. 6000 crore only
Rs. 4670 crore have been approved. Similarly,
for other schemes as against the proposed
amount of Rs. 720 crore only Rs. 110 crore has
been approved. The scheme of the Department
have tremendous impact on increasing capacity
building thereby improving rural infrastructure.
12 3

99
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
to the Department to take up the matter with
the Planning Commission for providing
adequate allocation commensurate with the
requirements with a view to achieve inclusive
growth so that the benefit are shared by the
poorest of poor in the country.
10. 4.6 The Committee have been informed that
various guidelines with regard to conduct of
Gram Sabha meetings in a proper manner have
been issued. However, they have a feeling that
all of them are not being followed in letter
and spirit leaving much to be desired. In this
connection the Committee have also been
informed about various initiatives like sending
of advisories to State Governments in the form
of circular issued in January, 2009 in this
behalf. The Committee recommend that in
order to ensure proper implementation of such
Guidelines, some methodology like presence of
officials of the Panchayati Raj Ministry when
gram Sabha meetings are in progress in some
of the selective States be evolved. This would
also enable the Ministry to have an idea of
the actual activities of Gram Sabhas in the
country and take further steps to strengthen
the Gram Sabha which is the backbone of
democracy.
11. 4.10 The Committee are constrained to note that in
the absence of proper technical knowhow and
personnel the Sarpanchs in different States are
facing difficulties in running the different rural
development programmes like NREGA and
that in many cases the Panchayat Secretary
generally does not guide the Gram Sabha
properly. Not only this the expected
cooperation from Government functionaries like
BDOs/Junior Engineers is also not forthcoming
owing to large responsibility of covering more
12 3

100
than one Gram Sabhas given to these
Government officers. All these revelations have
been candidly admitted before the Committee
by the Secretary, Panchayati Raj while assuring
necessary remedial steps. The Committee trust
that these issues will be taken care of by the
nodal Ministry for appropriate action. They
would like to be informed of the precise
remedial steps taken in this regard.
12. 4.11 On the issue of making available technical
support to Panchayats the Committee have
been informed that based on the findings of
World Bank team in eight States with problem
of large BRGF districts, a view has come up
that Panchayats can perform better
independently without Governments’ support
or other technical support. In Committee’s
opinion the findings of the World Bank team
may hold good for selective areas only.
Considering dismal infrastructure available
with Panchayats in general in the country, the
Committee feel that desired technical know-
how and personnel be made available to
Panchayats so that these can function in a
vibrant manner.
13. 4.15 The Committee find at present Panchayat
functionaries like Gram Pradhans and members
of Panchayats are not being provided
remuneration as in the case of members of
other elected bodies. In this connection the
Committee have been informed by the
Secretary, Panchayati Raj that this issue
alongwith manpower and buildings for
Panchayat Ghars were among those submitted
before the 13th Finance Commission whose
award is yet be announced. The Committee
have also been informed that financial
implications have been discussed with Principal
Secretary Panchayati Raj. The Committee
would await the 13th Finance Commission
Report before making detailed comments in
this regard.
12 3

101
14. 4.16 Another related issue that came up before the
Committee is of filling up of large number of
vacancies of Panchayat Secretary and Gram
Sewaks in Panchayats. The Committee feel that
this issue can be suitably addressed by the
nodal Ministry itself by taking up the matter
with the State Governments. They would,
therefore, like that the Ministry to take desired
action in this regard.
15. 4.23 The Committee are constrained to note that
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj does not even
have the basic data about the number of
elected representatives of Panchayats trained
in different States. In Committee’s opinion a
sorry state of affairs is currently prevailing over
this vital aspect relating to training of
Panchayat functionaries in the country. The
Committee find from the State-wise details
made available to them that in almost all the
States figures are not available with the
Ministry. In the absence of necessary data, the
Committee would wonder how the claims of
the Ministry that out of 28.8 lakh elected
representatives a total of 11.95 lakh elected
representatives have been trained can be relied
upon. The Committee expressed their concern
over the under achievement of targets with
regard to the training of elected representatives.
The Committee, strongly recommend that all
initiatives should be taken to ensure that fixed
targets for training of Panchayat functionaries
in the country are achieved and make the
training programme more effective.
16. 4.24 In view of the foregoing the Committee feel
that business like approach is essential on the
issue of training of elected representatives in
different States. The Committee are also of the
view that Ministry’s claim that within one year
the remaining elected representatives would be
12 3

102
trained provided the enhanced funds of
Rs. 1000 crore are made available under RGSY
is also not based on any assessment
particularly when everything is vague and
inconclusive on the issue of training in different
States. The Committee, therefore, feel that
before asking for higher funds, the Ministry
has to put its own house in order to take care
of higher funds in future. They, therefore,
desire that the Ministry should without any
delay make realistic assessment of the elected
representatives in PRIs who are yet to be
trained so that it can gear itself to the task
accordingly . According to the Ministry it has
advised the Planning Commission to introduce
integrated district planning through Centrally
Sponsored Schemes/State Sector Schemes.
Planning Commission is stated to have
proposed a scheme for planning units at State
and District level is for which the inter-
Ministerial consultations are in progress. They
recall that more or less a similar scheme was
also floated by the Ministry last year but it
could not see the light of the day. The
Committee, therefore, feel that instead of
charting out a flip-flop approach, a time bound
programme for training of PRI functionaries
on the pattern of ‘Bharat Nirman’ should be
prepared so that Panchayats in the country can
work as a unit of self-Government in the real
sense.
17. 4.30 The Committee regret to note that the
important aspect of training of elected
representatives of PRIs is beset with various
constraints like non-submission or delay in
submission of capacity building plans, late
arrival of funds at nodal agency level etc.
Besides the noble programme of ‘National
Capacity Building Framework’ (NCBF) has also
not come up to the expectations. The
12 3

103
Committee have also been informed that in
order to accomplish the task, faster training
would be done through private partnership
basis. The experience of States like West Bengal
and Andhra Pradesh on the training aspect
have been forwarded to other States for their
benefit. The Committee appreciate the good
work done by these States. They, however,
desire that nodal Ministry should first of all
address all constraints coming in the way of
training and utilise the NCBF for the above
purpose of capacity building. The Committee
also recommend that a follow up from different
States be obtained on the extent to which they
have adopted the approach of West Bengal and
Andhra Pradesh which has been circulated by
the Ministry. The Committee may also be
apprised of the same.
18. 4.34 The Committee are constrained to note that
expected progress has not been made on the
issue of simplification of decentralized planning
under BRGF through introduction of the
software ‘Plan Plus’. In this connection the
Committee are constrained to note that only
70,000 planning units in 250 BRGF have
adopted the software in three years period
from 2007-2008 to 2009-2010. The Committee
have been informed that full potential of the
software will be realized once all sectoral
schemes are routed through it. The Committee
feel that the initiative is quite good however
its coverage is far from satisfactory. They desire
that the matter of routing all the schemes
through the software be taken up expeditiously
with all concerned for its optimal utilization.
19. 4.37 On the issue of training of increased number
of women elected representatives in Panchayats
in the country, if the legislation relating to 50%
reservation for women in PRIs is enacted, the
12 3

104
Committee have been informed that the
increased number of women members will be
taken care of jointly under ‘National Capacity
Building Frmaework’ (NCBF) and Panchayat
Mahila Shakti Abhiyan. The Committee find
that as admitted by the Secretary, Panchayati
Raj the task is mammoth. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that a study/survey be
undertaken in advance to identify the correct
number of women representatives of PRIs in
different States who would be required to be
trained as there is complete absence of data in
this regard.
20. 4.40 The Committee appreciate the idea of setting
up a National Institute for Panchayati Raj for
imparting training of PRI functionaries across
the country instead of individual efforts of
different SIRDs in this regard. The Committee
recommend that in order to have a coordinated
approach on training of PRI functionaries as
well as officials involved in the implementation
of all rural development schemes, this kind of
national level institute be set up expeditiously
as currently National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD) is already pre-occupied
with other works relating to rural development.
21. 4.47 The Committee are unhappy to note that even
after five years of creation of the Ministry there
are as many as 68000 Panchayats without their
own Panchayat Buildings and another 58,000
Panchyat Bhavans across the country require
major repairs. The Ministry is stated to have
come up with a three years plan to build
Panchayat Bhavans with increased funds.
Simultaneously the Ministry has been
impressing upon the States to utilise the BRGF
funds first for building Panchayat Ghars. As
recommended by the Committee in a previous
chapter, a holistic and long term plan is
12 3

105
necessary for solving this problem related with
infrastructure of the Panchayats in the country.
The Committee desire that the construction of
Panchayat buildings in all the 68,000
Panchayats which do not have a building
should be taken up in the right earnest so that
each Panchayat in the country has a building
of its own within the next three years. The
Committee have also been informed assigning
the Panchayats an exclusive role to handle the
NREGA scheme is being contemplated. The
Committee welcome this development and
desire that further details in this regard be
furnished to them.
22. 4.52 The Committee are constrained to note that
on the issue of Centrality of PRIs in Centrally
Sponsored Schemes not much progress has
been made over the years. In this connection,
the Committee find that on 19 January, 2009 a
circular has been issued by the Ministry to
different Ministries urging them to give Central
role to Panchayats in their different schemes
run by these Ministries. In this connection the
Committee have been informed by Secretary,
Panchayati Raj that desirable headway has not
been made on this issue. The Committee
recommend that a task force under the
Chairmanship of Secretary Panchayati Raj be
set up on the issue of giving Central role to
Panchayats in the different schemes run by the
Ministries. The Committee may hold inter-
Ministerial consultations with different
Ministries as also with Planning Commission
and should submit their findings within three
months time suggesting specific action required
on the part of all the authorities/agencies
involved in order to achieve this objective of
strengthening the Panchayats.
23. 4.61 The Committee are constrained to note that
the two issues of devolution of functions,
12 3

106
functionaries and finances from different States
to Panchayats and Activity Mapping which
have been outlined by the Ministry as major
areas during Eleventh Plan have not progressed
on expected lines as mandated by the
Constitution and as recommended by the
Committee from time to time. The Committee
have analysed the position with regard to
devolution in their earlier reports and
expressed serious concern on the slow pace of
devolution in the country. The analysis of the
aforesaid data reveals that no significant
improvement has taken place and status quo
has been maintained for most of the States.
The Committee are dismayed to note that the
progress on exercise of Activity Mapping which
started way back in 2005 in 24 different States
could not progress well during the last four
years. For instance it has been completed in
only 6 States of Kerala, Karnataka, west Bengal,
Sikkim, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh.
Further in another 12 States of Assam, Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and
Punjab it is partially completed. In remaining
5 States of Rajasthan, Uttarakhand,
Maharashtra, Manipur and Goa it is at interim
stage. In this connection the Committee have
been informed by the Secretary, Panchayati Raj
that for necessary devolution of 3 Fs to
Panchayats two things are essentially required
one every State has to open a Panchayat
window in their budget and second the
Planning Commission should link a portion of
their Central assistance to State plans. In
Committee’s opinion the views expressed by
the Secretary, Panchayati Raj are relevant and
the matter should be taken up with Planning
Commission and with State Governments
earnestly and effectively in order to achieve
devolution in remaining period of the Eleventh
Plan.
12 3

107
24. 4.65 The Committee are constrained to note that
the Panchayat Empowerment and
Accountability Scheme that envisages
incentivizing States for Empowering PRIs based
on devolution index has also not progressed
well. For instance only ten States of Madhya
Pradesh, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Kerala,
Karnataka, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh,
Haryana, Chhattisgarh and Assam could get
the benefit of this scheme, whereas the
remaining States are far behind. The Committee
feel that in many States the nodal agencies
might not conceptually clear about the scheme.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that all
necessary steps should be taken to encourage
the States to take benefit of the scheme. This
would also help in quickening the pace of
devolution.
25. 4.68 The Committee find that with regard to District
Planning Committee’s (DPCs) there are three
tasks before the Ministry. One relates to
constitution of DPCs in Uttarakhand and
Jharkhand, second pertains to professionalizing
all the DPCs and third mass training for
decentralized planning. The Committee are
constrained to note that DPCs have not been
constituted in Uttarakhand. The Committee
recommend that the matter of constitution of
DPCs be taken up with Uttarakhand
Government. As for DPCs in Jharkhand, the
Committee were informed that the elections are
to held in the State. The Committee
recommend that soon after the formation of
Government the issue of early constitution of
DPCs should be taken up with State
Government of Jharkhand.
26. 4.69 As r egard, professionalizing DPCs, the
Committee find that the process of integrated
planning at district level was started way back
12 3

108
in August, 2006. However, it took three years
for the Ministry to even sanction funds to the
National Institute of Rural Development for
organizing training of trainers on District
Planning and for organizing orientation
programme for Technical Support Institutes
(TSIs). The Committee are of the opinion that
serious efforts need to be made in this regard
if the concept of Integrated District Plan is to
succeed. They also desire that details of work
done about professionalizing DPCs in terms of
trainers trained, empanelling of reputed
organizations as Technical Support Institutes
(TSIs) etc. in different BRGF States be furnished
to them.
27. 4.80 The Committee find that Panchayats (Extension
to Scheduled Areas) Act (PESA), 1996
empowering Gram Sabhas with special powers
in 9 PESA States of Andhra Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Orissa,
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and
Chhattisgarh has not progressed on expected
lines. Some States are yet to amend the subject
laws like those relating to money lending,
forest, excise etc. Consequently compliance
remains incomplete perfunctory and formal in
most States as has been admitted by the
Ministry. Not only that, the Committee are
dismayed to learn that vital issues like
ownership of minor forest produce, planning
and management of minor water-bodies etc.
which have been duly recognized in PESA as
the traditional rights of tribals living in the
scheduled areas, have still not received the
required attention. Powers statutorily devolved
upon Gram Sabhas and Panchayats have also
not been matched by corresponding transfer
of funds and functionaries, resulting in the
non-exercise of such powers. The Secretary,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj has contended
12 3

109
before the Committee that empowerment of
Gram Sabhas and Panchayats is also necessary
in order to solve the problem of naxalism
prevalent in central India. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Ministry to follow
up vigorously with the PESA State
Governments to take all measures necessary
for implementation of PESA in letter and spirit.
The Committee would like to be informed of
the efforts made by the Ministry in this regard.
28. 4.87 The Committee are constrained to note that
release position in respect of Twelfth Finance
Commission Grants to different States for
supplementing the resources of Panchayats has
not been encouraging as per latest figures. In
this connection the Committee note that out
of the total of Rs. 20,000 crore recommended
by the Twelfth Finance Commission, the actual
releases has been only around Rs. 14,522 crore
so far indicating a big gap of around of
Rs. 5478 crore. The Committee find from the
State-wise releases during 2008-2009 that in
respect of many States like Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Goa, Punjab, Tripura, Uttarakhand both
1st and 2nd Installments have not been
released. Further, in respect of States of Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, the second installment was
not released. In this connection the Committee
recall that the issue of expeditious releases of
Twelfth Finance Commission Grant was also
recommended by the Committee last year also
(para 3.57 of 38th Report). In view of huge
amount of Rs. 5478 crore lying unspent as also
non-release of 1st and 2nd installments in
respect of States referred above, the Committee
strongly recommended that the Ministry should
adopt a pro-active approach in this regard so
that unreleased amount is made available to
the Panchayats. If the grants are not optimally
used, the whole purpose is defeated. The
12 3

110
Committee would, therefore, recommend that
the Ministry should take stringent measures to
ensure that cent percent funds are utilized to
get the intended results.
29. 5.7 The Committee note that BRGF is facing a
large number of constraints in implementation
like time consuming process in transfer of
funds from State Governments to implementing
agencies, absence of technical staff at DPCs,
difficulty in convergence of all schemes at DPC
level specially in the case of financially weak
DPCs etc. The Committee have been informed
about various remedial measures like faster
transfer of funds to Panchayats, helping States
to identify the technical support to DPCs etc.
The Committee desire that Ministry should
deal with the problems coming in the way of
implementation of BRGF in a more resolute
manner.
30. 5.11 The Committee’s examination has revealed that
even the achievement of major BRGF objective
of removal of imbalances is in doubt. The
Ministry has concurred with the Committee’s
view that for proper implementation of BRGF
scheme at Gram Sabha level certain degree of
surveillance from the Ministry is needed. In
this connection the Committee have been
informed that a Committee viz. Ramachandran
Committee is already looking into various
aspects of BRGF including the issue of its
restructuring. The Committee have been
informed that by December, 2009 the
Committee was likely to submit its Report. The
Committee would like to be informed of the
findings of the Ramachandran Committee.
They also desire that expeditious action on
these findings should be taken including
restructuring of BRGF, so that the various
difficulties being faced in the implementation
of the programme can be removed.
12 3

111
31. 5.15 The Committee note that funds are being given
for capacity building of Panchayats under
BRGF at the rate or Rs. 1 crore per district per
year. Thus for 250 BRGF districts Rs. 250 crore
are being given. On the contrary in 350 non-
BRGF districts for capacity building, Rs. 40
crore only are being allocated. The Committee
concur with the Ministry’s view that amount
given under RSGY is grossly insufficient for
training requirements. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the issue of up-
scaling of funds for non-BRGF districts be
examined in consultation with the Planning
Commission.
12 3

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament
House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents
appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and
their outlets. The said information is available on
website“‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above.”