TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Rural Development)
for the year 2011-12]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.03.2012
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 22.03.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 26
Price : Rs. 65.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2011-2012) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government ............................................................ 11
CHAPTER III Recommendation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .............................................................................. 32
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee ...................................................................... 33
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ...................... 35
APPENDICES
I. Meeting of Gram Sabha after Transect Walk for
preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) under
PMGSY ........................................................................................ 40
II. Constitution of Working Group on PMGSY (Rural
Roads) for formulation of Twelfth Five Year Plan
(2012-17) ...................................................................................... 42
III. Detailed Note on Restructuring of Council for
Advancement of People’s Action and Rural Technology
(CAPART) ................................................................................... 47
IV. Extracts of Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee
held on 22 February, 2012..................................................... 57
V. Analysis of Action taken by the government on the
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development .............................................................................. 59
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012)
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit
5. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
6. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
7. Shri P . Kumar
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
10. Shri Rakesh Pandey
11. Shri A. Sai Prathap
12. Shri P .L. Punia
13. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
14. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
15. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray***
16. Dr. Sanjay Singh
17. Smt. Supriya Sule
18. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh
19. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar
20. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan
21. Smt. Vijaya Shanthi M**
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
23. Shri Ganga Charan
(iii)
*** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 03.01.2012 vice Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu.
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 25.11.2011.

24. Shri Hussain Dalwai
25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
26. Dr. Ram Prakash
27. Shri P . Rajeeve*
28. Shri Mohan Singh
29. Smt. Maya Singh
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
31. Vacant****
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raju Srivastava — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Committee Officer
(iv)
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 02.11.2011 vice Shri P .R. Rajan.
**** Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan retired on 15.02.2012.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2011-2012) having been authorised by the Committee to
present the Report on their behalf, present the 24th Report on the
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the 20th Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of
Rural Development (Department of Rural Development).
2. The 20th Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 18 August, 2011. Replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on
21 December, 2011.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 22 February, 2012.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 20th Report of the Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-V.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
21 March, 2012 Chairperson,
1 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2011-12) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twentieth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Rural Development) for the year 2011-2012.
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 August,
2011 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The
Report contained 25 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been examined and categorised as
follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 21,
23, 24 and 25
Total: 18
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government:
Serial No. 20
Total: 01
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Serial Nos. 14 and 16
Total: 02
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 2, 4, 6, and 22
Total: 04
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that final reply in respect of
Observations/Recommendations Serial Nos. 2, 4, 6, and 22 for which
only interim replies have been submitted by the Government and
Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in Chapter-I of the Report may be furnished to the Committee within
three months of the presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that
require reiteration or merit comments.
A. PLANNING FOR 12TH FIVE YEAR PLAN
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
6. The Committee’s examination had revealed that the most
important area of rural development of the Indian economy had not
received the desired level of attention for the allocation of funds from
the Planning Commission during the Eleventh Plan Period (2007-2012).
For instance, as against the proposal of about Rs. 4.07 lakh crore, the
Ministry of Rural Development received only Rs. 2.96 lakh core  i.e.
about 75 per cent of the amount sought. The Committee recommended
that before slashing the demands of rural development which touches
on basic needs of the ‘ aam admi’ like shelter, drinking water, sanitation,
employment, rural infrastructure including roads, etc. the Planning
Commission should prioritize these basic needs and find ways and
means of making available higher allocation in the Twelfth Plan (2012-
2017) for which the planning process was on.
7. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)
The observations of the Committee have been noted. The matter
will be pursued with the Planning Commission for enhancement
of allocation for IAY in the 12th Five Year Plan. The issue has also
been placed before the Working Group on the Indira Awaas Yojana
for the 12th Five Year plan constituted by the Planning Commission.
Swaranjyanti Gramin Sworazgar Yojana (SGSY)
The total funds allocated for SGSY in the 11th Plan is Rs. 17,803
crores. An amount of Rs. 9484 crore has been allocated for the
1st four years of the 11th plan i.e. 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and
2010-11. Therefore, an amount of Rs. 8319 crores is still available

3
for the last year of the Plan. In anticipation that the NRLM will
be implemented from 1st April, 2011 and keeping in view the
future plan of action and revised norms approved by the CCEA
for NRLM, the projected requirement was Rs. 5000 crore for taking
up various activities under NRLM for 2011-12. The Ministry would
have proposed for all the remaining funds of 11th Plan period i.e.
Rs. 8319 crore, but due to delayed approval of CCEA Note of
NRLM and capacities of the States/UTs in implementation of NRLM,
the Ministry proposed only Rs. 5000 crore for the year 2011-12.
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
Details of funds proposed, approved outlay, allocation and release
during the 11th Plan period in respect of Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) are as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
11th Plan (2007-2012) 12th Plan (2012-2017)
Plan funds Approved Total Total Plan funds proposed
proposed plan Allocation release by Department
by outlay by
Department Centre
(Upto
September,
2011)
81,801 59,751 86,120 75,894 Crore The report of Working
Group on Rural Roads
for formulation of
12th Plan is under
finalization.”
8. The Committee had pointed out that during the Eleventh Plan
Period (2007-12), as against the proposal of about Rs. 4.07 lakh crore,
the Ministry of Rural Development received only Rs. 2.96 lakh crore.
The Committee had emphasized that Planning Commission should
find ways and means of making available higher allocation in the
Twelfth Plan (2012-17). The Department have apprised the Committee
that various measures have been taken for enhancement of allocation
in the Twelfth Five Year Plan which include placing the matter
relating to Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) and Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) before the Working Group constituted by
the Planning Commission, etc. However, the Committee have not
been informed about the final contours of other flagship programmes

4
of the Department of Rural Development. The Committee would,
therefore, await necessary details of the results of various measures/
steps taken by the Department of Rural Development especially when
the Twelfth Five Year Plan will commence from April, 2012.
B. COVERAGE OF HABITATIONS WITH POPULATION OF
500-999 UNDER PMGSY
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
9. The Committee found that under PMGSY, soon after the
commencement of Bharat Nirman in 2005, the emphasis was on
coverage of habitations with population of 1000 and above; as a result
work relating to coverage of habitations below that level  i.e. 500 and
above, had largely not been taken up. The Committee were informed
that owing to paucity of funds, Government have prioritized coverage
of habitations with a population of 1000 and more. In the Committee’s
opinion changing the priority from covering habitations with a
population of 500 to habitations with a population of 1000 has adversely
affected rural connectivity and, as such, defeated the original objective
of PMGSY. The Committee, therefore, recommended that since the issue
of rural connectivity is paramount, all-out efforts should be made to
open up coverage of habitations with population of 500-1000 by
ensuring the availability of funds for this purpose.
10. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“PMGSY Scheme envisages providing connectivity, by way of an
all-weather Roads, to the eligible unconnected habitations with a
population of 500 persons and above in rural areas of the country.
In respect of Hill States (North-East, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand) and the Desert areas (as identified
in the Desert Development Programme) as well as the tribal
(Schedule-V) areas, the objective is to connect Habitations with a
population of 250 persons and above.
As Rural Road is one of the components of Bharat Nirman,
therefore current focus is to achieve the target of Bharat Nirman
under which unconnected habitations with a populations of 1000
persons and above in plain areas and 500 persons and above in
the hill States and the Tribal areas are eligible for connectivity.
The coverage of habitations with the population of 500-999 are
also being covered under External Aided Projects (World Bank and

5
ADB) in many States. Besides, project proposals of eligible
unconnected habitations with the population of 250 persons and
above in 60 Integrated Action Plan (IAP) Districts (as identified by
the Planning Commission) are also being considered under the
programme.”
11. In their reply, the Department has highlighted that their
current focus is to achieve the target of Bharat Nirman under which
unconnected habitations with a population of 1000 persons and above
in plain areas and 500 persons and above in the hill States and the
Tribal areas are eligible for connectivity. The coverage of habitations
with a population of 500-999 is being covered under External Aided
Projects (World Bank and ADB) in many States. The Committee
find it difficult to understand that even after the launch of PMGSY
in December, 2000 which aimed at providing road connectivity to all
unconnected habitations with a population of 1000 persons and above
(500 in case of hill States etc.) within 3 years (2000-03) and all
unconnected habitations with a population of 500 and above (250 in
case of hilly States etc.) by 2007, the desired results have not been
achieved. The Committee note that a lot of emphasis is now being
given to Bharat Nirman, which was a four year Business Plan for
rural connectivity (2005-09), due to which the PMGSY scheme has
lost its relevance. The Committee, therefore, once again reiterate that
projects under PMGSY for covering habitations with a population
of 500-999 in the rural areas of the country should not only be given
priority over rural road component of Bharat Nirman but also taken
up and completed in a time bound manner.
C. INVOLVEMENT OF PANCHAYATS FOR MONITORING
PMGSY WORKS
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
12. The other issue concerning PMGSY that came up during the
examination by the Committee was role of Panchayats in monitoring
PMGSY works at the fourth tier. The Committee were astonished to
find that monitoring of PMGSY works was undertaken at three level:
District, State and National level. The Committee desired that for
making PMGSY a people’s programme the PRIs should also play the
role of watch-dog especially in Tribal and Scheduled areas. In this
connection, the Committee were of the view that the inclusion of
Panchayats representatives in Joint Forest Management Committee
(JFMCs) in different States may be involved for PMGSY.

6
13. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“As per programme guidelines, there are three tier monitoring
systems under the programme:—
(i) Programme Implementation Units (PIUs) at District level;
(ii) State Rural Roads Development Agency (SRRDA) at State
level; and
(iii) National Rural Roads Development Agency (NRRDA) at
National Level.”
14. The Committee note that there are three-tier monitoring of
PMGSY works. However, the Department have not specified the
details of involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in
monitoring of PMGSY works. Also the Committee have not been
informed about the specific roadmap for effective inclusion of
Panchayats representatives for monitoring of PMGSY works. The
statement with regard to monitoring system under the programme is
merely reiteration of programme guidelines. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to transform the
PMGSY into a people’s programme, wherein, PRIs should play the
role of a watch-dog.
D. ENHANCEMENT OF PER UNIT ASSISTANCE UNDER IAY
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 2.19)
15. Another area that attracted the Committee’s attention was
related to providing decent housing with minimum space to live in
under IAY and enhancement of per unit assistance. The Department of
Rural Development had expressed its helplessness on the issue as the
Planning Commission was not in favour of any such enhancement.
The Secretary , Rural Development also informed the Committee that
there is essentially a need for funds from the Banking Sector in this
area even if the Government enhances per unit assistance since allotting
one to two IAY houses in one Gram Panchayat is not a long term
solution. The Committee, therefore, recommended that a broad-based
dialogue among all stakeholders, including the Banking/financial sector,
be initiated to find solutions for achieving the objective of ‘Housing
for All by 2017’.
16. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“A Committee to formulate concrete bankable schemes for rural
housing under the Chairmanship of the Chairman & Managing
Director, Central Bank of India was set up by the Ministry of

7
Rural Development. The Committee has submitted its report. The
recommendations of the Committee have been referred to the State
Governments/UTs for their comments. Some important
recommendations of the Committee are:
Bankable scheme for BPL households:
(a) The unit assistance given under IAY for BPL households
for construction of a household should be increased from
Rs. 45,000 at present to Rs. 75,000.
(b) IAY beneficiaries may be given loan up to Rs. 50,000 at
4% interest under Differential Rate of Interest (DRI). The
repayment period of the loan may be increased to 15 years.
Bankable scheme for Above Poverty Line (APL) households:
(a) Loan not exceeding Rs. 2 lakhs for construction of a new
house and Rs. 1 lakh for addition/up-gradation/repair of
old house with 5% interest subsidy
OR
Loan not exceeding Rs. 3 lakhs for construction of a new
house and Rs. 1.5 lakh for addition/upgradation/repair of
old house with 4% interest subsidy.
(b) Loan upto Rs. 4 Lakhs based on credit worthiness of the
borrower at interest ranging from 7% to 10% without any
subsidy.
The Working Group on Rural Housing for 12th Five Year Plan has
accepted the recommendations of the above Committee and
included these in their report which has been placed before the
Planning Commission. The Working Group has also recommended
to the Planning Commission enhancement of unit assistance under
IAY from Rs. 45,000 to Rs. 75,000 in plain areas and from
Rs. 48,500 to Rs. 80,000 in hilly and difficult areas”.
17. The Committee find that recommendations of the Committee
which was constituted to formulate concrete bankable schemes for
rural housing have been referred to the State Governments/UTs for
their comments. The Committee appreciate that the Working Group
on Rural Housing for 12th Five Year Plan has accepted the
recommendations of the said Committee which has now been placed
before the Planning Commission. The Committee are happy to note
that the Working Group has recommended the Planning Commission
for enhancement of per unit assistance under IAY from Rs. 45,000 to

8
Rs. 75,000 in plain areas and from Rs. 48,500 to Rs. 80,000 in hilly
and difficult areas. The Committee are of the view that the objective
of decent housing under IAY would be possible only when there is
realistic enhancement of per unit assistance alongwith a broad-based
dialogue among all the stakeholders including the Banking/Financial
sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend that concrete action on
the Report of Working Group on Rural Housing for 12th Five Year
Plan should be initiated by the Planning Commission. Needless to
emphasise that necessary provisions would be made in the budget
for the year 2012-13 to bear the impact of enhanced assistance. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress made in
this regard.
E. REV AMPING OF DISTRICT RURAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY
(DRDA)
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 2.22)
18. The Committee noted that the scheme of ‘DRDA
Administration’, one of the main implementing agency of all rural
development schemes at district level was in the process of being
restructured with a view to shouldering the increased load of new
schemes like MGNREGA and NRLM. The Committee had been
informed that task of restructuring of DRDA has been assigned to a
Committee headed by Shri V . Ramachandran which was to submit its
Report by May, 2011. The Committee has also been informed by the
Secretary, Rural Development that said Report may be finalized any
time in July, 2011. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the
said Report be submitted as expeditiously as possible so followed by
necessary examination and follow-up actions to expedite the crucial
reforms in DRDA Administration Scheme which not only envisages
reform in district level and below. The Committee recommended that
steps be taken to merge DRDAs with District Panchayats in States,
where this process had not been completed.
19. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“In order to strengthen and professionalise the DRDA to meet the
new challenges, a Committee has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Shri V . Ramachandran, former member,
2nd Administrative Reforms Commission. The Committee also
includes representatives from Ministry of Rural Development,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Secretary, Rural Development and
Department of some States, academicians and development experts
as members.

9
The Committee has already met on 19th January, 28th March, and
6th August, 2011. The Committee is likely to finalise its report by
31st October, 2011. Further follow-up action would be initiated
after receipt of the report of the Committee.”
20. The Committee are surprised to note that the Department
have furnished incomplete and insufficient information regarding
finalization of V . Ramachandran Committee Report on revamping or
otherwise of the District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) in view
of the fact that in the action taken reply of 21 December, 2011, a
reference has been made to the effect that the said Committee is
likely to finalize its Report by 31 October, 2011. The Committee had
also recommended the Department to initiate action to merge DRDAs
with District Panchayats in States where this process has not been
completed. The Committee are dismayed to note that the
Government’s reply is silent about this specific recommendation. The
Committee would like to re-emphasize the importance of bringing
the DRDAs under the supervision of Panchayats for better
implementation and impact so that DRDAs should not undermine
the importance of Panchayats. The Committee, therefore, would like
to be apprised about finalization and follow-up action on
Ramachandran Committee Report as also Government response to
specific recommendation of the Committee regarding merger of
DRDAs with the District Panchayats.
F. RESTRUCTURING OF CAPART
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 2.23)
21. While reviewing the role of CAPART the Committee were
dismayed to note that CAPART’s performance had been almost
negligible which hitherto before used to play prominent role in
involving NGOs in transfer of rural technology at the door step of
rural poor in the Country. The Committee were informed that ills of
CAPART had been due to variety of reasons like treating it as a post
retirement sojourn by ruling elite instead of allowing it to grow its
natural growth as per the objectives of CAPART. Meanwhile, the
Committee were informed that in view of large number of complaints
of irregularities penal action had been taken against some officers of
CAPART. The Committee would await details of restructuring of
CAPART, its new priorities and objectives so that the organisation
remains an organisation focusing on rural development.
22. The Department in their Action Taken Reply have stated as
under:—
“As desired by the Hon’ble Committee, the Details of restructuring
of CAPART, its new priorities and objectives are outlined in
Appendix-III.”

10
23. The Committee in their Report, while showing their concern
on the lack-luster performance of CAPART had decided to await the
restructuring process of CAPART before giving their considered
opinion. The Department in their action taken reply as well as during
the evidence held on 27 January, 2012, while spelling out the details
of restructuring of CAPART, have informed that restructuring of
CAPART based on the Reports of sub-groups and IRMA has been
approved by the Hon’ble Minister, Rural Development. The
Department have also informed that a Search Committee to review
the efficacy of the existing system for selection and appointment to
the post of DG and DDG, CAPART has been constituted. The
Committee are anguished to note that there is huge lapse since the
announcement of the process of restructuring of CAPART started
way back in 1996 and the entire exercise is still at the nascent stage
of implementation. Considering the fact that there has been
considerable delay in implementing the restructured format of
CAPART, the Committee strongly recommend that modalities of
restructuring of CAPART should be quantifiably implemented
without further loss of time. The Committee would await further
development on follow-up of restructuring process of CAPART.

11
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
The Committee take note that the Rule 331 G of the Rules of
Procedure and conduct of Business in Lok Sabha relating to examination
of Demand for Grants by the Departmentally Related Standing
Committee (DRSCs) was suspended by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha
due to rescheduling of the Financial Business in Lok Sabha to pass the
Demands for Grants for the year 2011-12 during the Seventh Session
of Fifteenth Lok Sabha without being referred to the concerned DRSCs.
However, the Committee have examined the Demands for Grants and
made report thereon. Since the Budget for the year 2011-12 has already
been passed by the Parliament, the Committee endorse the same.
Nevertheless, the Committee feel that the suggestions and
recommendations of the Committee would help the Department of
Rural Development, Ministry of Rural Development in analyzing their
performance and implementations of various Schemes/Projects during
the current year, which happens to be the terminal year of the 11th
Plan Period. The Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
are given in the succeeding paragraphs.
Reply of the Government
Action Taken Report (ATR) on the recommendations of the
Committee are given in the following paragraphs.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
Coming to the expenditure side of whatever inadequate Plan funds
are made available for rural development, the Committee are concerned
to note that the performance of the Department falls short of
expectations. Thus, against the available allocation of about Rs. 2,96,000
crore, the total anticipated expenditure during Eleventh Plan is only
about Rs. 2,88,000 crore leaving about Rs. 8000 crore that may remain
unutilized. Considering the requirements of the rural masses, the
Committee strongly recommend that all our efforts should be made
by the Ministry of Rural Development to ensure that allocated amount
does not go unutilized during current Plan. For this, necessary

12
coordination and monitoring process may be strengthened in
consultation with State Governments. In this connection, the Committee
reiterate their conviction that the key to better financial management
and reaching the envisaged benefits to the intended beneficiaries lies
in the effective devolution of functions, finances and functionaries to
the Panchayati Raj Institutions, the fostering of local level of planning
by the District Planning Committee as envisaged in the 73rd and 74th
amendments to the Constitutions.
Reply of the Government
Indira Awaas Yojana (IA Y)
The outlay for Indira Awaas Yojana for the XI Five Year Plan
(2007-12) is Rs. 26,882.21 crores. The funds allocated for the first four
years of the Plan were Rs. 31,977.53 crores against which Rs. 31,823.03
crores has been released. Against the target of 112.15 lakh houses for
the first four years, 102.27 lakh houses were constructed as on 31.3.2011.
During the current financial year, against the allocation of Rs. 10,000
crores, the expenditure incurred is Rs. 3,903.89 crores as on 31.7.2011.
The Ministry regularly monitors the implementation of the scheme
through different mechanisms. PRI institutions are closely involved
with the implementation of the scheme on the selection of beneficiaries
is done by Gram Panchayat/Gram Sabha.
Swaranjayanti Gramin Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)
The status of utilization of funds under SGSY the 11th Plan period
is given in the Table below. SGSY has now been restructured and
renamed as National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM). NRLM will
be a demand driven programme. The States will develop their own
State plan for poverty reduction which will be an aggregation of district
plans. Further, the community will also be supported through their
capacity building, to develop micro plans for enhancement of their
economic status.
Year Budget Allocation Budget Releases (in crore) %age
2007-08 1697.70 1697.70 100
2008-09 2350 2337.89 99.48
2009-10 2350 2230 94.89
2010-11 2984 2665.18 89.32
2011-12 2914.00 1124.77 38.60
(as on date)

13
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
The total plan outlay for 11th Plan of PMGSY was Rs. 59,751
crore. The total expenditure during current plan upto September, 2011
is Rs. 75,894 crore which is more than the Plan outlay. There are
already provisions for involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)
in preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) etc. Recently, the
Ministry has also issued circular on 27th July, 2011 making mandatory
that State government needs to ensure that Minutes of the Gram Sabha
meeting are also enclosed alongwith other requisite documents while
sending DPRs for road works under PMGSY vide Appendix-I.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para Nos. 2.5)
Another important matter that has attracted the attention of the
Committee is the state of preparedness for the Twelfth Plan (2012-17).
The Committee are not satisfied about the level of preparedness of the
Ministry as the Working Group for Twelfth Plan for Rural Development
is yet to be constituted. With the continuance of priorities of Eleventh
Plan like wage employment, rural housing, rural roads in the Twelfth
Plan, the Committee feel that the constitution of a Working Group for
Rural Development should be done expeditiously and it should start
working immediately since the Twelfth Plan is just nine months away
from now.
Reply of the Government
Indira Awaas Yojana (IA Y)
A Working Group under the chairmanship of Secretary, Department
of Rural Development has already been constituted to provide a
perspective and approach to rural housing under the 12th Five Year
Plan. Meetings of the Group have been held. The Group is expected
to submit its report shortly .
Swaranjayanti Gramin Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)
The Working Group on NRLM has already submitted its report to
the Planning Commission.
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY )
The Working Group on Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
(Rural Roads) for formulation of Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-2017)
has already been constituted on 2nd June, 2011 vide Appendix-II.

14
Two high level meetings of the Working Group and Sub-groups
meetings have already been held. The final report is under compilation.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee find that after the emergence of MGNREGA as a
major instrument of employment in rural areas, it constitutes a little
more than half of the budget of the Department of Rural Development.
The quantum of funds under MGNREGA is based on assessment of
the labour budgets of different State Governments. As per the figures
given by the Department of Rural Development, based on these labour
budgets, and keeping in view the cost increase arising out of the
revision of wage rates and the expected increase in outreach to
households to attain during this year a national average of 60 days of
employment (as against present average of 54 days employment), the
estimated demand is of the order of roughly Rs. 65,000 crore for
2011-12. The Committee find merit in the contention of the Ministry.
The Committee, therefore, are in agreement that the current allocation
of Rs. 40,000 crore is too inadequate to address the issue of employment
and recommend that it should be raised to Rs. 65,000 crore.
The Committee’s examination has revealed that there is
non-utilisation of funds under MGNREGA of the order of Rs. 14,000
crore. The Committee have been apprised that the Secretary (RD) has
already taken up the matter with the State Governments to pull up
their socks for meeting the target of their labour budgets. The
Committee hope that different State Governments will heed to the
directions of the Department of Rural Development for optimum
utilization of unspent amount.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry in its Annual Plan for 2011-12 had projected a financial
requirement of Rs. 64022 crore. This was on the presumption that
during 2011-12, the outreach would be 5.85 crore households with an
average of 60 days of employment per household. MGNREGA is a
demand driven and legally guaranteed scheme. If additional
requirement of fund is necessary during the year, the
Central Government is committed to provide additional funds and it
can be raised through supplementary Demand for Grants.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

15
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
On the issue of the statutory right to employment or, in the
alternative, the right to unemployment allowance embodied in
MGNREGA, the Committee are constrained to express their concern
that as against the provision of 100 days of guaranteed employment
to all who seek it in rural areas, at the ground level implementation
has left much to be desired. Neither have most households, especially
in States rife with rural unemployment received anywhere near 100
days of employment, there is almost total non-performance in providing
unemployment allowances under Section 7 of the Act to those who
desire but are unable to secure employment. As per the latest figures
submitted by the Department of Rural Development, only 5 crore job
card holders got employment out of a total of 11.6 crore job card
holders and that too at an average of 54 days of employment as
against the stipulated mandatory 100 days of guaranteed employment.
The Committee believe that the basic methods of assessment of demand
are flawed, particularly when the highest percentage of eligible
households to get 100 days of MGNREGA employment stands at
36 % in Tripura and precipitously drops to 6% to 8% in populous
States with high rural unemployment like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa
and Chhattisgarh, and falls even lower in disturbed North Eastern
States like Manipur. Equally the Committee are deeply disturbed that
Government is yet to effectively implement Section 7 of the MGNREGA
which stipulates the provision of unemployment allowance to
beneficiaries if the work they seek is not given. The Committee have
found that the highest number of beneficiaries under Section 7 is a
mere 1544 in Jharkhand; down to exactly 1 person in Kerala; and nil
in many States and Union Territories. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that this provision of the Act should be implemented in
letter and spirit and also suggest that a provision should be made in
the MGNREGA Act to ensure that the liability for unemployment
allowance should be on the Centre and for this MGNREGA be suitably
amended. It calls for widespread dissemination of information regarding
the provisions of Section 7 through Gram Sabhas and the provision of
budgetary allocations specifically to meet the requirements of
Section 7. The Committee seek an urgent report from the Department
of Rural Development in this regard.
Moreover, in many parts of the country, there is less than adequate
involvement of the Gram Panchayats in preparing the shelf of projects
of monitoring implementation. Unless all elected members of the
Panchayats, and the Gram Sabha, are fully involved in the planning
and implementation of MGNREGA at the ground level, the letter and

16
spirit of the Act stand violated. The involvement of the sarpanch is no
substitute for the involvement that will ensure effectual social audit
which is the key requirement for cutting down corruption and
promoting efficiency in implementing the Act.
Above all, it needs to be remembered the MGNREGA furnishes
entitlements by legal and justifiable rights; it cannot be treated as yet
another scheme. Financing is to be kept open ended and the
requirements for employment sought out proactively .
Reply of the Government
Under MGNREGA, employment is provided on demand and
unemployment allowance becomes payable in case an applicant is not
provided employment within 15 days of receipt of his application
seeking employment. As per Section 3 (1) of the MGNREG Act, it is
for the concerned State Government to provide unskilled manual work
up to one hundred days in a financial year in accordance with the
Scheme notified by the States as per Section 4 of the Act. Under the
Act, Central Government bears the entire expenditure on payment of
wages at notified wage rates to unskilled manual workers. The cost of
material component of projects, including the wages of the skilled and
semi-skilled workers, taken up under the Scheme shall not exceed
40% of the total project costs. 75% of material cost, including wages
of skilled and semiskilled workers, is also borne by the
Central Government. The liability for payment of unemployment
allowance is on the State Governments. This is to act as an incentive
to the States to provide employment on demand proactively failing
which the liability of unemployment allowance falls on them. It may
therefore be counter productive for the Central Government to bear
the burden of payment of unemployment allowance under the Act.
As per Section 16(1) of MGNREG Act, Gram Panchayats shall be
responsible for identification of projects in the Gram Panchayat area to
be taken up under the scheme as per the recommendations of the
Gram Sabha and Ward Sabhas. In accordance with Section 16(5) of the
Act, at least 50% of the projects by cost are to be executed by the
Gram Panchayats. Section 13(1) of MGNREGA provides that the
Panchayats at district, intermediate and village levels shall be the
principal authorities for planning and implementation of the schemes
made under the Act.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

17
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee are unhappy to note that MGNREGA being the
biggest programme of the Department of Rural Development is beset
with fundamental problems with regard to its implementation,
particularly the reported corruption in its implementation process,
which is a disgrace to the fair name of Mahatma Gandhi, the Father
of Nation, in whose name the Programme has been renamed. Effective
social audit is the key to limiting malpractices as has been demonstrated
already in Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh. The Committee welcome
the decision of the Department to universalize social audit of
MGNREGA. They further recommend that statutory powers be given
to them to monitor Panchayat level implementation to minimize
malpractices.
In Committee’s opinion the programme is beset with many
infirmities like inadequate assessment of the true level of need for
such employment in rural areas, given that two third to four fifth of
our rural population fall in the category of “poor and vulnerable”
identified by Arjun Sen Gupta Committee.
The Committee are also persuaded that convergence of MGNREGA
with other rural development schemes will be most effective into the
devolution of all the 29 subjects illustratively listed in Eleventh Schedule
of the Constitution by different State Governments plus the concomitant
transfer of functionaries and finances to the Panchayats. In this
connection, the Committee welcome the Department’s proposal that
Panchayats appoint Junior Engineers and Panchayat Development
Officers from the 6 per cent of their budget for administrative costs
borne by the Ministry. The Committee, recommend that the Ministry
of Rural Development take up all these issues with the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj in a focused manner so that MGNREGA progresses in
a truly Gandhian way.
Reply of the Government
To rectify faults and shortcomings in implementation and proactive
disclosures by local bodies observed during performance audits, the
Ministry has, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India, already notified the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Audit of Schemes Rules, 2011, which includes
Social Audit by Gram Sabhas. The salient features of the said rules
are:—
• Every Gram Panchayat to have atleast one social audit every
six months.

18
• Social Audit Units to facilitate verification of records with
primary stakeholders and work sites.
• Gram Sabha shall be convened to discuss the findings of
the verification exercise and also to review the compliance
on transparency and accountability, fulfilment of the rights
and entitlements of labourers and proper utilisation of
funds.
• The Gram Sabha shall provide a platform to all villagers to
seek and obtain further information and responses from all
involved in the implementation.
• Summary of findings of social audit to be submitted by
the State Government to the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India
The Ministry of Rural Development has been constantly following
up the issue of appointment of staff at the Panchayats for
implementation of MGNREGA with the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee are constrained to note that financial performance
of MGNREGA during the last two years i.e. 2009-2010 and 2010-2011
has not been satisfactory. While viewing the allocations vis-a-vis releases
position during this period the Committee find that during 2009-2010
the shortfall in allocation and releases was to the tune of around
Rs. 5,600 crore which by 2010-2011 was to the level of Rs. 5,232 crore.
Similarly, a comparison of total availability of funds vis-a-vis expenditure
incurred during these two years, the Committee find a dismal picture.
The Committee have noticed that there has been a shortfall of over
Rs. 10,000 crore between availability of funds and expenditure in each
of the year. The unspent balance have been attributed to a variety of
reasons like carry over of large unspent balances from previous financial
year in different States/UTs, relative slump in work demand under
MGNREGA due to seasonal factors like cropping seasons etc. The
Committee are not happy over the above dismal financial performance
under MGNREGA, particularly, when implementation of MGNREGA
is joint responsibility of the Central as well as State Governments. The
Committee find it equally disappointing and deplorable that, on the
one hand the Ministry pleads helplessness on the account of paucity
of funds under different Schemes including MGNREGA, while, on the

19
other, it is unable to put its own house in order by observing strict
financial discipline. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry of Rural Development direct different defaulting States/UTs
to move faster in utilization of funds so that scarce funds do not
remain unutilized.
A close look at the month-wise details of releases and expenditure
under MGNREGA during April 2010 to March 2011 by the Committee
reveal that the pace of expenditure started form July , 2010 and it
remained increasing upto September, 2010. From October, 2010 onwards,
it started declining. Moreover, the Committee find that in different
States the trend of expenditure differs. For instance, in hilly or snow-
clad States like Jammu & Kashmir, where during the course of a study
tour of the Committee to J&K, the Committee found the working
season is very limited and as such the trend of expenditure may not
be inconformity to the national pattern envisaged by the Department.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that expenditure
pattern in relation to releases of previous two years in different States/
UTs under MGNREGA may by assessed to arrive at logical conclusions.
Reply of the Government
Chapter IV , Para 14, Sub-section (6) of MGNREG Act empowers
the District Programme Coordinator to prepare an advance Labour
Budget which becomes the basis of budget estimates under MGNREGA.
Central funds are released after examining such Labour Budgets and
taking into account utilization of funds previously released. As
MGNREGA is demand based, funds to be released by the Centre under
the scheme to the Districts/State in a financial year, is based on the
labour demand at the field level projected by the concerned State
Government. The Central Government is committed to provide funds
to the States on demand and there has not been any paucity of funds
for MGNREGA at the Central level.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee are constrained to note that the physical
performance of MGNREGA has been even more deplorable than its
financial performance. Despite being five-year old programme,
MGNREGA has not been able to consolidate its position in terms of
completion of works as is evident from the fact that less than
50 percent of MGNREGA works have been completed since inception.

20
Reportedly there are large number of complaints on the issue of the
quality of assets created terming most of them as sub-standard and
non-durable. The level of corruption is so deep and well entrenched
in the system that the matter has reached the Supreme Court. All
these disquieting features about the implementation of MGNREGA call
for greater monitoring and transparency in implementation of the
programme. During the course of examination, the Department of Rural
Development itself has conceded that there are number of
implementation constraints/ills like non-availability of devoted staff,
no system of regular monitoring, absence of documentation of
prescribed forms and Reports, in operational MIS in many districts,
delayed payment etc. About setting things in order to the Department
of Rural Development has laboured to convince the Committee that
various steps like holding of performance review at State level by
eminent citizens, field visits and constitution of Working Groups on
important areas like planning and execution, transparency and
accountability, adoption of bio-metrics system at MGNREGA site etc.
have been taken to stamp out any scope of complaints. In the
Committee’s view all these tall claims will remain on paper if a sense
of integrity is absent and does not permeate the system run by
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), Government officials and Banks/
Post Offices. The Committee, therefore, recommend that besides faster
and implementation of MGNREGA on as per provisions of the Act,
social audit, formal audit and monitoring by Gram Sabha is essential.
The Committee during its visit to Jammu and Kashmir have come
across various valuable suggestions for incorporation in the MGNREG
Act for hilly and remote States like Jammu and Kashmir. These include
inclusion of the comparatively high cost of transportation of material
used in MGNREGA works at higher reaches as compared to plains.
The Committee feel that this issue should be examined by the
Department of Rural Development so that some relief is given to
affected people engaged in MGNREGA to tide over such kind of
problems being faced in hilly and difficult States.
During the Committee’s visit to Jammu, another important issue
of counting of 100 days of guaranteed employment under MGNREGA
came up for discussion. As per the existing norm, the requirement of
100 days of guaranteed employment under MGNREGA is being met
in a household by distributing 100 days among the eligible adults
who volunteered to work. In this connection, the issue of impact of
household norms for the purpose of employment under MGNREGA
on joint family system also came up for discussion before the
Committee. The Committee apprehended that the existing household

21
under MGNREGA norm which means family may lead to break-up
established joint family system in the country. The issue was taken up
with the Department of Rural Development and the Committee have
been informed that there are no reports that the provisions in
MGNREGA have led to break-up of joint family system. The
Committee, however, feel that the Department of Rural Development
should examine the issue in consultation with State Governments and
outcome arising thereof may be apprised to them.
Another important aspect regarding implementation of MGNREGA
that came up before the Committee was the need for inclusion of
thousands of traditional artisans, iron-smiths, leather workers etc. in
the Country within the ambit of ‘permissible works’ given under
Schedule I of MGNREGA with a view to saving their traditional skills
who in the absence of a social security mechanism are being reduced
to merely as stone cutting and other works. The Committee took up
the issue with Department of Rural Development so that the ambit of
permissible works can be widened to include above class of people.
The Committee have been informed that issue has already been
discussed by the Central Employment Guarantee Council on 23 June,
2011 who did not support any such widening of ‘permissible works’.
The Committee feel that in the absence of any social security and
their pitiable economic condition, the Committee do not subscribe to
the stand taken by Central Employment Guarantee Council (CEGC)
that their needs will be taken care of by NLRM which is yet to start
with full swing. The Committee, therefore, feel that since MGNREGA
is a countrywide programme that guarantees 100 days of employment
in rural areas, this issue should again be thoroughly examined by
CEGC. This can be done by way of first obtaining data about number
of such people who genuinely require such inclusion under MGNREGA
in different States so that the traditional artisans, iron-smiths etc. are
helped on realistic basis. The Committee hope that action taken thereon
may be apprised to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has, in consultation with the Comptroller & Auditor
General of India, already notified the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Audit of Schemes Rules, 2011, which includes
Social Audit by Gram Sabhas at least once every six months to facilitate
verification of records with primary stakeholders and work sites and
to review the compliance on transparency and accountability, fulfillment
of the rights and entitlements of labourers and proper utilisation of
funds. Summary of findings of social audits are to be submitted by
the State Governments to the Comptroller & Auditor General of India.

22
The issues regarding high material transportation cost in hilly and
remote areas, impact of norms of households under MGNREGA on
joint family system and widening ambit of focus of works under
Schedule-I of MGNREGA, could be examined in consultation with the
State Governments.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
Another important and disturbing matter that has attracted the
attention of the Committee is delayed payment of wages under
MGNREGA. In this connection, the Committee find that the much
talked about Business Model for making available payment in village
is shuttling between the Department of Rural Development and
Department of Financial Services and is to be discussed in the
Consultative and Coordination Committee. In view of the gravity of
the problem, the Committee recommend that both the involved
Departments should work in a pro-active manner for reaching a
solution for the timely delivery of payment to the eligible rural poor
under MGNREGA.
Reply of the Government
With a view to ensuring timely payment, infusing transparency
and enhancing the integrity of wage payment under MGNREGA,
Schedule II of MGNREG Act was amended to make wage disbursement
to workers through institutional accounts in Banks or Post Offices a
statutory requirement. To strengthen the institutional outreach for wage
disbursement, it has already been decided that State Governments
should roll out the Business Correspondent (BC) Model, to make wage
payment through Banks with bio-metric authentication at village level,
on competitive bid basis from Banks by inviting Expression of Interest
(EOI)/Request for Qualification (RFQ). All the State Governments have
been advised to identify unserved areas where the BC model may be
required and roll out the BC Model as per procedure detailed above.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee have come across another important issue of
genuineness of Social Audit of MGNREGA works. The Department of
Rural Development has also conceded before the Committee that owing

23
to variety of reasons the Social Audit has not yielded desired results
and taking cognizance of shortcomings in Social Audit in MGNREGA,
Social Audit in Scheme Rules, 2011 have been framed wherein Social
Audit through C&AG has been contemplated in a detailed manner.
The Committee have also been informed that these Rules have been
notified on 6 April, 2011 for comments thereon from public at large
for finalization thereof in a month’s time. The Committee would like
to be apprised about conclusive action taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has, in consultation with the Comptroller & Auditor
General of India, already notified on 30th June, 2011 the Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Schemes Rules,
2011, which includes Social Audit by Gram Sabhas.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
The Committee’s examination has revealed that so important a
scheme as PMGSY for rural connectivity has not been moving as it
ought to have moved in terms of both fund constraints and deviation
of approach. On the issue of fund constraints, the Committee find that
during the Tenth and Eleventh Plan Periods, it has not been able to
get the requisite support from the Planning Commission as funds
proposed were reduced to one-third and one-half level respectively at
the allocation stage. On the issue of deviation of approach, the
Committee are dismayed to note that instead of pursuing the coverage
of habitations of 500 and more the Government deviated from that
and started coverage of habitation of 1000 and more. The Committee
also note that the target of coverage of habitations has also gone down
from the initial level of 1.36 lakh habitations in 2000 to 56,648
habitations at the time of Bharat Nirman in 2005, presumably owing
to the execution of habitations of population of 500-999. The
Committee’s examination of the coverage of habitations during
2008-2009 and 2009-2010 has revealed that the performance of PMGSY
is below target. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a
thorough review of PMGSY be undertaken for taking corrective
remedial measures.
Reply of the Government
The performance of PMGSY is regularly reviewed by the Ministry
through Performance Review Committee meetings at central level,
Regional Review Committee meetings at Regional level.

24
The performance of PMGSY is also reviewed in the Empowered
Committee Meetings and various periodical reports viz. monthly,
quarterly progress reports.
States have been requested to take following necessary actions to
accelerate the pace of implementation of the programme:—
(a) Strengthening of institutional capacity including deployment
of adequate number of dedicated programme
implementation units (PIUs);
(b) Use of standard Bidding Document;
(c) e-tendering;
(d) Joint meetings with officers of State’s Forest Department to
facilitate faster clearance under Forest (Conservation) Act;
(e) To monitor delay in award and completion.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.17)
The Committee find that there have been suggestions from various
quarters to review the guidelines in existence for Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana. The Committee recently visited Kuttanad region of
Alappuzha District (Kerala) during their Study Tour. The Committee
found that it is not feasible in such areas to fulfill the 8 meter width
condition. Similarly, there is need to allow small bridges for connectivity
to tablet habitations. The Committee, therefore, would like that for
specific regions, particularly, hilly, difficult areas, areas surrounded by
water like Kuttanad region, the Government should examine and allow
on case to case basis relaxation for road width, inclusion of small
bridges in the Scheme, relaxation in pavement of index survey and
construction of cartable bridges/structure bridges to have the real
connectivity in such areas.
Reply of the Government
Implementation of PMGSY is governed by the existing Programme
Guidelines. However, the Ministry had received requests from the
Kerala State, for relaxation in existing guidelines in respect of the
standards, specifications and design of roads under PMGSY.
An Expert Committee was constituted by the Ministry to review
the standards and specifications prescribed under PMGSY. On the basis
of recommendation of the Expert Committee, the following relaxations

25
in specifications had been permitted to Kerala State on geometric
parameters:—
• Width of carriage-way for link roads 3 metre upto traffic
of 100 motorised vehicles per day and can be increased to
3.75 metres for traffic more than that.
• The roadway width (width at the top of the road) for link
road can be 6 metres.
Since, PMGSY Programme envisages All-weather Connectivity to
eligible unconnected habitations, construction of Bridges wherever
required, is also permitted under PMGSY subject to condition that
cost of bridges upto 50 meters (75 meters in IAP Districts) is borne by
the Government of India and cost beyond these limits is borne by the
state government.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 2.18)
The Committee’s examination of IAY’s performance has revealed
that whereas its financial performance is 100 per cent during 2009-
2010; its physical performance is not all that good and is much lower
than the targeted level. The Committee are constrained to note that as
per the latest available figures there is a housing shortage of 4.4 crore
in the country and exact data will be available after the final figures
of Census of 2011 are announced. The Committee have been informed
that Government have declared a goal of ‘Housing for All’ by 2017  i.e.
by the end of Twelfth Plan (2012-2017) and the Ministry has projected
an outlay of Rs. 17,000 crore for it.
The Committee find that the pace of construction of house is not
progressing as per the demand. The Committee recommend that instead
of the target of construction of 60 lakh houses in five years it should
be 60 lakh houses in one year to achieve the objective of ‘Housing for
All by 2017’. The Committee, therefore, stress that there is a need for
revising targets and outlay for the Twelfth Plan and evolving
methodologies for attaining these targets in close association with the
Panchayats and the Gram Sabhas.
Reply of the Government
The Planning Commission had set up a Working Group on Rural
Housing to make recommendations for the formulation of the
12th Five Year Plan. The Working Group has assessed the rural housing
shortage during the 12th Plan period (2012-17) as approx. 40 million.
Given the current trends of housing in rural India, it can be safely

26
assumed that about half of the current shortage of 40 million houses
would require financing through IA Y and interest subsidy assistance.
The rest of the 20 million households would be able to construct their
houses through state schemes, their own sources or informal sources
of finance such as money lenders, borrowings from family and friends
or family gifts. This translates into a target of at least 40 lakh houses
every year during the 12th Plan period. Accordingly, the Working
Group has proposed an allocation of Rs. 1,50,000 crores for the
12th Five Year Plan.
The report of the Working Group has been placed before the
Planning Commission. The matter will be further discussed with the
Planning Commission at the time of finalization of the 12th Five Year
Plan.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 2.19)
Another area that has attracted the Committee’s attention is related
to providing decent housing with minimum space to live in under
IAY and enhancement of per unit assistance. The Department of Rural
Development has expressed its helplessness on the issue as the Planning
Commission is not in favour of any such enhancement. The Secretary,
Rural Development also informed the Committee that there is
essentially a need for funds from the Banking Sector in this area even
if the Government enhances per unit assistance since allotting one to
two IAY houses in one Gram Panchayat is not a long term solution.
The Committee, therefore, feel that a broad-based dialogue among all
stakeholders, including the Banking/financial sector, be initiated to find
solutions for achieving the objective of ‘Housing for All by 2017’.
Reply of the Government
A Committee to formulate concrete bankable schemes for rural
housing under the Chairmanship of the Chairman & Managing Director,
Central Bank of India was set up by the Ministry of Rural
Development. The Committee has submitted its report. The
recommendations of the Committee have been referred to the State
Governments/UTs for their comments. Some important
recommendations of the Committee are:
Bankable scheme for BPL households:
(a) The unit assistance given under IAY for BPL households
for construction of a household should be increased from
Rs. 45000 at present to Rs. 75000.

27
(b) IAY beneficiaries may be given loan up to Rs. 50000 at 4%
interest under Differential Rate of Interest (DRI). The
repayment period of the loan may be increased to 15 years.
Bankable scheme for Above Poverty Line (APL) households:
(c) Loan not exceeding Rs. 2 lakhs for construction of a new
house and Rs. 1 lakh for addition/up-gradation/repair of
old house with 5% interest subsidy
OR
Loan not exceeding Rs. 3 lakhs for construction of a new
house and Rs. 1.5 lakh for addition/upgradation/repair of
old house with 4% interest subsidy.
(d) Loan upto Rs. 4 Lakhs based on credit worthiness of the
borrower at interest ranging from 7% to 10% without any
subsidy.
The Working Group on Rural Housing for 12th Five Year Plan has
accepted the recommendations of the above Committee and included
these in their report which has been placed before the Planning
Commission. The Working Group has also recommended to the
Planning Commission enhancement of unit assistance under IAY from
Rs. 45000 to Rs. 75000 in plain areas and from Rs. 48,500 to Rs. 80000
in hilly and difficult areas.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 2.21)
The Committee have been informed that the SGSY scheme has
been restructured as the National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM)
in 2010-2011 so as to reach out to 7 crore rural poor households and
uplift them from abject poverty in a time bound manner. The
Committee have been informed that State have been told to operate
SGSY and NRLM programme side by side. The Secretary, Rural
Development has in a detailed deposition before the Committee spelt
out the delivery mechanism under the new programme along with
the exit policy. In view of uncertainty about genuine BPL list and
other factors, the Committee feel that there is a need for close
coordination between Department of Rural Development and
Department of Financial Services for preparing the necessary frame
work for the new Programme of NRLM.

28
Reply of the Government
After the approval of National Rural Livelihoods Mission by
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) the Ministry had
discussions with many Central Government departments, State
Governments, banks/financial institutions, NGO, Civil Society
Organisation, and various other stake holders of the programme on
the implementation strategies of NRLM. Many workshops and meeting
were held with these stakeholders. After having the discussions and
taking their views, the Ministry prepared the “Implementation
Framework for National Rural Livelihoods Mission”. This
implementation framework clearly highlights the role and responsibility
of other departments/organisation and also on the issues of
convergence. Under NRLM banks and other financial institutions have
to play a critical role in achieving the objectives of NRLM. For this
the Ministry will always have close coordination with Department of
Financial Services. The Framework for Implementation of NRLM is
also a dynamic document, if required at any stage that there is need
for any change in the implementation strategies of the programme the
same will be carried out in the framework for better implementation
of the programme.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 2.23)
While reviewing the role of CAPART the Committee are dismayed
to note that CAPART’s performance has been almost negligible which
hitherto before used to play prominent role in involving NGOs in
transfer of rural technology at the door step of rural poor in the
country. The Committee have been informed that ills of CAPART have
been due to variety of reasons like treating it as a post retirement
sojourn by ruling elite instead of allowing it to grow its natural growth
as per the objectives of CAPART. Meanwhile, the Committee have
been informed that in view of large number of complaints of
irregularities penal action has been taken against some officers of
CAPART. The Committee would await details of restructuring of
CAPART, its new priorities and objectives so that the organisation
remains an organisation focusing on rural development.
Reply of the Government
As desired by the Hon’ble Committee, the Details of restructuring of
CAPART, its new priorities and objectives are outlined in Appendix-III.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report)

29
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 2.24)
The Committee are unhappy to note that innovative scheme like
PURA has not yet started even after though it was started way back
in 2004-2005 on pilot basis. The Committee find that what is more
disappointing is that year after year since 2008-2009 large funds have
been surrendered. For instance, Rs. 30 crore were surrendered in each
year 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 and during 2010-2011 Rs. 50 crore were
surrendered due to various reasons. The Committee, therefore, are not
satisfied with the way this important scheme is being handled and
recommend that more action oriented approach is called for and the
Ministry would take conclusive action in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas scheme was
initially implemented on a pilot basis for three years, from the year
2004-05 to 2006-07. In between this period and subsequently steps
were taken to restructure the scheme. The budgetary provision for the
year 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 has been Rs. 10.00 crore, Rs. 30.00
crore and Rs. 30.00 crore respectively. Funds were not released in these
years as the scheme was being restructured. The restructured PURA
scheme has been approved for implementation by Cabinet Committee
on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 21.01.2010. Budgetary provision of the
scheme is Rs. 248 crore for the 11th Plan and allocation for the year
2010-11 is Rs. 124 crore.
The restructured PURA scheme proposes holistic and accelerated
development of compact areas around a potential growth centre in a
Gram Panchayat (or a group of Gram Panchayats) through Public
Private Partnership (PPP) framework for providing livelihood
opportunities and urban amenities to improve the quality of life in
rural areas.
The rolling out of the restructured PURA scheme was started by
formulation of Guidelines. Subsequently, a notice was issued inviting
Expression of Interest (EoI) from private sector entities for selecting
the private partners. 93 EoIs were received out of which 45
organizations qualified at the EoI Stage. Nine organizations had
submitted 14 proposals out of which 11 proposals qualified. The
concerned private entities were asked to submit a Detailed Project
Report (DPR). In response, 5 organizations have submitted 8 DPRs.
The experts had evaluated the DPRs and suggested many
improvements. The qualified bidders have been requested to submit

30
the revised DPRs by 30th September 2011. The modified DPRs will be
evaluated and placed before Inter-Ministerial Empowered Committee
for approval. After such approval a Concession Agreement and State
Support Agreement would be signed and executed by the middle of
November 2011.
Out of the budgetary allocation for PURA scheme for 2010-11 (RE)
of Rs. 74 crore, Rs. 07.80 crore was meant for North Eastern (NE)
States. Since no projects were received from NE States, the funds meant
for NE States were re-appropriated and used in some other schemes
of the Ministry. The remaining amount of Rs. 66.20 crore has been
placed with concerned District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs)
where the pilot PURA projects are to be implemented.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 2.25)
The Committee are dismayed to note that there is no updated BPL
list in rural areas in the Country and whatever BPL data are available
these pertain to the year 2002. During all these years, the Committee
have been highlighting the need for updating the BPL list. However,
on account of various reasons the matter has not progressed much.
This year, the committees have been informed that by March, 2012,
the required BPL List will be made available to the country. In this
connection, the most vital aspect with regard to BPL was identification
of genuine poor in the BPL list. Various suggestions like putting
together all the BPL relating matter under one roof, observing a more
realistic approach with regard to identification of poor in the form of
taking into account the family income or income from assets of
permanent nature, full involvement of Panchayats in the process etc.
have come up before the Committee. Besides, the representative of the
Department of Rural Development has also put forth before the
Committee steps taken for bringing transparency in method of selection.
The Committee hopes that the Department of Rural Development will
be benefited by these suggestions for bringing out a BPL list largely
acceptable to all.
Reply of the Government
The Socio-Economic and Caste Census (2011) has been commenced
for collecting Socio-economic and caste data of households in the rural
and urban areas of the country. Socio economic data collected from
SECC 2011 will be utilized by respective States/UTs for identifying
BPL households in rural as well as Urban areas.

31
The Socio-Economic and Caste Census 2011 (SECC-2011) would be
conducted from 30th June, 2011 to 31st December, 2011 in a phased
manner throughout the country depending upon availability of Hand
Held Devices (HHDs) or Tablet PCs supplied by Bharat Electronic
Limited (BEL) and preparedness of States/UTs.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

32
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATION  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE  DO  NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 2.20)
The Committee’s examination has also revealed that there is a
need to link IAY with Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) for construction
of toilets by way of adding an amount of Rs. 3000 to Rs. 4000 under
IAY so that IA Y housing is provided with toilets. Similarly, the labour
component under IAY be sourced from MGNREGA. The Committee
accordingly recommend that these issues relating to convergence of
schemes be examined by the Department of Rural Development in
conjunction with all the Ministries/Departments concerned. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the outcome in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The guidelines for Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) already provide for
convergence of construction of a house under IAY with the activities
and funds provided under Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) for
providing a sanitary latrine in the house. These instructions have been
reiterated in a joint letter issued by the Department of Rural
Development and the Department of Drinking Water Supply. It has
been made mandatory that if a beneficiary does not have a sanitary
latrine, the authority sanctioning the house under IAY should
simultaneously sanction a sanitary latrine under TSC.
As regards sourcing the labour component under IAY from
MGNREGA is concerned, the objective of MGNREGA is to enhance
livelihood security of rural poor. For this reason, the list of permissible
activities include works that would improve land productivity . Almost
70% of works being undertaken under MGNREGA falls in this category.
Remaining are largely works that fall in the broad category of ‘Rural
Connectivity’. For these reasons, construction of rural houses under
IAY cannot be considered under MGNREGA. Given the shortfall in
rural housing (40 million), if IAY houses were to be allowed under
MGNREGA, the focus on creation of assets that enhance livelihood
security would be lost.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P) Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

33
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee note that under PMGSY, soon after the
commencement of Bharat Nirman in 2005, the emphasis was on
coverage of habitations with population of 1000 and above; as a result
work relating to coverage of habitations below that level i.e. 500 and
above, has largely not been taken up. The Committee have been
informed that owing to paucity of funds, Government have prioritized
coverage of habitations with a population of 1000 and more. In the
Committee’s opinion changing the priority from covering habitations
with a population of 500 to habitations with a population of 1000 has
adversely affected rural connectivity and, as such, defeated the original
objective of PMGSY. The Committee, therefore, recommend that since
the issue of rural connectivity is paramount, view, all-out efforts should
be made to open up coverage of habitations with population of
500-1000 by ensuring the availability of funds for this purpose.
Reply of the Government
PMGSY Scheme envisages providing connectivity, by way of an
All-weather Roads, to the eligible unconnected habitations with a
population of 500 persons and above in rural areas of the country. In
respect of Hill States (North-East, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu
& Kashmir, Uttarakhand) and the Desert areas (as identified in the
Desert Development Programme) as well as the tribal (Schedule-V)
areas, the objective is to connect Habitations with a population of 250
persons and above.
As Rural Road is one of the components of Bharat Nirman,
therefore current focus is to achieve the target of Bharat Nirman under
which unconnected habitations with a populations of 1000 persons
and above in plain areas and 500 persons and above in the hill states
and the Tribal areas are eligible for connectivity.
The coverage of habitations with the population of 500-999 are
also being covered under External Aided Projects (World Bank and
ADB) in many states. Besides, project proposals of eligible unconnected

34
habitations with the population of 250 persons and above in 60
Integrated Action Plan (IAP) Districts (as identified by the Planning
Commission) are also being considered under the programme.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P), Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.11 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
The other issue concerning PMGSY that came up during the
examination by the Committee was role of Panchayats in monitoring
PMGSY works at the fourth tier. The Committee are aware that
monitoring of PMGSY works is at present undertaken at three level:
District, State and National level. The Committee urge that for making
PMGSY a people’s programme the PRIs should also play the role of
watch-dog especially in Tribal and Scheduled areas. In this connection,
the Committee are of the view that the inclusion of Panchayats
representatives in Joint Forest Management Committee (JFMCs) in
different States may be involved for PMGSY.
Reply of the Government
As per programme guidelines, there are three tier monitoring
systems under the programme:—
(i) Programme Implementation Units (PIUs) at District level;
(ii) State Rural Roads Development Agency (SRRDA) at State
level; and
(iii) National Rural Roads Development Agency (NRRDA) at
National Level.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P), Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report)

35
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
The Planning Commission must recognize that accelerated growth
has not led to inclusive growth; that the overwhelming majority of
our population is nowhere near and many have even fallen off, the
high trajectory of GDP growth that widening disparities are a danger
to both the Democracy and Development; it is in the area of rural
development inclusive growth is most required; and that for inclusive
growth, participative development through Panchayati Raj Institutions
as mandated by Part IX of the Constitution, read with Article 243 ZD
and the Eleventh Schedule is indispensable. In view of these
considerations, the Committee’s examination has revealed that the most
important area of rural development of the Indian economy has not
received the desired level of attention for the allocation of funds from
the Planning Commission during the Eleventh Plan Period (2007-2012).
For instance, as against the proposal of about 4.07 lakh crore, the
Ministry of Rural Development received only Rs. 2.96 lakh crore  i.e.
about 75 per cent of the amount sought. The Committee stress that
before slashing the demands of rural development which touches on
basic needs of the ‘aam admi’ like shelter, drinking water, sanitation,
employment, rural infrastructure including roads etc. the Planning
Commission should prioritize these basic needs and find ways and
means of making available higher allocation in the Twelfth Plan
(2012-2017) for which the planning process is on.
Reply of the Government
Indira Awaas Yojana (IA Y)
The observations of the Committee have been noted. The matter
will be pursued with the Planning Commission for enhancement of
allocation for IAY in the 12th Five Year Plan. The issue has also been
placed before the Working Group on the Indira Awaas Yojana for the
12th Five Year Plan constituted by the Planning Commission.
Swaranjayanti Gramin Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)
The total funds allocated for SGSY in the 11th Plan is Rs. 17,803
crores. An amount of Rs. 9484 crore has been allocated for the 1st four
years of the 11th plan i.e. 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 as per
tabular statement given below. Therefore, an amount of Rs. 8319 crores

36
is still available for the last year of the Plan. In anticipation that the
NRLM will be implemented from 1st April, 2011 and keeping in view
the future plan of action and revised norms approved by the CCEA
for NRLM, the projected requirement was Rs. 5000 crore for taking up
various activities under NRLM for 2011-12. The Ministry would have
proposed for all the remaining funds of 11th Plan period  i.e. Rs. 8319
crore, but due to delayed approval of CCEA Note of NRLM and
capacities of the States/UT in implementation of NRLM, the Ministry
proposed only Rs. 5000 crore for the year 2011-12. The allocation for
the financial year was Rs. 2914 crore.
Year Budget Allocation (Rs. in crore)
2007-08 1800
2008-09 2350
2009-10 2350
2010-11 2984
Total 9484
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
Details of funds proposed, approved outlay, allocation and release
during the 11th Plan period in respect of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY) are as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
11th Plan (2007-2012) 12th Plan (2012-2017)
Plan funds Approved Total Total Plan funds proposed
proposed plan Allocation release by Department
by outlay by
Department Centre
(Upto
September,
2011)
81,801 59,751 86,120 75,894 crore The report of Working
Group on Rural Roads
for formulation of
12th Plan is under
finalization.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P), Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

37
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
Regarding enhancement of allocation for rural development right
from commencement of the current Plan till 2011-12, the terminal year
of the Plan, the Ministry have apprised the Committee that the flow
of funds has progressively increased from Rs. 33,000 crore in
2007-2008 to Rs. 74,100 crore in 2011-12. The Committee, however, feel
that requirements of the people and capacity of the State Governments
have increased manifold. Also taking into consideration of high
inflationary trend of about 8 to 10 per cent, the real value of the
enhanced funds has not increased much. Accordingly, the Committee
would like the Ministry to seek higher allocations from the Planning
Commission rather than being content with the perceived increase in
nominal allocations.
Reply of the Government
Indira Awaas Yojana (IA Y)
As indicated in reply to para 2.2, the issue of enhancement of
allocation for the Indira Awass Yojana for the 12th Five Year Plan has
been placed before the Working Group on the Indira Awaas Yojana for
the 12th Five Year Plan constituted by the Planning Commission. It
will be pursued vigorously with the Planning Commission.
Swaranjayanti Gramin Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)
Once all the States are completely NRLM compliant, the
requirement of funds is expected to increase manifold and accordingly
this Ministry propose to seek for more funds during the 12th Plan
Period.
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
The Report of the Working Group for Rural Roads for formulation
of 12th Plan is under finalization.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P), Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
While examining the funds proposed vis-a-vis funds allocated for
rural development for the Annual Plan 2011-12, the Committee regret
that the trend of Eleventh Plan allocations being lower than the demand

38
raised by the Department has been repeated this year also. Thus, as
against the Department’s proposal of Rs. 1,19,000 crore, the actual
allocation has been as low as Rs. 74,100 crore. After perusal of the
scheme-wise reasons for required amount of Rs. 1,19,000 crore, the
Committee find that the major portion was for crucial areas like
employment, road and shelter under the schemes of MGNREGA,
PMGSY and IAY. The Committee are entirely persuaded of the reasons
and justification for the amount proposed under these schemes. They
apprehend that significant reductions in these important schemes will
adversely impact rural development and social equity across the
country. They, therefore, also concur with the view of the Ministry of
Rural Development that any reduction in allocation for important
schemes like MGNREGA, PMGSY and IA Y will retard the momentum
of progress; in these vital areas of employment, rural connectivity and
shelter, and therefore, inimical to the imperative of inclusive growth
and social justice. They, therefore, strongly recommend that the issue
of additional funds for these schemes in the Twelfth Plan be vigorously
pursued with the Planning Commission, highlighting the integral
relationship between inclusive growth and participate rural
development, especially in view of India’s position on the UN Human
Development Index over the last two decades of accelerated GDP
growth.
Reply of the Government
Indira Awaas Yojana (IA Y)
The issue of inadequacy of funds allocated for implementation of
IAY has been placed before the Working Group on IAY for the
12th Five Year Plan. It will also be pursued vigorously with the
Planning Commission.
Swaranjayanti Gramin Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)
No comments
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
As already mentioned in reply to para 2.4, the Report of the
Working Group for Rural Roads for formulation of 12th Plan is under
finalization.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P), Dated: 19.12.2011, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

39
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 2.22)
The Committee find that the scheme of ‘DRDA Administration’,
one of the main implementing agency of all rural development schemes
at district level is in the process of being restructured with a view to
shouldering the increased load of new schemes like MGNREGA and
NRLM. The Committee have been informed that task of restructuring
of DRDA has been assigned to a Committee headed by
Shri V . Ramachandran which was to submit its Report by May, 2011.
The Committee have been informed by the Secretary , Rural
Development that said Report may be finalized any time in July, 2011.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the said Report be submitted
as expeditiously as possible so followed by necessary examination and
follow-up actions to expedite the crucial reforms in DRDA
Administration Scheme which not only envisages reform in district
level and below. The Committee recommend that steps be taken to
merge DRDAs with District Panchayats in States, where this process
has not been completed.
Reply of the Government
In order to strengthen and professionalise the DRDA to meet the
new challenges, a Committee has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Shri V . Ramachandran, former member,
2nd Administrative Reforms Commission. The Committee also includes
representatives from Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of
Panchayati Raj, Secretary, Rural Development, Department of some
States, academicians and development experts as members.
The Committee has already met on 19th January, 28th March, and
6th August, 2011. The Committee is likely to finalise its report by
31st October, 2011. Further follow-up action would be initiated after
receipt of the report of the Committee.
[O.M. No. H-11020/8/2011-GC (P), ` Dated: 19.12.2011,
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
21 March, 2012 Chairperson,
1 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

40
APPENDIX I
No. P-17017/1/2010-RC
Government of India
Ministry of Rural Development
Department of Rural Development
Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi,
Dated: 27th July , 2011
Subject: Meeting of Gram Sabha after Transect Walk of
preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPRs) under
PMGSY.
Community participation is key to empowerment of a community
and evolving its belongingness to process of development. Participating
communities have many centers of activity and community action
engages the natural enthuisition and harnesses talents of citizens leading
to higher rates of resource acquisition and better reults. Overall rural
development can be accelerated by involvement of people at grass
root level. Rural roads are also crucial to attract other infrastructure
facilities in the rural areas. Community participation right from
planning stage is vital for any infrastructure project of this nature
spread over the length of rural heartland. It helps in making the plan
realistic and easily implementable. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
(PMGSY) envisages to involve local community, Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs) and Hon’ble Members of Parliament for effective
planning of rural roads.
2. In this regard, recently a circular No. 3/2011 was issued on
28th April, 2011 regarding Necessity of a Transect Walk and consultation
with Hon’ble Members of Parliament for planning of rural roads under
PMGSY.
3. In order to formally invovle the institution of Gram Sabha, it is
equally important that the transect walk should be so planned that it
culminates into the scheduled meeting of Gram Sabha to consider
proposed alignment, land availability and to moderate any adverse
social & environmental impact, eliciting necessary community
participation in the programme.
4. With a view to involve the community, the State Government
needs to ensure that Minutes of the Gram Sabha meeting are also

41
enclosed along with other requisite documents as indicated in Circular
No. 3/2011 including at least ten digital photographs taken during
Transect Walk while sending Detailed Project Reports (DPRs). The
Minutes of the Gram Sabha Meeting covering the aspect of transect
walk can be treated as a Minutes of the Transect Walk as mentioned
in earlier Circular No. 3/2011.
5. Therefore, no new proposals would be considered unles the
following are appended, besides fulfilling other requirements:-
(i) The digital photographs of the Transect Walk
(ii) Minutes of the Gram Sabha meeting held on culmination
of Transect Walk and having recommendations of Gram
Sabha about the proposed DPR.
(iii) Proof of consultations with the concerned Hon’ble Member
of Parliament and duly filled in forms MP-1 and MP-2.
Sd/-
(S.R. Meena)
Director (RC)
To
All State Principal Secretaries/Secretaries dealing with PMGSY.
Copy to:
(i) PS to Secretary (RD)/PS to JS (RC)
(ii) Directors of RC Division and NRRDA Dir. (F&A)
(iii) Technical Director (NIC)
(iv) Guard

42
APPENDIX II
No. 17/13/2011-Tpt.
Government of India
Planning Commission
(Transport Division)
Yojana Bhavan, Sansad Marg
New Delhi, dated 2nd June, 2011
Subject: Constitution of Working Group on Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) (Rural Roads) for formulation
of Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-17).
With a view to formulating the Twelfth Five Year Plan for PMGSY
(Rural Roads), it has been decided to constitute a Working Group on
Rural Roads. The composition of the Working Group will be as follows:
I. Composition
Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development — Chairman
Members
 (1) AS/FA, Ministry of Rural Development
 (2) Sr. Consultant (Tpt.), Planning Commission — Shri B.N. Puri
 (3) Adviser (Tpt.), Planning Commission — Dr. Manoj Singh
 (4) Director, Central Road Research Institute (CRRI), New Delhi.
 (5) Representative from National Rural Roads Development Agency
(NRRDA), New Delhi.—Dr. K.M.L. Rao, Dir. (Technical).
 (6) Representative from Department of Expenditure, Ministry of
Finance
 (7) Representative from Ministry of Road Transport & Highways
(MORTH)
 (8) Representative from NABARD
 (9) Representative from DONER
(10) Principal Secretary, PWD, Government of Gujarat
(11) Engineer in Chief, PWD, Government of Haryana
(12) Engineer in Chief, PWD, Government of West Bengal

43
(13) Engineer in Chief, PWD, Government of Mizoram
(14) Engineer in Chief, PWD, Government of Karnataka
(15) Engineer in Chief, PWD, Government of Rajasthan
(16) Engineer in Chief, PWD, Government of Maharashtra
(17) Engineer in Chief, PWD, Government of Jammu & Kashmir
(18) Engineer in Chief, PWD, Government of Bihar
(19) Engineer in Chief, PWD, Government of Arunachal Pradesh
(20) Engineer in Chief, PWD, Government of Tamil Nadu
(21) Jt. Secretary (commerce), Min. of Commerce
(22) Professor, IIT, Delhi
(23) Professor, IIT, Roorkee
(24) Professor, NIT, Jorhat, Assam
(25) Representative, State Technical Agency (STA)
(26) Representative, Science & Technology Mission
(27) Director (Road Connectivity), Deptt. of Rural Development, Min.
of Rural Development
(28) Any other Co-opt officials and non officials as decided by the
Chairman
(29) Jt. Secretary,(Road Connectivity), Deptt of Rural Development,
Ministry of Rural Development — Convenor
II. Terms of reference
1. To critically review the financial and the physical progress of
the development of the rural road network during the first
four years of 11th Five Year Plan, highlighting the constraints
faced and the remedial actions required to be taken in the
context of the preparation of the 12th Five Year Plan.
2. Keeping in view the experience acquired from PMGSY and
launch of Bharat Nirman, recommend a policy framework for
the development of rural roads in the 12th Five year Plan
and a perspective for the next decade beyond 12th Plan—
Vision 2021—taking cognizance of various issues, including
inter-alia the following:
(i) need for providing connectivity with a view to improving
accessibility;
(ii) need for enhancing the capacities of various implementing
agencies in order to achieve time targets;

44
(iii) prioritization of development work in view of a large
number of deficiencies in the existing rural roads network
with a view to consolidating the network;
(iv) need for maintenance and preservation of existing assets;
(v) need for creating an environment conducive to public
private partnerships, in view of the increasing role of
private sector;
(vi) need for upgradation of technology in order to improve
quality of construction of rural roads and reduce
construction time;
(vii) energy conservation and environment protection.
3. To formulate a programme for development of rural roads
for the 12th Five Year Plan  indicating monitorable physical
targets, financial outlays and their year-wise phasing during
this Plan period. While formulating the Plan, various aspects
should be examined including inter-alia the requirement to
provide essential road links to rural areas in the country in
a cost effective manner, existing deficiencies of road system
and remedial measures and the need for integrating backward
and remote areas  particularly the north-east and tribal areas
with the rest of the country .
4. To review the existing arrangements, including the availability
of resources from Central Road Fund, for funding the
development of rural roads and suggest innovative measures
for augmentation of resources both for construction and
maintenance of rural roads.
5. To review the existing norms and criteria for maintenance
and repairs for rural roads, assess progress of funds spent
during first four years of 11th Plan and assess actual
requirement of funds for the Twelfth Plan and recommend
measures to meet such requirements.
6. To review the type of machinery and material presently being
used in rural road construction and maintenance and suggest
improvements, including steps needed for growth of road
equipment industry in the country in order to deliver quality
output in a time bound manner.
7. To review the existing manpower training arrangements at
the Central and State level and suggest improvements, keeping
in view the need for construction of quality rural roads in a
time bound manner.

45
8. To review the status of various implementing agencies
involved in the development and maintenance of rural roads
in terms of their capability to deliver timely outputs and to
recommend measures, including outsourcing and institutional
for enhancing capacities of the States.
9. To suggest measures for effectively monitoring the progress
of construction and maintenance of rural roads. Also to evolve
a mechanism to ensure that funds allocated for maintenance
of roads in the 12th Finance Commission are optimally utilised.
10. To review the status of domestic construction industry in terms
of its capability to absorb, utilize and augment the technology
being presently used timely for rural road construction.
11. Integrated Planning of Roads having different functionality
and Inter-model coordination.
12. Study on the connectivity status of the roads constructed under
different schemes with reference to All Weather and its
structural entity.
13. Developing integrated system of GIS survey.
14. Planting of fruit bearing trees along rural roads and suggesting
working model for Vriksha Rojgar Yojana.
15. To examine any other matter considered important by the
Working Group.
III. The Chairman of the Working Group may co-opt officials or non-
officials as Members and constitute sub-groups, if considered
necessary.
IV . The expenditure towards TA/DA in connection with the meetings
of the Working Group in respect of the official members will be
borne by their respective Ministries/Departments. In case of non-
official members of the Working Group, expenditure towards their
TA/DA would be met by the Planning Commission as admissible
to the Class-I officers of the Government of India.
V. The name(s) of the representatives of various organizations, as
per the above composition may be communicated to the
Convenor/Member Secretary of the Working Group under
intimation to Dr. Manoj Singh, Adviser (Tpt.), Planning
Commission.

46
VI. Shri Sugan Singh, Director (Tpt.), Planning Commission, Room
No. 359, Yojana Bhawan, New Delhi-110001 (Tel. No. 23096737),
shall be the Nodal Officer for this Working Group. VII. The
Working Group will submit its report to the Planning Commission
latest by 31st August, 2011.
Sd/-
(Sugan Singh)
Director (Transport)
Telefax: 23096737
Copy to:
 1. Chairman, all Members, Member-Secretary and Convenor of the
Working Group.
 2. PS to Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission.
 3. PS to Minister of State (Planning).
 4. PS to all Members, Planning Commission.
 5. PS to Member-Secretary, Planning Commission.
 6. All Principal Advisers/Sr. Advisers/Advisers/HODs, Planning
Commission.
 7. Director (PCMD), Planning Commission.
 8. Administration (General-I) and (General-II), Planning Commission.
 9. Account-I Branch, Planning Commission.
10. Information Officer, Planning Commission.
11. Library , Planning Commission.
Sd/-
(Sugan Singh)
Director (Transport)
Telefax: 23096737

47
APPENDIX III
A DETAILED NOTE ON RESTRUCTURING OF COUNCIL FOR
ADVANCEMENT OF PEOPLE’S ACTION AND RURAL
TECHNOLOGY (CAPART )
Introduction
CAPART is a registered society functioning under ageis of Ministry
of Rural Development. CAPART was created (in 1986) by merger of
two organisations namely People’s Action in Development India (PADI)
and Council for Advancement of Rural Technology (CART). The council
has its Headquarters in New Delhi and has nine Regional Offices
(Ahmedabad, Bhubaneshwar, Chandigarh, Dharwad, Ghuwahati,
Hyderabad, Jaipur, Lucknow, and Patna) spread all over the country.
Members of the Society
2. The Society permits the membership of 100, out of which 40 are
from voluntary societies, 25 from other institutions, 25 ex-officio members
and 10 per cent individuals. The General Body (GB) is the highest
Governing body of CAPART comprising all its members presided over
by the Minister, Rural Development which gives overall policy
guidance, approves the Annual Budget, Balance Sheet, the audited
accounts and the Annual Reports, amends the Rules of the Society
and the by-laws. The Executive Committee (EC) is chaired by the
Hon’ble Minister (Rural Development) and is in-charge of the day-to-
day functioning. It is the duty of the Chairperson to ensure that the
Society runs efficiently. The Secretary of the Department is the
ex-officio Vice-Chairman of the EC. The Director General(DG) is
appointed by the EC and is responsible for proper administration of
the Society and its funds, supervision and control over its activities
and coordination amongst others. There is also Standing Committee
on Finance & Administration headed by the Director General which
scrutinizes accounts and budget estimates of the Society, considers
proposals for new expenditure and scrutinizes re-appropriation
statements amongst others.
Vision of the Society
3. As per the Memorandum of Association (MoA) of CAPART, the
Vision is to “play a dynamic and catalytic role with the various

48
Government agencies and Non Governmental Organizations (NGOs),
influence public policy and contributes its share towards many sided
development of rural India”.
Mission
4. The Mission of CAPART mandated it to work in close
cooperation with the rural NGOs and to empower them by engaging
them in dialogue, respecting their thoughts and ideas, listening to
their voice, harnessing their resources, funding their activities,
strengthening their hands, particularly, the weaker sections of rural
society and the disabled and the other privileged sections of the rural
society and walking hand-in-hand with them on the road to rural
prosperity.
Objectives
5. The objectives of the Society includes encouragement, promotion
and assistance to voluntary action, strengthening and promotion of
voluntary efforts in rural development with focus on injecting new
technologies appropriate to the rural areas and to act as conduit for
transfer appropriate technologies to Government Departments, Public
Sector Undertakings, Cooperative Societies and Members of the Public,
disseminate knowledge on rural technologies, promote all-round rural
development and creation of employment opportunities and
programmes, conservation of environment, setting up institutions of
research, collaboration with other institutions, conduct of training
programmes, lectures and seminars including training of trainers, carry
out research studies, prepare print and publish papers and create
awareness amongst the people on IPR. For this purpose the Society
may raise funds.
Source of funds
6. There are multiple sources of funds for CAPART including grants
by the Central or the State Governments, donations and contributions
from other agencies, fees and charges imposed by the Society, income
from investments and other sources. Provision of these multiple sources
indicates that the intention of the Government was that CAPART should
attain self-sufficiency.
CAPART in need of Reforms
7. CAPART has had a troubled existence right from the beginning.
The organisation seems to be suffering from: Plagued by poor image;
Strong Perceptions of ineffectiveness, inefficiency and mission

49
dissipation; Rent seeking behavior; Gross indiscipline and disregard of
the objective; Failure to build up a financial self-sufficiency and a
healthy corpus; No organization focus; No networking at any except
with clientele institutions.
7.1 In view of the above, CAPART has been assessed a number of
times since inception which includes a TCS Study and Organisation
review (1996), short term review of the structure (2000), Secretary (RD)
Committee (2005), Vinay Shankar Committee (2005-06), Vitthal
Evaluation Committee (2005), Sevottam (2008-09), Strategic Planning
and Result Framework (2010).
7.2 In the year 2009, 6 Sub-Committees of the Executive Committee
(EC) were constituted to suggest reforms in CAPART and their Reports
have since been submitted. The EC meeting convened on 30th April
2010 decided to appoint IRMA for a third party evaluation of the
reports submitted by the Sub-Groups. The Report of IRMA has since
been submitted.
IRMA Recommendations
8. The Report emphasizes excessive interference from the
Government as the key factor for its present state of affairs and
emphasises full autonomy for the organisation in order to cure its
defects. The funding must be resumed forthwith; the status of the
Regional Centres have to be upgraded through IT based application;
CAPART should emerge from self renewal exercise as a ‘knowledge—
embodied and learning organisation’; management has to be
professionalised with a stable term for the top executive with a fixed
tenure being a sine qua-qua-non; there has to be balanced stakeholders
representation etc. The Report goes ahead to give several options:
CAPART could either be a Government instrument for the programmes
of the MoRD or for all Ministries in the GoI or get delinked with the
Ministry and be placed on a stand alone basis to play further roles in
the civil societies or it could even function as a full forum of civil
society. In the case one of the last 2 options were to be selected the
Government could place an initial corpus grant given for this purpose;
self enforced discipline is necessary; CAPART needs to undertake a
process of renewal in phases. In Phase-I comprises of a series of
workshops leading to formulation of strategies and organisational
design within 4 months. Phase-II comprises the implementation stage.
In other words the remedy for the ills of CAPART is to be self-found
and the organisation has to search for that.
9. The reports of Sub-groups and IRMA report is at present under
the active consideration of the Ministry. The Ministry had done an
indepth examination of the reports submitted by the Sub-Groups and

50
report of the IRMA. Based on that, a restructuring proposal has been
approved by Hon’ble Minister, Rural development. The measures
suggested range from creating a new focus for CAPART on Capacity
development, focus on Marketing, Creating institutional networking of
stakeholder organizations, structural reorganization including open
selection for DG’s post etc. The details are as under:
Proposed measures for reforming CAPART
i. Creating a New Focus
a. Capacity development of PRIs;
b. SHGs and their federations;
c. Sustainable development of natural resources;
d. Capacity development of voluntary organisations;
e. Learning from the people’s models.
ii. CAPART should revert to its original role of development/
dissemination of appropriate rural technologies wherein a focus is
required on the following:—
a. Collect, audit, store and disseminate technologies;
b. To act as a platform for technology producing, users and
marketing institutions;
c. To provide the technological input for NREGS, NRLM, IAY
and other programmes of the Ministry;
d. Youth Employability Skill Development and Placement: the
Kaarigar Scheme (Group 3);
e. Engagement with Appropriate Technologies and Knowledge
Systems for enhancing nature based livelihoods (formerly
ARTS) (Group 2);
f. Strengthening Institutional Base for enhancing Technical
Competencies in CSOs (TRCs) (Group 2).
iii. Marketing of Rural Produce: Holds the key to the success of the
RD and other initiatives. The rural produce do not find adequate
markets on account of distances, costs and access to electronic
media. It is, therefore, necessary that the rural produce must be
provided this access so that the terms of trade are corrected. This
focus could be brought in the following ways:—
a. Organise haats/melas at the national/all States capital on
permanent basis;

51
b. Organise an e-marketing network for all rural produce;
c. Induct SHGs and other rural producers for this network;
d. Evolve a revenue model for the scheme;
e. Gradually spread the marketing network internationally.
iv. Grassroots Planning:  One of the major problems identified is
regarding the lack of involvement of the people with the
programmes. This is because the planning process does not involve
the people and despite all protestations grassroots planning is not
being practised. Here, grassroots planning becomes an imperative
with focus on following subjects:
a. Capability building of the people in the tools of grassroots
planning;
b. Capacity development of the PRIs and other people’s
institutions in grassroots planning;
c. Creating awareness of different models that have emerged
in grassroots planning;
d. Helping people to evolve their own formats and appropriate
models;
e. Creating linkages through local and regional networks;
v. Process Support: Apart from huge investments Government has
much stake in the success of its programmes in the rural areas.
The following focus needs to be created:
a. CAPART to be the principal institution to provide process
support to the Government programme structure;
b. Process Support to include grassroots planning,
implementation, resource mobilisation and social-audit;
c. To provide legal literacy, mobilisational and other issue
based support to the Panchayats;
d. Enable realization of Rights: Forest Rights, RTI, MGNREGA,
Right to Food etc. (Sub-Group 1);
e. Fill up the missing link between institutions like DRDAs,
RSETIs and the PRIs and the people;
f. Also to undertake process design, documentation and
module development;

52
vi. Marketing Support:  With initiatives like SHGs marketing support
to rural products is vital for any exercise in resuscitation. CAPART
will fulfil this role with focus on the following:
a. To network with State-led endeavours like NRLM, SHGs
and their Federations, PURA, Khadi Board and other
enterprises in the rural areas;
b. To create a platform of the marketing institutions;
c. To expand the scope of the Gram Shree Melas to create an
universal coverage;
d. To undertake and promote e-marketing for the constituent
units;
e. Research including Action Research into the marketing
needs of the constituent units;
f. Networking with the other initiatives of the Government
and the voluntary sector;
vii. Networking: A major failure on part of the Voluntary Organisations
is their incapacity to network together on major issues. CAPART
is ideally placed to play this role with a clear focus on:
a. Create robust institutional network;
b. To act as platform of national and international funding
agencies, Government, other institutions, PRIs and VOs;
c. Representation and advocacy on behalf of VOs;
d. Create partnership with Anchor Organisations in different
regions;
e. Bring all such organizations into a network to support the
Government and other endeavours in rural areas;
viii. Structural Reorganisation:  Selection of DG/DDGs;
a. Organisation created for a different time and context.
CAPART is structurally not able to cope with the
requirements of workload. An antiquated organisational
structure has become a constraint to the growth of
CAPART;
b. The process of selection of the CEO and the top executive
a key process. The upper management is monopolised by
IAS cadre. Not every IAS officer is capable of handling the

53
workload in CAPART. It is essential that the process of
selection of the CEO and the top executive needs to be
broadened.
c. The DG should be selected through a transparent
broadbased selection process from the open market. A
Search Committee headed by an eminent person like Deputy
Chairman/Member, Planning Commission needs to be
constituted. The post of DG/DDGs should have a fixed
term of 5 years extendable by another term.
d. One DDG should be from the Voluntary Sector while the
third could be from the open market.
e. The emolument of the DG should be fixed at Rs 1.5 L
while the DDGs should get 1L fixed.
f. All other staff should be recruited from the open market
for fixed terms;
g. Continuation should be on the basis of annual appraisal by
an independent machinery.
ix. Change in Funding Pattern:
a. There can be no functional autonomy without financial
autonomy. CAPART needs to delink from its dependence
upon the Government for its day-to-day existence. [IRMA
Report]
b. A Corpus of Funds of Rs. 1,000 C to be created at CAPART.
c. CAPART should service all Central/State Government
organisations international funding agencies, industrial
houses and should seek project based support from them;
d. CAPART should access multiple sources of funding;
e. The Ministry would undertake project based funding to
CAPART. This would help the organisation to get its acts
together.
f. CAPART may develop into a Federation of funding
organisations and could even become a clearing house for
FCRA proposals;
x. Change in the Internal Processes:
a. Any change in CAPART has to be preceded by change in
its internal processes of invitation of application, appraisal,

54
funding, monitoring and evaluation. These processes have
to acquire objectivity, transparency and have to adhere to
time lines.
b. The processes have to be made IT based and human
interface have to be minimised to the extent possible. The
movement of the project proposals have to be online
through the web so that there is transparency.
c. There has to be a process of registration of organisations
along with evaluation at the entry points.
d. The vigilance process to be reconsidered. The present system
of vigilance has done least to check the behaviour in rent
seeking.
e. We could think in terms of having a Standing Committee
on Vigilance in place of the Director Vigilance.
f. The filing, storage and retrieval of information have to made
totally electrophonic based.
xi. Changes in the Governing Structure:
The major stakeholders including the NGOs, the staff, the PRIs,
other Ministries to acquire a real stake in the governance process.
Internal autonomy is a sine qua non for the organisation but it is
not to be equated with licence to indulge in non-objective related
behaviour:
a. While the Minister (Rural Development) continues may
continue to be the President of the General Council of
CAPART Member (RD) of Planning Commission or the
Deputy Chairman himself be the Chairman of the Executive
Committee.
b. Members of the alliance of funding institutions could be
included in the governing process in the EC or the GC.
c. It is necessary the Regional Centres need to be developed,
vested with greater autonomy and financial and other
powers. They need to be made functional.
d. We need to put together a transparent process for
nomination to the GC/EC of CAPART.
e. Some of the Regional Centres could also be managed in
PPP mode with the help of the organizations.
f. There is urgent need to get away from the Government
processes.

55
xii. Stages of Restructuring
I. In Stage I, the organisational changes would be made
including the proposed pattern of the appointment of the
DG/DDG and the rest of the top management.
II. Conduct a series of workshops for firming up the Vision,
Mission and the Strategies.
III. In Stage II put the financial processes in place and start
working it out.
IV. Create Networking;
V. Many of these actions will take place simultaneously.
11. As a step forward, the Ministry had already initiated the process
of reform by constituting a Search Committee to review the efficacy of
the existing system for selection and appointment to the post of DG
and DDG, CAPART. The composition of the Search Committee shall
be as under:—
1. Dr. Mihir Shah, Member, Planning Commission — Chairperson
2. Shri B.K Sinha, Secretary, Rural Development — Member
3. Ms. Renana Jhabvala, Coordinator, — Member
Self-Employed Women’s Association (SEWA),
Ahmedabad
4. Shri Deep Joshi, Member, National Advisory — Member
Council
5. Dr. Vivek Bhandari, Former Director, IRMA — Member
Terms of Reference of the Search Committee:—
(i) The Committee shall review the efficacy of the existing
system for selection and appointment to the post of Director
General, CAPART.
(ii) The Committee shall recommend suitable modifications in
the existing system of appointment in order to provide the
desired continuity, stability and effectiveness.
(iii) The Committee shall recommend the qualifications,
methodology and search procedures for the post of DG,
CAPART through Search-cum-Selection Committee.
(iv) The Committee shall submit its report within two months
to the Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development & President,
CAPART.

56
12. The Search Committee had held its meetings and is finalizing
the mode of appointment for the posts of DG and DDG, CAPART. We
have further requested the DoP&T to approve the constitution of
Search-cum-Selection Committee for selection to the posts of DG and
DDG, CAPART.
13. It is hoped that once restructuring process is completed in
timebound manner, CAPART would be able play its due role in a
more effective manner.

57
APPENDIX IV
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012)
EXTRACTS  OF THE MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF
THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 22 FEBRUARY, 2012
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
3. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
4. Shri P . Kumar
5. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
6. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
8. Shri Hussain Dalwai
9. Shri P . Rajeeve
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Smt. Maya Singh
12. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
3. Shri Raju Srivastava — Deputy Secretary

58
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the
Committee to the sitting convened to discuss *** consideration and
adoption of draft Action Taken Reports on action taken by the
Government on recommendations of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2011-12) in respect of ***, Department of Rural Development
and ***.
3. *** *** *** ***
4. Thereafter, the Committee considered draft Action Taken Reports
on action taken by the Government on recommendations contained in
***, 20th, and *** reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2011-12) of the ***, Department of Rural Development and ***
respectively. After detailed discussion, the Committee adopted draft
Reports without any modifications. The Committee also authorized
the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and present them to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portion of the Minutes not related with the subject have been kept separately .

59
APPENDIX V
[Vide Introduction of Report]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH
REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
I. Total number of recommendations: 25
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 17, 18,
19, 21, 23, 24 and 25
Total: 18
Percentage: 72%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Serial No. 20
Total: 01
Percentage: 04%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Serial Nos. 14 and 16
Total: 02
Percentage: 08%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 2, 4, 6 and 22
Total: 04
Percentage: 16%