STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                         (2013-2014) 
      
 
        FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
   
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Forty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural Development  
 (Department of Rural Development) for the year 2013-14]  
 
FORTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
47 


 
 FORTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2013-2014) 
          (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Forty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural Development  
 (Department of Rural Development) for the year 2013-14]  
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 04.01.2014 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.02.2014 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2014 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2014/Pausa, 1935 (Saka) 
  


 
CRD No. 93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
  
 
  

CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-2014) ......................................   (ii)   
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................   (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................   1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................   15 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies ...........................................................................  43 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee .....................................................   44 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ..............  47 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the meeting held on 29.04.2013 under the Chairmanship of  
Secretary (RD), MoRD to discuss issues regarding implementation of  
PMGSY in Andaman & Nicobar Islands……. ………………………………. 53 
 
II. Sequence of events of follow-up with States for Socio-Economic and 
Caste Census…………………………………………………..……………….  59 
 
III. Statement showing release made to States and utilization of funds  
during 2011-12 and 2012-13………………………………………………………………60 
 
IV.      Extracts of Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 27 November, 2013……61 
V.      Analysis of Action taken by the government on the recommendations   
contained in the Forty-First Report  (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing  
Committee on Rural Development………...……………………….................................63 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(2013-2014) 
 
        Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
5. Shri Premchand Guddu 
6. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
7. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
8. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
9. Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy 
12. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy 
13. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
14. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
15. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
16. Smt. Supriya Sule 
17. Smt. Annu Tandon 
18. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar 
19. Smt. Usha Verma 
20. Shri P. Viswanathan 
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
23. Shri Munquad Ali 
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
28. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
29. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
30. Vacant*   
31. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Shah   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Maneesh Mohan Kamble - Committee Officer 
 
*Vacancy caused on account of demise of Shri Mohan Singh from 22.09.2013  

(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (20 13-2014) having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the Forty-Seventh Report on the 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Forty-First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development).  
2.  The Forty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 April, 2013. Replies 
of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 22 July, 2013. 
3.  The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
27 November, 2013. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by  the Government on the recommendations contained in the          
Forty-First Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-V. 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;       SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
10  December, 2013                       Chairperson, 
19 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

1 
 
               
 
 REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2013 -14) deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Forty -First Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development) for the year 2013-2014. 
 
2. The Forty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 30.04.2013 and was laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 38 observations/recommendations.: 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report 
have been received from the Government. These have been examined and categorized as follows: ---- 
 
 
(i)  Observations/recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos.:1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 
24, 25, 27, 28, 32, 35, 36, 37 and 38.            
Total: 27 
Chapter-II 
(ii)  Observations/recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
Serial Nos.: 26 
Total: 01 
Chapter-III 
(iii)  Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Serial Nos.: 8, 10 and 12.  
       Total: 03 
       Chapter-IV 
(iv)  Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. : 11, 17, 29, 30, 31, 33 and 34. 
Total: 7 
Chapter-V 
 
4. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of observations/recommendations for 
which only interim replies have been submitted by the Government and Action Taken Notes on the 
observations/recommendations contained in Chapter -I of the Report may be furnished to the 
Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 

2 
 
               
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
 
I. Data for coverage of rural households under MGNREGA. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.8) 
 
6. In the context of maintaining a single data for coverage of rural job card households under MGNREGA, 
the Committee had recommended as under: ---- 
  
 “The Committee find wide variance between the NSSO data as reflected its own 
MGNREGA Sameeksha document showing only 35 percent rural job cards holders households 
and its own assessment that the data might not reflect real time data instead the DoRD has rel ied 
on MIS data maintained by DoRD showing the figure as 60%.  The Committee are not convinced 
with the approach of DoRD of showing two data for coverage of rural households under 
MGNREGA one by NSSO and other by MIS as it may lead to confusion.  They, the refore, feel that 
a single reliable data for coverage of rural households under MGNREGA be maintained by DoRD.” 
 
 
7. The Department in their action taken reply has stated as under: ---- 
 
 “NSSO data are based on survey conducted by them in randomly selecte d NSSO regions 
on the basis of the methodology adopted by them whereas the data reflected in MIS is real time 
data as fed into the system by the States. Since its inception (upto 17.6.2013) 12.72 cr. Rural 
households have been issued job cards. This indica tes that 76% of total rural households  
[16.85 cr.: Census 2011] have been provided with job cards. Since the data reported is in 
cumulative figure, the number of households provided employment captured in MIS undergoes 
constant change.  Variance in the da ta of NSSO and MIS can also be attributed to the fact that in 
certain states, the number of job cards issued is seen to be more than the number of households 
indicated.  To ensure reliability of data, the Revised Operational Guidelines 2013 have mandated 
the States/UTs to verify the genuineness of the job cards held by the households in a locality.”  
 
8.  The Committee while pointing out variation between NSSO data and DoRD's own data 
collected through MIS for coverage of rural households under MGNREGA had recommended for 
maintaining a single reliable data for this purpose. In response thereto the DoRD has informed that 
NSSO data are based on survey conducted by NSSO in randomly selected NSSO regions  whereas 
MIS data is in cumulative figures the number of ho useholds provided employment captured in MIS 
that undergoes constant change. In certain States the number of job cards are greater than number 
of rural households indicated and as such both the data may vary . DoRD has also informed that for 

3 
 
               
 
ensuring reliable data under the Revised Operational Guidelines, 2013 States/UTs have been asked 
to verify the genuineness of job cards held by the households in a locality. The Committee feel that 
verifying genuineness of job cards holders under Revised  Operational Guidelines is a welcome 
step. However, Committee's recommendation about maintaining a single reliable data remains 
unaddressed. They, therefore, reiterate that DoRD should maintain a single reliable data in this 
regard.   
 
II.  Coordination with State Governments for enhancing demand for work under MGNREGA.   
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.10) 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:-- 
 
 “The Committee feel dissatisfied to note that primary objective of MGNREGA for 
enhancing the livelihood security of the rural household by providing minimum 100 days of 
guaranteed wage employment in a year to every household on demand for doing unskilled ma nual 
work has hardly been achieved in the light of the fact that out of 5.04 crore households and 4.15 
crore households who were provided employment during 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 as low as 40.54 
lakh households and 43.65 lakh respectively could get 100 days o f employment. The Committee 
have been informed by DoRD about various steps taken like organising Rozgar Diwas at least 
once in every month at Gram Panchayat level for increasing awareness about MGNREGA. The 
Secretary, DoRD also submitted before the Committ ee that States are being asked to generate 
demand. The Ministry's contention is that objectives of MGNREGA is also to supplement the 
income of rural household and it is not intended to be sole means of earning livelihood for rural 
population and that workers are free to avail any other employment opportunities available to them. 
The Committee find the contention of DoRD untenable when there is huge gap between 
employment provided and rural household given 100 days of employment.  The Committee feel 
that the  essence of MGNREGA programme is not only to enhance the livelihood security to the 
rural households by providing them upto 100 days of employment but also entrusted a duty to 
implementing agency to generate the demand for work. The Committee therefore, fe el that DoRD 
should take urgent steps in coordination with State Governments for providing 100 days of 
guaranteed employment to maximum households out of 4-5 crore households who demand work.” 
 
 
10. The Department in their action taken reply has stated as under:-- 
 
"The mandate of MGNREGA is to supplement the income of the rural households by 
providing at least 100 days of wage employment on demand. While various measures like 
expanding the scope of employment by inclusion of more works in Schedule -1, incre asing the 
administrative expenditure, grievance redressal mechanism, awareness generation etc., have been 
taken up by the Ministry, the responsibility of providing employment to the job seekers lie with the 

4 
 
               
 
respective State Government/implementing agencies , whereas the onus of demanding work lie 
with the job card holders.  Adequate provisions are also enshrined in the Act wherein the job 
seekers are entitled to unemployment allowance in the event of work not being provided within the 
specified period. Similarly, delay in payment of wages, within the specified period is required to be 
compensated. These provisions in the MGNREGA, act as a deterrent to States in denying 
employment or in delaying payment of wages.  However, the employment generation of a minimum 
100 days would depend on the realistic projection of labour demand by the States and the actual 
demand from the job card holders." 
 
11.  While expressing their dissatisfaction over the non -achievement of primary objective of 
MGNREGA of providing 100 days  of guaranteed wage employment in previous years i.e. 2011 -12 
and 2012 -13 as compared to number of households who demand ed wage employment under 
MGNREGA, the Committee had recommended the DoRD to take urgent steps in coordination with 
State Governments/UT Administration for providing 100 days of wage employment. In action taken 
reply, the DoRD, has inter-alia stated that responsibility for generation of demand for work in 
MGNREGA lies with State Governments/UT Administration whereas onus of demand for work lies 
with the job card holders. However, the employment generation of a minimum 100 days would 
depend on realistic projection of labour demand and the actual demand from State Governments.  
 
The Committee feel that although the generation of demand for work and realistic projection 
of labour budgets are within the domain of State Governments/UT Administrations, yet the Central 
Ministry of Rural Development can play a significant role in taking up these issues at the level of 
Chief Ministers/Chief Administrators of different State Governments/UT Administrations by holding 
regular review meetings with  the representatives of State Governments/UT Administrations. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that DoRD should take urgent steps in 
coordination with State Governments/UTs for providing 100 days of guaranteed employment  as per 
provisions of the Act.  
  

5 
 
               
 
III.  Assessment about utility and durability of assets under MGNREGA.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12) 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee are  constrained to note that there are two independent assessments 
available in DoRD on the issue of durability and availability of assets created under MGNREGA 
across the States. The Committee also find that whatever assessment about utility and durability o f 
assets under MGNREGA has been made available to the Committee are from the few States of 
Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Bihar, Gujarat and Kerala. The Committee feel that 
although these assessment though confirmed by NSSO, yet may not hold tr ue in respect of other 
States. The Committee, therefore, recommend a nationwide assessment in this regard to be made 
by DoRD.”     
 
 
13. The Department in their action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
"Para 2 of  Schedule I of  MGNREGA 2005 stipulates that  creation of durable assets and 
strengthening the livelihood resource base of the rural poor shall be an important objective of the 
Scheme. Effective implementation of the scheme has the potential to transform rural areas by 
creating durable assets that wo uld not only enhance the livelihood security of rural poor but result 
in substantial infrastructural development in rural areas.  While Schedule -I of the Act stipulates the 
permissible works that can be taken up, it was felt that there may still be doubts in the minds of the 
implementing agencies as to its interpretation. Accordingly the revised Operational Guidelines 
2013 delineates a negative list of works under MGNREGA.  It explicitly mentions that items of 
expenditure that are recurring in nature and/or  do not lead to creation of durable assets, are not 
permitted under MGNREGA. A detailed negative list of such works are indicated in Para 7.3 and 
Appendix 2 of the guidelines. Impact of these recent revised guidelines on creation of durab le 
assets is yet to be assessed/quantified." 
 
14.  In the light of two independent assessments on the issue of durability and availability of 
assets created under MGNREGA across the States, the Committee had recommended a nationwide 
assessment by DoRD in this regard. In res ponse thereto the DoRD ha s referred to Para 2 of 
Schedule I of MGNREGA, 2005 stipulating creation of durable assets and has stated that Revised 
Operational Guidelines explicitly mention the negative list of works under MGNREGA containing 
items of expenditu re that do not lead to creation of durable assets and are not enlisted under 
MGNREGA. However, impact of these Revised Operational Guidelines on creation of durable assets 
is yet to be a ssessed/quantified. The Committee are of the strong view that efficacy  of the Revised 

6 
 
               
 
Guidelines for creation of durable assets under MGNREGA can be determined only through 
scientific assessment of durable assets created under MGNREGA. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation for having nationwide assessment of durability and availability of 
assets created under MGNREGA. 
IV.  Irregularities in PMGSY in UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.17) 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:-- 
 
"The Committee find that unde r PMGSY in Andaman & Nicobar Islands, the Department 
has cleared 18 proposals of the value of Rs. 18 crore upto December, 2012. However, 
Administration of Andaman & Nicobar Islands has failed to construct any road till date. The 
Committee also note that special audit of PMGSY works conducted by the Department has brought 
out many irregularities such as non-imposition of penalty for delay, non-revalidation of Performance 
Bank Guarantee, upward revision of cost estimates without the approval of MoRD, diversio n of 
funds to other Departments/Sectors, non- maintenance of cash books , submission of final bills not 
signed by the Engineer concerned etc. The Committee has also been informed that Department is 
still awaiting response of Andaman & Nicobar Islands Admin istration on special audit report. The 
Committee are of strong view that irregularities under PMGSY work in A & N islands as reported 
the special audit are of serious nature. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
take the matter with the Mi nistry of Home Affairs to initiate steps to lodge criminal cases against 
those found responsible for such gross irregularities and inform the Committee accordingly. At the 
same time, the Committee also recommend the Department to impress upon the local 
administration for speedy submission of fresh proposals for construction of roads in rural areas of  
A & N Islands." 
 
16. The Department in their action taken reply has stated as under:-- 
 
“A Central Team has visited UT of Andaman & Nicobar Island s on 9 -12th April, 2013 to 
review the implementation of PMGSY including the quality of roads. The report of the Central Team 
has been received and discussed with Chief Secretary of A&N Island s in the meeting held on 29 th 
April, 2013 at New Delhi. During the meeting, the UT was impressed upon the need for completing 
all PMGSY roads immediately. UT was further advised to send an Action Taken Report on the 
report of the special audit undertaken by the Ministry.‟  
 
 “The Ministry vide their communication dated 22 November , 2013 , further  informed that 
Action Taken Report on the Report of the Special Audit is still awaited from the Union Territory. 
The matter has also been brought to the notice of Ministry of Home Affairs for taking follow up 
action.” 
 
17.  The Committee  while reviewing the performance of PMGSY Scheme in UT of Andaman &  
Nicobar Islands had noticed various irregularities of serious nature and had recommended DoRD to  
 

7 
 
               
 
 
take up the matter with the Ministry of Home Affairs to initiate steps for lodging crim inal cases 
against those found guilty and also recommended the DoRD to impress upon local administration 
for expeditious submission of fresh proposals for construction of roads in rural areas of UT of 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands.  The DoRD in their action tak en reply has stated that a Central Team 
has visited the UT of Andaman & Nicobar Island s on this issue on 9-12th April, 2013 and the Report 
of the Central Team was discussed with the Chief Secretary of UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands on 
29th April, 2013, wh erein UT was impressed upon the need for completing all PMGSY road works 
immediately and UT  Administration has been advised to send an Action Taken Report on Special 
audit undertaken by the Ministry.  
 The Committee have also been informed by the Department of Rural Development that the 
report on Social Audit was still awaited and the matter of bringing the culprits responsible for 
committing irregularities of serious nature to book has been brought to the notice of the Ministr y of 
Home Affairs for taking follow up action. The Committee expect the Department of Rural 
Development to apprise the Committee about the latest update in this regard.   
 
V.  Implementation of IAY.  
Recommendation (Serial No. 28, Para No. 2.28) 
 
18. The Committee had recommended as under:-- 
 
"The Committee note that IAY beneficiary can take a loan upto Rs. 20,000/ - per housing 
unit @ 4% per annum under differential rate of interest (DRI) Scheme. However, the Committee 
examination has revealed that only 26, 131 beneficiaries have availed loan under DRI till date. The 
Committee have been informed that difficulties such as eligibility of only SC/ST category for loan 
under DRI, consideration of eligibility of income ceiling and land -holdings applicable to other 
beneficiaries of DRI being applied for IAY beneficiaries desirous of taking loan under DRI is leading 
to such bad performance. The Committee have also been informed that matter is being taken with 
Ministry of Finance/RBI for directing all banks to allow be neficiaries of IAY to avail loan facilities 
under DRI Scheme irrespective of income ceiling and eligibility criteria. The Committee are of view 
that apart from reason mentioned by the Department, failure of the Department to increase 
awareness about these provision of IAY is main reason for such bad performance of loan disbursal 
under DRI Scheme to IAY beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 

8 
 
               
 
start aggressive awareness campaign for benefits available under IAY including facilitie s of loan in 
order to provide relief to large section of poor people in rural areas." 
 
19. The Department in their action taken reply has stated as under:-- 
 
"In revised IAY guidelines new strategy has been adopted to make beneficiary aware of 
the Scheme and help the beneficiary in getting the loan.  Following provisions have been made:- 
 
(i) Mobilisation of DRI Loans 
 
Nationalized Banks have been instructed by the RBI to provide loans upto Rs.20,000 / - per 
house at an interest rate of 4% per annum under the  Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) Scheme to 
SC/ST beneficiaries. To ensure its implementation, the following methodology is suggested:  
 
(a)  Hold a meeting of State Level Bankers Committees (S LBC) to discuss the Scheme and take                  
 collective decision on modalities; 
(b) Assign responsibilities to the DLBC as per district level targets;  
(c) At the district level, bank-wise targets may be finalized according to their service area;  
(d) Once the beneficiary selection is finalized, in the initial meeting of the beneficiaries, 
 applications for DRI loan should be collected and submitted in the bank branch concerned. A 
 functionary may be assigned the task of following up these applications. 
(e)    Monitoring of the sanction of DRI loans should be done at the block, district and state levels  
    including at BLBC/DLBC/SLBC levels. At the district and state level, a senior officer should be   
    made responsible for responding to grievances related to non-sanction of DRI loans and sort     
    them out in consultation with the banks concerned. 
 
(ii) Mobilisation of other loans 
 
States may also arrange loans from banks, including cooperative banks to IAY 
beneficiaries, to supplement the grant  assistance, in a schematic manner. The maximum amount 
of such loan could be Rs.50,000/- and the  rate of interest could be subsidized on prompt payment. 
Detailed guidelines may be issued after working out the Scheme in consultation with the banks and 
cooperatives. Wherever such loans are provided, the beneficiaries have to be sensitized on 
repayment requirements and their willingness obtained.  
 
(iii) Formulation of subsidy -linked projects availing loans from banks/financial 
 institutions: 
 
State Governments are  free to formulate projects which would provide subsidy using IAY 
funds (within the amount permissible), linked to assured loans from banks including cooperative 
banks or financial institutions like HUDCO. For coordinating implementation, the States could use 
the services of organizations of repute and meet their service charges from the provision for 
administrative expenses and if they are not sufficient, from state funds.  Such special projects need 
the prior approval of the Empowered Committee." 
 
 

9 
 
               
 
20.  While noticing very less number of IAY beneficiaries availing housing loans under DRI 
Scheme from different Banks, the Committee had recommended the DoRD to start aggressive 
awareness campaign among IAY beneficiaries for availing benefits available under IA Y in order to 
provide relief to large section of poor people in rural areas. In action taken reply the DoRD has 
informed that under revised IAY Guidelines new strategy has been adopted to make beneficiary 
aware of the Scheme for which provisions have been made for mobilization of DRI loans from 
Banks upto 20,000 per household at an interest rate of 4% to SCs/STs, (ii) mobilization of other 
loans upto 50,000 through State Governments from Banks including Cooperative Banks to IAY 
beneficiaries for supplementing the grant assistance and allowing State Governments to formulate 
subsidy linked projects for availing from Banks/Financial Institutions. In this connection the 
Committee desire that DoRD should monitor steps taken by different State Governments towards 
annual achievement of targets under the new strategy drawn up under the Revised IAY Guidelines.  
 
VI.  Finalization of BPL List.   
 
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 29 and 30, Para Nos. 2.29 and 2.30) 
 
21. The Committee had recommended as under:-- 
 
"The Committee note that BPL survey which was due in 2007 has been delayed and 
started as Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC 2011) on 29 th June 2011 in the country in a 
phased manner. The Census was expected to be completed by June 2012, however, later on the 
Department has extended the deadline to May, 2013. The Committee note that process of 
enumeration which is first stage of the Survey has been completed in 98.05 percentage of 
enumerating Blocks in the country. The Committee also note that after the enumeration, the 
States/UTs would enter the claim & objection stage for publication of the final list. It is expected 
that for majority of States/UTs, the Final List is likely to be published by the end of September, 
2013. The Committee are of view that co mpletion of BPL survey has been inordinately delayed, 
which must be causing hardship to needy people of rural areas of the country. The Committee, 
therefore, 132 recommend the Department to make efforts with States concerned to finalise the 
final BPL list without any further delay so that all tendered benefits reach the BPL population." 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 29, Para No. 2.29) 
 
"Identification of ineligible families in BPL list is big problem across States. The Committee 
note that ongoing SECC 2011 ha s some criterion to exclude household owning Motorized 

10 
 
               
 
Two/Three/Four Wheelers/Fishing boats (which require registration)/ tractors/harvester, having 
Kisan Credit Card with the credit limit of Rs.50,000 and above, households owning refrigerator, 
households owning landline phones etc. the Committee also note that some inclusion criteria has 
been adopted to compulsorily include deprived section such as households without shelter, 
destitute/living on alms, manual scavengers, Primitive Tribal Groups, legally re leased bonded 
labourers in BPL list. The Committee also note that a proposal to set up permanent BPL machinery 
is under consideration by the Department. This would interface with the States to ensure that only 
genuine BPL families are included in the list of beneficiaries eligible for various Government 
schemes and that those not satisfying the eligibility requirements are taken out of the list by the 
States on a continuous basis following transparent and equitable processes which will be set out in 
guidelines. The Committee has also been informed that a multi -disciplinary committee of experts 
with Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member, Planning Commission as Chairperson has been constituted to give 
their suggestions on developing an interim system for updating the exis ting BPL lists till SECC 
2011 is finalized and updating of BPL list in future. 133The Committee are unhappy to note that the 
progress in finalization of BPL criteria/list has been very slow. The Committee take note of recent 
initiative taken by the Departm ent to constitute such ongoing mechanism for identification of 
genuine poor families in BPL list. The Committee are of view that such mechanism will go a long 
way to address the problem of corruption in programmes for BPL families and enhance productivity 
of expenditure on programmes for rural development. The Committee, however, of the view that all 
State Government should be taken on board in initial phase itself so as to reduce time lag in 
establishment of such mechanism in entire country." 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 30, Para No. 2.30) 
 
22. The Department in their action taken reply has stated as under:-- 
 
“The SECC is being conducted through a comprehensive programmes  involving the 
Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, the Office of the 
Registrar General and Census Commissioners, India and State Governments.  Enum eration is 
being done by the States/UTs with the help of an electronic handheld device (Tablet PC) supplied 
by Bharat Electronic Limited (BEL). BEL lead consortium of CPSUs is also providing Data Entry 
Operators (DEOs), other technical services in connecti on with software for data collection and data 
transfer etc.   A web -based MIS is put in place to monitor the progress of SECC 2011. A series of 
measures have been put in place to ensure accuracy and transparency during collection of data for 
the SECC 2011.  Instructions for filing, receiving and disposing claims and objections during the 
SECC 2011 have also been issued to the States/UTs.  The Ministry of Rural Development has 
been continuously monitoring the progress of SECC with the States/UTs through regul ar visits, 
trainings and video conferencing to ensure early completion and sort out various issues with the 
States.   States/UTs specific reviews and assessment of the progress of work was also taken up in 
the Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting hel d on a quarterly basis. Similarly, PRC 
meetings were also held for the North Eastern States wherein the progress of the SECC was 
regularly reviewed. Based on the review and decisions taken in the Performance Review 
Committee, senior official from the Minis try of Rural Development visited the States having specific 
issues. So far, 4 video conferencing with all the States/UTs have been conducted in connection 
with the progress of SECC 2011. Secretary (RD) has also written to all the States Chief Secretaries 
advising them to adhere to the timelines and early completion of the Census in their respective 
State. Hon‟ble Minister (RD) wrote to the Chief Minister of major states intimating them the 

11 
 
               
 
tentative dates for „draft list‟ publication and requested them to a dhere to the timelines. All these 
efforts would result in completion of the SECC project.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 29, Para No. 2.29) 
 
“The Ministry of Rural Development constituted an Expert Group on Socio Economic and 
Caste Census on 28th December, 2012 under the Chairmanship of Prof. Abhijit Sen to examine the 
SECC indicators and the data analysis and recommend appropriate methodologies for determining 
classes of beneficiaries for different rural development programmes. It will consult St ates, Experts 
and Civil Society Organizations while arriving at these methodologies. The proposal to set up a 
permanent mechanism to act as an interface between MoRD and state governments has been 
referred for inter -ministerial consultation. The States wil l also be consulted in the matter. The 
Abhijet Sen Committee for suggesting a methodology for inclusion of eligible families in the existing 
BPL list, which recently submitted the Report has recommended that the proposal of setting up a 
permanent mechanism in the MoRD be implemented as early as possible.” 
  
 “The Ministry vide their communication dated 22 November, 2013, further informed that the 
proposal for setting up a permanent mechanism in the Ministry of Rural Development has been 
further examined. As of now, it has been decided that the existing BPL unit in the Ministry which 
looks after the work of SECC/BPL survey will also constitute such mechanism.” 
  
 
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 30, Para No. 2.30) 
 
 
23.  While noting that the BPL Survey that was due in 2007 ha d been inordinately delayed and  
started as the Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC, 2011) that was to be completed in June, 
2012 but later on the deadline was extended to May, 2013, the Committee had recommended the 
DoRD to make efforts in coordination with State Governments  concerned to finalize the final BPL 
list without any further delay. The Committee had also noted that the progress in finalization of 
criteria for BPL list ha d been slow and had recommended expeditious setting up  of a mechanism 
for identification of genuine poor in the BPL list. The Committee from the action taken reply find 
that number of steps have been taken by DORD both at the level of Secretary, DoRD and Hon'ble 
Minister for Rural Development by emphasizing for adhering to the timelines for expeditious 
finalization of long pending BPL list. The Committee also find  that the proposal to set up a  
 permanent mechanism to act as an interface between DoRD and State Government s has been   
 

12 
 
               
 
 
 
referred for inter-Ministerial consultation.  
 The Committee have also been informed by Department of Rural Development that the 
matter has been examined by them and a decision has been taken that existing BPL unit in Ministry 
which looks after the work  of SECC/BPL survey will also constitute such mechanism. The 
Committee regret to note that  inspite of stated steps the work regarding th e finalization of BPL list 
is yet to be conclusively accomplished. T hey, therefore, reiterate their recommendation for 
expeditious finalization of BPL list at the earliest under intimation to the Committee.  
 
VII.  Restructuring of CAPART.   
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 33, Para No. 2.33) 
 
 
24.  The Committee had recommended as under:-- 
 
“On the issue of restructuring process of CAPART, the committee are dismayed to note 
that it has not been completed yet. The Committee have been informed that T ata Institute of Social 
Sciences (TISS) has been entrusted with the task of submitting a report on restructuring of 
CAPART. The Committee also note that inordinate delay in restructuring of CAPART has led to 
situation where majority of funds allocated to C APART is being used for meeting expenses of 
salaries, administrative expenditure, implementation of PM Rural Development Fellow Scheme and 
other project related expenses. The Committee are of the view that the presence of an apex 
institution is necessary f or promoting public cooperation, research and promotion of technologies 
aimed for enhancement of standard of life in rural areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Department to complete the process of restructuring of CAPART in time bound manner.” 
 
25. The Department of Rural Development in their action taken reply has stated as under:-- 
 
“A Project Document outlining a detailed frame work for restructuring of CAPART was 
prepared by this Ministry and the Institute of Rural Management Anand (IRMA) was  requested to 
help the Ministry in this regard. IRMA submitted its report and made a detailed presentation on the 
study report on “State of Organisation and Road Map of CAPART” in 54th Executive Committee 
meeting held on 8th December, 2010. Subsequently, I RMA conveyed their inability for taking up 
the assignment further. Thereafter, the Ministry decided to engage another agency viz; Tata 
Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai, which may go into specific details of all aspects of the 
organization and it s functioning and render assistance in the restructuring exercise. A draft Terms 
of Reference (ToR) for the consulting agency had also been finalized by the Committee constituted 

13 
 
               
 
under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (RD). The first meeting with TISS officials was held 
on 08.01.2013 wherein broad issues relating to Restructuring of CAPART were discussed. In 
March, 2013 TISS has further submitted a concept note, highlighting the proposed strategies for 
restructuring, and the same is under consideration.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 33, Para No. 2.33) 
 
26.  Expressing dismay over non -completion of restructuring of Council for Advancement  of 
People’s Action and Rural Technology (CAPART) and finding that Tata Institute of Social Services 
(TISS) had been asked to submit a report on restructuring of CAPART, the Committee had 
recommended the DoRD to complete the process of restructuring of CAPART  in a time bound 
manner.  In action taken reply giving the update on the issue, the DoRD has informed t he 
Committee about finalization of draft Terms of Reference (TOR) for the consulting agency, holdings 
of discussion on broad issues relating to restructuring with TISS officials on 8 th January, 2013 and 
submission of concept note by TISS in March, 2013 highlighting the proposed strategies for 
restructuring and has stated that the same is under consideration of DoRD. In this connection the 
Committee, while drawing the attention of DoRD to  Para No. 8 of Forty -Fourth Report of the 
Committee presented to the Parliament  on 14 August, 2013 wherein the Committee had 
recommended expeditious completion of long pending restructuring of CAPART, reiterate their 
recommendation that DoRD should  compl ete the restructuring process of CAPART without any 
further delay.  
 
VIII.  Restructuring of District Rural Development Agency (DRDAs). 
Recommendation (Serial No. 34, Para No. 2.34) 
 
27. The Committee had recommended as under:-- 
 
“On the issue of restructuring of DRDA, the Committee note that Department has analysed 
and accepted the report and process of consultation with States as a prelude to formulation of EFC 
note for restructuring of DRDA Scheme has been completed.  The Committ ee have also been 
informed that EFC note has been prepared and has since been vetted by IFD.  The EFC note is 
likely to be circulated to the concerned Ministries/ Departments of the Government of India during 

14 
 
               
 
the 1st week of April 2013.  The Committee feel  that process of revamping of DRDA administration 
has been inordinately delayed. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to complete 
the process during the 2013 itself.“ 
 
 
28. The Department of Rural Development in their action taken reply has stated as under:-- 
 
“An EFC Note on restructuring of DRDA Administration Scheme duly incorporating 
recommendations of V. Ramachandran Committee has been prepared and circulated among the 
concerned Ministries/Departments of the Government of India seeking their comments.” 
 
 
29.  Taking into account the completion of consultation process with States  and likely 
circulation of EFC note to concerned Ministries/Departments in April, 2013, the Committee while 
expressing their displeasure over inordinate delay in restructuring of DRDA Scheme, had 
recommended the DoRD to complete the process during 2013 itself. In the action taken reply the 
Committee find that EFC note on restructuring of DRDA Administration Scheme duly incorporating 
recommendations of V. Ramachandr an Committee, has been prepared and circulated among the 
concerned Ministries/Departments of the Government of India seeking their comments. The 
Committee feel DoRD has taken long time in circulation of EFC note to different 
Ministries/Departments. The Com mittee, therefore, urge the DoRD to complete the revamping of 
DRDA scheme expeditiously.  
 
 
  

15 
 
               
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1) 
 
 The Committee note  that the Demands for Grants of the Department of Rural Development 
(Demand No. 83) were presented to Lok Sabha on 17 March, 2013.   The Demands makes a provision for 
Rs. 74,477.65 crore (Rs. 74,429.00 for Plan and Rs, 48.65 crore for non -plan). The alloca tion funds are 
higher by Rs. 1302.65 crore as compared to the budget provisions made during previous year vis 2012 -13.   
The Committee endorse the same. The Committee have examined the Demands w.r.t. priorities made and 
utilization of funds during 11th Fiv e Year Plan and also during 2012 -13 which was the first year of the 12th 
Plan. The recommendations of the Committee have been set out in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No action on the part of the Department. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.2) 
 
The Committee note  that budget for rural development ranks fifth largest of the total budget of 
Government of India only after Finance, Health & Family Welfare, Defence, Food & Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution.  The Committee also find that allocation to agriculture  ranks at distant tenth place in 
Central Budget.  In this connection, as per DoRD the order of priority of funds for rural development in 
developed and developing countries have been varying degree.   For instance the developed countries like 
USA and U.K. the order of priority of funds for rural development has been at eleventh place only after 
defence, health and education.  Whereas almost half of EU Budget is still devoted to agriculture with 
support to rural development increased very recently.   The Committee also find that in developed countries 
this has been done for ensuring good living conditions and opportunities in rural areas and also to ensure 
that these areas are not depopulated.   On the contrary the Committee find that in developing countries in 
addition to agriculture the focus is on rural poverty. On the issue of inter linking rural development with 
agriculture in India on the pattern of EU where half of the budget is devoted to agriculture so as to prevent 
present day exodus of rural populat ion to urban areas.  The Committee have been informed by DoRD that 
based on the independent studies done by MoRD implementation of various rural development schemes 
like MGNREGA, PMGSY, IAY etc. by creating infrastructure, improved living conditions, have reduced out 
migration from villages and migration from other than distress migration leads to development.   Thus the 
depopulation of rural areas should not be looked upon negatively in the context of developing countries like 
India.  
 

16 
 
               
 
 The Committee while  agreeing with the contention of DoRD that rural development schemes like 
MGNREGA, IAY, PMGSY might have checked out village migration, they do not subscribe the view of 
DoRD that migration other than distress migration leads to developments in the light o f the fact that 
reportedly a large number of farmers have committed suicide in rural areas in various parts of the country 
due to lack of reach by the Central/State schemes intended for them.   They, therefore, recommend that 
Central Budget for rural devel opment should be assessed,  keeping in mind budget requirements of 
agriculture, food security, social justice, drinking water & sanitation and empowerment of panchayats for 
integrated development of rural India. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Planning Commission assesses the priorities to be accorded to various sectors and the budget 
outlays of the Government. The recommendation of the Committee has been brought to their notice. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3) 
 
The Committee find with dismay that there has been big gap at two levels during XIth Plan (2007 -
12) period. One, between funds proposed and actual allocatio ns and two between Revised Estimates and 
actual expenditure. The Committee are constrained to note that the gap between funds proposed by DoRD 
and actual allocation has been as high as Rs. 1.36 lakh crore whereas the gap between R.E. and actual 
expenditure has been of huge Rs. 12,000 crore. The Committee are constrained to note that reduced 
outlay has badly affected the important rural development schemes of IAY and PMGSY as a result their 
physical targets have been lowered considerably.  For instance under  IAY the targets had to be lowered 
from 150 lakh houses to 137 lakh houses.  Whereas under PMGSY targets for covering habitations as also 
for connecting new connectively have been brought down from the level of 86,904 habitations to 60,638 
habitations and from 1.85 lakh km. of new connectivity to 1.29 lakh km.  
 
 The Committee are also constrained to find that at the end of the Plan the DoRD could not utilize 
as large as Rs. 12,000 crore.   In this connection, the Committee recall  that they in their Thirtieth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of DoRD had also dealt with the issue and had recommended the DoRD for 
increasing financial absorption capacity for higher Twelfth Plan allocation.  As a follow-up action to this,  the 
Committee have been informed by DoRD that the process for formulation of Twelfth Plan has been started 
in the Planning Commission by constitution of Special Working Group to deliberate on the strategy and 
thrust areas and a result enhanced funds for 2013 -14 have been proposed plus enhanced XIIth   Outlay of 
Rs. 4.03 lakh crore have been budgeted under different rural development schemes and various scheme -
wise measures like enlarging the scope of works under MGNREGA, starting the restructured SGSY 
programme under NRLM, tackling housing shortage in a big way under Rural housing by way of enhanced 
per unit assistance under IAY and connecting remaining habitations and strengthening existing rural roads 
under PMGSY II.  
 

17 
 
               
 
 The Committee are, however, constrained to  note that BE 2012 -13 of Rs. 73,175 crore were 
reduced to Rs. 52,000 at R.E. stage crore mainly on account of huge unspent balances under PMGSY, 
IAY, Aajeevika due to slow place of expenditure for various reasons like in -adequate institutions capacity 
under PMGSY, essentiality of uploading Awassoft for IAY schemes and delay in transition from old SGSY 
to new NRLM across different States.   Further, the Committee unhappy to note that out of RE of Rs. 
52,000 crore, the actual expenditure was as low as Rs. 40,754 crore as on 31.01.2013.   In this connection, 
the Committee have been informed by Secretary DoRD that expenditure may improve further as Rs. 
48,217.08 crore have been released upto 26.03.2013.   The Committee have also been informed that out of 
RE of R s. 52,000 crore,  Rs. 1357 crore was taken away by the Ministry of Finance on the ground that in 
last month the total expenditure of the DoRD should not exceed 15% of total budget thus DoRD was left 
with only Rs. 50,164 crore.   The Committee observe that this trend of under -utilisation continued 
throughout the Eleventh Plan (2007 -2012) and the first year of 12th Plan i.e. 2012 -13 was not different.  
They therefore, recommend the that DoRD should put their house in order before blaming the Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance by ensuring uniform utilization of resources throughout the year and 
avoiding huge unspent balances at the end. 
 
Reply of the Government 
MGNREGA 
 
MGNREGA is a demand driven wage -employment programme. The Act guarantees at least 100 
days of employment to every rural household whose adult members demand unskilled manual work.   
Thus, in case of sudden rise in the labour demand, there is a legal onus on the Central Govt. to ensure 
adequate flow of funds to the States to execute the schem es under the Act.   The legal onus to ensure 
sufficient funds with the State has led the Central Govt. to earmark adequate resources at the BE/RE stage 
under MGNREGA. 
 
2.            The Budget Estimate (BE), Revised Estimate (RE) and Central Releases made u nder MGNREGA 
during 11th Five Year Plan (2007 -12) and the first two years of 12 th Five Year Plan (2012 -17) are depicted 
in the Table below. 
 
 BE/RE and Release under MGNREGA 11th and 12th Five Year Plans 
(Rs. Cr.) 
SN Year BE RE Central 
Release 
Central Release as per cent 
to Revised Estimates (%) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1 2007-08 12,000.00 12,000.00 12,661.22 105.5% 
2 2008-09 16,000.00 30,000.19 30,000.19 100.0% 
3 2009-10 39,100.00 39,100.00 33,539.38 85.7% 
4 2010-11 40,100.00 40,100.00 35,841.49 89.4% 
5 2011-12 40,000.00 31,000.00 29,215.05 94.2% 
11th Plan Total 1,47,200.00 1,52,200.19 1,41,257.33 92.8% 
6 2012-13 33,000.00 30,287.00 30,274.00 99.9% 
7 2013-14 33,000.00 - 18,660.40* 56.5% 
1st Two Years of 
12th Plan 
66,000.00 - 48,934.4 74.1% 
*Release as on 03.06.2013   
 

18 
 
               
 
  As is observed from the above table, against an RE provision of Rs. 1, 52,200.19 cr., around 93 
per cent (i.e. Rs. 1, 41,257.33 cr.) has been utilised during the 11 th Plan (2007 -12). The annual Central 
Releases as per cent to the Revised Estimates under MGNREGA is in the range between 85.7 % and 
105.5 % during the 11th Plan period i.e. 2007-08 to 2011-12. The first year of 12th Five Year Plan (2012-13) 
witnessed 99.95% utilization of resources as projected in the Revised Estimates of Rs. 30,287 cr. Similarly, 
during the second year of the 12 th Plan (i.e. FY 2013-14), against a BE of Rs. 33,000 cr. 56.5% have been 
utilised as on 03.06.2013. 
 
PMGSY 
 
During the 11 th Plan period, the target was to cover 60,638 habitations and constructi on of 
2,30,447 km road length, against which 45,412 habitations were covered by constructing 2,20,612 km of 
road length. As implementation of PMGSY is through concerned State/UT governments, the pace of 
implementation depends on various factors, including absorption capacity, contracting capacity and area -
specific issues faced during construction/upgradation of rural roads under the programme. Funds, in 
accordance to programme guidelines, are released to State/UT government based on their absorption 
capacity and utilization of available unspent balance. 
       The unspent balance on 1 st April, 2012 was Rs. 8,884.55 crore, which reduced to Rs. 4,761 crore 
as on 1st April, 2013. As per the release procedure under PMGSY guidelines, the first installment is 50% of 
cleared value, though these funds are not idle, as they are part of pool of Programme Funds available with 
SRRDAs. As such these funds are to meet the cost of all ongoing works including those nearing 
completion.  
 
IAY 
 
Total outlay in the 11 th Five Year Plan (2007 -2012) under Rural Housing was initially Rs.26882.21 
crore, against which Rs.41997.50 crore were provided.  The 11 th Plan document envisaged construction of 
150 lakh houses over a period of five years from 2007 -2012.  However, with an allocation of Rs. 26882.21  
crore for total 11 th Plan Period and with the prevailing financial assistance of Rs.25,000/ - (plain areas) and 
Rs.27,500 (difficult and hilly areas), only 137 lakh houses could have been constructed as fund allocation 
was not according to the physical target.   Further, with the increase in financial assistance twice over last 
four years from Rs. 25000 (plain areas) and Rs.27500 (hilly areas) to Rs. 35,000/ - (Plain areas) and 
Rs.37500 (for hilly and difficult areas) w.e.f. 1 st April, 2008 and to Rs.45,000/ - in plain areas and 
Rs.48,500/- (for hilly and difficult areas) w.e.f. 1 st April, 2010, the physical target got reduced further.  
Therefore, only 139.83 lakh houses were expected to be completed over 11 th Plan period against tar get of 
150 lakh houses.  The initial allocation of Rs.26882.21 crore for 11 th Plan actually turned out to be 
Rs.41977.50 crore.  The physical target got further reduced as 78 Left Wing Extremism affected Districts 
(LWE)  (35 LWE vide order dated 7 -10-2010,  25 LWE vide order dated 23 -5-2011 and 18 LWE vide order 
dated 10-4-2012) were treated as difficult areas and were made eligible for higher rate of unit assistance 
provided to hilly/difficult areas. 
 
The final report of the Working Group for Rural Housing  for the Twelfth Five Year Plan was 
submitted to the Planning Commission on 13 -10-2011.  The Working Group had proposed to enhance unit 
assistance for house construction under IAY to Rs.75,000/ - and had proposed that unit assistance be 
enhanced incrementally each year to absorb escalation in cost of material and labour. 
 

19 
 
               
 
The issue of enhancement of allocation for Indira Awaas Yojana  for the 12 th Five Year Plan was 
placed before the Planning Commission.  The budget proposed for the year 2012 -13 i.e. the fir st year of 
12th Five Year Plan was Rs.25869.90 crore (as grant for 15 million houses and subsidy for 5 million 
houses).  However, against this, Planning Commission had allocated Rs.11075 crore for Indira Awaas 
Yojana which was further reduced to Rs. 9024.0 0 crore at R.E. stage. The unit assistance for IAY has also 
been enhanced from Rs. 45,000/- to Rs.70,000/-(plain areas) and Rs.48,500/- to Rs.75,000/- (hilly, difficult, 
IAP areas). 
 
As regards unspent balances under IAY, during the year 2012 -13 an amount of Rs.4646.98 crore 
has been lying as unspent balance with the States and UTs (upto December 31, 2012).  This is mainly due 
to release of  funds in the third quarter of 2012 -13 (Rs.546.46 crore) and special package sanctioned to the 
states amounting to  Rs.1157.93 crores as well as slow implementation of the programme in many districts. 
 
The release of funds under IAY are linked to stages of construction of house.  IAY beneficiaries are 
provided assistance in three instalments by the District Administration .  The construction of houses in IAY 
usually spill over to next financial year. 
In order to reduce the unspent balances and to ensure timely disbursement and sound financial 
management, Ministry has been constantly pursuing with the State Governments and D RDA Administration 
to minimize the unspent balances through Performance Review Committee Meetings, State Coordinating 
Officers Meetings from time to time.  To ensure that States incur expenditure on the scheme efficiently and 
timely during the year, there is provision of deduction, if more than 10% of the available funds are carried 
forward.  However, such deductions are restored when performance improves.  It is expected that the 
allocations will be fully utilized during the current financial year.   
 
SGSY/NRLM 
 
  As already submitted before the committee, during 2012 -2013, most states were in the process of 
meeting the transition conditions for transiting to Aajeevika.  while there has been considerable progress in 
this respect in the States, the instituti on building process under Aajeevika, i.e. formation of SHGs of rural 
poor women, has just been initiated in most states in the selected first phase blocks. Therefore, 
expenditures in most States remained low and, as a result, off -take of funds from the Cen tre remained low.  
This Department is taking all steps to build the capacities of the States for programme implementation.  For 
the purpose, the National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) has been set up at the Central level which is 
staffed with qualified pr ofessionals and their mandate is to help build the capacities of the State teams 
along with providing need-based technical assistance to them. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated:   22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note the scheme wise short comings identified in Mid -Term 
Review of Eleventh Plan (2007-2012) inter-alia pertain to urgency for a clear set of Guidelines for using 6% 
administrative cost, deployment of cluster approach, strengthening of IT system, Technical support of better 
convergence etc. under MGNREGA, restructuring of SGSY under NRLM, addressing housing  shortage 

20 
 
               
 
under IAY, e -procurement under PMGSY etc. have not been addressed in toto. In this connection, the 
DoRD have tried to convince the Committee that various steps like issuing of instructions for setting up of 
Ombudsman for bringing transparency,  n otification of rules for social audit, recommending States to 
appoint Panchayat personnel from 6% of administrative cost, adoption of integrated approach for 
convergence mechanisms, enhancing per unit assistance under IAY, increasing the contracting capaci ty of 
the contractors,  simplification of forest clearance etc. under PMGSY have been outlined.  
  
 Keeping in view, the vast and diverse country with large regional disparities in term of development 
would depend to a great extent on the institutional capacities of State Governments being the implementing 
agencies.    The Committee, therefore, feel that DoRD cannot shy away their primary responsibility of 
persuading and guiding the State Governments to move on scheme -wise findings of Mid Term Review of 
Eleventh Plan.  The Committee expect the DoRD to take up these issues with State Governments more 
seriously so that these are adequately addressed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
MGNREGA 
 
„MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013‟ have  been issued to State Governments which 
consolidates all relevant instructions for  effective implementation of the scheme. Para 12.5 of the 
guidelines provides in detail the expenses of activities that are permi ssible under the 6% administrative 
expenses the States can incur.  It also provides list of items whose expenses are not allowed to be met 
from administrative expenses under any condition.  Para 4.2.3 of the guidelines stipulates the constitution 
of Cluster Facilitation Team (CFT) to serve cluster of Gram Panchayats.  Each cluster would cover around 
15,000 job cards or an area of about 15000 ha. and would have four experts namely, community 
mobilization, soil and moisture conservation, agriculture and allied and MIS & ICT.  
 
 ICT facilities in GPs is one of the permissible activities under the Administrative expense.  In all 
relevant chapters of the Guidelines, work flow has been provided explaining methods for data entry in MIS.  
The Guidelines also has a d edicated chapter on MIS (Chapter 11) providing illustration of all required 
details.  The chapter on “Framework for Convergence between MGNREGA and other Programmes” 
discuss in detail modes of convergence, operationalizing convergence, modalities for conve rgence, 
maintenance of accounts in convergence projects etc.     
 
 
PMGSY 
 
The approved outlay for PMGSY during the 12 th Five Year Plan is Rs. 1,05,000 crore. The BE for 
the current financial year 2013-14 is Rs. 21,700 crore, out of which Rs. 4,000 crore has been earmarked for 
PMGSY-II to upgrade the existing road network during the year. Letters have also been sent by Hon‟ble 
Minister of Rural Development to Hon‟ble Chief Ministers of States indicating their absorption capacity with 
an urge to improve the p ace of implementation of PMGSY in difficult terrains. The Annual Allocation for 
2013-14 has been shared in advance by Ministry and also discussed in the presence of Planning 
Commission in the beginning of the financial year with State/UT governments. Furth er, as advised by the 
Committee, it is to submit that National Rural Roads Development Agency (NRRDA) is also focusing on 
Capacity Building with a target to provide training to at least 1,200 personnel of SRRDAs/PIUs and other 

21 
 
               
 
functionaries and contractors  each year to enhance the capacity of personnel involved in execution of the 
programme. 
 
IAY 
The findings of the Mid Term appraisal of the 11 th Plan of IAY scheme were discussed in the 
various fora with the State Governments /UT administration.  In order t o strengthen the implementation 
capacity of the State/District administration, 4% funds have been provided from 2013 -14 to meet the 
administrative expenditure.  As per the recommendation of the MTA, unit assistance has been enhanced 
w.e.f. 1 -04-2013, conve rgence with Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) has been ensured for construction of 
toilets with IAY houses.   A joint circular has been issued by the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation  
and M/o Rural Development on 16-05-2013. 
 
SGSY/NRLM 
 Based on the findings of the mid -term review and recommendations of various committees 
including the steering committee of the Planning commission, the Swarnjyanti Gram Swarozgar 
Yojana(SGSY) has been restructured as Aajeevika.  Aajeevika has been designed  to address the 
shortcomings of SGSY. Several workshops have been organized for all the State personnel involved in 
Aajeevika implementation for their induction into the basics of Aajeevika.  Besides, the State teams have 
been advised to visit the best pra ctice sites in a few States for first hand understanding of the programme 
implementation.  Most State teams have already undertaken such immersion in the best practice sites. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.5) 
 
 The Committee note with dismay that like Eleventh Plan the DoRD could not get the level of funds 
proposed by DoRD for Twelfth Plan (2012 -17) period. In this connection, the Committee are constrained to 
note that as against the proposed outlay of DoRD of Rs. 8.21 lakh crore the outlay as communicated by the 
Planning Commission to DoRD is as low as Rs. 4.03 lakh crore. The Committee also find that reduced level 
of fund according to DoRD may not be adequate to achieve the targets proposed for different schemes for 
Twelfth Plan period. In this context the Committee find that Twelfth Plan document lays emphasis on 
reversing the observed deceleration to growth by generat ion of higher revenue necessary for funding rural 
development schemes like MGNERGA, PMGSY etc. for inclusive growth.  
 
 However, the Committee note with dismay that the first year of the Twelfth Plan i.e. 2012 -13 has 
experienced a severe reduction of Rs. 20,000 crore of RE stage reflecting a reduction of as high as Rs. 
14000 crore under PMGSY,  Rs. 3613 crore under MGNREGA,  Rs. 2051 crore under IAY and Rs. 1315 
crore under NRLM programmes.  
 
 The Committee also note that allocation for 2014 -15, 2015 -16 and 2015 -17 for DoRD are to be 
made in consultation with the Planning Commission. The Committee trust that the Planning Comm ission 
would replenish the above huge reduction in subsequent years of the current Plan so that targets under 

22 
 
               
 
different schemes are not lowered subsequently and the plan funds allocation of Rs. 4.03 lakh for 12th Plan 
is not subject to reduction at any cost. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DoRD would take up the matter with Planning Commission at the appropriate time for allocation of 
2014-15 etc. 
 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6) 
 
 The Committee note that out of the total XIIth  Plan (2012-2017) outlay of Rs. 1.63 lakh crore for 
MGNREGA in the first two years of the Plan i.e. 2012-13 and 2013-14 a total of 0.66 lakh crore have 
been made available to DoRD and the Committee have been informed that DoRD is hopeful of getting the 
remaining outlay in remaining three years of the current Plan. In this connection, the Committee are 
constrained to find that during 2011-12 i.e. the terminal year of XI Plan (2007-12) the outlay for MGNREGA 
was Rs. 40,000 crore and which during 2012-13 i.e. first year of XIIth Plan was reduced to Rs. 33,000 crore 
indicating a steep reduction of Rs. 7000 crore.  The Committee note that for the next 3 ye ars also the level 
of funds would remain in the range of Rs. 30,000 crore to Rs. 35,000 crore.  Considering the annual 
revision in wages and stagnant budget the number of days/beneficiaries is likely to go down substantially.  
The Committee, therefore, wou ld like the DoRD to look into this aspect and seek enhanced budget in 
keeping view the objectives of the scheme. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
MGNREGA is a demand driven programme and no targets are fixed. The outlay projected for 
MGNREGA depends on the projected likely labour demand in the states and the trend observed during the 
preceding years.  The States are legally bound to provide 100 days of wage employment on demand in a 
financial year to the willing adult members of the rural households and funds are  released accordingly.  
Keeping in view the low absorption capacity due to less labour demand in States/UTs, the BE of 2011 -12 
(Rs 40,000 cr.) was revised to Rs.31,000 cr. during RE stage of budgetary process.  The BE and RE of 
MGNREGA in FY 2012 -13 – the first year of 12 th Five Year Plan, were Rs.33000.00 cr. and Rs.29387.00 
cr. respectively.  Peak labour demand during last quarter of 2012 -13 led to further revision of the allocation 
to Rs.30287.00 cr.  The BE for 2013 -14 under MGNREGA is Rs.33,000 cr. Sin ce the demand driven 
programme of MGNREGA is backed by legislation and the Government is committed to provide funds as 
per labour demand, Ministry is hopeful of getting adequate funds in remaining three years of the current 
Plan period.  The requirement of funds for remaining 3 years of the X1Ith Plan period will be assessed at the 
time of submission of annual plans each year and requirement of funds will be revised, if needed.  
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 

23 
 
               
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.7) 
 
 The Committee are  constrained to note that no updated data is available with DoRD for reporting 
releases and actual expenditure under MGNREGA and there is a time lag of one and half month.  As a 
result the status of releases and expenditure has underwent significant change  from the figures earlier 
submitted before the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the DoRD to strengthen its MIS 
programme so that updated figures are made available.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Para 13(a) of Schedule -I of the Act stipulates that all information relating to the implementation of 
MGNREGA shall be pro -actively put in public domain. Data as captured in MIS of MGNGEGA is uploaded 
by the respective States/UTs. While releasing of centra l share of funds, the Ministry examines Utilisation 
Certificates (UC) as submitted by the States/UTs concerned and information on physical progress in terms 
of employment generated, advance projection of labour demand etc.  The data reflected in UCs as 
submitted by the States/UTs are compared with the data as uploaded in the MIS.  In cases of substantial 
difference in two data sets, advisories are issued to the State Governments/UTs concerned.  Lack of 
connectivity (IT) and poor supply of electricity in rem ote areas restricts MIS data entry.  However, the 
Ministry in the revised Operational Guidelines 2013 has provided detailed process and procedures on MIS 
to ensure timely and correct data entry in to NREGA soft.    
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.9) 
 
 The Committee find that as against the cumulative number of jobs cards of 12.38 crore and 1 2.58 
during 2011-12 and 2012 -13 as low as 5.09 crore and 4.19 crore rural household demanded employment 
and further as low as 5.04 crore and 4.15 crore of rural household were given employment. The Committee 
have been informed by DoRD that this decline may  not necessarily be bad indicator as it may suggest that 
MGNREGA beneficiaries might have moved away from the scheme and as per MIS data around 50% of 
beneficiaries from SCs; STs, BPL or beneficiaries of land reform or IAY, small and Marginal Farmers (SMF)  
have not sought employment under MGNREGA because of work on their land as a result of land 
development under MGNREGA by reason of enlarging the scope of work in Schedule 1, Paragraph No.1 of 
MGNREGA notification dated 22nd July, 2009 to provide for irriga tion facility, horticulture plantation, land 
development, belonging to SCs, STs, BPL, beneficiaries and land reforms, or beneficiaries under IAY.    
The Committee are not convinced of the reasons for low level of employment given.   Since the scheme 
has been enlarged to cover works of other areas like Railways and its convergence to other rural schemes 
like IAY, construction of roads, agriculture, the Committee expect that this number should rise substantially. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The cumulative number of job cards issued, as reported by the states during 2012 -13, has since 
increased to 12.70 crore, whereas the number of rural households provided employment has increased to 
4.93 crore as reported by the States/UTs, against a demand from 5.10 crore rural households. The figures 

24 
 
               
 
are likely to go up when the final figures are captured.  The MGNREGA is a self -selecting wage 
employment programme with high participation from marginalized groups including women, Scheduled 
Castes (SCs) and S cheduled Tribes (STs). While lack of robust demand management system under 
MGNREGA has an adverse impact on the prospective workers to turn to MGNREGA works, the decline in 
the demand of rural households under the scheme could be due to a myriad of factors  external to 
programme management viz. available alternative and remunerative employment opportunities outside 
MGNREGA, rainfall pattern, prevailing unskilled wage rate in rural, semi -urban/urban areas, better 
connectivity to semi -urban/peri-urban/urban ar eas, distance of the offered workplace from their dwelling, 
preference for a particular work etc.   
 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.13) 
 
 The Committee's examination has revealed even though convergence of MGNREGA with other 
Schemes was set in motion after issue of convergence Guidelines in 2005 by DoRD and then subsequently 
amended in 2011 not much progress has been made in this regard.  In this connection, from the State -wise 
details regarding number of works under convergence on -going and completed the Committee find that 
whatever progress that has done is only in few States of Uttar Pradesh,  Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan and Odisha. The Committee also find that a token activity is visible in a few more States of 
Maharashtra, Sikkim, West Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar, Assam, etc.  They, therefore, desire convergence 
of MGNREGA with other s chemes should be done in big way particularly when most of convergence is to 
be done under different schemes of MoRD and MoDWS, so that it does not remain on paper only. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In the year 2009, the Ministry developed and disseminated convergence guidelines with different 
Schemes and specific programmes viz., Indian Council of Agricultural Research, National Afforestation 
Programme and other schemes of the Ministry of Environment  & Forest, Schemes of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, PMGSY (Department of Rural Development), SGSY (Department of Rural Development), 
Watershed Development Programmes (Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development) 
and schemes of Ministry o f Agriculture. In the year 2011 Ministry vide notification dated 30. 9.2011 made 
amendment in the schedule to MGNREG Act about access to sanitation facilities in convergence with the 
Total Sanitation Campaign of the Ministry of Drinking water and Sanitatio n. Recently on 13th June 2013 
Ministry of Rural Development has issued an advisory for better convergence between MGNREGA and 
schemes of Ministry of Agriculture.   In the Operational Guideline, 2013 a separate chapter on the 
intersectoral convergence is added.   
 
In the last three years after issue of convergence guidelines between MGNREGA and different 
programmes like Watershed Programmes, National Agriculture Development Programme (Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana), National Horticulture Mission, Scheme of A rtificial Recharge of Ground Water through Dug 
well and Backward Region Grant Fund has brought in synergies between different government 
programmes/schemes in terms of planning, process and implementation. Convergence also helps in 
creation of durable assets.  

25 
 
               
 
 
Different good practice model were documented and professional institutions were engaged by the 
Ministry to monitor the convergence initiative by different ministries. Ministry of Rural Development reviews 
the convergence initiatives during internal review meeting with other partner Ministries and also during the 
performance review meeting with the State Rural Development secretaries. Ministry engages NIRD/SIRD 
for training and capacity building for planning with convergence of difference schemes.  Mi nistry has 
advised state governments to update data on convergence project on online (MIS).  Details of the number 
of works taken up under convergence are indicated as under:  
 
Number of works under convergence with MGNREGA 
 
No Year 
Number of works under 
convergence with 
MGNREGA 
Number of completed 
convergence projects 
Number of ongoing 
convergence 
projects 
1 2010-11 2931 450 2481 
2 2011-12 16021 7820 8201 
3 2012-13 77239 15143 62096 
4 2013-14 67511 745 66766 
 
The details of Individual Household Latrines (IHHL) taken up through convergence between 
MGNREGA and Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) of Ministry of Drinking water and sanitation is as follows: 
Number of Rural Sanitation works 
     Sl. 
No. 
State Rural Sanitation works 
taken up since 2012-13 
No. of Works started Completed works 
1 ANDHRA PRADESH 1062185 17742 
2 ARUNACHAL PRADESH 9 0 
3 ASSAM 504 77 
4 BIHAR 15 0 
5 CHHATTISGARH 2723 229 
6 GUJARAT 5186 1741 
7 HARYANA 966 495 
8 HIMACHAL PRADESH 458 119 
9 JAMMU AND KASHMIR 2988 735 
10 JHARKHAND 174 8 
11 KARNATAKA 74880 15883 
12 KERALA 361 122 
13 MADHYA PRADESH 47497 7683 
14 MAHARASHTRA 12830 1915 
15 MANIPUR 239 214 
16 ODISHA 818 76 
17 PUNJAB 35 0 
18 RAJASTHAN 17318 1014 

26 
 
               
 
19 TAMIL NADU 2095 1515 
20 TRIPURA 960 706 
21 UTTAR PRADESH 155751 20427 
22 UTTARAKHAND 395 147 
23 WEST BENGAL 20 1 
24 ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR 6 0 
  Total 1388413 70849 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.14) 
 
 The Committee find that demand to revise the limit of 100 days or more under MGNREGA has 
often been raised by beneficiaries in different States. The Committee note  that there was no such specific 
proposal under consideration by the Department to revise the limit of 100 days of employment per 
household to 150 days or more under MGNREGA. The Committee also note that in accordance with 
section 22 of MGNREGA 2005, the C entral Government had decided to fund additional 50 days of 
employment upon completion of 100 days of employment to households registered in drought affected 
Talukas/Blocks as notified by the State Governments during 2012 -13. This special dispensation term inates 
w.e.f. 31.03.2013.  The Committee are of view that genuine demand of beneficiaries for additional 
employment under MGNREGA in poverty stricken and backward areas of the country should be given 
compassionate consideration. The Committee, therefore, r ecommend the Department to use provision of 
section 22 of MGNREGA 2005 liberally to allow demand for additional employment under MGNREGA as 
and when required to address the problem of hunger and destitute in rural areas of the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The representations received in this regard were examined in totality considering the trend of 
employment generation in the country since inception of the scheme. Since the average number of 
persondays of employment generated per household in the co untry had been below 50 days during the 
preceding 3 years, there is no adequate justification for the Government to move any such proposal for the 
present. However, the Act has inherent provision under Section 3(4) read with Section 22 of the Act to 
increase the mandated 100 days of wage employment in any such eventuality.     
 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development 
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
  

27 
 
               
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.15) 
 
 
 The Committee note that Outlay for PMGSY during XIIth  Plan (2012-2017)  is Rs. 1.05 lakh crore 
out of which the outlay for first two years of current Plan is only Rs. 45,700 crore. The Committee also note 
that during 2012-13, outlay for PMGSY has been reduced  to Rs. 8884.66 crore as compared to BE of Rs. 
24,000 crore.  The Committee have also been informed that implementing agencies in States/UTs have 
been able to utilize Rs.6472.86 crore till 28.02.2013. The Committee find that issues such as availability of 
unspent balance of Rs. 8,885 crore of previous financial years and slow pace of implementation has led to 
huge reduction of funds to PMGSY at RE stage. The Committee is aware that apart from budgetary support 
and cess on High Speed Diesel, loan from Asian Development Bank, World Bank and NABARD are current 
source of funding of PMGSY. The Committee are of view that the Department is not following policy of 
prudent financial management while forecasting need of funds for PMGSY that might led to borrowing more 
funds from external sources. The Department, therefore, recommend the Department to assess 
expenditure pattern of States/UTs, capacities of implementing agencies etc. before finalizing proposal for 
funds for next financial year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is informed that  the approved outlay for  PMGSY  for  the  12 th  Five Year Plan is  Rs. 1,05,000 
crore. The BE for the current Financial Year 2013-14 is Rs. 21,700 crore, out of which Rs. 4,000 crore have 
been earmarked for PMGSY -II for upgradation of existing road network and Rs. 4,447.05 crore is 
earmarked for repay ment of Principal and Interest amount due against NABARD loan. As the Advisory of 
12th June, 2009 has been revised on 19th July, 2012 accordingly, it has been decided to consider proposals 
of upgradation in respect of those States where New Connectivity pr oposals are largely sanctioned.  The 
Ministry is likely to receive more proposals for upgradation from the States/UTs during the current Financial 
Year. The project proposals amounting to Rs. 27,014 crore have been sanctioned by the Ministry during 
last Financial Year 2012-13. Annual Allocation for 2013 -14 has also been communicated to the States and 
discussed during the Annual Plan discussion jointly organized by this Ministry and Planning Commission on 
5th April, 2013. A letter has also been sent by Hon‟b le Minister of Rural Development to Chief Ministers of 
all the States to indicate their absorption capacity and improve the pace of implementation of PMGSY. 
Further, as advised by the Committee, it is to inform that the Result Framework Document (RFD) 2013 -14 
has a component of Capacity Building with a target to provide training to 1,200 personnel of SRRDAs/PIUs 
and other functionaries and contractors to enhance the capacity of personnel involved in execution of 
programme. However, taking into consideration  the absorption capacity of States/UTs and other 
commitments i.e. launch of PMGSY -II and repayment against NABARD loan, it was assessed by the 
Programme Division that an allocation of Rs. 17,000 crore would be sufficient for the current Financial Year 
2013-14. 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
  

28 
 
               
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.16) 
 
 Speedy construction of roads under PMGSY is vital for providing critical link for rural communities 
to access markets, education, health and other facilities. The Committee note that  only 80,577 habitations 
have been connected  out of eligible 1,27,708 habitations of population 500 and above (as per 2001 
census) till February, 2013. The Committee also note that pace of construction of roads in States such as 
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh is very slow. The Committee find that 
inadequate implementation capacities, non -availability of construc tion material, limited contractual 
capacities, inadequate institutional capacities, law & order problem in LWEs Districts, delay in obtaining 
forest clearance etc. has been cited as reason for slow pace of construction of roads under PMGSY. The 
Committee are of view that some of the problems such as non -availability of construction material, limited 
contractual capacities, inadequate institutional capacities etc. could be assessed and steps could be taken 
to solve these while planning for construction of ro ads. The Committee are also of the view  that National 
Rural Roads Development agencies and State Rural Roads Development agencies which aremandated for  
scrutiny of project proposals and human resources development under the project may be delegated the 
responsibility for assessing these difficulties in advance and suggest ways for overcoming these. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to direct NRDDA and SRDDA through State Concerned 
for making efforts for devising better projects planning & implementing mechanism for construction of roads 
utilizing locally available materials. At the same time, they may take initiatives to start training programmes 
in order to encourage young professionals to become entrepreneurs in the field of construction  of roads. 
The Committee hope that these initiatives will go a long way not only to enhance speed of construction of 
roads under PMGSY but also help the country to maintain these roads in years to come. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is informed that the Exe cution Capacity of the States are worked out and discussed in the 
Regional Review Meetings and Empowered Committee Meetings of the States. The States are requested 
to increase the execution capacity and to use the local materials available in the State. Tr aining is also 
being imparted to Contractors and their staff. These steps are being followed in the States as these are the 
implementing agencies of PMGSY; and are regularly being monitored by NRRDA. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 2.18) 
 
 The Committee note that Rs. 8,000 crore has been allocated during 2012 -13 and 2013 -14 for 
NRLM-Ajeevika out of Rs. 29,000 crore approved for XIIth Plan period. The committee also note that 
allocation for 2012 -13 has been reduced to Rs. 2600 crore as compar ed to approved outlay of Rs. 3915 
crore. The Committee find that the implementing agencies in States/UTs have been able to uilise Rs. 
1765.85 crore (upto January 2013). The Committee have been informed that as implementation of NRLM - 
Ajeevika is being done  in phased manner, States/UTs are in process to put in place necessary 
administrative, financial and training mechanism for smooth implementation of the Programme. The 
Committee have also been informed that momentum of implementation will now pick up and e xpenditures 
will rise substantially over the next two years as 19 States accounting for more than 95% of the NRLM 

29 
 
               
 
budget have transited to the Mission and have undertaken recruitment for their State units and first phase 
District and sub-District units. The Committee are of view that smooth implementation of NRLM- Ajeevika is 
key to encourage rural entrepreneurship. The Committee, therefore recommend the Department to make 
adequate provision for funds in next financial year based upon demand and preparednes s of States for 
implementation of NRLM- Ajeevika. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
For 2013-14, an allocation of Rs. 4000 crores has been made for NRLM - Aajeevika, after making a 
careful assessment of the requirements of the States, based on their level of prepar edness.  An 
assessment of the physical and financial performance of the States will be made in the middle of the year 
and, if required, more funds will be sought through supplementary Demands for Grants. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development 
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 2.19) 
 
 The implementation of NRLM - Ajeevika is being done in phased manner which involve setting of 
State societies, identification of intensive District/Blocks, submission of State project implementation 
programme, submission of Annual Action Plan, establishment  of SHGs federation at different level etc. The 
Committee note that  most of the States have  completed the process of recruitment of full time State 
Mission Management Units core team, Identification of Intensive Districts/blocks completed, approval of 
Annual Action Plan, approval for recruitment of staff for SPMUs and intensive DPMUs and BPMUs and  
Identification of Resource Blocks. However, process of preparation and submission of State project 
implementation programme and signing of MoU with resource or ganisation have been completed in very 
few States. The Committee also note that many States such as Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Nagaland, 
Manipur, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Goa are still lagging behind to establish 
necessary mec hanism for implementation of NRLM - Ajeevika. The Committee are satisfied to note the 
progress made in States towards implementation of NRLM - Ajeevika. However, pace of establishing of 
necessary mechanism in laggard Sates required to be enhanced in order to  benefit people of rural 
areas of these Sates. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take the issue with states 
concerned to establish necessary mechanism for smooth implementation of NRLM- Ajeevika. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All efforts ar e being made to support the laggard States to establish necessary mechanism for 
smooth implementation of Aajeevika.  It is expected that all the remaining States will transit to NRLM within 
this Financial Year. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development 
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
  

30 
 
               
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 2.20) 
 
 Establishment of SHGs federations at different levels is stated objective of Ajeevika -NRLM. The 
Committee note  that the process of formation of SHGs federation has not been started under Ajeevika -
NRLM. However, SHGs federations have been formed under the rural livelihoods programmes 
implemented by State Governments in Andhra Pradesh, Tamilnadu, Kerala, Bihar and O disha. The 
Committee have been informed that federations are the next level institutions of the poor and can be 
formed only after a substantial number of primary institutions, i.e. SHGs have been formed and have 
attained a certain level of maturity. The Co mmittee are astonished to know  that  Department has not been 
able to encourage establishment of sufficient number of SHGs in different States even after implementation 
of Swarnjayanti Grammeen Swarojgar Yojna ( SGSY) since 1999 which has been pre -cursor o f NRLM -
Ajeevika. The Committee are of view that existence of federation at the grass root level i.e. village and 
Block level is pre -requisite for promoting and making SHGs financially viable. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to take all n ecessary steps to encourage States to establish SHGs federation 
at different level as proposed under NRLM- Ajeevika.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the figures reported by the States under SGSY, more than 44.31 lakh SHGs have been 
formed under Swarnjaya nti Gram Swarojgar Yojana (SGSY) since 1999.  However, it is not known how 
many of the SHGs formed are still functional.  SGSY had certain shortcomings like lack of sufficient and 
professional manpower for implementing the programme leading to practically no long term handholding of 
the SHGs, lack of focus on the programme by States etc.  Due to these shortcomings, many SHGs became 
defunct or were not of good quality.  Under NRLM, it is proposed to do a mapping of the existing SHGs, 
and wherever possible, s trengthen them through long term handholding by NRLM professionals and 
thereby ensure their effectiveness and sustainability.  Once sufficient number of good quality SHGs are 
available, they will be federated at village level initially and subsequently at higher levels.  Forming 
institutions of the poor, including federations of the SHGs at various levels, is the key focus area of NRLM.  
Federations are expected to play a major role in the community in terms of financial intermediation on 
behalf of its memb ers and also provide voice and space to the rural poor women. Hence all states will be 
encouraged to ensure that federations of SHGs at various levels are formed in the States. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 2.21) 
 
 The Committee note that establishment of Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) in 
every District of the Country is stated objective of NRLM -Ajeevika. The Committee find that 535 RSETIs 
have been established out of 608 Districts of the country till date. Out of these 535 RSETIs, 319 have been 
established by banks and rest 216 RSETIs have established by MoRD grant. The Committee also note that 
5.47 lakh beneficiaries has been trained by these RSETIs during the period of 2010 to 2013.  The 
Committee are of opinion that establishment of RSETIs will go a long way to professionalise training under 
NRLM-Ajeevika. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to constitute RSETIs in States 

31 
 
               
 
where these have not been set up.   The Committee also reco mmend the Department to enhance target of 
training of rural youth by RSETIs. The Committee may be apprised about the steps taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.   As on 31.3.2013, 565 
Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) have started functioning in the country.  During the 
year 2013-14 an enhanced training target of 2,55,200 has been fixed for the RSETIs.  It is also planned to 
focus on settlement of candidates with bank linkages.  
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 2.22) 
 
 The Committee note that 5% of the Central allocation under Aajeevika is earmarked for innovations  
which have the potential for reaching out specifically to the poorest or for reaching out to the largest 
number of poor and having maximum impact with limite d resources. The Committee have been informed 
that no funds have been earmarked for innovations under NRLM during the last two years and Rs. 67.39 
crore have been utilized for innovations for innovation projects in 13 States and one multi -State project 
during the period of 2010 -13. The Committee are astonished to know that the Department has incurred 
expenditure on projects for innovations despite not earmarking funds for the same. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the exact situation on this anoma ly. At the same time, the Committee also 
recommend the Department to encourage the reputed organisations working in field of rural development 
for submitting proposal under innovation component of Ajeevika. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry released Rs. 67.39 crores towards Central share in respect of Special Projects 
(Innovative) which were sanctioned under Swaranjayanti Gram Swarojgar Yojana (SGSY). SGSY has been 
restructured into National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) and 5% of total allocation under NRLM is 
earmarked for Innovative projects. This Ministry is finalizing/formulating the Guidelines for the projects to be 
considered under innovative theme keeping in view the aims and objectives of NRLM. The projects under 
Innovative component will be invited after the finalization of Guidelines. 
 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 2.23) 
 
 The Committee note that “Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyojana” (MKSP) as a sub component of 
the Aajeevika is being implemented to meet the specific needs of women farmers and achieve socio -
economic and technical empowerment of rural women farmers. The Committee note  that  47 projects 

32 
 
               
 
under MKSP from the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat West Bengal including one multi State project 
from Central Silk Board has been sanctioned by the Department. The Committee have been informed that 
33 projects covering 22, 38,700 women farmers under MKSP are being implemented in 7 States with total 
project cost of Rs. 573.47 crore. The Committee are of view that encouragement to women farmers i s 
urgent necessity for their empowerment and MKSP is a good step towards that goal. However, there is 
need to enhance number of projects under the scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to enhance awareness towards this critical component of NRLM- Ajeevika and encourage rural 
women SHGs and reputed organizations to submit more proposals.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All States are being encouraged to submit proposals for funding through MKSP component.  The 
Ministry has already organized  three workshops at regional levels and proposes to organize more, 
particularly in the North East region in order to familiarize the States and likely MKSP partners with the 
concept of MKSP and to support them in project formulation.  In fact, the States a re now being encouraged 
to undertake MKSP projects through the State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLMs) for which they are 
required to formulate their Action plan for funding support by MoRD.  This will enable larger number of 
projects to be taken up in the country and hence larger coverage of women farmers. 
 
 [O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 2.24) 
 
 The Committee note that 100% central assistance scheme “Himayat” has been launched in Jammu 
& Kashmir for Skill Empowerment and Employment of youth.  It envisages covering one lakh youth from 
rural & urban areas during 2011 -16s. It will cover all youth with diverse educatio n background i.e school 
dropout, under graduate etc. 70% of the funds will be utilized for skilled wage employment and remaining 
30% for self employment. The Committee find that 7793 beneficiaries have been trained till 31.01.2013 
under the scheme against the target of 9000.  The Committee have also been informed that 5228 trained 
youth have been given placement in various sector such as BPO, garment sector etc. The Committee also 
note that two senior Officers have been positioned in J & K for effective mon itoring of the scheme.   The 
Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Department to provide training and employment to youth in J 
&K.  The Committee would like the Department to take steps to increase awareness about the Scheme 
among youth in the State. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department must take every action to 
achieve the objective and target as set under the scheme under intimation to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Mandate under HIMAYAT is to train and place 100,000 youth from J&K in organized sectors over a 
five year period (2011-12 to 2016-17). Priority will be given to youth who are school drop-outs, have studied 
up to 10th class or 12th class and those who are college drop-outs.  
 
 

33 
 
               
 
ii. The year wise target to be achieved under HIMAYAT is as given below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii. As on 10 th May, 2013, 7929 youth have been trained by the four PIAs (IL& FS, India Can, Don 
Bosco and Cap Foundation) and 5434 have been placed in jobs. 
iv. To further ensure that the intended target for the year 2013 -14 is achieved, MoRD has sanctioned 
5 new projects to Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs) under HIMAYAT, and t hese new PIAs are likely to 
start implementation of the project in 2013-14. 
v. Projects for imparting training under Self Employment Training components have been received by 
the Ministry and soon training for self employment would also be initiated in J&K under HIMAYAT. 
 
vi. To ensure effective implementation of HIMAYAT, MoRD, GoI has signed an MoU with Govt of J&K.  
Accordingly, Govt of J&K has designated JKEDI as the Himayat Mission Management Unit (HMMU) and 
MoRD will extend all technical and budgetary support to the HMMU for implementation of HIMAYAT. 
 
 
The Project is being implemented in Mission mode with focus on retention of youth at jobs.  With 
new PIAs and effective implementation arrangement in the State of J&K, focused efforts are on to achieve 
the desired targets under HIMAYAT. 
 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 2.25) 
 
 The Committee note that Rs.26,259 crore were allocated during first two years out of  80,085 crore 
have been approved by Planning Commission for implementation of IAY during the twelfth Plan period. The 
Committee also note that  during 2012 -13, allocation  for IAY  was reduced to Rs. 9024  crore at RE stage 
as against BE of Rs. 11,075 crore. The Committee are dismayed to note that allocation for IAY has been 
reduced due to  failure of States to fulfil essential condition of uploading data on the MIS Awaassoft before 
the release of 2 nd installment.  The Committee are of view that the Department should take proactive steps 
to enable States to fulfill essential condition for release of funds under IAY as failure of doing so cause 
immense hardship to needy people in rural areas. The Committ ee would like to apprise about the steps 
taken in this regard. 
 
  
Financial Year Number of Youth to be trained 
2013-14 19000 
2014-15 22000 
2015-16 25000 
2016-17 25000 

34 
 
               
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Indira Awaas Yojana is being continuously reviewed on the basis of Monthly and Annual Reports 
received from the States/UTs.  An online monitoring mechanism has been put in place to enable DRDAs to 
upload their monthly progress reports onto the website of the Ministry, called  „AwaasSoft‟ which is a local 
language enabled workflow based transaction level Management Information System to facilitate e -
governance in the S ystem.  The System is designed for all the Stakeholders of IAY including the 
beneficiaries of the scheme.  The portal http://iay.nic.in is accessible to all including the 
national/international Community.  The objectives of  AwaasSoft are work flow automation, transparency in 
the system, information exchange thereby empowering the stakeholders.  Data of beneficiaries is being 
uploaded in this software by the States.  Photographs of the houses under various stages of construct ion 
are also being uploaded. 
 
 The programme is also reviewed at the meetings with the state Secretaries of Rural Development 
and with the Project Directors of DRDAs every year.  The provision of 0.5%of total allocation as 
administrative expenditure from c urrent year will help State Governments to organize workshops at 
State/District level and train officials to upload the IAY data on AwaasSoft efficiently thereby enabling timely 
release of fund to achieve targets.  To ensure that all States/DRDAs are on bo ard to upload data on MIS, a 
series of workshops were organized.  States/UTs have nominated Nodal Officer for AwaasSoft.   
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 2.27) 
 
 The Committee find that Homestead Scheme has been launched as Demand driven sub -
componenet under IAY   aims to provide land to rural BPL households who do not have any land to 
construct houses. The Committee dismayed to note that funds allocated to 8 States for 
purchase/acquisition of  6,94,933 homestead sites during 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 were not utilized and 
amount released during 2009 -10 and 2010 -11has been adjusted against normal IAY grants of respective 
States. The Committee also find that no release has been made under the scheme after 2010 -11. The 
Committee recall that in their Thirtieth Report while criticizing “Demand driven” nature of scheme, they have 
recommended the Department to initiate a quick stud y to pragmatically analyse the shortcomings of the 
demand driven approach of scheme so that timely action for re -transforming the scheme to target -oriented 
approach may be taken. The Committee once again reiterate their recommendation and desire the 
Department to make homestead scheme a regular scheme. At the same time, funding ratio of 50:50 should 
be suitably changed in consultation with all States.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Homestead scheme was launched on 24th August, 2009 as part of IAY, for providing 
homestead sites to those rural BPL households whose names are included in the Permanent IAY Waitlists 
but who have neither agricultural land nor house site.  Assistance under the scheme has been increased 
from Rs.10,000/- to Rs.20,000/- per homestead site w.e.f. 1.4.2013.   Funding is shared by the Centre and 
the States in the ratio of 50:50.     

35 
 
               
 
 IAY guidelines have been revised and provisions, which address the concern of the Committee, 
regarding the Homestead Scheme are indicated below:- 
 
Para 3.2.3: Provision of house sites 
 
1.      State Governments may notify the entitlements for house sites in their respective states.  If justified, 
this could vary within the State.  Different extents of land may be prescribed for different localities based on 
the availability of land and its cost.  Ideally 10 cents of land should be provided. 
2. For the house sites component, the District Collector should identify public lands available in the 
habitations and allot them to the eligible landless.  In case public la nd is not available the required land may 
be purchased by following the procedure prescribed by the State government.  If this is not possible, land 
acquisition may be undertaken as the last resort.   
3. If money provided under the scheme is not sufficient, a dditional funds may be provided by the State 
Government.  If the beneficiary is willing to purchase the land she may be reimbursed the eligible amount 
after due verification.  States should issue detailed guidelines for this component. 
The States may prepare projects for providing houses to all such landless people who have been given 
land sites and give special priority to them under IAY.  Once the details of such landless people to be given 
housing sites are available, Ministry of Rura l Development would earmark a stream of IAY funds 
exclusively for the benefit of this group based on a formula and this amount would be non-divertible.   
. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 28, Para No. 2.28) 
 The Committee note that IAY beneficiary can take a loan upto Rs. 20,000/ -per housing unit @ 4% 
per annum under differential rate of interest (DRI) scheme. However, the Committee examination has 
revealed that only 26,131 beneficiaries have availed loan unde r DRI till date. The Committee have been 
informed that difficulties such as eligibility of only SC/ST category for loan under DRI, consideration of 
eligibility of income ceiling and land -holdings applicable to other beneficiaries of DRI being applied for I AY 
beneficiaries desirous of taking loan under DRI is leading to such bad performance. The Committee have 
also been informed that matter is being taken with Ministry of Finance/RBI for directing all banks to allow 
beneficiaries of IAY to avail loan facilit ies under DRI 131 scheme irrespective of income ceiling and 
eligibility criteria. The Committee are of view that apart from reason mentioned by the Department, failure of 
the Department to increase awareness about these provision of IAY is main reason for such bad 
performance of loan disbursal under DRI scheme to IAY beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to start aggressive awareness campaign for benefits available under IAY 
including facilities of loan in order to provide relief to large section of poor people in rural areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In revised IAY guidelines new strategy has been adopted to make beneficiary aware of the scheme 
and help the beneficiary in getting the loan.  Following provisions have been made:- 
 

36 
 
               
 
(iv) Mobilisation of DRI Loans 
 
Nationalized Banks have been instructed by the RBI to provide loans upto Rs.20,000/ - per house 
at an interest rate of 4% per annum under the  Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) Scheme to SC/ST 
beneficiaries. To ensure its implementation, the following methodology is suggested:  
(a)  Hold a meeting of State Level Bankers Committees (SLBC) to discuss the scheme and take 
collective decision on modalities; 
(b) Assign responsibilities to the DLBC as per district level targets;  
(c) At the district level, bank-wise targets may be finalized according to their service area;  
(d) Once the beneficiary selection is finalized, in the initial meeting of the beneficiaries, applications for 
DRI loan should be collected and submitted in the ban k branch concerned. A functionary may be 
assigned the task of following up these applications. 
(e) Monitoring of the sanction of DRI loans should be done at the block, district and state levels 
including at BLBC/DLBC/SLBC levels. At the district and state level, a senior officer should be 
made responsible for responding to grievances related to non -sanction of DRI loans and sort them 
out in consultation with the banks concerned. 
 
(v) Mobilisation of other loans 
 
States may also arrange loans from banks, including cooperative banks to IAY beneficiaries, to 
supplement the grant assistance, in a schematic manner. The maximum amount of such loan could be 
Rs.50,000/- and the  rate of interest could be subsidized on prompt payment. Detailed guidelines may be 
issued after working out the scheme in consultation with the banks and cooperatives. Wherever such loans 
are provided, the beneficiaries have to be sensitized on repayment requirements and their willingness 
obtained.  
 
(vi) Formulation of subsidy-linked projects availing loans from banks/financial institutions: 
 
State Governments are free to formulate projects which would provide subsidy using IAY funds 
(within the amount permissible), linked to assured loans from banks including cooperative banks or 
financial ins titutions like HUDCO. For coordinating implementation, the States could use the services of 
organizations of repute and meet their service charges from the provision for administrative expenses and if 
they are not sufficient, from state funds.  Such specia l projects need the prior approval of the Empowered 
Committee. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated:   22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
               
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 32, Para No. 2.32) 
 
 On the issue of restructuring of PURA scheme which is being implemented on Public private 
participation (PPP) mode since 2010, the Committee note that the two pilot projects launched in 
Malappuram and Thrissur Districts of Kerala during 2012 are yet to tak e off as Private developer i.e. INKEL 
is still in the process of getting local level approvals and is reworking the work schedule to start actual 
construction.  The Committee note that Department is also evaluating proposals received from private 
sector fo r next set of 10 -15 pilots during Twelfth Plan under PURA.  The Committee have also been 
informed that there is a proposal to up -scale the scheme by carrying out appropriate modifications in the 
scheme to include more areas during the 12th Five Year Plan and making a funding pattern for PURA Grant 
in the ratio of 80:20 between Central and State Governments.  The Committee are of the view that the 
Department has inordinately delayed the execution of projects as envisaged under noble concept of PURA 
and nothing worthwhile has been put up on the ground even after incurring considerable expenditure.  The 
Committee have brought this failure of the Department in their earlier reports.  At the same time by 
adopting PPP mode, the Department is not promoting Panchaya ti Raj Institutions to participate actively in 
execution of these projects as they were not encouraged to put up proposals under restructured PURA 
scheme.  The Committee are of considered view that there is enough talent and ability among many PRIs 
in diff erent parts of the country and those, if given opportunity and support may not only successfully 
implement such projects but also enlist popular participation under programmes for rural development.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to ta ke steps to make provision for participation of PRIs 
as implementing agencies for the program and make efforts to encourage them to submit proposal.  The 
Department may also take steps to provide them necessary technical and financial support through NIRD 
and respective SIRDs.  The Committee would like to apprise the steps taken in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The concept of Public Private Partnership (PPP) in rural development is a new paradigm.  The 
process of implementing the Scheme under PPP  mode involved understanding the concept itself by all 
stakeholders which include State Governments, Gram Panchayats, other Ministries/Departments of the 
Government of India, besides calling for Expression of Interest from potential private developers, evaluating 
the EOIs and short -listing of private developers.  In addition, the PURA envisages convergence of various 
schemes of MoRD and other Ministries besides bringing in private capital for rural development in an 
earmarked cluster of gram panchayats.  Ma ndatory requirements of support of the State Governments and 
the concerned Panchayat(s) for the PURA projects and ensuring coordination between multiple -agencies 
are the other major aspects that have to be tackled before a project is approved for implement ation.   Thus, 
it may be seen that the scheme is more process oriented.   
             
 The Scheme Guidelines provide for an agreement between Gram Panchayat and the private 
partner that makes the restructured PURA a model for empowerment of Gram Panchayats and public 
accountability.  The Training and Capacity Building under PURA envisages enhancing the knowledge and 
capacity of various stakeholders including the Gram Panchayats.    
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 

38 
 
               
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 35, Para No. 2.35) 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that most important Schemes of DoRD of Management 
support to Rural Development Programmes and Strengthening of District Planning Committee has seen 
experiencing big gap between releases and utilization of  funds during 2011 -12 and 2012 -13. For instance 
the Committee find that as against the total release of Rs. 7706.26 lakh the utilization was only Rs. 4650.28 
lakh during 2011 -12. From the state -wise details of releases and utilization the Committee find th at in 
respect of J&K no funds have been utilized out of total releases of Rs. 760.15 lakh. Also in respect of Tamil 
Nadu of Rs. 1337.78 lakh releases, the utilization is as low as Rs. 101.17 lakh. Similarly, in respect of other 
States like Chhattisgarh, Ke rala, Odisha, Punjab, Uttarakhand there are huge gap between releases and 
utilization. During 2012-13, the Committee find that out of releases of Rs. 6886.81 lakh only Rs.48.50 lakh 
have been shown as amount utilized only in one State i.e. Andhra Pradesh. The Committee find an 
explanation has been given by DoRD stating that the utilization certificates for the grant released in 2012 -
13 will be submitted by SIRDs and ETCs alongwith the fresh proposals. The Committee are not of all 
satisfied with the overall fund releases and utilization of this scheme across the States. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that DoRD should have a proper vigil on utilization of funds through regular video 
conferencing in all States and by sending Central teams in States like J&K a nd Tamil Nadu where there 
has been no utilization so far. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under the Scheme “Management Support to RD Programmes and Strengthening of District 
Planning Process”, non-recurring grants, by way of 100% funding support, are provided by Department for 
infrastructural development of SIRDs and ETCs.  SIRDs are also given  100% funding support for 
placement of five core faculty members and 50% of other recurring and administrative expenses.  In case 
of ETCs, a maximum amount of Rs.20.00 lakh per annum is provided to each ETC towards recurring 
expenditure.  Funds are also pr ovided under the scheme of OTC for conducting seminars, workshops etc. 
to train the rural development functionaries in the implementation of rural development programmes in 
States/UTs. An updated statement showing State -wise release of funds and Utilizatio n thereof in 2011 -12 
and 2012-13 is given in Appendix - III. Out of a total of Rs.2706.31 lakh released to SIRDs and ETCs as 
recurring grants and for OTCs during 2011 -12, the unutilized amount is only Rs.5.00 lakh.  The grants for 
non-recurring expenditure  are to be utilized within a period of 18 months. States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Arunachal Pradesh, J&K, Kerala, Odisha, Punjab and Uttarakhand who have not utilized these grants given 
in 2011-12 within the stipulated period of 18 months have been asked to retu rn the unutilized moneys or 
seek extension of time for reasons of merit. SIRD in the State of Tamil Nadu has reported that the non -
utilization was due to delay in finalization of tenders etc. for civil works. A team from the Department has 
already visited SIRD, Tamil Nadu and has reported that the tender process has been completed and the 
work is expected to pick up fast. 
2. Major share of the non -recurring grants are for civil works. The progress of civil works is regularly 
monitored by NIRD through freque nt visits of technical consultants and their reports are taken into account 
while considering requests for release of further installments. 
3. All the States which have not reported full utilization of recurring grants and funds for OTCs 
released during th e year 2012 -13 have been requested to furnish updated reports and reasons for non -
utilization, if any. Utilization Certificates and Audit Reports in respect of funds released in the previous year 
are invariably considered before release of funds. Therefore , the States even though have not reported 
expenditure so far, will have to utilize the funds to become entitled for further funds in 2013-14.  
 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development 
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 

39 
 
               
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 36, Para No. 2.36) 
 
The Committee observe that meetings of both State and District level V&MCs are not being held 
quarterly as provided in the guidelines of V& MCs. The Committee note that none of the States have held 
the stipulated number of meetings of State V&MCs except West Bengal during the last two years, whereas 
the Committee have been informed that major hurdles in achieving the target of holding quarterl y meetings 
as reported by the States/Districts include delay on the part of Chairman in indicating the date for the 
Meeting, postponement due to inability of the Chairman to attend the Meeting, elections, preoccupation of 
Member Secretary, etc. However, th e Committee examination has revealed that Members of Parliament 
are not getting adequate co -operation of State and local administration in holding meetings of V & MCs at 
State and District level. In this connection the issue of non -holding of V&MC meetings in Kacheepuram and 
Shivaganga Districts in Tamil Nadu for a very long time came up before the Committee. The Committee 
have been informed that the Department has communicated and interacted with Chief Secretary of Tamil 
Nadu for holding V&MC meetings in t hese Districts. The Committee have also been informed that the 
Ministry has so far not withheld release of funds to any District for failure to convene meetings of V&MCs 
regularly. The Committee are of view that V&MCs are important mechanism for monitoring  of programmes 
of rural development and it help to enhance speedy implementation of scheme at ground level alongwith 
reducing corruption in the scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to vigorously 
take the matter with State Governments concerned in order to ensure regular meetings of V &MCs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
After the formation of XV Lok Sabha, the Ministry advised all State Governments/district 
administrations to reconstitute the Committees vide order dated 26 th August 2009 an d nominated 
Chairman/Co-Chairman for district Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (VMCs). The guidelines have 
subsequently been revised and a provision has also been made in the guidelines to make the Member 
Secretary of the Committees personally responsib le for convening the Meetings. The importance of re -
constitution of VMCs at State and district levels and holding regular Meetings, at stipulated intervals, is 
invariably stressed in the Performance Review Committee Meetings, which are held on a quarterly basis, 
with State Secretaries of Rural Development. The matter regarding VMC meetings in Tamil Nadu was 
taken up with the Chief Secretary, Tamil Nadu by the Union Secretary (Rural Development) on 16 -11-2011. 
The States/UTs have also been reminded on 5.06.2 012, that the guidelines allow the Member Secretaries 
to convene the Meeting within 15 days of end of each quarter, in consultation with Co -Chairman, if the 
Chairman failed to indicate a date for the Meeting during the quarter. They have also been reminded  on 
19.12.2012, that the Member Secretary shall be personally responsible for convening Meetings.  
 
The Ministry has been pursuing the matter regarding regular meetings of VMCs with all the States. 
Recently, on 22.05.2013, the Hon‟ble Minister of Rural Development has again addressed the Chief 
Minister of all States advising them to impress upon the conc erned officials for holding meetings of State 
and District level VMCs in their State in accordance with the guidelines.  
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 

40 
 
               
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 37, Para No. 2.37) 
 
The Committee are  constrained to note that DoRD has reflected a huge amount of Rs. 26,363.03 
crore as unspent balances in their outcome Budget (2013 -14) laid before Parliament showing Rs. 
14,545.47 crore as unspent in MGNREGA, Rs. 5,788.58 crore under PMGSY, Rs. 4,646.99 c rore under 
IAY and Rs. 1,387.99 crore under Aajeevika programme. With respect of unspent funds under MGNREGA, 
the Committee have been informed that these reflect a sustainable flow of funds towards meeting any 
eventuality and any unsurge of labour demand d uring the last quarter. The Committee have been further 
informed that as on 28.03.2013 the States/UTs have reported an unspent balances of Rs. 8,473.89 crore 
including committed liabilities of Rs. 3,019.66 crore. Similarly, for unspent balance under PMGSY the 
Committee have been informed that these funds can be utilized against on going works of any phase. For 
unspent balance under IAY the Committee have been informed that these are mainly due to release of 
funds in the third quarter of 2012 -13 of Rs. 546.4 6 crore and special package sanctioned to States 
amounting to Rs. 1157.99 crore as well as slow implementation of IAY in may districts. The Committee 
have also been informed that construction of houses under IAY usually spill over to next year and it is 
expected that allocation will be fully utilized. Meanwhile for ensuring better flow of funds to States Revised 
Guidelines for IAY are being formulated that may be fnzlized by 2013 -14. In the case of NRLM the 
Committee find that DoRD have candidly admitted be fore the Committee that unspent balance are large 
and these would be utilized in last quarter of 2012 -13. In this connection, the Committee recall that they 
during the last years examination of Demands for Grants of DoRD had revealed non -receipt of proposa ls 
for second installment from State Governments with necessary financial documents after reaching 
prescribed expenditure of 60% of toal available funds, the Committee had recommended to set up a study 
to go into the reasons behind accumulation & unspent b alance with States. In this connection, the 
Committee find that the issue is under consideration with DoRD and though an agency viz. the National 
Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) has submitted a proposal to undertake the study, the sameis 
yet to be entrusted to NIPFP. The Committee disapprove the delay on the part of DoRD to set up the study 
as recommended by the Committee and desire that DoRD to go for it without any further delay so that its 
findings are made available in time for wiping out unspent balances under different schemes of DoRD. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
MGNREGA 
One of the reasons for large amount of unspent balances in MGNREGA is the architecture of the 
scheme.  At least 50% of the funds are required to be spent by Panchayats.  T he total number of 
Implementing agencies in the country is more than 2,50,000.  Even small amounts remaining unspent with 
these implementing agencies add up to a huge number. 
 In spite of this constraint, the Ministry has focused on this problem, as a result of which, unspent 
balances with the states have come down.   
 The following table gives the figures of unspent balances as reported by States/UTs for the last 
three years:   
 
S. No. Year Unspent Balance (Rs. in crores) 
1. 2010-11 Rs. 15450.13 
2. 2011-12 Rs. 10009.09 
3. 2012-13 Rs.   4274.65 
 

41 
 
               
 
PMGSY 
Funds, in accordance to programme guidelines, are released to State/UT government based on 
their absorption capacity and utilization of available unspent balance. The unspent balance on 1 st April, 
2012 was Rs. 8,884.55 crore, which is reduced to the tune of Rs. 4,761 crore as on 1 st April, 2013. As per 
the release procedure under PMGSY guidelines, the first installment is 50% of cleared value, though these 
funds are not idle, as they are par t of pool of Programme Funds available with SRRDAs. As such these 
funds are to meet the cost of all ongoing works including those nearing completion; therefore, availability of 
some levels of unspent balance at SRRDAs level is a necessity as per programme guidelines.  
 
IAY 
 In IAY during the year 2012 -13 an amount of Rs.4646.98 crore has been lying as unspent balance 
with the States and UTs (upto December 31 st, 2012).  This is mainly due to release of  funds  in the third 
quarter of 2012 -13 (Rs.546.46 crore) and special package sanctioned to the states amounting to  
Rs.1157.93 crores as well as slow implementation of the programme in many districts. 
 
The releases of funds under IAY are linked to stages of cons truction of the house.  IAY 
beneficiaries are provided assistance in three instalments by the District Administration.  The construction 
of houses in IAY usually spill over to next year. 
  
In order to utilize the unspent balances available with the State G overnments the Ministry of Rural 
Development has taken a number of initiatives in the recent past. 
 
1. Constant monitoring of implementation of scheme through MIS Awaassoft. 
2. The states are provided additional incentives in terms of physical targets, keeping i n view the 
availability of funds annually, for better physical performance and gainful utilization of central 
assistance. 
3. To ensure that States incur expenditure on the scheme efficiently and timely during the year, 
second installment is released only when 60% of total available funds are utilized by the district. 
4. To maintain financial discipline, a mandatory deduction (s) on account of late submission of 
proposal by the state government shall be imposed depending upon the date of receipt of complete 
proposal for release of second instalment under IAY.  Under the system, there will be progressive 
deductions for proposal(s) received in the month of January and February @10% and 20% 
respectively on the total central allocation for the year.   Incomplete propos als will not be accepted.  
The date on which last information is received from the State shall be treated as date of receipt of 
the proposal. 
5. The performance of the IAY scheme of the states is reviewed through quarterly Performance 
Review Committee Meetings, State Coordinating Officers Meeting from time to time. 
6. The officers of the Ministry visit states at regular interval to review physical and financial 
performance of Indira Awaas Yojana. 
 
In order to make the guidelines more effective the Ministry undert ook a consultative process where 
experts, state governments and other stakeholder were invited to give their inputs.  Based on the 
inputs/suggestions received, Ministry has finalized the revision of IAY guidelines. Revised guidelines for 
IAY are likely to facilitate better fund flow to state governments as well as coordinated implementation at 
state level. 
 

42 
 
               
 
Following the recommendation of the Committee, the National Institute of Public Finance and 
Policy (NIPFP) has been entrusted a study titled “Understand ing High Unspent Balances and Fund Flow 
Mechanism in Major Rural Development Programmes” on 13th June, 2013.  NIPFP is to submit the report in 
nine months. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated:   22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 38, Para No. 2.38) 
 
 The Committee are  unhappy to note that due to under -utilisation of funds DoRD has been 
surrendering funds year after year. For instance during 2011-12, the level of funds surrendered was as high 
as Rs. 12,153.34 crore which by 2012 -13 rose to the level of Rs.23,012 crore i .e. nearly double than the 
previous year. The Committee have been informed by DoRD that surrender of funds is largely due to large 
opening balances of the year and also due to slow pace of expenditure. The Committee also find that of 
Rs.23,013 crore funds surrendered during 2012 -13 major funds are under  PMGSY over Rs. 15,000.00 
crore, followed by relatively lesser funds under MGNREGA, SGSY, PURA and other DoRD schemes. The 
Committee find that factors like absorption capacity, contracting capacity, areas sp ecific issues etc. in 
PMGSY and other factor have been shown as reasons for surrender of funds under IAY, Aajeevika 
Schemes. The Committee also find that under DoRD non -receipt of utilization certificates of 2011 -12 has 
been attributed surrender of Rs. 112 crore during 2012-13. Similarly non-requirement of funds under PURA 
due to lack of required approvals of projects was reason for surrender of Rs. 150 crore under PURA. As 
recommended earlier in the Report the Committee recommend that DoRD should take nece ssary action in 
coordination with States to utilize the funds right from Start of the financial year. For this the Planning 
process has to be initiated well before start of the year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Noted for compliance. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated:   22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 

43 
 
               
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DONOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 2.26) 
 
 On the issue of enhancement of per unit assistance in hilly and difficult areas, the Committee have  
been informed that per unit assistance grant to BPL families under IAY has been enhanced from Rs. 
48,500 Rs.75,000 respectively for  difficult/ hi lly areas. The Committee have also been informed that it 
would not be feasible to go in further enhancement at this juncture. The Committee are of considered view 
that cost of construction material and labour in hilly and difficult areas are much higher th an plain areas and 
any Government scheme should always be formulated keeping these difficulties in mind. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to re -examine this issue for enhancing suitably per unit assistance 
under IAY for hilly and difficult areas. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The unit assistance under IAY has been enhanced recently by the Cabinet.   It is not possible to 
enhance the unit assistance further at this stage. However, the Ministry will consider the same at 
appropriate time. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated:   22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
  

44 
 
               
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE  
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.8) 
 
 The Committee find wide variance between the  NSSO data as reflected its own MGNREGA 
Sameeksha document showing only 35 percent rural job cards holders households and its own assessment 
that the data might not reflect real time data instead the DoRD has relied on MIS data maintained by DoRD 
showing the figure as 60%.  The Committee are not convinced with the approach of DoRD of showing two 
data for coverage of rural households under MGNREGA one by NSSO and other  by MIS as it may lead to 
confusion.  They, therefore, feel that a single reliable data for coverage of rural households under 
MGNREGA be maintained by DoRD. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NSSO data are based on survey conducted by them in randomly selected NSSO regions on the 
basis of the methodology adopted by them whereas the data reflected in MIS is real time data as fed into 
the system by the States. Since its inception (upto 17.6.2013) 12.72 cr. Rural households have been issued 
job cards. This indicates that 76% of total rural households [16.85 cr.: Census 2011] have been provided 
with job cards. Since the data reported is in cumulative figure, the number of households provided 
employment captured in MIS undergoes constant change.  Variance in the data of NSSO and MIS can also 
be attributed to the fact that in certain states, the number of job cards issued is seen to be more than the 
number of households indicated.  To ensure reliabilit y of data, the revised Operational Guidelines 2013 
have mandated the States/UTs to verify the genuineness of the job cards held by the households in a 
locality.  
 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.10) 
 
 The Committee feel dissatisfied to note that primary objective of MGNREGA for enhancing the 
livelihood security of the rural household by providing minimum 100 days of guaranteed wage employment 
in a year to every household on demand for doing unskilled ma nual work has hardly been achieved in the 
light of the fact that out of 5.04 crore households and 4.15 crore households who were provided 
employment during 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 as low as 40.54 lakh households and 43.65 lakh respectively 
could get 100 days o f employment.  The Committee have been informed by DoRD about various steps 
taken like organising Rozgar Diwas at least once in every month at Gram Panchayat level for increasing 
awareness about MGNREGA.  The Secretary, DoRD also submitted before the Commi ttee that States are 

45 
 
               
 
being asked to generate demand.  The Ministry's contention is that objectives of MGNREGA is also to 
supplement the income of rural household and it is not intended to be sole means of earning livelihood for 
rural population and that wo rkers are free to avail any other employment opportunities available to them.   
The Committee find the contention of DoRD untenable when there is huge gap between employment 
provided and rural household given 100 days of employment.   The Committee feel th at the essence of 
MGNREGA programme is not only to enhance the livelihood security to the rural households by providing 
them upto 100 days of employment but also entrusted a duty to implementing agency to generate the 
demand for work.   The Committee there fore, feel that DoRD should take urgent steps in coordination with 
State Governments for providing 100 days of guaranteed employment to maximum households out of 4 -5 
crore households who demand work. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The mandate of MGNREGA is to s upplement the income of the rural households by providing at 
least 100 days of wage employment on demand. While various measures like expanding the scope of 
employment by inclusion of more works in Schedule-1, increasing the administrative expenditure, grievance 
redressal mechanism, awareness generation etc., have been taken up by the Ministry, the responsibility of 
providing employment to the job seekers lie with the respective State Government/implementing agencies, 
whereas the onus of demanding work lie with the job card holders.  Adequate provisions are also enshrined 
in the Act wherein the job seekers are entitled to unemployment allowance in the event of work not being 
provided within the specified period. Similarly, delay in payment of wages, within t he specified period is 
required to be compensated. These provisions in the MGNREGA, act as a deterrent to States in denying 
employment or in delaying payment of wages.  However, the employment generation of a minimum 100 
days would depend on the realistic projection of labour demand by the States and the actual demand from 
the job card holders.  
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that there are two independent assessments available in 
DoRD on the issue of durability and availability of assets crea ted under MGNREGA across the States. The 
Committee also find that whatever assessment about utility and durability of assets under MGNREGA has 
been made available to the Committee are from the few States of Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Bihar,  Gujarat and Kerala. The Committee feel that although these assessment though 
confirmed by NSSO, yet may not hold true in respect of other States. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend a nationwide assessment in this regard to be made by DoRD.     
 
Reply of the Government 
Para 2 of  Schedule I of  MGNREGA 2005 stipulates that creation of durable assets and 
strengthening the livelihood resource base of the rural poor shall be an important objective of the Scheme. 

46 
 
               
 
Effective implementation of the scheme has the po tential to transform rural areas by creating durable 
assets that would not only enhance the livelihood security of rural poor but result in substantial 
infrastructural development in rural areas.  While Schedule-I of the Act stipulates the permissible works that 
can be taken up, it was felt that there may still be doubts in the minds of the implementing agencies as to 
its interpretation. Accordingly the revised Operational Guidelines 2013 delineates a negative list of works 
under MGNREGA.  It explicitly mentions that items of expenditure that are recurring in nature and/or do not 
lead to creation of durable assets, are not permitted under MGNREGA. A detailed negative list of such 
works are indicated in Para 7.3 and Appendix 2 of the guidelines. Impact of the se recent revised guidelines 
on creation of durable assets is yet to be assessed /quantified.    
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated:   22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
  

47 
 
               
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARESTILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.11) 
 
 The Committee are  constrained to note that for timely payment of wages under MGNREGA not 
much progress has been made with regard to Electronic Fund Management System e -FMS under 
MGNREGA by use of crore Banking System of Banks and NEFT/RTGS/ECS system in several States.  
The Committee find only 19 States have started Total Fund Transfer Orders (FTO). The Committee also 
find that good progress has been made in the States of Gujarat, Karnataka, Odisha and Rajasthan.  In this 
connection, the Committee find that DoRD had recomme nded all States to disburse wages through Post 
Offices and Banks. The Committee recommend that DoRD should ensure that other States the work of e 
FMS must pick up as has been done in from States of Gujarat, Karnataka, Odisha and Rajasthan so that 
timely payment of wages is ensured to beneficiaries under MGNREGA.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has already chalked out a tentative schedule for the States to shift over to e -FMS by 
March, 2014.  By end of June, 2013 all districts of Karnataka, Gujarat, Orissa and Rajasthan are required to 
shift over to e-FMS for making all types of payments viz. wages, material and administrative expenses at all 
locations.  All 46 districts identified for Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) shall also start payments through 
Aadhaar Payment Bridge (APB).  All remaining States excluding North -Eastern states are to switch over to 
e-FMS in September, 2013 and NE states by December, 2013.  By March, 2014, it is expected that all the 
States would be switching over to e-FMS for all types of payments under MGNREGA. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated:   22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.17) 
 
 The Committee find  that under PMGSY in Andaman & Nicobar Islands, the Department has 
cleared 18 proposals of the value of Rs. 18 crore upto December, 2012. However, Administration of 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands has failed to construct any road till date. The Committee also no te that special 
audit of PMGSY works  conducted by the Department has brought out many irregularities such as non -
imposition of penalty for delay, non -revalidation of Performance Bank Guarantee, upward revision of cost 
estimates without the approval of MoR D, diversion of funds to other Departments/Sectors, non - 
maintenance of cash books , submission of final bills not signed by the Engineer concerned etc. The 
Committee has also been informed that Department is still awaiting response of Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands Administration on special audit report. The Committee are of strong view that irregularities under 
PMGSY work in A & N islands as reported the special audit are of serious nature. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to take the matter with the Ministry of Home Affairs to initiate steps 
to lodge criminal cases against those found responsible for such gross irregularities and inform the 

48 
 
               
 
Committee accordingly. At the same time, the Committee also recommend the Department to impress upon 
the local administration for speedy submission of fresh proposals for construction of roads in rural areas of 
A & N Islands. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Central Team has visited UT of Andaman & Nicobar Island on 9 -12th April, 2013 to review the 
implementation of PMGSY including the quality of roads. The report of the Central Team has been received 
and discussed with Chief Secretary of A&N Island in the meeting held on 29 th April, 2013 at New Delhi.  
The minutes of the meeting is given at Appendix - I. During the meeting, the UT was impressed upon the 
need for completing all PMGSY roads immediately. UT was further advised to send an Action Taken Report 
on the report of the special audit undertaken by the Ministry. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 29, Para No. 2.29) 
 
 The Committee note  that BPL survey which was due in 2007 has been delayed and started as 
Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC 2011) on 29 th June 2011 in the country in a phased manner. 
The Census was expected to be completed by June 2012, however, later on the Department h as extended 
the deadline to May, 2013. The Committee note that process of enumeration which is first stage of the 
Survey has been completed in 98.05 percentage of enumerating Blocks in the country. The Committee also 
note that after the enumeration, the St ates/UTs would enter the claim & objection stage for publication of 
the final list. It is expected that for majority of States/UTs, the Final List is likely to be published by the end 
of September, 2013. The Committee are of view that completion of BPL sur vey has been inordinately 
delayed, which must be causing hardship to needy people of rural areas of the country. The Committee, 
therefore, 132 recommend the Department to make efforts with States concerned to finalise the final BPL 
list without any further delay so that all tendered benefits reach the BPL population.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The SECC is being conducted through a comprehensive programmes  involving the Ministry of 
Rural Development, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, the Of fice of the Registrar General 
and Census Commissioners, India and State Governments.  Enumeration is being done by the States/UTs 
with the help of an electronic handheld device (Tablet PC) supplied by Bharat Electronic Limited (BEL). 
BEL lead consortium of  CPSUs is also providing Data Entry Operators (DEOs), other technical services in 
connection with software for data collection and data transfer etc.   A web -based MIS is put in place to 
monitor the progress of SECC 2011. A series of measures have been put  in place to ensure accuracy and 
transparency during collection of data for the SECC 2011. Instructions for filing, receiving and disposing 
claims and objections during the SECC 2011 have also been issued to the States/UTs.  The Ministry of 
Rural Development has been continuously monitoring the progress of SECC with the States/UTs through 

49 
 
               
 
regular visits, trainings and video conferencing to ensure early completion and sort out various issues with 
the States.   States/UTs specific reviews and assessment of th e progress of work was also taken up in the 
Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting held on a quarterly basis. Similarly, PRC meetings were 
also held for the North Eastern States wherein the progress of the SECC was regularly reviewed. Based on 
the review and decisions taken in the Performance Review Committee, senior official from the Ministry of 
Rural Development visited the States having specific issues. So far, 4 video conferencing with all the 
States/UTs have been conducted in connection with the pr ogress of SECC 2011. Secretary (RD) has also 
written to all the States Chief Secretaries advising them to adhere to the timelines and early completion of 
the Census in their respective State. Hon‟ble Minister (RD) wrote to the Chief Minister of major state s 
intimating them the tentative dates for „draft list‟ publication and requested them to adhere to the timelines. 
All these efforts would result in completion of the SECC project.  The sequence of events of follow -up with 
states is given in the Appendix - II. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 30, Para No. 2.30) 
 
 Identification of ineligible families in BPL list is big problem across States. The Committee note that 
ongoing SECC 2011 has some criterion to exclude household owning Motorized Two/Three/Four 
Wheelers/Fishing boats (which require registration)/ tractors/ harvester, having Kisan Credit Card with the 
credit limit of Rs.50,000 and above, households owning refrigerator, households owning landline phones 
etc. the Committee also note that some inclusion criteria has been adopted to compulsorily include 
deprived section such as households without shelter, destitute/living on alms, manual scavengers, Primitive 
Tribal Groups, legally released bonded labourers in BPL list. The Committee also note that a proposal to 
set up permanent BPL machinery is under consideratio n by the Department. This would interface with the 
States to ensure that only genuine BPL families are included in the list of beneficiaries eligible for various 
Government schemes and that those not satisfying the eligibility requirements are taken out of  the list by 
the States on a continuous basis following transparent and equitable processes which will be set out in 
guidelines. The Committee has also been informed that a multi -disciplinary committee of experts with Prof. 
Abhijit Sen, Member, Planning Co mmission as Chairperson has been constituted to give their suggestions 
on developing an interim system for updating the existing BPL lists till SECC 2011 is finalized and updating 
of BPL list in future. 133The Committee are unhappy to note that the progres s in finalization of BPL 
criteria/list has been very slow. The Committee take note of recent initiative taken by the Department to 
constitute such ongoing mechanism for identification of genuine poor families in BPL list. The Committee 
are of view that such mechanism will go a long way to address the problem of corruption in programmes for 
BPL families and enhance productivity of expenditure on programmes for rural development. The 
Committee, however, of the view that all State Government should be taken on  board in initial phase itself 
so as to reduce time lag in establishment of such mechanism in entire country. 
  
 
 

50 
 
               
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Rural Development constituted an Expert Group on Socio Economic and Caste 
Census on 28 th December, 20 12 under the Chairmanship of Prof. Abhijit Sen to examine the SECC 
indicators and the data analysis and recommend appropriate methodologies for determining classes of 
beneficiaries for different rural development programmes. It will consult States, Experts  and Civil Society 
Organizations while arriving at these methodologies. The proposal to set up a permanent mechanism to act 
as an interface between MoRD and state governments has been referred for inter -ministerial consultation. 
The States will also be con sulted in the matter. The Abhijet Sen Committee for suggesting a methodology 
for inclusion of eligible families in the existing BPL list, which recently submitted the Report has 
recommended that the proposal of setting up a permanent mechanism in the MoRD be implemented as 
early as possible.  
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 31, Para No. 2.31) 
 
 The Committee note that Rs. 200 crore has been allocated during 2013 -14 out of Rs. 1325 crore 
earmarked for implementation of PURA scheme during 12th Plan. However, the Committee are dismayed to 
note that expenditure under the scheme during 2012-13 were nil due to lack of approval at various level for 
implementation of PURA on PPP mode. The Committee are anguished to know that utilization certificate of 
expenditure of expenditure during 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 hav e not been submitted by the implementing 
agencies concerned. The Committee have been informed that under restructured PURA, the implementing 
agency is not the DRDA but the private sector entity who is supposed to provide the UC. The funds 
released to DRDAs are kept in a separate account and are 134 transferred further to the projects accounts 
of private sector entities based on the progress reported. The Committee have also been informed that 
under restructured PURA, no funds has so far been transferred to project account of any of the private 
sector entities from whom the UCs can be obtained and once the funds are transferred to project accounts, 
submission of UCs would become due and would be insisted as provided under General Financial Rules. 
The Committe e are of view that availability of updated information regarding utilization of funds is first 
canon of financial prudency. However, the Department do not seem very keen on this issue in case of 
PURA scheme. At the same time, keeping unutilized funds under the scheme with DRDA also cause stress 
on finance of the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to analyse the 
reasons for such sorry state of affairs of utilization of funds under PURA. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of steps taken by the Department in this regard.  
   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The approved allocation for the year 2013 -14 is Rs.50 crore.  As per Scheme Guidelines, funds 
available with DRDAs can be transferred to the project accounts of the private sector entities only on 

51 
 
               
 
approval of project by the Inter -Ministerial Empowered Comm ittee [EC], signing of Concession and State 
Support Agreement and on the private sector entity successfully fulfilling all „conditions precedent‟.  In 
respect of the two Kerala project, the private sector entity M/s INKEL has not fulfilled all the „conditi ons 
precedent‟. One more project at Krishna District of Andhra Pradesh was launched on 5 th May, 2013 for 
which the Concession and State Support Agreements are being processed for signing.   The remaining 
projects have not reached the level of consideration by the EC.  Therefore, no funds could be transferred to 
the project accounts in respect of any of the projects. Hence, no utilization certificate has become due.   
Concerted efforts will be made to ensure the private sector entity fulfills conditions precedent in time.  
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated:   22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 33, Para No. 2.33) 
 
On the issue of restructuring process of CAPART, the committe e are dismayed to note that it has 
not been completed yet. The Committee have been informed that Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) 
has been entrusted with the task of submitting a report on restructuring of CAPART. The Committee also 
note that inordinate delay in restructuring of CAPART has led to situation where majority of funds allocated 
to CAPART is being used for meeting expenses of salaries, administrative expenditure, implementation of 
PM Rural Development Fellow Scheme and other project relat ed expenses. The Committee are of the view 
that the presence of an apex institution is necessary for promoting public cooperation, research and 
promotion of technologies aimed for enhancement of standard of life in rural areas. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to complete the process of restructuring of CAPART in time bound 
manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Project Document outlining a detailed frame work for restructuring of CAPART was prepared by 
this Ministry and the Institute of Rural Management Anand (IRMA) was requested to help the Ministry in this 
regard. IRMA submitted its report and made a detailed presentation on the study report on “State of 
Organisation and Road Map of CAPART” in 54 th Executive Committee meeting held on 8 th December, 
2010. Subsequently, IRMA conveyed their inability for taking up the assignment further. Thereafter, the 
Ministry decided to engage another agency viz; Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai, which 
may go into specific details of all aspects of the organization and its functioning and render assistance in 
the restructuring exercise. A draft Terms of Reference (ToR) for the consulting agency had also been 
finalized by the Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (RD). The first 
meeting with TISS officials was held on 08.01.2013 wherein broad issues relating to Restructuring of 
CAPART were discussed. In March, 2013 TISS has further submitted a concept note, highlighting the 
proposed strategies for restructuring, and the same is under consideration. 
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated: 22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 

52 
 
               
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 34, Para No. 2.34) 
 
On the issue of restructuring of DRDA, the Committee note that Department has analysed and 
accepted the report and process of consultation with States as a prelude to formulation of EFC note for 
restructuring of DRDA Scheme has been completed.  The Committ ee have also been informed that EFC 
note has been prepared and has since been vetted by IFD.  The EFC note is likely to be circulated to the 
concerned Ministries/ Departments of the Government of India during the 1 st week of April 2013.  The 
Committee feel  that process of revamping of DRDA administration has been inordinately delayed. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to complete the process during the 2013 itself.   
 
Reply of the Government 
An EFC Note on restructuring of DRDA Administrati on Scheme duly incorporating 
recommendations of V. Ramachandran Committee has been prepared and circulated among the 
concerned Ministries/Departments of the Government of India seeking their comments.  
 
[O. M. No. H – 11020/03/2013 – GC (P), dated:   22 July, 2013 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI             SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
10 December, 2013             Chairperson 
19 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Rural Development  
 
  

53 
 
               
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING HELD ON 29.4.2013 UNDER THE CHAIRMANSHIP OF 
SECRETARY (RD), MINI STRY OF RURAL DEVELO PMENT TO DISCUSS ISSUES 
REGARDING IMPLEMENTA TION OF PMGSY IN AND AMAN & NICOBAR 
ISLANDS 
 
 A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary (RD), Ministry of Rural 
Development at 11.30 AM on 29.4.2013 at “Unnati”, Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi, with the Chief 
Secretary UT Administration to discuss issues regarding implementation of Pradhan Mant ri 
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) in A&N Islands.  List of participants is given at Annexure-I. 
 
2. At the outset, Secretary (RD) welcomed the Chief Secretary, UT Administration and 
other officers from the UT and the Ministry and apprised the urgency of the Mee ting.   Secretary 
(RD) informed that the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural Development in its meeting 
held on 1.4.2013, inter alia, discussed the progress of works under Pardhan Mantri Gram Sadak 
Yojana (PMGSY) in the UT of A&N Islands and commente d upon the poor performance of the 
UT in the implementation of the Scheme.  He further stated that the Committee has made the 
same remarks in two consecutive financial years, which is a matter of serious concern. Further, 
C&AG had raised an audit para No.1 7.1 of C&AG report No. 16 of 2011 -12 concerning 
“Abnormal delay in execution of scheme work”, A&N Administration.  
 
3. Keeping in view the importance of the matter, the Ministry of Rural Development 
undertook a special audit of implementation of PMGSY in A &N Islands through the Office of 
Chief Controller of Accounts, MoRD  during 20.12.2012 to 28.12.2012 and a copy of the report 
has been sent to UT for furnishing Action Taken Report (ATR).  However, the ATR is still 
awaited.  
 
4. Further, a Central Team was  constituted to visit the UT to assess the physical and 
financial status of implementation of the scheme in the UT and the report has been received and 
examined in the Ministry. Secretary (RD) requested Chief Secretary to take immediate action to 
furnish A TR on the observations of special audit and also on the observations of the Central 
Team.  He further requested Chief Secretary to prepare a road map to complete all incomplete 
works sanctioned under PMGSY. 
 
5. Chief Secretary, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, i nformed that unlike in most of the main 
land, the houses/habitations in Andaman & Nicobar Islands are scattered as such the PMGSY 
norms generally do not fit in for the UT.  He informed that out of 18 works sanctioned under 
PMGSY during 2000 -01 and 2001 -02, 6 works have been completed, and a  few works are 
proposed to be dropped due to issues like forest clearance, land availability, etc., and balance 
works are under progress.  He assured that all possible steps will be taken to complete the road 
works as per the PMGSY guidelines.   
 
6. On the visit of the Central Team to A&N Islands during 9 -12 April, 2013, Director, (P -
III), NRRDA made a presentation and highlighted the following observations regarding 
implementation of PMGSY. 
 

54 
 
               
 
i) Rural Development Department is acting as the Nodal Department and APWD is 
the acting as implementing agency for PMGSY. 
ii) Total road works cleared by the Ministry under PMGSY were 18 with a cost of  
Rs. 32.97 crore (7 road works at a cost of Rs. 10.59 crore in Phase I during the 
year 2000-01 and 11 road works at a cost of Rs.22.38 crore in Phase II during the 
year 2001-02).  
iii) An amount of Rs.10 crores each was made available to A & N Admn. during the 
financial year 2000 -01 and 2001 -02 for the road works under PMGSY as an 
Additional Central Assistance (ACA) by the Planning Commission. 
iv) Out of 18 road works covering 37.40 Km sanctioned, 6 road works (Phase -I- 3, 
Phase-II- 3) have been completed incurring an expenditure of Rs.11.69 crores. 
The balance funds available with the UT are Rs.14.93 crores including interest. 
v) Rs.25.5 lakh were transferred to Rajiv Gandhi Relief Rehabilitation Package 
during the financial year 2006 -07 and the same were credited back during the 
same financial year. 
vi) The NQMs have assessed the overall quality of the 7 insp ected roads (6 
completed and one partially completed) was found to be “Satisfactory”. All the 
road works have been found to be “overdesigned” 
vii) 7 incomplete works initially handled by Zilla Parishad North and Middle 
Andaman have been transferred to APWD alon g with the funds for 
implementation.  
viii) The Administration has not prepared DRRP and Core Network for PMGSY. 
ix) No time limit has been set by the A&N Admn. for completing the balance works. 
x) Adequate Implementation capacity in APWD and RD. 
xi) Reasons as reported by  the UT for delay in implementation include: Delay or 
Non-receipt of Forest clearance, non -availability of land, issues related to 
transportation of material or non -availability of material, limited working season, 
more focus on Tsunami relief works, lack of interest among contractors due to the 
fact that contractors have an impression that the qualification criterion for bidding 
are very difficult  and the road is to be maintained for 5 years without any 
payment. 
 
7.  The Meeting also reviewed the road -wise progress and the status of all 18 road works 
along with the proposed action for each road incomplete is as follows.  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Package Number 
of road 
works 
Status of 
work 
Proposed 
action as 
reported by 
UT 
1. C/oRural road at Havelock to provide 
connection to Vijay Nagar and Radha Nagar. 
SW: C/o Rural road from Camp No. 5, 
Kalapathar, Vijay Nagar at Havelock Ph -II 
(4.27 km) under PMGSY scheme and C/o Link 
road to Radha Nagar Revenue village at 
Havelock under PMGSY scheme 
2 100% 
completed 
-- 

55 
 
               
 
2 C/o Rural Road from Chidyatapu to bada 
Nallah (4.24 km) i/c cross drainage and culvert 
and C/o Rural Road from Kodiya Ghat to Bada 
Nallah (1.327 km) i/c cross drainage and culvert 
under PMGSY 
2 80% 
completed 
Work will be 
completed 
after 
reviewing the 
cost 
estimates 
3. C/o Rural Road from Kalighat to Jagannath 
Dera under PMGSY 
1 100% 
Completed 
-- 
4 C/o Rural Road from Karmatang to Paiket Bay 
4 km Phase -I (10-2 Km) including culvert and 
c/o Rural Road from Pinaki nagar to Kamalapur 
(1.1-2.3 Km) SW: -C/o Rural Road for  a length 
of 1.2 km. under PMGSY (Revised Estimate) 
2 Earthwork/c
ollection of 
material in 
progess 
Work will be 
completed 
after 
reviewing the 
cost 
estimates 
5. C/o Rural Road from ATR to Rani Sai’s House 
via V.D. Plantation (1.30 km) at Beodnabad 
Panchayat in South Andaman i/c cross drainage 
and culvert under PMGSY. 
1 100% 
completed 
-- 
6. C/o Rural road from New Wandoor to Shri 
Natai Biswas house at Humphrygunj South 
Andaman under PMGSY 
1 100% 
completed 
-- 
7 C/o Rural Road from New Bimblitan school to 
new Bimblitan village for a length of 1.5 km 
under PMGSY 
1 100% 
completed 
-- 
8 C/o Rural Road from Chunna Bhatta to North 
Bay, South Andaman (3.00 Kms) 
1 Proposed to 
be dropped 
UT to send a  
proposal for 
dropping 
9. C/o Rural Road from SS Shibpur to Kalipur, 
North Andaman, (2.00 Kms). 
1 Proposed to 
be dropped 
UT to send a 
proposal for 
dropping 
10. C/o Rural Road from Kalighat to Nischintapur 
in North Andaman (1.20 Kms) 
1 Proposed to 
be dropped 
UT to send a 
proposal for 
dropping 
11 C/o Rural Road from Sitanagar to Nayadera via 
Krishnapuri in North Andaman (5.00 kms). 
1 Proposed to 
be dropped 
UT to send a 
proposal for 
dropping 
12 C/o Rural Road from DB Gram School to 
Laxmipur main road via 7 family (4.00 kms) in 
North Andaman. 
1 Incomplete Work will be 
completed 
after 
reviewing the 
cost 
estimates. 
13 C/o Rural Road ATR Suchadhan’s House to 
Thoratang forest camp (Ganapath Baraks house 
in North Andaman). (2.00 kms) 
1 Incomplete Work will be 
completed 
after 
reviewing the 
cost 

56 
 
               
 
estimates 
14 C/o Rural Road from main road to Lal 
Bahadur’s house at Tugapur including Bridge & 
Culvert in Mayabunde Tehsil No. 7 (2.40 kms) 
1 Incomplete Work will be 
completed 
after 
reviewing the 
cost 
estimates 
15 C/o Rural Road from Chainpur to Hanspuri 
(12.00 kms) 
1 Proposed to 
be dropped 
UT to submit 
the proposal 
for dropping 
 
The detailed road-wise status is given at Annexure-II. 
 
8.  It was observed that on some of the roads, the UT has incurred higher expenditure than 
the amount sanctioned. It was clarified that the amount of interest of the programme funds has 
been utilized for completing those roads.  Secretary (RD) advised the UT to send a proposal in 
this regard indicating the detailed justification. The Officers of UT further requested the Ministry 
to enhance  the cost estimates of the incomplete roads considering the cost inflation as the 
estimates were finalized 10 years back. UT was advised to prepare a detailed cost estimates 
along with redesigning of the roads, wherever required, in consultation with NRRDA and send to 
the Ministry for consideration. 
 
9.  While summing up, Secretary (RD) stressed the need for completion of all incomplete 
road works (other than proposed for dropping) and advised the UT to prepare completion 
plan/road map and to send to the Mi nistry immediately .  He further emphasized the need for 
maintaining the roads constructed under PMGSY by earmarking separate provision of funds.  
 
10.  Issues related to other Schemes of the Ministry  
 
10.1. National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM) :Direc tor NRLM, MoRD, informed that the 
UT Administration is yet to register any progress in the implementation of NRLM. Chief 
Secretary, UT of A&N opined that considering the special difficulties and requirements of the 
Islands, it would be ideal if a team from  the Ministry visits the Islands and see the ground reality 
before taking a decision about the required flexibility and applicability of AJEEVIKA in place of 
erstwhile SGSY. Secretary (RD) directed that a team of officers from the Division should visit 
the UT and hold discussions with the UT officials to adopt a strategy for the effective 
implementation of the programme.   
 
10.2. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) :Director 
MGNREGA, MoRD informed that UT Admn. is far behind in updating the Management 
Information System (MIS) under MGNREGS.  Also the UT is yet to settle the accounts of 
Central funds released in the past, which is delaying the further release to the UT under the 
programme.  As MIS is an important tool to monitor a nd review the pace of implementation of 
MGNREGA, the UT should take necessary corrective measures for rectifying the updation of 
MIS and settling accounts of Central fund to avoid Audit para. 
 
  

57 
 
               
 
11.  The following decisions emerged in the Meeting: 
 
i. ATR on all issues raised in the special audit conducted by the Ministry should be 
sent to the Ministry within two weeks.  
(Action: UT) 
 
ii. Road Map/Action Plan should be prepared and completion plan for incomplete 
works and sent to the Ministry within three weeks. 
(Action: UT) 
iii. A proposal should be sent to the Ministry for seeking ex -post facto approval for 
availing the interest on programme fund for construction of the roads. 
(Action: UT) 
 
iv. A detailed cost estimates along with re -designing of the roads, wherever required, 
should be prepared in consultation with NRRDA and sent to the Ministry for 
consideration.  The re -designing of the road should be carried out using IRC SP -
72:2007 and Rural Road Manual IRC SP 20:2002. 
(Action: UT/NRRDA) 
 
v. DRRP and Core Network u nder PMGSY should be prepared in consultation with 
NRRDA. 
(Action: UT/NRRDA) 
vi. Provision of at least 10 % for five years for maintenance of roads should be made 
 (Action: UT) 
 
vii. Monitoring Mechanism as per PMGSY guidelines should be put in place. 
(Action: UT) 
    viii      Separate account for PMGSY (separately for Programme fund & Admn. fund) 
should be opened.  The UT should provide a list of officers along with their 
designations, contract details of nodal department implementing PMGSY and 
details of contract ors, in order to provide training to the field officers and 
contractors. 
(Action: UT) 
ix. Proposal for dropping of roads should be sent to the Ministry in the prescribed 
format (format at Annexure-III). 
(Action: UT) 
x. NRRDA should conduct orientation training to  the field level functionaries of the 
implementing agency and the Contractors in consultation with the UT. 
(Action: NRRDA) 
xi.  Regarding AJEEVIKA, a Team of officers in the Division should visit UT and 
hold discussions with the UT officials to adopt a strateg y for the effective 
implementation of the programme. 
 (Action: RL Division) 
 
 
12. The meeting ended with vote of thanks to the chair. 
 

58 
 
               
 
Annexure-I 
 
 
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS 
 
Ministry of Rural Development 
 
1. Shri S. Vijay Kumar, Secretary (RD)  ….. ….. ….    In Chair 
2. Dr. P.K Anand, JS (RC) 
3. Shri C.R.K. Nair, Adviser (Stat.) 
4. Shri Y.S. Dwivedi, Director(RC) 
5. Shri . P. Manoj Kumar, Director(RC) 
6. Shri . K.K.Tripathi, Director (MGNREGA) 
7. Smt Nita Kejriwal, Director (RL) 
8. Shri L.D. Saraswati, Deputy Controller of Accounts 
9. Shri M. Jayachandran, Under Secretary, RC 
 
Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
 
1. Shri Anand Prakash, Chief Secretary 
2. Shri D.N. Singh, Secretary , Secretary (RD) 
3. Ms. Puniya Srivasta, Secretary (PWD) 
4. Shri S. Tej Bahadur, Superintendent Engineer   
5. Shri  Jose  P. John , AE(W) 
 
National Rural Roads Development Agency 
 
1. Shri Prabha Kant  Katare, Director(P-III) 
2. Shri N.C. Salonki, Director(P-I) 
3. Shri (Dr.)  I.K.Pateriya, Director(Tech) 
4. Shri Bhupal Nanda, Director (F&A) 
 
  

59 
 
               
 
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
Sequence of events of follow up with States for Socio Economic & Caste Census 
 
S. 
No. 
Dates Particulars 
1 13-Mar-12 Video Conference (VC) from 13th March and 03rd April 2012 
2 31-May-12 Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting 
3 31-May-12 Secretary issued letter to All States / UTs in two lots 31st May and 
06th June 2012 
4 6-Jun-12 Secretary issued letter to All States / UTs in two lots 31st May and 
06th June 2012 
5 23-Jun-12 Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting North East at 
Shillong 
6 18-Jul-12 Video Conference (VC) from 18th July to 07th August 2012 
7 15-Oct-12 Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting 
8 30-Oct-12 Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting North East at 
Guwahati 
9 17-Nov-12 Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting 
10 21-Nov-12 Video Conference (VC) from 21st November to 27th November 
2012 
11 15-Jan-13 Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting (15, 16 and) 
12 18-Jan-13 Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting North East at 
Aizwal 
13 28-Mar-13 Regional Review meeting for SECC on 28th March 2013 at 
Kolkata 
14 3-Apr-13 Regional Review meeting for SECC on 3rd April 2013 Bangaluru 
15 8-Apr-13 Regional Review meeting for SECC on 8th April 2013 Chandigarh 
16 10-Apr-13 Regional Review meeting for SECC on 10th April 2013 Delhi 
17 12-Apr-13 Regional Review meeting for SECC on 12th April 2013 Mumbai 
18 16-Apr-13 Regional Review meeting for SECC on 16th April 2013 Bhopal 
19 29-Apr-13 Video Conference (VC) from 29th April 2013 
20 21-May-13 Minister issued letter to 17 States / UTs for SECC Draft List 
Publication 
21 28-May-13 Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting (27th and 28th 
May 2013) at Delhi 
22 7-Jun-13 Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting  North East at 
Kohima  
 
 
  

60 
 
               
 
APPENDIX - III 
 
Statement showing release made to States and Utilization of funds during 2011-12 and 
2012-13.   
           
          (Rs. In lakh) 
S.No. Name of State 2011-12 2012-13 
  Released Utilised Released Utilised 
1. Andhra Pradesh  215.50 128.02 342.20 48.50 
2. Arunachal Pradesh  152.00 78.97 79.07 79.07 
3. Assam 844.19 844.19 699.67 422.17 
4. Bihar 23.50 23.50 0.00 0.00 
5. Chhattishgarh 159.45 110.80 67.85 NR 
6. Goa 26.09 26.09 29.13 NR 
7. Gujarat 57.22 57.22 338.95 48.53 
8. Haryana 233.65 180.36 496.42 78.40 
9. Himachal Pradesh 57.47 57.47 71.90 71.90 
10. Jammu & Kashmir  760.15 760.15 44.12 NR 
11. Jharkhand  82.30 82.30 36.30 23.81 
12. Karnataka  104.65 104.65 131.10 115.11 
13. Kerala  303.57 103.96 129.25 74.25 
14. Madhya Pradesh  125.87 125.87 195.44 113.85 
15. Maharashtra  347.09 248.71 335.61 20.00 
16. Manipur  239.79 136.97 378.37 NR 
17. Meghalaya  343.09 343.09 583.75 417.73 
18. Mizoram  208.65 208.65 177.22 177.22 
19. Nagaland  299.69 299.19 227.10 227.10 
20. Odisha  98.52 15.95 89.79 NR 
21. Punjab  151.16 71.94 92.35 NR 
22. Rajasthan  73.84 73.84 92.08 92.08 
23. Sikkim  202.06 180.82 171.16 155.79 
24. Tamil Nadu  1337.78 210.49 108.59 NR 
25. Tripura  56.12 56.12 145.94 NR 
26. Uttar Pradesh  850.81 827.46 1135.10 20.00 
27. Uttarakhand  235.11 110.56 1359.31 74.52 
28. West Bengal  116.94 116.94 128.20 NR 
 Total 7706.26 5584.28 7685.97 2260.03 
 
 
  

61 
 
               
 
APPENDIX – IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(2013-2014) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 27 NOVEMBER 
2013 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room No. „G-074‟, Ground Floor, 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
                Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan       - Chairperson  
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Shri Premchand Guddu 
4. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
5. Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
6. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
7. Smt. Annu Tandon 
8. Smt. Usha Verma 
9. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
10. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
11. Shri Munqad Ali 
12. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
13. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
14. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
15. Prof. Saif-ud-Din-Soz 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri A.K.Shah   Additional Director  
 2. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  Deputy Secretary    
 
 
 ****  ****  ***  *****  ****   
 
 
  

62 
 
               
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee to the sitting convened  
 ****   ****  ****  ****   **** and to adopt Draft Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendation s contained in the 41 st Report on Demands for 
Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development). 
 
****  ****  ***  *****  **** 
 
4. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration Memorandum No. 2 regarding action taken by 
the Government on the recommendation s contained in the Forty First Report on Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) . The Committee 
considered and adopted the Draft Report without any modification. The Committee also authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the Draft Report and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
--------- 

63 
 
               
 
 
APPENDIX – V 
 
[Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-FIRST REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF  
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
I. Total number of recommendations 38 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 
28, 32, 35, 36, 37 and 38 
Total : 
Percentage:  
 
 
 
27 
71% 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's Replies: 
Serial Nos. 26 
Total:  
Percentage:  
 
 
 
1 
3% 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Serial Nos. 8, 10 and 12 
Total:  
Percentage:  
 
 
 
3 
8% 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited:  
Serial Nos. 11, 17, 29, 30, 31, 33 and 34 
Total:  
Percentage:  
 
 
 
7 
18% 
 
 
 