FORTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2012-2013)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Computerization of
Land Records’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.08.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.08.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2013/Sravana, 1935 (Saka)

CRD No. 089
Price : Rs. 47.00
© 2013 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE NO.
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-2013) ......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government ................................................................ 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Comm ittee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ................................................................................. 21
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ............................................................. 22
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ............................. 27
APPENDICES
I. Progress in Computerizati on of Land Records .......... 30
II. Results Framework Document (RFD) .......................... 34
III. Primary and Secondary Ladder .................................... 36
IV . Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
20 May, 2013 ...................................................................... 38
V .  Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-third
Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development .................................................... 40

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013)
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Thangso Baite
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
5. Shri Premchand Guddu
6. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique
7. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
8. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
9. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
12. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy
13. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
14. Dr. Sanjay Singh
15. Vacant*
16. Smt. Supriya Sule
17. Smt. Annu Tandon
18. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar
19. Smt. Usha Verma
20. Shri P. Viswanathan
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
(iii)
* Vacancy caused on account of demise of Shri Uma Shankar Singh on 24 January, 2013.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Munquad Ali
23. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay
25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Shri C.P . Narayanan
30. Shri Mohan Singh
31. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma — Director
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Satish Kumar — Committee Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2012-2013) having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on their behalf, present the 43rd Report on the action taken by
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 33rd Report
of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (15th Lok Sabha) on
‘Computerization of Land Records’.
2. The 33rd Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 28 August, 2012. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 06 December, 2012.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 20 May, 2013.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 33rd Report of the Committee (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-V.
N
EW DELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
31 May, 2013 Chairperson,
10 Jyaistha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2012-13) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Thirty-third Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Computerisation of Land Records’.
2. The Thirty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28.08.2012
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report
contained 17 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been examined and categorised as
follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 15 and 17
Total : 09
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government:
Serial No.  NIL
Total : Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 6
Total : 04
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Observ ations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 10, 11, 14 and 16
Total : 04
Chapter-V
4. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of
recommendations for which only interim replies have been submitted
by the Government included in Chapter-V of this Report and replies
to recommendations made in the Chapter-I of this Report may be
furnished to the Committee expeditiously.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that require
reiteration or merit comments.
A. Slow pace of Computerization of Land Records
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
6. The Committee in the context of slow pace of Computerization
of Land Records had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that initiative for computerization of land
records was taken by the Central Government more than two
decades ago in the form of two centrally sponsored schemes viz.
Computerization of Land Records (CLR) and Strengthening of
Revenue Administration and Updating of Land Records (SRA and
ULR) in 1988-89 and 1987-88 respectively. CLR scheme aimed at
bringing efficiency, transparency and easy accessibility to the system
of land records covered 583 districts and an amount of Rs. 586.61
crore was released under the scheme till March, 2008. The
Committee find that all States and UTs except A&N Islands
implemented CLR scheme. The Committee further note that SRA
and ULR aimed at helping States in updating and maintaining land
records and strengthening and modernization of the revenue
machinery, survey and settlement and training infrastructure. The
funds amounting to Rs. 475.36 crore were released under this scheme
till March 2008. The Committee note with dismay that the progress
under these two schemes was not consistent across the country, as
several difficulties were faced in implementation of the schemes.
For instance, the choice of activities was left to the States/UTs thereby

3
strengthening revenue administration rather than helping in
updation of land records.
Similarly neither time frame for completion of activities was
indicated, nor technology options for survey were firmed up. Even
the system of monitoring was not clearly spelt out. Most importantly
both the schemes of CLR and SRA&ULR excluded the concept of
single-window system and inter-connectivity, Geographic
Information System (GIS) mapping, connectivity with banks and
treasuries and with Registrar Office for automatic updation i.e. the
steps considered to be vital link in updating the land records were
not taken. This necessitated merger of these two schemes into one
modified and enhanced scheme in the shape of National Land
Records Modernization Programme (NLRMP) on 21st August, 2008.
The Committee are at a loss to understand as to why the Department
went into slumber for more than two decades after initiating CLR
and SRA and ULR schemes and failed to identify the shortcomings
of these schemes despite spending more than one thousand crore
rupees. The Committee are of the view that Government was not
sincere in implementing these schemes as specific directions were
not spelt out before initiation of the schemes. The Committee would
also like to be apprised of the reasons as to why CLR was not
implemented in th e Union T erritory of A&N Islands.”
7. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“It is pertinent to mention here that most of the initiatives in the
field of computerization of land records have come from the Central
Government. With the advent of the computers in the eighties, the
Central Government launched the aforesaid two schemes of the
CLR and SRA and ULR for computerization of land records and
for strengthening of revenue administration. Due to these efforts
only, various States/UTs have progressed in computerization of their
land records management system.
Further, both the aforesaid schemes were demand driven schemes.
The Andaman and Nicobar Islands Administration preferred the
demand under SRA and ULR scheme only and accordingly funds
were released to them under this scheme. As proposal was not
received from Andaman and Nicobar Islands Administration under
CLR Scheme, no funds were released to them.”

4
8. Noting that as the progress under the ‘Computerization of
Land Records’ (CLR) and ‘Strengthening of Revenue Administration
and Updating of Land Records’ (SRA and ULR) schemes which were
initiated way back in 1980’s were not consistent across the country and
several difficulties were faced in their implementation, the two schemes
were merged into modified and improved National Land Records
Modernization Programme (NLRMP) in 2008, the Committee had
pointed out that despite spending more than one thousand crore of
rupees and after more than two decades of initiating the schemes, the
Department had failed to identify the shortcomings in the schemes.
The Committee find that the Government has not given a convincing
reply to their recommendation as it has merely stated that with the
advent of computers in 80’s Central Government launched these two
schemes of CLR and SRA&ULR and due to these efforts, various States/
UTs have progressed in computerization of their land records
management system. However, from the details of progress in
computerization of land records furnished by the Department, the
Committee find that only 6 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh have started issuing digitally
signed Records of Rights (RoRs), 19 States/UTs have started issuing
RoRs from Tehsil computer centre and 18 States have placed their RoR
data on website. Only 6 States have digitized the cadastral maps. With
this kind of scenario even after 25 years of initiation of computerization
of land records in the country, the Committee strongly feel that had
the shortcomings of CLR and SRA&ULR schemes been identified earlier
by the Government before merging them into modified scheme of
NLRMP, there could have been marked improvement in the
computerization of land records across the country by now and the
programme would not have lagged on to 12th Five Year Plan. While
expecting the Government to implement the NLRMP with utmost
sincerity, the Committee hope that the scheme would be implemented
consistently throughout the country expeditiously by overcoming the
infirmities noticed in the earlier schemes.
B. Coverage of National Land Records Modernization Programme
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
9. The Committee had inter-alia recommended as under:—
“The Committee are informed that the ultimate goal of NLRMP
is to usher in the system of conclusive titling to replace the current

5
system of presumptive titles in the country by modernizing the
land records system and to build up an integrated land information
management system with up-to-date and real time land records,
automatic mutation, integration between Textual and Spatial records
and inter-connectivity between land records and registration
systems. The Committee find that the major focus of the NLRM
programme is on citizen centric services and it would prove to be
of immense usefulness to the Central and State Governments in
modernizing and bringing efficiency to the land revenue
administration and offering comprehensive tool for planning various
land-based developmental, regulatory and disaster management
activities needing location-specific information. The Committee are
also apprised about certain improvements that have been made in
NLRMP vis-à-vis earlier two schemes of CLR and SRA&ULR. These
mainly include computerization of registration, connectivity
amongst land records and registration offices, connectivity among
revenue offices, firming up technologies for survey/resurvey, apart
from preparing technical guidelines and manuals for smooth
implementation of the programme. The district has been made unit
of implementation where all activities will converge and all districts
are proposed to be covered by end of Twelfth Five Year Plan. With
the coming into being of NRLMP in 2008, the Committee feel that
by merely reframing the programme would not serve much purpose
unless Government takes keen interest and implement it with full
thrust to achieve its objectives. The Committee express concern at
the slow pace of progress of programme which is evident from the
fact that so far only five States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa,
Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka have started issuing Computerized
copies of Records of Rights (RoRs) through Citizen Service Centres/
Kiosks. The Committee note with satisfaction that district has been
made unit of implementation and expect that at least now the
Government should implement the programme with due
seriousness by assigning it high priority and formulating year-wise
targets so that computerization of land records across the country
is completed by the end of Twelfth Five Year Plan.”
10. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“Some States have taken major initiative in extension of citizen
services in the Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. In these
eleven States, i.e. , Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana,

6
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab,
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh the RoRs are being provided through
kiosks/common service centres at the town/village level. However,
it may be mentioned that 20 States/UTs have computerized their
RoRs. These States/UTs are Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu,
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Delhi and
Puducherry. They are providing copies of the RoRs through kiosks
and/or through their Tehsil computer centres.”
11. Expressing concern over the slow pace of progress of NLRM
programme, the Committee had urged the Government to implement
the NLRMP with due seriousness by assigning it high priority and
formulating year-wise targets so that computerisation of land records
across the country is completed by the end of Twelfth Five Year Plan.
The Committee, however, regret to note that the reply of the Department
is silent on the issue of formulating year-wise targets. Rather the reply
states that some States have taken major initiative in extension of citizen
services in the Public Private Partnership mode and accordingly in
these 11 States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh, the RoRs are being provided through kiosks/common
service centres at the town/village level. However, 20 States/UTs have
computerized their RoRs and are providing copies of the RoRs through
kiosks and/or through the Tehsil computer centres.
The Committee are disappointed to note that even after the
passage of more than 4 years of bringing in modified and enhanced
scheme of NLRMP, still a lot needs to be done to achieve the objective
of universal computerization of land records. The Committee, therefore,
strongly urge the Government to ensure 100% computerization of land
records by the end of Twelfth Five Year Plan so that its in-built
advantages are reaped by all citizens of the country. The Committee
would await action taken by the Government in this regard.
C. Non-utilization of allocated funds
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
12. In the context of unspent balances, the Committee had
recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that under SRA&ULR and CLR, funds to the
tune of Rs. 475.36 crore and Rs. 586.61 crore were released whereas

7
utilisation was to the tune of Rs. 354.88 crore and Rs. 444.82 crore
respectively. Nil utilization was reported in States of Jharkhand
and Manipur for SRA &ULR. However, in case of CLR, nil utilisation
was reported from UTs of D&N Haveli and Chandigarh. Further
under NLRMP , the Committee find that as against release of
Rs. 683.30 crore so far, utilization has been Rs. 111.95 crore only.
The Committee find that funds were not released for the States of
Goa, Karnataka and Chandigarh and nil utilization was reported
in case of 15 States/UTs of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu and
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Manipur, Meghalaya, Odisha, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Delhi, Daman and
Diu and Puducherry. The Committee note with concern that out
of the total expenditure of Rs. 1745.27 crore made so far, huge
unspent balances amounting to Rs. 833.61 crore i.e. 47.76% have
been noticed whereas utilisation is to the tune of Rs. 911.66 crore
i.e. 52.24% only.
The Committee express their displeasure on the substantial and
persistent under-utilization of allocated funds which reflects failure
of planning to absorb the allocated funds. The Committee desire
that Government should look into the reasons for low or nil
utilization of funds reported by the States/UTs and take effective
remedial measures to fully utilize the allocated funds. The
Committee would also like the Government to regularly review the
implementation of the scheme in coordination with States/UTs
keeping in view the twin objectives viz. fully utilize the funds
allocated and to achieve the physical targets of computerization of
land records.”
13. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“Implementation of the programme is being reviewed regularly by
the Department. Recently, five Regional Review Meetings were
organized by the Department in various parts of the Country where
implementation of the programme was reviewed thoroughly. In a
new initiative, Results Framework Document (RFD) has been
finalized for each State/UT, which delineates the target to be
achieved in the year 2012-13. Further, to give a push to the agenda
of land records computerization, a State Revenue Ministers’
Conference was held in Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi on

8
20th September, 2012 which was chaired by the Hon’ble Minister
for Rural Development, Shri Jairam Ramesh.”
14. Noticing about 48% unspent balances under NLRMP, the
Committee had desired the Government to look into the reasons for
low or nil utilization of funds reported by the States/UTs and take
effective remedial measures to fully utilize the allocated funds. The
Committee find that the reply of the Department is silent on this aspect.
While expressing unhappiness over the incomplete replies furnished
by the Department, the Committee desire that due consideration be
given to their recommendations and replies furnished to them should
be proper and complete. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Government to furnish details of reasons for low or nil utilization of
funds alongwith effective remedial measures taken or proposed to be
taken to fully utilize the allocated funds.
D. Strengthening infrastructure component and Implementation of
NLRMP especially in North-Eastern States and UTs
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 4 and 6, Para Nos. 2.4 and 2.6)
15. The Committee in aforesaid paras of the Report had
recommended as under:—
“The Committee are informed that so far, 1366 Record rooms, 4311
office-cum-residence of Patwari/Talathi/RI, 412 Tehsil Kacharies have
been constructed whereas 64 Training Institutes have been
renovated/upgraded/constructed. The Committee note with concern
that infrastructural activities have not been taken up at all in Goa,
Jharkhand, North-Eastern States of Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Sikkim and UTs of Chandigarh, D&N Haveli, Delhi, Daman and
Diu and Puducherry. The Committee find that progress made in
regard to infrastructural development, which is crucial for success
of the programme, is far from satisfactory especially in North-
Eastern States and UTs and desire that attention should be paid
to develop adequate infrastructure in these regions.
The reason furnished by the Department that though the funds for
the infrastructural development were provided but the choice of
activities was left to the States, who opted for other activities does
not sound convincing. The Committee felt that this is lapse on the
part of the Department wherein it had failed to give directions to
States/UTs about the activities to be taken up on priority basis. The

9
Committee, therefore, desire that Government should not only
prioritize the activities to be taken up, but also, motivate the States/
UTs to make efforts to strengthen the infrastructure component in
a time bound manner.”
(Recommendation Para No. 2.4)
“The Committee are also apprised that an agreement/MoU needs
to be signed with each State/UT to fix timelines for each activity
to be taken up in the programme. The Committee strongly
recommend that such MoUs should be signed with all States/UTs
without delay so that targets of NLRMP are achieved in a time
bound manner. At the same time, the Committee also desire that
the timeline fixed for each activity be apprised to them.
The Committee also strongly recommend that the Government
should ensure proper implementation of the scheme in smaller,
North-Eastern Border States/UTs and UTs like Andaman and
Nicobar Islands which are strategically important to the country’s
national security point of view.”
(Recommendation Para No. 2.6)
16. The Department in their action taken replies have stated as
under:—
“Taking the experience of the earlier schemes of CLR and SRA&ULR
into consideration, these two schemes were merged into a new and
enhanced scheme in the shape of NLRMP in the year 2008-09. The
detailed guidelines and manuals for the implementation of the
NLRMP have been prepared by the Department and circulated to
all the States/UTs. These guidelines clearly delineate steps in the
Ladder like approach which need to be followed by the States/UTs
to reach the ultimate stage of real-time land records.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 2.4)
“The guidelines of the NLRMP already provide for signing of a
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Department
of Land Resources (DoLR) and the States/UTs. This MoU clearly
delineates the roles and responsibilities of the DoLR and the States/
UTs. Further, the Department has taken a new initiative in the form
of finalization of Results Framework Documents (RFDs) for each

10
State/UT for the year 2012-13. These RFDs delineate the road map
for each State/UT for the year 2012-13 with marks given for
completing the activities within specified time schedules.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 2.6)
17. Finding infrastructural development far from satisfactory
especially in North-Eastern States and UTs, the Committee had desired
the Government not only to prioritize the activities to be taken up but
also to motivate the States/UTs to make efforts to strengthen the
infrastructure component in a time bound manner. The Committee had
also urged the Government to ensure proper implementation of the
NLRMP in the smaller, North-Eastern States/UTs and UTs like Andaman
and Nicobar Islands, which are strategically important to the country’s
national security point of view. The Committee had also recommended
to sign MoUs with all States/UTs delineating the roles and responsibilities
of the DOLR and the States/UTs and apprise them of timeline fixed for
each activity.
The Committee find that Department’s reply merely states that the
guidelines and manuals for implementation of NLRMP have been
prepared and circulated to all States/UTs. The Results Framework
Documents (RFDs) for each State/UT for the year 2012-13 have been
finalized which delineate the roadmap for each State/UT for the year.
Further, the guidelines of NLRMP already provide for signing MOUs
between DOLR and the States/UTs.
The Committee are constrained to note that the Department has
neither spelt out the measures taken to motivate the States/UTs to make
efforts to strengthen the infrastructure in a time bound manner nor the
details of steps taken to ensure proper implementation of the NLRMP
in smaller, North-Eastern States/UTs and UTs like Andaman and Nicobar
Islands. The Department has not even furnished the details of MoUs
signed with the States/UTs.
While reiterating their earlier recommendations the Committee
would like to be apprised of the efforts made to motivate the States/UTs
to strengthen the infrastructure component in a time bound manner
alongwith details of steps taken in smaller, North-Eastern States/UTs
especially UTs like Andaman and Nicobar Islands for proper
implementation of NLRMP in these areas which are strategically important
as far as country’s security is concerned. At the same time, the Committee
would also expect the Department to apprise them of the details of MoUs
signed with States/UTs so far and the timeline fixed for each activity. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the follow up action taken

11
in respect of Results Framework Documents (RFDs) for each State/UT for
the year 2012-13.
E. Setting up of National Institute of Land and Management
(NILAM)
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
18. To facilitate training of officials, the Committee had
recommended as under:—
“The Committee are also apprised that for capacity building, the
Department is in the process of establishing a National Institute
of Land and Management (NILAM) at the central level to ensure
training, research and development in land administration and land
information management system. The Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) memo has been prepared and is reportedly sent
to the Ministry of Finance for approving the NILAM project. The
Committee are informed that as soon as approval takes place, the
Department would start working on the project. The Committee
would like the Government to expedite setting up of NILAM and
hope that the establishment of NILAM would facilitate training of
officials in modern methods and techniques. The Committee also
recommend that to provide training across the country, the
Government should consider having Regional Centres so that
training programmes are more and within the geographical reach
of the people.”
19. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“Once the NILAM is established, it may be networked with various
regional Institutes in the States/UTs. This will help in imparting
training of the concerned Revenue, Registration, Survey officials
and other stakeholders on a regional basis.”
20. To facilitate training of officials in modern methods and
techniques, the Committee had desired the Department to expedite
setting up of National Institute of Land and Management (NILAM)
and also to consider having Regional Centres so that training
programmes are more and within the geographical reach of the people.
While accepting the reply of the Government that once the
NILAM is established, it may be networked with various regional

12
Institutes in the States/UTs which will help in imparting training of
the concerned Revenue, Registration, Survey officials and other
stakeholders on a regional basis, the Committee would re-emphasise
the need to expedite setting up of NILAM. They also desire the
Department to apprise the Committee of the latest position in this
regard inter-alia covering details of place identified where NILAM
will be set up, timeframe fixed for its completion and provision of
total budgetary allocation for setting up NILAM.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
The Committee note that initiative for computerization of land
records was taken by the Central Government more than two decades
ago in the form of two centrally sponsored schemes viz. Computerization
of Land Records (CLR) and Strengthening of Revenue Administration
and Updating of Land Records (SRA and ULR) in 1988-89 and 1987-88
respectively. CLR scheme aimed at bringing efficiency, transparency and
easy accessibility to the system of land records covered 583 districts and
an amount of Rs. 586.61 crore was released under the scheme till March,
2008. The Committee find that all States and UTs except A&N Islands
implemented CLR scheme. The Committee further note that SRA and
ULR aimed at helping States in updating and maintaining land records
and strengthening and modernization of the revenue machinery, survey
and settlement and training infrastructure. The funds amounting to
Rs. 475.36 crore were released under this scheme till March, 2008. The
Committee note with dismay that the progress under these two schemes
was not consistent across the country, as several difficulties were faced
in implementation of the schemes. For instance, the choice of activities
was left to the States/UTs thereby strengthening revenue administration
rather than helping in updation of land records.
Similarly neither timeframe for completion of activities was
indicated, nor technology options for survey were firmed up. Even the
system of monitoring was not clearly spelt out. Most importantly both
the schemes of CLR and SRA & ULR excluded the concept of single-
window system and inter-connectivity, Geographic Information System
(GIS) mapping, connectivity with banks and treasuries and with Registrar
Office for automatic updation i.e. the steps considered to be vital link
in updating the land records were not taken. This necessitated merger
of these two schemes into one modified and enhanced scheme in the
shape of National Land Records Modernization Programme (NLRMP) on
21st August, 2008.
The Committee are at a loss to understand as to why the Department

14
went into slumber for more than two decades after initiating CLR and
SLA and ULR schemes and failed to identify the shortcomings of these
schemes despite spending more than one thousand crore rupees. The
Committee are of the view that Government was not sincere in
implementing these schemes as specific directions were not spelt out
before initiation of the schemes. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the reasons as to why CLR was not implemented in the
Union Territory of A&N Islands.
Reply of the Government
It is pertinent to mention here that most of the initiatives in the
field of computerization of land records have come from the Central
Government. With the advent of the computers in the eighties, the Central
Government launched the aforesaid two schemes of the CLR and SRA
and ULR for computerization of land records and for strengthening of
revenue administration. Due to these efforts only, various States/UTs have
progressed in computerization of their land records management system.
The progress in this regard is indicated in Appendix-I.
Further, both the aforesaid schemes were demand driven schemes.
The Andaman and Nicobar Islands Administration preferred the demand
under SRA and ULR scheme only and accordingly funds were released
to them under this scheme. As proposal was not received from Andaman
and Nicobar Islands Administration under CLR scheme, no funds were
released to them.
[O.M. No.14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee find that so far 26 States have completed data entry
of textual data, 21 States have provided legal sanctity to computerized
RoRs and 20 States have started issuing computerized copies of RoRs,
work relating to mutations using computers has been completed in
18 States; 17 States have published RoRs on website. Only 5 States have
started issuing computerized RoRs through Citizen Service Centres/Kiosks;
Registration has been computerized in 16 States, 14 States have abolished
stamp papers and have introduced payment of stamp duty and registration
fees through Bank/Treasuries. Only 4 States have completed inter-
connectivity between revenue and registration offices. Survey is reported

15
to be in progress in 5 States and 26 States have taken up digitization of
cadastral maps. 32 NLRMP Cells in 27 States are being established and
Project Management Units (PMUs) have been established in 7 States. In
this scenario, the Committee are of the considered view that a lot needs
to be done to achieve the objectives of NLRMP fully.
Reply of the Government
It is true that a lot needs to be done to establish efficient systems
of modern land records management in the States/UTs. The Department
is taking many initiatives to put the agenda of modernization of land
records in priority of the States/UTs. Keeping this in view, five Regional
Review Meetings were organized by the Department in various parts of
the Country where implementation of the program was reviewed
thoroughly. In these meetings, Results Framework Documents (RFDs)
have been decided for each State/UT. These delineate the road map for
each State/UT for the year 2012-13. Further, to give a push to the agenda
of land records computerization, a State Revenue Ministers’ Conference
was held in Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi on 20th September, 2012 under
the Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Minister for Rural Development,
Shri Jairam Ramesh.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee welcome the steps taken by Department to
standardize codes for various parameters used in record systems in
consultation with States/UTs which will ensure inter-operatability of land
record systems and data at National level. They also appreciate that
previous records of the land which are vital have not been deleted and
are available online. The Committee expect the Department to issue
common guidelines to all States/UTs in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The detailed guidelines and manuals for the implementation of the
NLRMP have been prepared by the Department and circulated to all the
States/UTs.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee note that under NLRMP, survey is proposed be
done with modern survey equipments through Pure ground method using

16
Electronic Total Station (ETS) and Global Positioning System (GPS), Hybrid
methodology using aerial photography and ground truthing by ETS and
GPS; and High resolution Satellite Imagery (HRSI) and ground truthing
by ETS and GPS so that digitized maps can be used for various planning
and development purposes. The Committee are informed that about 60%
of funds released under NLRMP are for conducting survey which was
envisaged as the first thing to be done under the programme. The
Committee are perturbed to note that survey has not been completed in
any State so far and is reported to be in progress in five States viz. Gujarat,
Haryana, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir.
Reply of the Government
The Survey/Re-survey as first component is not the only approach
prescribed under the NLRMP . The two approaches prescribed under the
Primary Ladder of the NLRMP guidelines may kindly be seen in this
regard (Appendix-III). Gujarat, Haryana and Bihar have progressed very
well under the Survey/Re-survey component of the NLRMP . Rest of the
States, are also taking initiatives in this regard and they are at various
stages of starting the Survey/Re-survey.
[O.M. No.14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee further note that Karnataka completed ‘Bhoomi
Project’, did computerization without doing survey and started giving
citizen’s services. Thereafter, the Department realized that survey is not
a prerequisite for computerization of land records and has slightly changed
its approach and have issued instructions to States/UTs to give priority
to do computerization of land records, to do connectivity with Registrar
Offices and to set up citizen’s kiosks and to do survey simultaneously.
The Committee, however, feel that this shift of focus from survey to
computerization of land records is a welcome sign, but a time limit is
definitely required to be fixed as survey has to be completed at some
point of time and State Governments/UTs can be persuaded to complete
survey simultaneously by adopting appropriate use of technology.
Reply of the Government
As already indicated earlier, the Department has taken a new
initiative in the form of finalization of Results Framework Documents
(RFDs) for various States/UTs for the year 2012-13. These RFDs delineate
the road map for each State/UT for the year 2012-13 with marks given
for completing the activities within specified time schedules. Such RFDs

17
are proposed to be finalized in the beginning of each Financial Year in
future also. This will help in realization of the goals in a time bound
manner and ensure effective monitoring also.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note that so far only 7 States have established Project
Management Units (PMUs) to coordinate the efforts of various
Departments engaged in the maintenance of land records. Further, a
National level project/proposal sanctioning and Monitoring Committee
for NLRMP , which is a demand driven scheme, has been constituted and
proposals from States/UTs are placed before the Monitoring Committee
and funds are released as per its recommendation. Besides, to advise on
issues related to implementation as well as on technological aspects, a
Core Technical Advisory Group has been constituted. The Committee
also note that for implementation of the NLRMP, detailed Guidelines and
Technical Manuals have been circulated and Regional review meetings
are organized to review the implementation of the programme and to
chalk out future course of action. The Committee also find that to review
the physical and financial progress made by States/UTs under NLRMP,
review meetings with States/UTs are being held regularly.
Moreover, a Management Inform ation System (MIS) has been
developed with the help of NIC and made online to facilitate monitoring
of the programme.
While emphasizing the need to overcome various constraints in
implementation of NLRMP which includes changes in State laws for
making new technologies legally valid, need for training a large number
of personnel for new technologies, slow releases of State share, and
coordination required among different Departments, the Committee desire
that private sector should be involved to play a role, wherever necessary,
in the implementation of programme.
Reply of the Government
The guidelines of the NLRMP have recognized the fact that the
programme has generated an enormous workload on the existing revenue
and registration machinery. It also requires high level of technological
inputs at almost every stage. In order to streamline the implementation
of the programme and to achieve the targets within the specified time

18
frame, the guidelines provide that the States/UTs may like to go for the
Public Private Partnership (PPP) models in respect of certain activities
under the programme or outsource them on a turnkey basis.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee note that training and capacity building activities
are of great significance under the NLRM Programme. In this context,
the Committee are informed that NLRMP being a high tech and complex
project involving application of diverse sets of technology, training is
provided by the National Informatics Centre (NIC), National Remote
Sensing Centre (NRSC) and Indian Institute of Surveying and Mapping
of India etc. for implementation of the programme. They are also apprised
that so far 37 training programmes have been conducted and 780 officials
participated in these training programmes.
The Committee further note with dismay that only 32 NLRMP cells
are being established in 27 States/UTs for imparting training.
While expressing their dissatisfaction on the slow progress made
in respect of training and capacity building, the Committee are of the
view that there is need for massive capacity building among persons
associated with the management of land records and desire that training
programmes should be held at regular intervals to train maximum number
of persons for new technology. The Committee also desire that at least
one NLRMP cell should be set up in each State/UT for imparting effective
training.
Reply of the Government
The NLRMP Centres/Cells are being established in Administrative
Training Institutes/Survey Training Institutes/Patwar Training Schools with
the objective of providing training to the concerned Revenue, Registration,
Survey officials and other stakeholders on a continuous basis in the States/
UTs. One/two NLRMP Cells are proposed to be established in each State/
UT. Further, trainings are also being conducted at Lal Bahadur Shastri
National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), NIC, Survey of India
etc. Furthermore, a National level Institute in the form of National Institute
of Land Administration and Management (NILAM) is also proposed to
be established.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]

19
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
The Committee are also apprised that for capacity building, the
Department is in the process of establishing a National Institute of Land
and Management (NILAM) at the central level to ensure training, research
and development in land administration and land information
management system. The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) memo
has been prepared and is reportedly sent to the Ministry of Finance for
approving the NILAM project. The Committee are informed that as soon
as approval takes place, the Department would start working on the
project. The Committee would like the Government to expedite setting
up of NILAM and hope that the establishment of NILAM would facilitate
training of officials in modern methods and techniques. The Committee
also recommend that to provide training across the country, the
Government should consider having Regional Centres so that training
programmes are more and within the geographical reach of the people.
Reply of the Government
Once the NILAM is established, it may be networked with various
regional Institutes in the States/UTs. This will help in imparting training
of the concerned Revenue, Registration, Survey officials and other
stakeholders on a regional basis.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.17)
The Committee are of the considered view that Gram Panchayats
could play a significant role in updation of land records and identification
of property owners in the course of settlement operations and desire that
to enable speedier mutations, the Department should advise State
Governments to take necessary help from the Panchayats and equivalent
bodies in regard to land management, maintenance of records etc. The
Committee also desire that alongwith land records, requisite maps,
boundaries, identifications, landmarks should also be in-built in the system
so as to facilitate easy understanding and having clear titles. The early
implementation of the NLRMP will help in reduction of land related
legal cases which are huge in number particularly in the rural areas.

20
Reply of the Government
The guidelines of the NLRMP provide that the Gram Panchayats
(GPs) can play a significant role in updation of land records and
identification of property owners in the course of the settlement
operations. The Gram Sabha could be involved to facilitate survey/re-
survey, wherever necessary. The States/UTs can think of giving the power
of doing undisputed mutations to the Gram Panchayats. Where GPs are
involved in carrying out undisputed mutations, interconnectivity with
tehsils may be worked out by the States/UTs with their own funds or
by dovetailing funds from other sources. The District Administration
may take help from the Panchayati Raj Institutions and reputed NGOs
in building up awareness about the Programme. The District Monitoring
and Review Committee, of which the CEO/EO of Zila Parishad is also
a member, may give due weightage to the recommendations of the PRIs
in the implementation of the Programme.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]

21
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
– NIL –

22
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee are informed that the ultimate goal of NLRMP is
to usher in the system of conclusive titling to replace the current system
of presumptive titles in the country by modernizing the land records
system and to build up an integrated land information management
system with up-to-date and real time land records, automatic mutation,
integration between Textual and Spatial records and inter-connectivity
between land records and registration systems. The Committee find that
the major focus of the NLRM programme is on citizen centric services
and it would prove to be of immense usefulness to the Central and State
Governments in modernizing and bringing efficiency to the land revenue
administration and offering comprehensive tool for planning various land-
based developmental, regulatory and disaster management activities
needing location-specific information. The Committee are also apprised
about certain improvements that have been made in NLRMP vis-à-vis
earlier two schemes of CLR and SRA&ULR. These mainly include
computerization of registration, connectivity amongst land records and
registration offices, connectivity among revenue offices, firming up
technologies for survey/resurvey, apart from preparing technical guidelines
and manuals for smooth implementation of the programme. The district
has been made unit of implementation where all activities will converge
and all districts are proposed to be covered by end of Twelfth Five Year
Plan. With the coming into being of NRLMP in 2008, the Committee feel
that by merely reframing the programme would not serve much purpose
unless Government takes keen interest and implement it with full thrust
to achieve its objectives. The Committee express concern at the slow pace
of progress of programme which is evident from the fact that so far only
five States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa, Himachal Pradesh and
Karnataka have started issuing Computerized copies of Records of Rights
(RoRs) through Citizen Service Centres/Kiosks. The Committee note with
satisfaction that district has been made unit of implementation and expect
that at least now the Government should implement the programme with
due seriousness by assigning it high priority and formulating year-wise

23
targets so that computerization of land records across the country is
completed by the end of Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Reply of the Government
Some States have taken major initiative in extension of citizen
services in the Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. In these eleven
States, i.e., Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh
the RoRs are being provided through kiosks/common service centres at
the town/village level. However, it may be mentioned that 20 States/UTs
have computerized their RoRs. These States/UTs are Andhra Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil
Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Delhi and
Puducherry. They are providing copies of the RoRs through kiosks and/
or through their Tehsil computer centres.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee find that under SRA&ULR and CLR, funds to the
tune of Rs. 475.36 crore and Rs. 586.61 crore were released whereas
utilisation was to the tune of Rs. 354.88 crore and Rs. 444.82 crore
respectively. Nil utilization was reported in States of Jharkhand and
Manipur for SRA&ULR. However, in case of CLR, nil utilisation was
reported from UTs of D&N Haveli and Chandigarh. Further under
NLRMP, the Committee find that as against release of Rs. 683.30 crore
so far, utilization has been Rs. 111.95 crore only.
The Committee find that funds were not released for the States of
Goa, Karnataka and Chandigarh and nil utilization was reported in case
of 15 States/UTs of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir,
Jharkhand, Manipur, Meghalaya, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Delhi, Daman and Diu and Puducherry. The
Committee note with concern that out of the total expenditure of
Rs. 1745.27 crore made so far, huge unspent balances amounting to
Rs. 833.61 crore i.e. 47.76% have been noticed whereas utilisation is to
the tune of Rs. 911.66 crore i.e. 52.24% only.

24
The Committee express their displeasure on the substantial and
persistent under-utilization of allocated funds which reflects failure of
planning to absorb the allocated funds. The Committee desire that
Government should look into the reasons for low or nil utilization of
funds reported by the States/UTs and take effective remedial measures
to fully utilize the allocated funds. The Committee would also like the
Government to regularly review the implementation of the scheme in
coordination with States/UTs keeping in view the twin objectives viz.
fully utilize the funds allocated and to achieve the physical targets of
computerization of land records.
Reply of the Government
Implementation of the programme is being reviewed regularly by
the Department. Recently, five Regional Review Meetings were organized
by the Department in various parts of the Country where implementation
of the programme was reviewed thoroughly. In a new initiative, Results
Framework Document (RFD) has been finalized for each State/UT, which
delineates the target to be achieved in the year 2012-13 (a copy of the
model RFD is at Appendix-II). Further, to give a push to the agenda of
land records computerization, a State Revenue Ministers’ Conference was
held in Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi on 20th September, 2012 which was
chaired by the Hon’ble Minister for Rural Development, Shri Jairam
Ramesh.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee are informed that so far, 1366 Record rooms,
4311 office-cum-residence of Patwari/Talathi/RI, 412 Tehsil Kacharies have
been constructed whereas 64 Training Institutes have been renovated/
upgraded/constructed. The Committee note with concern that
infrastructural activities have not been taken up at all in Goa, Jharkhand,
North-Eastern States of Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Sikkim and UTs
of Chandigarh, D&N Haveli, Delhi, Daman and Diu and Puducherry. The
Committee find that progress made in regard to infrastructural
development, which is crucial for success of the programme, is far from
satisfactory especially in North-Eastern States and UTs and desire that
attention should be paid to develop adequate infrastructure in these regions.

25
The reason furnished by the Department that though the funds for
the infrastructural development were provided but the choice of activities
was left to the States, who opted for other activities does not sound
convincing. The Committee feel that this is lapse on the part of the
Department wherein it had failed to give directions to States/UTs about
the activities to be taken up on priority basis. The Committee, therefore,
desire that Government should not only priorities the activities to be
taken up, but also, motivate the States/UTs to make efforts to strengthen
the infrastructure component in a time bound manner.
Reply of the Government
Taking the experience of the earlier schemes of CLR and SRA&ULR
into consideration, these two schemes were merged into a new and
enhanced scheme in the shape of NLRMP in the year 2008-09. The detailed
guidelines and manuals for the implementation of the NLRMP have been
prepared by the Department and circulated to all the States/UTs.
These guidelines clearly delineate steps in the Ladder like approach
(primary and secondary ladder at Appendix-III ) which need to be
followed by the States/UTs to reach the ultimate stage of real-time land
records.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee are apprised that an agreement/MoU needs to be
signed with each State/UT to fix timelines for each activity to be taken
up in the programme. The Committee strongly recommend that such
MoUs should be signed with all States/UTs without delay so that targets
of NLRMP are achieved in a time bound manner. At the same time, the
Committee also desire that the timeline fixed for each activity be apprised
to them.
The Committee also strongly recommend that the Government
should ensure proper implementation of the scheme in smaller, North-
Eastern Border States/UTs and UTs like Andaman and Nicobar Islands
which are strategically important to the country’s national security point
of view.

26
Reply of the Government
The guidelines of the NLRMP already provide for signing of a
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Department of Land
Resources (DoLR) and the States/UTs. This MoU clearly delineates the
roles and responsibilities of the DoLR and the States/UTs. Further, the
Department has taken a new initiative in the form of finalization of Results
Framework Documents (RFDs) for each State/UT for the year 2012-13.
These RFDs delineate the road map for each State/UT for the year 2012-13
with marks given for completing the activities within specified time
schedules.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report)

27
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee note that to resolve legal disputes arising out of
survey/resurvey of Land Records, World Bank under Non-Lending
Technical Assistance (NLTA) has been conducting two studies in Gujarat
namely ‘Comprehensive Training Needs Assessment (TNA) for the State’
and on the ‘Reconciliation of legacy and the newly generated survey
data’.
The Committee note that the term of NLTA was to expire on
30th June, 2012 and efforts were reportedly being made to extend
the time period. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details
and current status of these studies inter-alia including extension of time
given.
Reply of the Government
The aforesaid studies are still to be completed. Details will be shared
with the Committee as and when the aforesaid studies are presented to
the Department.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee note that to reach the ultimate goal of ushering in
the system of conclusive titles with title guarantee to replace the current
system of presumptive titles in the country, a Draft Model Titling Bill,
2011 has been prepared which will act as a model for the States. The
Committee note that the comments from States and other stakeholders
have been obtained on the Bill and this has been sent to the Ministry
of Law and Justice for vetting. The Committee would, therefore, like to
be apprised of the present status of Land Titling Bill.

28
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Law and Justice (MoL&J) has prepared the first
draft of the Model Land Titling Bill. The MoL&J has raised certain queries
with regard to the aforesaid Bill. Replies to these queries have been sent
to the MoL&J.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee further note that Committee on ‘State Agrarian and
unfinished task in land reforms’ constituted under Chairmanship of
Minister of Rural Development had recommended setting up of ‘National
Agency for Computerisation of Land Records’ (NSCLR) and ‘State Agency
for Computerisation of Land Records’ at the State Levels (SACLR).
The Committee would like to know the status of action taken on
the recommendations made by the Committee on ‘State Agrarian and
unfinished task in land reforms'.
Reply of the Government
With a view to look into various issues related to land reforms,
a “Committee on State Agrarian Relations and the Unfinished Task in
Land Reforms” was constituted under the Chairmanship of Minister of
Rural Development vide Resolution dated 09.01.2008. The terms of
reference of the Committee, inter-alia, included in–depth review of the
issues related to land ceiling programme/tenancy etc. The Committee has
submitted its Report, and has made recommendations on various aspects
of land reforms. The Report of the Committee is to be placed before the
“National Council for Land Reforms” constituted under the Chairmanship
of the Prime Minister for its consideration and directions. However, it
has been decided that the recommendations of the Committee may be
examined by an appropriate Committee of Secretaries (CoS) before these
are placed for consideration of the “National Council for Land Reforms”.
Accordingly, the recommendations have been examined by the CoS. Now,
further actions on the recommendations would be taken as per decision
of the National Council for Land Reforms. The first meeting of the
‘National Council for Land Reforms’ is yet to be held. However, a
preparatory meeting for the ‘National Council for Land Reforms’ has
been held on 26th June, 2012 with the non-official members under the
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]

29
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
The Committee are informed that some States like M.P .,
Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan have given the powers to do undisputed
mutations to the Gram Panchayats despite land records being managed
by Revenue Department. They are fu rther apprised t hat P.S. Appu
Committee and D. Bandyopadhyay Committee have also recommended
for handing over the Land Records Management to the Gram Panchayats.
Further, the Committee on ‘State Agrarian and unfinished task in land
reforms’ was also of the view that a time has come for decentralizing
and democratizing land management system. As Department has
intimated that action on the recommendations would be taken as per
directions of National Advisory Council, the Committee would like to
be apprised of the status of the implementation of recommendations of
the aforesaid Committees.
Reply of the Government
The guidelines of the NLRMP already provide that the Gram
Panchayats (GPs) can play a significant role in updation of land records
and identification of property owners in the course of the settlement
operations. The Gram Sabha could be involved to facilitate survey/
re-survey, wherever necessary. The States/UTs can think of giving the
power of doing undisputed mutations to the gram Panchayats. Further,
as stated in reply to Q. No. 14, the first meeting of the ‘National Council
for Land Reforms’ is yet to be held.
[O.M. No. 14011/09/2012-GC-LRD, dated 06 December, 2012]
N
EW DELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
31 May, 2013 Chairperson,
10 Jyaistha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Rural Development.

30
APPENDIX I
PROGRESS IN COMPUTERIZATION OF LAND RECORDS
Sl. States/UTs RoRs Stopped AccordedStarted Placed Digiti-
No. Comp- manual legal mutation RoR zed
leted issue sanctity using data on Cadas-
of RoRs to comp- compu- website tral
uterized ters Maps
copy of
RoRs
 1 2 345678
1. Andhra Pradesh /checkbld- /checkbld/checkbld/checkbldUnder
progress
2. Arunachal Pradesh - - ----
3. Assam Under - /checkbld- /checkbld-
progress
4. Bihar Under - - - Under Under
progress progress progress
5. Chhattisgarh /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld
6. Gujarat /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld
7. Goa /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld
8. Haryana /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbldUnder
progress
9. Himachal Pradesh /checkbld- /checkbld/checkbld- Under
progress
10. Jammu and Kashmir Under - - - - Under
progress progress
11. Jharkhand Under - - Under - -
progress progress
12. Karnataka /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbldUnder
progress
13. Kerala Under Under -
progress progress
14. Madhy a Pradesh /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld
15. Maharashtra /checkbld- /checkbld/checkbld/checkbldUnder
progress

31
16. Manipur /checkbld-- /checkbld--
17. Meghalaya - - ----
18. Mizoram - - - Under - -
progress
19. Nagaland - - ----
20. Odisha /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbldUnder
progress
21. Punjab /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbldUnder
progress
22. Rajasthan /checkbld- /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld-
23. Sikkim /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld- Under
progress
24. Tamil Nadu /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbldUnder
progress
25. Tripura /checkbld- /checkbld/checkbld/checkbldUnder
progress
26. Uttar Pradesh /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbldUnder
progress
27. Uttarakhand /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld-
28. West Bengal /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld- /checkbld
29. A&N Islands Under /checkbld/checkbld- /checkbld-
progress
30. Chandigarh - /checkbld----
31. D&N Haveli Under - ----
progress
32. Delhi - - - Under - -
progress
33. Daman and Diu Under - ----
progress
34. Lakshadweep Under - ----
progress
35. Puducherry /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld
 Total 20 16 21 20 18 6
1 2 345678

32
Progress in computerization of land records………contd.
Sl. States/UTs Issuance of Issuance RoRs Issuance of
No. Records of Rights through Digitally Signed
(RoRs) from Kiosks/Common RoRs
Tehsil Computer Service Centres
Centre at Town/Village
level
 1 2 345
1. Andhra Pradesh /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld
2. Arunachal Pradesh - - -
3. Assam - - -
4. Bihar - - -
5. Chhattisgarh /checkbld --
6. Gujarat* /checkbld/checkbld -
7. Goa /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld
8. Haryana* /checkbld/checkbld -
9. Himachal Pradesh /checkbld/checkbld -
10. Jammu and Kashmir - - -
11. Jharkhand - - -
12. Karnataka /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld
13. Kerala - /checkbld -
14. M.P . /checkbld/checkbld -
15. Maharashtra /checkbld - /checkbld
16. Manipur - - -
17. Meghalaya - - -
18. Mizoram - - -
19. Nagaland - - -
20. Odisha /checkbld --
21. Punjab /checkbld/checkbld -
22. Rajasthan /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld
23. Sikkim /checkbld --
24. Tamil Nadu /checkbld --
25. Tripura /checkbld --

33
26. Uttar Pradesh /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld
27. Uttarakhand /checkbld --
28. West Bengal /checkbld --
29. A&N Islands - - -
30. Chandigarh - - -
31. D&N Haveli - - -
32. Delhi - - -
33. Daman and Diu - - -
34. Lakshadweep - - -
35. Puducherry /checkbld --
 Total 19 11 6
* Gujarat and Haryana are also expected to issue the RoRs with digital signatures soon.
1 2 345

34
APPENDIX II
NATIONAL LAND RECORDS MODERNIZATION PROGRAMME
(NLRMP)—RESULTS FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT (RFD)
From 01.04.2012 to 31.03.2013
Name of the State/UT ____________
Sl. Activities Weight- Details Target Target Target
No. age of the to be to be to be
Target Achie- Achie- Achie-
ved by ved by ved by
30.09.12 30.12.12 30.03.13
1 2 34567
1. Formation of Project
Monitoring Unit
2. Submission of Pending UCs
(SRA and ULR, CLR and
NLRMP)
3. Completion of NLRMP-MIS
entry for the projects
sanctioned upto 2011-12
4. Utilizing 50% of the available
funds on 31st March, 2012
5. Release of State Share for the
projects sanctioned upto 2011-
12
6. Submission of Land related
data*
7. Completion of Data Entry
Work
8. Assigning of Legal Sanctity to
computer database generated
RoRs
9. Starting Distribution of
Computerized Records of
Rights from Tehsil Computer
Centres
*Total No. of land parcels, No. of cadastral maps/FMB and number digitized.

35
10. Hosting of Land Records
Data on the Website
11. Integration of Land Records
Mutation with Registration
12. Training at NLRMP Cell
1 2 34567

36
APPENDIX III
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY LADDER APPROACH
Primary Ladder: Approach 1
• Registration — computerization of SROs
• Integration of registration and land records maintenance
systems
• Automatic mutation following registration
• Mutation — updating of pending cases and their
computerization
• Integration of textual and spatial data
• Survey, including ground control networks and ground
truthing
• Training and strengthening of training institutions
• Strengthening of technical organizations
• Record rooms at Tehsil levels
• Link up with development process
• Legal changes
• Conclusive titles
Primary Ladder: Approach 2
• Survey, including ground control networks and ground
truthing
• Mutation — updating of pending cases and their
computerization
• Integration of textual and spatial data
• Registration — Computerization of SROs
• Integration of registration and land records maintenance
systems

37
• Automatic mutation following registration
• Training and strengthening of training institutions
• Strengthening of technical organizations
• Record rooms at tehsils levels
• Link up with development process
• Legal changes
• Conclusive titles
Secondary Ladder
• Computerization of existing records
• Scanning of existing survey maps
• Computerization of legacy mutation data
• Record rooms

38
APPENDIX IV
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2012-2013)
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 20 MAY, 2013
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
3. Shri Premchand Guddu
4. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique
5. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
6. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
7. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
8. Dr. Sanjay Singh
9. Smt. Usha Verma
10. Shri P. Viswanathan
Rajya Sabha
11. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
12. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
13. Dr. Chandan Mitra
14. Shri C.P. Narayanan

39
15. Shri Mohan Singh
16. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma — Director
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the
sitting. Thereafter, The Committee took up for consideration the Draft
Reports on  ***   ***   ***  and on Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendation contained in the 33rd Report on “Computerization
of Land Records". After discussing the Draft Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the same with minor modifications. The Committee
also authorized the Chairperson to finalize these Draft Reports taking
into consideration consequential changes arising out of factual
verifications, if any, by the concerned Ministry/Department and to present
the same to Hon’ble Speaker/both the Houses of Parliament.
3. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relavant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

40
APPENDIX V
[Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-THIRD
REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA)  OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
I. Total number of recommendations: 17
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 15 and 17
Total: 09
Percentage: 52.94%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies:
Serial No. -Nil-
Total: 00
Percentage: 0.00%
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee:
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 6
Total: 04
Percentage: 23.53%
V . Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 10, 11, 14 and 16
Total: 04
Percentage: 23.53%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”