STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                         (2013-2014) 
      
 
        FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
   
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Forty-sixth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Working of Vigilance and Monitoring Committees in States/UTs']  
 
FIFTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
51 


 
FIFTY-FIRST  REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2013-2014) 
          (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Forty-sixth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Working of Vigilance and Monitoring Committees in States/UTs']  
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 04.01.2014 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.02.2014 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2014 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2014/Pausa, 1935 (Saka) 
 


CRD No. 097 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-2014) ......................................   (ii)   
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................   (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................   1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................   10 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies ...........................................................................  19 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee .....................................................   20 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ..............  23 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Extracts of Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 17 December,2013…….… 24 
II.  Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations   
contained in the Forty-sixth Report  (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing  
Committee on Rural Development  ……………………….................................26 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(ii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
5. Shri Premchand Guddu 
6. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
7. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
8. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
9. Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy 
12. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy 
13. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
14. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
15. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
16. Smt. Supriya Sule 
17. Smt. Annu Tandon 
18. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar 
19. Smt. Usha Verma 
20. Shri P. Viswanathan 
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar  
23. Shri Munquad Ali 
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
28. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
29. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
30. Vacant* 
31. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma   - Director 
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Satish Kumar    - Committee Assistant 
 
* Vacancy caused on account of demise of  Shri Mohan Singh on 22.09.2013 

 (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rur al Development (201 3-2014) having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the 51st Report on the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 46th Report of the Standing Committee 
on Rural D evelopment (15 th Lok Sabha) on 'Working of Vigilance and Monitoring Committees in 
States/UTs'. 
2.  The 46th Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 August, 2013. Replies of 
the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 18 November, 2013. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 17 December, 
2013. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the          
46th Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                         SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
17 December, 2013                                               Chairperson, 
  26 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Comm ittee on Rural Development (201 3-14) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Forty-sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Working of Vigilance and 
Monitoring Committees in States/UTs'. 
 
2. The Forty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 30.08.2013 and was laid 
on the Table of  Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 23 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect  of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government.  These have been 
examined and categorised as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 
          20, 21, 22 and 23. 
Total: 19 
Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
 
Serial No. NIL  
Total: NIL 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Serial Nos. 4, 5, 11 and 13 
Total: 04 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter-V 
 
  

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that comments in respect of observations / 
recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this report should be furnished to 
them within three months of presentation of the Report to Parliament. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Nomination of MPs to State Level V&MCs 
 
[Recommendation Serial No. 4 (Para No. 2.4)] 
6. The Committee in the context of nominating MPs to  State Level V&MCs had 
recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note  that  Chairman  of  State level  V&MC  is Minister of  
Rural Development  of  the  State.  The Member Secretary is Secretary-in-charge 
of Rural Development programmes in the State.  Further, the members of the 
Committee include 4 MPs of Lok Sabha, 1 MP of  Rajya  Sabha,  5 MLAs, 
representative of  SC/ST/Women, 4 Non -officials, 2 NGOs and officials, Chief 
Post Master General of the postal circle.  The Committee are further apprised 
that all MPs, Non -officials, NGOs and representatives of KVIC are nominated by 
Ministry of Rural Development.  The Commi ttee note that Ministry nominates 4 
MPs of  Lok  Sabha and 1  MP  of  Rajya Sabha to State level V&MCs with the 
approval of Minister of Rural Development. The Committee are of the considered 
view that Members of Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural De velopment 
should be given preference while nominating MPs to these State level V&MCs. 
The Ministry may also consider  increasing  the representation  of  Lok Sabha 
and  Rajya Sabha Members  in the V&MCs depending upon the area of the State 
for effective functioning of V&MCs."   
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
"The term of Members of Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural 
Development is for one year. However, MPs are nominated by this Ministry to the 
State level V& MCs for the remaining period of the concerned Lok Sabha. 
Therefore, it is not practicable to give preference to Members of Parliamentary 
Standing Committee while nominating MPs to State level V&MCs.  
                The guidelines of V&MCs are being modified for nominating to the State 
level V&MC one member of every political party represented in the Lok Sabha 
from the State subject to feasibility. One independent MP (LS), if any, will also be 
nominated. The number of MP (RS) in the State level V&MCs will b e restricted to 
half of the number of MP (LS) in the State level V&MC. The minimum number of 
MPs in the Committee will be kept at 4 MP (LS) and one MP (RS).  If the number 
of political parties with representation in Lok Sabha is less than 4, the minimum 
requirement may be fulfilled with representation proportionate to the strength of 
each political party represented in the Lok Sabha from the State, to the extent 
feasible." 
 

3 
 
8.  Finding  that  4 MPs of Lok  Sabha and 1 MP of Rajya Sabha are nominated 
to State level V&MCs by the Ministry of Rural Development  with the approval of 
Minister of Rural Development, the Committee, for effective functioning of 
V&MCs, had recommended that while nominating MPs to  State level V&MCs, the 
Members of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural Development should 
be given preference.  
The Ministry in their action taken reply furnished to the Committee have 
stated that the term of Members of Parliamentary Standing Committee  on  Rural  
Development  is for one year whereas MPs are nominated  to State level V&MCs 
for the remaining period of the concerned Lok  Sabha,  hence,  it  is not 
practicable to give preference to Members of Parliamentary Standing Committee 
while nominating MPs to State level V&MCs. The reply simply depi cts the 
unwillingness on the part of the Government to implement this recommendation. 
The Committee  while reiterating their earlier recommendation desire the 
Government to give due preference to the Members of Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Rural Development at the time when State level V&MCs are 
constituted.  
B. Chairman of State Level V&MCs  
[Recommendation Serial No. 5 (Para No. 2.5)] 
 
9. In the aforesaid para of the Original Report, the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
"The Committee note  that Chairman of State Level V&MCs is Minister of 
Rural Development.  In  this  context, the Committee are of  the view  that  V&MC 
being  a Vigilance Committee, it  would  not  be  appropriate  for  the Minister of  
the Rural Development to chair meetings of V&MCs which have been constituted 
with the sole purpose to mainly supervise,  exercise vigilance and monitor the 
implementation of programmes of the Ministry of Rural Development. The 
Committee are of the opinion that senior most member of Parliament of  the 
State should chair the meetings of State Level V&MCs." 
 

4 
 
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
  "All the Ministers in the State responsible for implementing various 
programmes of rural development are included in the State level Committee and 
the seniormost among them is to be the Chairman of the State level V&MC. In 
view of the difficulties in determ ining the inter -se seniority of Ministers in the 
State and the MPs (LS) from the State, this recommendation cannot be 
implemented." 
 
11.  Taking note  that  V&MC  being a Vigilance Committee constituted with the 
sole purpose to supervise, exercise vigilance and monitor the implementation of 
programmes of  the Ministry of Rural Development, the Committee felt that  the 
Minister of Rural  Development  should  not chair meetings  of  V&MCs and 
recommended that senior most Member of Parliament of the State should chair 
the meetings of State level V&MCs.  
The Ministry in their action taken reply furnished to the Committee have 
stated that all the Ministers in the Stat e responsible for implementing various 
programmes of rural development are included in the State level Committee and 
the seniormost among them is to be the Chairman of the State level V&MC. In 
view of the difficulties in determining the inter -se seniority of Ministers in the 
State and the  MPs (LS) from the State, this recommendation cannot be 
implemented.  
The evasive reply furnished by the Ministry is not acceptable to the 
Committee. Since all relevant information relating to MPs being readily available 
on the website,  it is not difficult to determine the inter -se-seniority of MPs as 
stated by the Government in their action taken reply. The Committee while 
reiterating their recommendation expect the Government to make concerted 
efforts to implement the recommendation of the Committee so that senior most 
member of Parliament of the State chairs the meetings of State level V&MCs.  

5 
 
C. Nomination of non-official members and NGOs to State Level V&MCs 
[Recommendation Serial No. 8 (Para No. 2.8)] 
 
12. In the aforesaid para of the Original Report, the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
"The Committee find that  there are 21 vacancies of  non -officials  in 8  
States and 32 vacancies  of  NGOs in 19 States in  State Level  V&MCs.  The 
Committee furt her note that despite formulating clear and  unambiguous 
Guidelines for nomination of non -official members and NGOs and giving open 
advertisements, there are still  vacant slots  which  is  a matter of  deep  concern.  
While  expressing concern  at  the in ordinate  delay  in nominating  non -officials  
members and  NGOs to State Level  V&MCs, the  Committee recommend  the 
Department to take necessary action to obviate delay in nominating non -officials 
and NGOs to State Level V&MCs in future.  The Committee e xpect the  
Government to have a broader panel of non-officials and NGO's to fill up the slots 
immediately.” 
 
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
"Open advertisements were issued in 2011 & 2012 for filling up vacancies 
of non-officials and NGOs in State Level V&MCs. Nominations of eligible 
candidates were also invited from the concerned State Governments. However, 
the Ministry has not been able to fill up the vacant slots as eligible applicants 
were not available. Therefore , the guidelines are being revised to modify the  
eligibility criteria as under: 
 
For Non-Official Members 
a) The age of the applicant should not be more than 65 years; 
b) The applicant should not be a public servant; 
c) The applicant should be the resident of the State to which he applies; 
d) 50% of the vacancies may be filled with women candidates, subject to 
availability. In case of non -availability to the extent of 50%, the gap may 
be filled with male applicants. 
e) Minimum qualification to be Post Graduate degree fro m a recognized 
University; 
f) Applicant should have minimum 10 years in social sector (reduced from 
20 years)  including 5 years’ minimum experience in rural development ; 
and 
g) No other reservations will apply. 
For NGOs 
a) The NGO should not have been blacklisted b y any 
Government/Government Agency during its entire period of existence; 
b) The NGO should be registered organization and working in the State; 
c) The NGO should have minimum 10 years experience in social sector 
(reduced from 20 years), out of which minimum 5 years experience in rural 
development. 
d) The NGO should have minimum turnover of Rs. 1 Crore per year. 
e) For the representative of NGO, qualification of Doctorate in any discipline  
would be desirable, but not mandatory 
f) The NGO should have presence in a wide geographical area within the 
State." 
 

6 
 
14. Expressing deep concern at the inordinate delay in filling up 21 vacancies 
of non-officials in 8 States and 32 vacancies of NGOs in 19 States, the Committee 
had recommended the Government to take necessary action to obviate delay in 
nominating non -officials and NGOs to State level V&MCs in future. The 
Committee had also suggested the Government to have a broader panel of non -
officials and NGOs to fill up vacant slots immediately.  
From the action taken reply furnished by the Government, the Committee 
note with satisfaction that Guidelines are being revised to modify  the eligibility 
criteria to fill up vacancies of non-officials  and NGOs in State level V&MCs.  
The Committee , however, are unhappy to note that the reply of the 
Government is silent on the aspe ct of having a broader panel of non -officials and 
NGOs. The Committee  while  reiterating  their recommendation would  
emphasize the Government to have a broader panel of non - officials and NGOs in 
order to fill up vacant slots .  
D. Incentives for holding meetings  
[Recommendation Serial No. 11 (Para No. 2.11)] 
 
15. In order to encourage holding of regular meetings, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that despite various efforts taken by the Government 
viz. revising  V& MC Guidelines in  September,  2010 thereby making  Member  
Secretary personally  responsible for  convening  the meetings  at stipulated  
intervals;  advising State Governments to  give concerted  attention to conduct  
meetings at  State and District level and requesting Chief Secretaries of States to 
make relevant entries in the Annual Performance Appraisal Report/Annual 
Confidential Report of the Member Secretaries of State and District V&MCs who 
do not achieve targets of four meetings in a year; the stip ulated  number  of  
meetings  are not  being  held. Ministry of  Rural Development's  contention  that  
it  would not  be  possible  for  them  to enforce  these measures on Chief 
Secretaries as they are not accountable to the Department and is administratively  
under  the control  of  State Government  is  not acceptable  to the Committee. 
The Committee are of the opinion that since holding of V&MCs meetings is  in 

7 
 
the larger  public  interest  and  helps improve the quality of  delivery of  the 
programmes,  the State  Governments  should effectively  utilize this  mechanism  
to ensure better execution and should play a more facilitatory role to 
institutionalize this system. To encourage holding of regular meetings, the State 
Government may evolve ways to g ive incentives for holding meetings. The 
Committee also recommend that the Department should continuously press upon 
the State Governments so that State and District level V&MCs meetings are 
conducted as per the Guidelines in this regard.  The Committee st rongly feel that 
the Department has to be vigilant in this respect to ensure that funds sanctioned 
for centrally sponsored schemes are effectively utilized." 
 
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
  "The Ministry has continuously been pressing the State Governments to 
conduct meetings of the V&MCs in accordance with the Guidelines. The Minister 
of Rural Development has, in May 2013, written to all the Chief Ministers in the 
matter. Different monitoring  mechanisms are already in place to ensure that 
funds sanctioned for Centrally Sponsored Schemes are effectively utilized. 
Giving incentive for holding mandatory meetings is not considered appropriate." 
 
17.  Considering that holding of V& MCs meetings is in larger public interest  
which  helps improve  the quality of delivery of  the programmes, the Committee 
in order  to encourage holding of regular meetings had recommended that State 
Governments should  evolve ways to give incentives for holding meetings. 
The Committee regret to note the reply of the Government which merely 
states that giving incentive for holding mandatory meetings is not considered 
appropriate. From the action taken reply furnished by the Government the 
Committee find th at the Government have not specified  the reasons for not 
accepting  their  recommendation. Since the  sole purpose  to incentivize holding  
meetings  was   to  encourage the  States to  perform better in terms of  
conducting stipulated number of meetings,  the  Committee while reiterating their 
earlier recommendation would like the Government to impress upon the State 
Governments to evolve ways to give incentives for holding  regular meetings. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the action taken  by the Government 
in this regard. 

8 
 
E. Providing agenda to members before meetings 
 
[Recommendation Serial No. 13 (Para No. 2.13)] 
 
18. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee are informed that Member Secretary of the V& MC who is 
personally responsible for convening the meeting is expected to finalize the 
agenda in consultation with the Chairman.  The Committee find that agenda is 
either received late or is made available at the time of meeting only which causes 
inconvenience. To obviate  this, the Secretary, DoRD had  assured  the 
Committee that  necessary Guidelines to make available  agenda before the 
meeting  would be  issued  and  if possible, the agenda would also be put up on 
the website.  The Committee would, there fore, like to be apprised of the action 
taken by the Department to make available  agenda to Members before the 
meeting so as to enable them to study and verify the facts beforehand." 
19. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
 "The Ministry has decided to modify the guidelines, which will also have 
the following features: 
(i) The district level V&MC meetings are to be held on a specific date 
as under: 
  Last Saturday of May 
  First Saturday of August 
  First Saturday of November 
  First Saturday of February 
 
If for any reason, the meeting is not held on the given date, the 
meeting should be held within a month, as an adjourned meeting, on a 
date to be decided by the Member Secretary, 
(ii) If the Chairman of the Committee is also C hairman of other district 
V&MCs, he may hold a combined meeting of all such V&MCs or a group 
of such V&MCs on the scheduled date keeping in view the administrative 
convenience. If all V&MCs are not covered in one meeting, the meeting of 
remaining V&MCs is to be held on another date convenient to the 
Chairman. The venue of the meeting in such cases should be located in a 
different district for each meeting. The Member Secretary of the district 
where meeting is held will be the nodal officer for organizing th e meetings 
in co -ordination with the Member Secretaries of other District V&MCs 
included in the meeting." 
 
 
20. To obviate inconvenience caused to members due to agenda for the 
V&MCs meetings either being received late or at the time of meeting, the 
Committee had desired to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in 
respect of issuing necessary Guidelines to make available agenda to members 
before the meeting.  

9 
 
 The Committee are, however, surprised to note that the Ministry 's reply is 
silent on the issue of providing agenda to Members before the meeting.  
The Committee while reiterating their recommendation would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by the Government i n terms of issuing necessary 
Guidelines to make available agenda to Members before the meeting  so as to 
enable them to study and verify the facts  beforehand. The  Committee would  
also like to be apprised of  the  progress made in respect of putting up a genda of 
the meetings on website.  
------ 
 
 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1) 
 The Committee note that Vigilance and Monitoring Committees have been set up at State and 
District level in the year 2002 to provide an important role to the Members of P arliament/State 
Legislatures/PRIs in monitoring and reviewing the implementation of programmes of the Ministry of Rural 
Development to ensure that these programmes are implemented properly. One of the main objectives of 
V&MCs is to ensure quality of expenditure, particularly in the context of la rge public funds being spent 
under various programmes of the Ministry of Rural Development.   The Committee are further apprised that 
the scope of V&MCs at Dis trict level has been enlarged and they are also  required to monitor the 
programmes of Ministries of Tribal Affairs, Panchayati Raj and Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidhyutikaran Yojana 
(RGGVY) of Ministry of Power apart from programmes of the Ministries of Rural Development and Drinking 
Water and Sanitation. 
Reply of the Government 
No Action Taken Report needed 
 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.2) 
  The Committee feel that setting up of V&MCs is an  appropriate step to monitor the Government 
schemes. The Committee are of the view that if this particular mechanism is used effectively, all 
participating Ministries would be greatly benefited as these would help in understanding the aspirations of 
the people as also the deficiencies  in the implementation  of various  programmes  of Rural 
Development, Tribal Affairs, Panchayati Raj and RGGVY.   The Committee trust that with efficient 
functioning of V&MCs, not only the fu nds allocated for various programmes/schemes would be properly 
spent but also the results expected from these various programmes/schemes of the participating Ministries 
will achieve the desired objectives of the various schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 No Action Taken Report needed 
 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3) 
 Noting V&MCs  as  an effective tool  for  not  only implementing the various 
Government schemes but also in bringing the  executive, people's  representatives and 
other stakeholders together to forge development works, the Committee find that more 
emphasis  is  laid on  monitoring of  financial  aspects of  the schemes. They therefore, 
desire that qualitative aspects of works done under the schemes should also be 
monitored. In Committee's view inclusion of objectives, measurable targets and 
achievements would help in evaluating the implementation of the schemes in a better 
way. 

11 
 
Reply of the Government   
In view of the recommendation of the Committee, the proforma relating to 
different schemes monitored by V&MCs are being revised. 
 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6) 
 The Committee have been apprised that after the constitution of t he Fifteenth Lok Sabha, the 
Ministry advised all States and UTs on 28.08.2009 for reconstituting State and District level V&MCs and 
also to nominate Members for State level V&MCs and Chairman/Co-Chairman  for District level V&MCs. 
The Committee are apprised that State/UT level V&MCs have been reconstituted in 31 out  of 33 
States/UTs (barring Lakshadweep and Puducherry) whereas District level V&MCs have been reconstituted 
in 621 out of 635 Districts in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
            
No Action Taken Report needed 
 
 [O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.7) 
 Regarding  nomination  to two  States and  14  District  Level  V& MCs,  the 
Committee are apprised that the Ministry of Rural Development nominated MPs to all 
State Level  Committees (except  1  MP of Lok  Sabha in Himachal  Pradesh)  and all 
District  level  Committees except  in case of  newly  created  districts and r ecently 
elected MPs. The Committee are informed that delay in nominating Chairman which is  
due to delay in  getting  the information  from  the State Government  concerned 
regarding  newly created Districts having more than one Lok Sabha Constituency or in a 
UT with only one MP who is already Chairman of another District in the UT. The 
Committee would like the Government to expedite constitution of V&MCs in remaining 2 
States and 14 Districts. 
Reply of the Government 
 
       State level V&MCs have not been  constituted in UTs of Lakshadweep and 
Puducherry. The UT of Lakshadweep has informed that only a district level V&MC has 
been constituted and not a State/UT level V&MC in the UT as there is only one district 
in the UT. The UT of Puducherry has been remind ed to expedite constitution of the 
State/UT level V&MC. District level V&MCs have since been constituted in all the 14 
districts, where they were not constituted earlier. 
 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 

12 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.8) 
 The Committee find that  there are 21 vacancies of  non -officials  in 8  States 
and 32 vacancies  of  NGOs in 19 States in  State Level  V& MCs.  The Committee 
further note that despite formulating clear and  unambiguous Guidelines for nomination 
of non -official members and NGOs and giving open advertisements, there are still  
vacant slots  which  is  a matter of  deep  concern.  While  expres sing concern  at  the 
inordinate  delay  in nominating  non -officials  members and  NGOs to State Level  
V&MCs, the  Committee recommend  the Department to take necessary action to 
obviate delay in nominating non -officials and NGOs to State Level V&MCs in future.  
The Committee expect the Govt. to have a broader panel of non -officials and NGO's to 
fill up the slots immediately. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Open advertisements were issued in 2011 & 2012 for filling up vacancies of non-
officials and NGOs in State Level V&MCs. Nominations of eligible candidates were also 
invited from the concerned State Governments. However, the Ministry has not been 
able to fill up the vacant slots as eligible applicants were not available. Therefore, the 
guidelines are being revised to modify the eligibility criteria as under: 
 
For Non-Official Members 
a) The age of the applicant should not be more than 65 years; 
b) The applicant should not be a public servant; 
c) The applicant should be the resident of the State to which he applies; 
d) 50% of the vacancies may be filled with women candidates, subject to 
availability. In case of non -availability to the extent of 50%, the gap may be filled 
with male applicants. 
e) Minimum qualification to be Post Graduate degree from a recognized University; 
f) Applicant should have minimum 10 years in social sector (reduced from 20 
years) including 5 years’ minimum experience in rural development; and 
g) No other reservations will apply. 
For NGOs 
a) The NGO should not have been blacklisted by any Government/Government  
Agency during its entire period of existence; 
b) The NGO should be registered organization and working in the State; 
c) The NGO should have minimum 10 years experience in social sector (reduced 
from 20 years), out of which minimum 5 years experience in rural development. 
d) The NGO should have minimum turnover of ` 1 Crore per year. 
e) For the representative of NGO, qualification of Doctorate in any discipline would  
be desirable, but not mandatory 
f) The NGO should have presence in a wide geographical area within the State. 
 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

13 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.9) 
  The Committee are  apprised that meetings of V&MCs are to be held every quarter of the 
year. The Committee, however, are constrained to note that so far during 15th Lok Sabha, the 
performance of V&MCs falls short of the requirement as prescribed in the Guidelines as the meetings held 
are far less than the stipulated number. The Committee feel that these V&MCs are not being taken seriously 
and the performance of V&MCs also varies from State to State despite being implemented with the 
same objectives in all the States/UTs.  The Committee find that West Bengal is t he only State  where 
during the year 2011-2012, 100% State level V&MCs meetings were held. The Committee further note 
that not a single State level V&MC meeting was held in Jammu  & Kashmir, Nagaland, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Dadra & Nagar Haveli during the years 2011-12 and 2012-13. 
The Committee are also concerned to note that in Goa, Punjab, Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep and  
Puducherry,  no State level V&MC meeting was held during the years 2009-10 to 2012-13.  In case of 
District level V&MCs, the C ommittee find that no m eeting was held in Nagaland, D & N Haveli and 
Puducherry during the years 2011-12 and 2012-13. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No Action Taken Report needed 
 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.10) 
The Committee have been apprised of the reas ons for less number of meetings held which inter 
alia include special circumstance like elections, natural calamities, difficulty in deciding date and 
preoccupation of Member Secretary (District Collector/Deputy Commissioner) with other time bound or 
urgent matters, etc. 
Reply of the Government 
 
No Action Taken Report needed 
 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12) 
The Committee have been apprised that as per Guidelines revised in September, 
2010 the actual expenditure incurred is within the overall ceiling of Rs. 1 lakh for State 
level V&MC meeting and up to Rs.  50,000/ - for District level V&MC meeting is 
reimbursable from the Minis try. The Committee note that the non -official members of 
the State and District Level V&MCs are entitled for reimbursement of local travel within 
the State and District respectively for attending the V&MC meeting. Further, daily 
allowance at the rate of Rs. 150 per day or at the State Government DA rate, whichever 
is lower, is also allowed to non -officials and NGO members. The Committee desire that 
in view of current inflationary trends, TA/DA given to attend the V&MC meeting should 
be suitably enhanced. Th e Committee would also like the Department to regularly 
review enhancing the existing financial limits for holding V&MC meetings for which 
necessary amendments in the Guidelines be made accordingly. This could be linked to 
consumer price index. 

14 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The non -official members of the State and district Level V&MCs are already 
entitled to local travel within the State and district respectively for attending the V&MC 
meetings. 
           So far as Daily Allowance is concerned, the present p rovision “ Rs. 150/- per day 
or at the State Government DA rate, whichever is lower” in the guidelines is being 
modified as “at the State Government DA rate applicable for Group A officers”, thus, 
removing the restriction of Rs.150/- per day. 
           The expenditure ceiling for State and district level V&MC is being raised to Rs. 2 
lakh and Rs. 1 lakh per meeting respectively, though the reimbursement will be based 
on actuals. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.14) 
The Committee are informed that on the suggestion to include Chairman of the 
Autonomous District Council(ADC) to participate in the meeting of V&MCs, the 
Department has sought the suggestions of State Governments of North -Eastern 
Region.  The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the follow up action 
taken in this regard by the Government. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The guidelines are being modified for enabling the State Governments for 
nominating the Head of Autonomous District Council to the District level V&MC in 
districts having Schedule VI Areas, as member. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.15) 
The Committee are apprised that after V&MC meeting is held, minutes are drawn 
and recommendations considered by State Governments concerned for appropriate 
action and the action taken report is required to be circulated before the next meeting. 
The Committee are also informed that DoRD has expressed its inability to ensure action 
as follow -up action on the recommendations made by V&MCs is to be taken by the 
respective State Governments. The Committee are, however, of the view that being 
nodal agency, the Department of Rural Development should set  up a suitable  
mechanism  to ensure prompt action  by  State Government  because in the absence of  
action taken on  the recommendations of  V&MC,  the whole  purpose of setting up 
these  V&MCs gets defeated . This would also help the Central Government to  review 
their schemes, proposed funds and the intended beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government 
 
All States/UTs have been advised in December, 2012 to, inter alia, instruct 
Member Secretary of the State & district level V&MCs to ensure follow up action on 
recommendations of the V&MCs within 30 days of the meeting and also to have Action 
Taken on the recommendations of the previous meeting as the first agenda item in the 
next subsequent meeting.  

15 
 
 The Ministry has also decided to put in place a web -based monitoring system for 
the V&MC meetings. 
 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.16) 
The Committee note with satisfaction that in order to make V&MCs effective and 
to strengthen their working, Department has addressed the Chief Secretaries of the 
States prescribing transparent procedure for conducting meetings of  V&MCs, for 
preparing  and  processing  action  taken  report  and  for  sharing  recommendations of 
V&MCs.  The Committee are hopeful that if implemented properly, these measures 
would go a long way in strengthening the working of V&MCs. The Department may also 
explore the feasibility to undertake field visits by these V&MCs to get first hand 
information. 
Reply of the Government 
The existing guidelines do provide for enabling a V&MC or its Sub -Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Member of Parliament to undertake field visits  for inspection 
of works taken up under various rural development programmes. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.17) 
The Committee are informed that V&MCs look into complaints/alleged 
irregularities/ misappropriation of funds received for implementation of the programmes 
and recommend follow up action. In this context, V&MCs may refer any matter for 
enquiry to the Distri ct Collector/Chief Executive Officer/Project Director which shall be 
acted upon by him within 30 days. The Committee are further apprised that where there 
is definite evidence that Programme funds are not being properly utilized, the 
Department does consider withholding the funds till the position is clarified. If it is not to 
the satisfaction of the Department, in that case, action, if any, taken against any official 
is followed up on continuous basis as corrective/punitive action is to be taken by the 
State Governments. The Committee would  like  the Ministry of  Rural  Development  to  
examine this  matter afresh  for  amending  V&MCs Guidelines appropriately.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has decided that the status of the irregularities pointed out during 
the last V&MC meeting will be an integral part of check -list during review meetings with 
the States/districts. However, stopping of funds meant for the poor is not considered 
feasible, as the Ministry is not in the favour of punishing the poor. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
  

16 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 2.18) 
The Committee are  perturbed to note that no specific coordination mechanism 
existed between Ministry of Rural Development, Central Ministries and State 
Government/UT Administration till recently. The need to have a strong coordination 
becomes all the more important with th e expansion of scope of V&MCs, by including 
programmes of the Ministries of Tribal Affairs & Panchayati Raj and RGGVY of Ministry 
of Power in addition to the programmes of the Ministries of Rural Development and 
Drinking Water and Sanitation for review and  monitoring by these V&MCs.  The 
Committee, however, have been apprised that coordination mechanism has recently 
been evolved and prescribed procedure circulated among all stakeholders. The 
Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The co-ordination mechanism stipulated by the Ministry in January 2013 include 
the following: 
(i) District level Vigilance & Monitoring Committees may refer matters to the 
concerned Department in the State Governme nt for appropriate action in 
accordance with the recommendations of the Committee.  The State 
Government may place such recommendations of the district level V&MC 
before the State level V&MC for consideration and appropriate 
recommendations; 
(ii) The district level V&MCs may take up issues with the State Government and 
if the State Government so desires, may refer such issues directly to the 
Union Ministry concerned, in case State Government requires intervention of 
the Union Government. 
(iii) If any matter pertaining  to other Ministries is referred to the Ministry of Rural 
Development by any V&MC, the Ministry of Rural Development shall forward 
the same to the concerned Ministry for appropriate action which they may 
take independently and inform the concerned V&MC accordingly; 
(iv) If any of the participating Ministry desire to issue advisories to the V&MCs 
with regard to their programmes, such Ministry may, in normal course, refer 
the matter to the Ministry of Rural Development.  The Ministry of Rural 
Development shall issue the advisories to the V&MCs, if found feasible; 
The Ministry has not received any feedback indicating difficulties in 
operationalising this mechanism. 
 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 2.19) 
The Committee are apprised that Performance Review Committee (PRC) 
meeting is held periodically with the State Governments to discuss issues including  
those relating to the V&MCs.  The Committee desire that to make monitoring system 
more effective, better coordination of V&MCs with PRC and National Level Monitoring 
should be established so  that the objectives of V&MCs are achieved i.e. meetings are 
held regularly and funds given for the  programmes are effectively utilized and are not 
misused. 

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coordination of V&MCs with PRC and National Level Monitoring has already 
been ensured. The issues relating to V&MCs are discussed with the State Governments 
in PRC meetings and report submitted by the National Level Monitors (NLMs) on their 
visit to district is sent to the Chairman of the district level V&MC and District Magistrate 
for necessary action. The reports of NLMs are also discussed with representatives of 
the State Governments in the Regional Workshops. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 2.20) 
The Committee are apprised about the practical difficulties coming in the way  of  
smooth  functioning  of  V&MCs in different  States/UTs  which inter-alia  include, delay 
in indicating date of meeting, postponement of meetings, inability of Chairman to attend  
meetings,  elections,  preoccupation of  Member  Secretary,  lack  of  proper follow up 
action  on decision  taken  in the V&MC meetings and limitation  in  taking action against 
erring employees of  the State  Governments.  The Committee desire that Department 
should make concerted efforts to resolve/overcome these difficulties by taking suitable 
remedial measures/amendments in the Guidelines so as to e nsure smooth functioning 
of the V&MCs. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Specific dates are being stipulated for the meetings, as stated against 
Recommendation Serial No. 13, to ensure regular meetings.  Also, Guidelines have 
been issued to the States/UTs in Decembe r, 2012 to, inter alia, instruct Member 
Secretary of the State & district level V&MCs to ensure follow up action on 
recommendations of the V&MCs  within 30 days of the meeting. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 2.21) 
The Committee note that no specific mechanism exists for lodging complaints by 
common man to V&MCs regarding irregularities in the implementati on of the 
programmes. The Committee, therefore, recommend setting up of such a mechanism 
which would facilitate lodging complaints by common man so that remedial action can 
be taken thereon. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by th e 
Department in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has initiated the process of creating a portal for V&MCs in which 
provision for registering public grievances will also be made. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 

18 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 2.22) 
The Committee find  that no exclusive publicity has been undertaken by the 
Department for creating awareness among the public about existence and functions of 
V&MCs. In this context, the Committee are apprised that all relevant information viz. 
position of release of funds t o the States and districts under various programmes is 
uploaded on the website of the Department for information of general public. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that Department should also undertake publicity campaign 
through advertisements etc. to cre ate awareness  among  public about existence and 
functioning of V&MCs.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has initiated the process for including V&MCs in the Ministry’s 
publicity campaign through audio and video spots. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 2.23) 
The Committee further note that no seminar/conference  etc .  has ever  been 
organized for  MPs/MLAs,  representatives  of  PRIs and  other  members of  State and 
District level V&MCs to educate them about the objectives, working and relevance of 
these V&MCs.  The Committee therefore, recommend that to have full c ooperation and 
participation of MPs/MLAs, representatives of PRIs and other members of State  and 
district level V&MCs, Department of Rural Development should ensure that seminars/ 
conferences are conducted periodically.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The seminars and conferences for the purposes of educating the MPs and MLAs 
is relevant and effective at the time of reconstitution of the Committees. Ministry will 
organise such training courses through State Institutes of Rural Development and 
Extended Training Centres, after the constitution of the Sixteenth Lok Sabha. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
  

19 
 
Chapter III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
  
 
 
- NIL - 
 
  

20 
 
Chapter IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4) 
The Committee note  that  Chairman  of  State level  V&MC  is Minister of  Rural 
Development  of  the  State.  The Member Secretary is Secretary -in-charge of Rural 
Development programmes in the State.  Further, the members of the Committee include 
4 MPs of  Lok Sabha, 1 MP of Rajya  Sabha, 5 MLAs, representative of  SC/ST/ 
Women, 4 Non -officials, 2 NGOs and officials, Chief Post Master General of the postal 
circle. The Committee are  further apprised that all MPs, Non -officials, NGOs and 
representatives of KVIC are nominated by Ministry of Rural Development.  The 
Committee note that Ministry nominates 4 MPs of  Lok  Sabha and 1  MP  of  Rajya 
Sabha to State level V&MCs with the approv al of Minister of Rural Development. The 
Committee are of the considered view that Members of Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Rural Development should be given preference while nominating MPs to 
these State level V&MCs. The Ministry may also consider  increasing  the 
representation  of  Lok Sabha and  Rajya Sabha Members  in the V&MCs depending 
upon the area of the State for effective functioning of V&MCs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The term of Members of Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural 
Development is for one year. However, MPs are nominated by this Ministry to the State 
level V&MCs for the remaining period of the concerned Lok Sabha. Therefore,  it is not 
practicable to give preference to Members of Parliamentary Standing Committee while 
nominating MPs to State level V&MCs.  
                The guidelines of V&MCs are being modified for nominating to the State level 
V&MC one member of every political party represented in the Lok Sabha from the State 
subject to feasibility. One independent MP (LS), if any, will also be nominated. The 
number of MP (RS) in the State level V&MCs will be restricted to half of the number of 
MP (LS) in the State level V&MC. The minimum number of MPs in the Committee will 
be kept at 4 MP (LS) and one MP (RS).  If the number of political parties with 
representation in Lok Sabha is less than 4, the minimum requirement may be fulfilled 
with representation proportionate to the strength of each political party represented in 
the Lok Sabha from the State, to the extent feasible. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.5) 
The Committee note that Chairman of State Level V& MCs is Minister of Rural 
Development.  In  this  context, the Committee are of  the view  that  V&MC being  a 
Vigilance Committee, it  would  not  be  appropriate  for  the Minister of  the Rural 
Development to chair meetings of V&MCs which have been const ituted with the sole 
purpose to mainly supervise,  exercise vigilance and monitor the implementation of 

21 
 
programmes of the Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee are of the opinion 
that senior most member of Parliament of  the State should chair the m eetings of State 
Level V&MCs. 
Reply of the Government 
All the Ministers in the State responsible for implementing various programmes of 
rural development are included in the State level Committee and the seniormost among 
them is to be the Chairman of the S tate level V&MC. In view of the difficulties in 
determining the inter -se seniority of Ministers in the State & the MPs (LS) from the 
State, this recommendation cannot be implemented. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation  (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.11) 
The Committee note that despite various efforts taken by the Government viz. 
revising  V&MC Guidelines in  September,  2010 thereby making  Member  Secretary 
personally  responsible for  convening  the meetings  at stipulated  intervals;  advising 
State Go vernments to  give concerted  attention to conduct  meetings at  State and 
District level and requesting Chief Secretaries of States to make relevant entries in the 
Annual Performance Appraisal Report/Annual Confidential Report of the Member 
Secretaries of State and District V&MCs who do not achieve targets of four meetings in 
a year; the stipulated  number  of  meetings  are not  being  held. Ministry of  Rural 
Development's  contention  that  it  would not  be  possible  for  them  to enforce  these 
measures on Chief Secretaries as they are not accountable to the Department and is 
administratively  under  the control  of  State Government  is  not acceptable  to the 
Committee. The Committee are of the opinion that since holding of V&MCs meetings is  
in the  larger  public  interest  and  helps improve the quality of  delivery of  the 
programmes,  the State  Governments  should effectively  utilize this  mechanism  to 
ensure better execution and should play a more facilitatory role to institutionalize this 
system. To encourage holding of regular meetings, the State Government may evolve 
ways to give incentives for holding meetings. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department should continuously press upon the State Governments so that State and 
District level V&MCs meetings are conducted as per the Guidelines in this regard.  The 
Committee strongly feel that the Department has to be vigilant in this respect to ensure 
that funds sanctioned for centrally sponsored schemes are effectively utilized. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has continuously been pressing the State Governments to conduct 
meetings of the V&MCs in accordance with the Guidelines. The Minister of Rural 
Development has, in May 2013, written to all the Chief Ministers in the matter. Differ ent 
monitoring mechanisms are already in place to ensure that funds sanctioned for 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes are effectively utilized. Giving incentive for holding 
mandatory meetings is not considered appropriate. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 

22 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation  (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.13) 
The Committee are  informed that Member Secretary of the V&MC who is 
personally responsible for convening the meeting is expected to finalize the agenda in 
consultation with the Chairman.  The Committee find that agenda is either received late 
or is made available at the ti me of meeting only which causes inconvenience. To 
obviate  this, the Secretary,  DoRD had  assured  the Committee that  necessary 
Guidelines to make available  agenda before the meeting  would be  issued  and  if 
possible, the agenda would also be put up o n the website.  The Committee would, 
therefore, like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department to make available  
agenda to Members before the meeting so as to enable them to study and verify the 
facts beforehand. 
Reply of the Government 
The Mini stry has decided to modify the guidelines, which will also have the 
following features: 
(i) The district level V&MC meetings are to be held on a specific date as under: 
 Last Saturday of May 
 First Saturday of August 
 First Saturday of November 
 First Saturday of February 
            If for any reason, the meeting is not held on the given date, the meeting should 
be held within a month, as an adjourned meeting, on a date to be decided by the 
Member Secretary, 
(ii) If the Chairman of the Committee is also Chairman of other district V&MCs, he 
may hold a combined meeting of all such V&MCs or a group of such V&MCs on the 
scheduled date keeping in view the administrative convenience. If all V&MCs are not 
covered in one meeting, the meeting of remaining V&MCs is  to be held on another date 
convenient to the Chairman. The venue of the meeting in such cases should be located 
in a different district for each meeting. The Member Secretary of the district where 
meeting is held will be the nodal officer for organizing t he meetings in co-ordination with 
the Member Secretaries of other District V&MCs included in the meeting. 
[O.M. No. H.13013/1/2012-VMC dated 18 November, 2013, Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

23 
 
Chapter V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                       SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
17 December, 2013                                             Chairperson, 
  26 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                Standing Committee on Rural Development 
  

24 
 
Appendix-I 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON                                                    
TUESDAY, THE 17 DECEMBER, 2013 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1540 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan  -             Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
4. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
5. Smt. Annu Tandon 
6. Smt. Usha Verma 
7. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
9. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
10. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
11. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz    
          SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
   
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee convened for 
consideration of Memoranda containing draft Reports of the Committee on action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in three Reports on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) and one Report on 
'Working of Vigilance and Monitoring Committee in States/UTs'.  
 

25 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
(i)    X X X X X X X X X X X; 
(ii)    X X X X X X X X X X X; 
 (iii)    X X X X X X X X X X X; and 
(iv)   Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  
Forty-sixth  Report on 'Working of Vigilance and Monitoring Committees in States/UTs; and.  
4. Draft Reports were taken up seriatum.  After detailed discussions, the Co mmittee adopted the 
Reports with minor modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid 
Reports and present the same to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
X Relevant portion of the Minutes not related with the subject have been kept separately. 
 
  

26 
 
APPENDIX - II 
[Vide Introduction of Report] 
  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-SIXTH REPORT                              
(15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations:     23 
     
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the     
  Government :    
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 
                  20, 21, 22 and 23. 
         
Total:          19 
Percentage:         82.61 %
            
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not 
  desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies :      
 
Serial No.   -  NIL - 
 
Total:          00 
Percentage:         0.00 %
    
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the    
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:     
Serial Nos.  4, 5, 11 and 13 
 
Total:          04 
Percentage:         17.39 %
            
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the   
Government are still awaited :       
 
Serial Nos. -  NIL - 
Total:          00 
Percentage:         0.00 % 
 