STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (2009-2010) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
‘THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TENTH AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2009’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
14 
 


FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
‘THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TENTH AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2009 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28th July, 2010 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28th July, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 NEW DELHI  
 
 
 
 
 
 
July, 2010/Sravana, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 


 
 
 
 
C.R.D. No. 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price: Rs.77.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  
(First Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005. 
  

CONTENTS 
 
 
 
APPENDICES  
 
I. The Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009 34 
II. List of representatives of State Governments who tendered evidence 
before the Committee  
 
37 
III. List of NGOs/experts who tendered evidence before the Committee on the 
Bill 
 
38 
IV. State-wise comments on ‘The Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth 
Amendment) Bill, 2009 Views of different State Governments on the Bill. 
  
39 
V. State-wise monthly/daily allowances, remunerations etc. available to office 
bearers of PRIs 
41 
VI. Extracts of the Ninth sitting held on 20th January, 2010 48 
VII. Minutes of the Tenth sitting held on 10th February, 2010 50 
VIII. Minutes of the Eleventh sitting held on 9th March, 2010 53 
IX. Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting held on 19th May, 2010 56 
X. Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting held on 7th June, 2010 59 
XI. Minutes of the Twenty First sitting held on 20th July, 2010 62 
      Page No. 
 Composition of the Committee (2009-10) 
 
Introduction      
(ii) 
 
(iii) 
 REPORT 
 
PART I 
 
 Introductory 
 
1 
(i) Enhancing reservation for women in Panchayats 
 
6 
(ii) Views on reservation of seats for women in Panchayats by rotation 
 
8 
(iii) Issue of inclusion of the word ‘rural’ before the word ‘population’ occurring 
in proviso (i) of clause 2 (iii) of the Bill  
 
9 
(iv) Retaining the words ‘not less than one-half’ occurring the Bill 
 
10 
(v) Capacity Building and training of elected representatives  
 
11 
(vi) Pre-requisites for necessary empowerment of elected representatives of  
Panchayats including elected women representatives 
21 
(vii) Issue of proxy attendance 26 
 PART II 
 
 
 Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 27 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2009-2010) 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
   Members 
Lok  Sabha  
1. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
2. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
5. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
6. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
7. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
8. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
9. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
10. Shri Rakesh Pandey 
11. Shri P.L. Punia 
12. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
13. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
14. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu 
15. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
16. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
17. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
18. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh 
19. Shrimati Usha Verma 
20. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
Rajya  Sabha 
21. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar* 
22. Shri Ganga Charan 
23. Shri Silvius Condpan** 
24. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
25. Dr. Ram Prakash 
26. Shri P.R. Rajan 
27. Shri Arjun Singh 
28. Vacant@ 
29. Shrimati Maya Singh 
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah  - Additional Director 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
*    w.e.f. 15 April, 2010 
**    Re-nominated w.e.f. 3 May, 2010 
@  Consequent upon retirement of Shri Bhagwati Singh, MP, Rajya Sabha from membership of  Rajya Sabha w.e.f.  4 July, 2010.  
 
      (ii) 

(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing  Committee on Rural Development (2009-10) having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present th is Fourteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ The Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 
2009’.   
2.  ‘The Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009’ was introduced in 
Lok Sabha on 26 th November, 2009, was referred by the Hon’ble Speaker to the Standing 
Committee on Rural Development on 21 st December, 2009 for examination and report  to 
Parliament within three months i.e. by 21st March, 2010. 
3. ‘The Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009’  seeks to amend 
Article 243 D of the Constitution by proposing that the reservation of women in the Panchayats 
in the total number of seats, offices of Chairpersons and in the seats reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes across thre e tiers should be raise d from ‘not less than one -third’ 
to ‘not less than one -half’ and also proposing similar reservation for women belonging to the 
Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe categories in the offices of Chairpersons in the 
Panchayats at each level upto ‘not less than one-half’.  
4. The Committee at their sitting held on 20 th January, 2010 inter-alia decided that a press 
communiqué soliciting views of public on various provisions of the Bill be issued and with the 
permission of the Hon’ble Speaker views of State Governm ents/UT Administrations on the Bill 
be obtained since the subject matter of the Bill concern ed the State Governments/UT 
Administrations.  
5.  The Committee obtained written information on various provisions contained in the Bill 
from Ministry of Panchayati  Raj. The preliminary briefing of the representative s of Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj on the above Bill was held on 10th February, 2010 wherein representatives of 
Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice ) were also present for assisting the 
Committee.  
6. The Committee at their sitting held on 9 th March, 2010 inter-alia discussed the progress 
of examination on the Bill and observed that the Committee were to present the report thereon 
by 21st March, 2010 and the examination thereof was not complete since the Committee was 
preoccupied with the mandatory work relating to presentation of four Reports on Demands for 
Grants (2010-11). The Committee felt that it would not be possible to complete the examination  

(iv) 
of the Bill and present a r eport thereon by the stipulated date.  The Committee decided that the 
Hon’ble Speaker may be requested to grant extension of time upto the last day of the first week 
of the next session for presentation of the report on the aforesaid Bill and extension of time as 
requested by the Committee was acceded to by the Hon’ble Speaker.  
7. The Committee at their sittings held on 9th March, 2010  took oral evidence of the 
representatives of State Governments (Appendix II) and on 19th May, 2010  took the oral 
evidence of the experts/NGOs (Appendix III) based on their memoranda received  on various 
provisions of the Bill. The Committee had also received views of various State Governments/UT 
Administrations on the Bill Appendix IV. 
8. The Committee at their sitting held on 7 th June, 2010 took evidence of the 
representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj on various provisions contained in the Bill, wherein 
the representatives of Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice) were also present to 
assist the Committee. 
9. The Committee at their sitting held on 20 th July, 2010 considered and adopted the Draft 
Report on the aforesaid Bill with certain modifications/additions.  
10. The Committee were immensely benefited by the contributions made by the members of 
the Committee for which I express my sincere thanks to them. 
11. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to representatives of Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj, representative s of Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justic e), 
experts/NGOs, representatives of State Governments who appeared before the Committee in 
connection with examination of the above Bill . The Committee also express t heir thanks to 
individuals and experts who have submitted their memoranda to the Committee.  
12. The Committee would like to place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.  
13. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in Part-II of the report. 
 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;                 SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
26 July, 2010                   Chairperson, 
4 Sravana, 1932 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Rural Development 

1 
 
      REPORT  
               PART I 
Introductory 
 The 73 rd amendment to the Constitution which came into effect in 1993 paved 
the way for entry of large numbers of women into electoral politics in India. This 
landmark legislation gave India the unique distinction of having more number of elected 
women representatives (EWRs) than the rest of the world together. What followed over 
the course of the next fifteen years was a political and s ocial transformation that has 
impacted the nature of governance itself. The presence of more than 1 million elected 
women representatives in the institutions of local governance in rural India may be 
termed as „silent revolution‟ within the process of democratic decentralization ushered in 
by the 73rd amendment. 
1.2  As per information given by Ministry of Panchayati Raj i n 25 States* and 6 Union 
territories, out of total number of elected representatives of 26,78,183 at Gram 
Panchayats, 9,84,273 are women elected representatives. Similarly , at Intermediate 
Panchayats, out of a total elected representatives  of 1,57,973, the women elected 
representatives are 58,112. Likewise at District Panchayat level , out of total number of 
elected representatives of 15,583, elected women representatives are 5,763.  
1.3 By virtue of being inclusive, women‟s political participation through the PRIs has 
altered the traditional structure. It is not just women from political families who are 
contesting elections to the Panchayat s but many women from marginalized sections, 
often with little or no political experience are also contesting the elections.  
1.4 While reservation may have facilitated women‟s entry into the political space, the 
EWRs have demonstrated their capacity to sh oulder the responsibilities of political 
office. They not only serve as elected members in rural local bodies, many of the EWRs 
occupy leadership positions in the three tiers of Panchayats.  
* Maghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland have traditional Councils,  
J&K elections have not been held after adoption of the Panchayat Act.  
Panchayat elections have not been held in Jharkhand 
 

2 
 
1.5 The President of India in her address to the Parliament on 4 th June, 2009 has 
mentioned the intent to provide fifty percent reservation for women in Panchayats as 
women suffer multiple deprivations of class, caste and gender and enhancing 
reservation in Panchayats will lead to more women entering into/in the public sphere.  
1.6 Panchayats as such have a vital role to play in the welfare and development of 
the weaker sections of the society, viz., women, Scheduled Castes (SCs), Scheduled 
Tribes (STs). Greater representation of these sections would enhance their voice i n 
these bodies and promote inclusive g overnance which is critical to  inclusive growth. 
Enhancement of reservation for women in Panchayats will facilitate more women 
entering into public sphere and thereby lead to further empowerment of women and 
also make Panchayats more inclusive institutions, thereby improving governance and 
public service delivery.  
1.7 Government on 27 th August, 2009 approved the proposal for moving a 
Constitutional Amendment Bill for enhancing reservation for women in Panchayats at all  
the three tiers of PRIs from one third to 50% in the total number of seats. Accordingly, 
„the Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009‟ (Appendix I)  was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 26 th Nov, 2009.  On 21st December, 2009, the aforesaid Bill 
was referred to the Standing Committee on Rural Development by Hon‟ble Speaker, 
Lok Sabha for examination and Report.  
 
Constitutional provision regarding reservation of seats  
 
1.8 The existing provisions in Article 243 D of the Constitution read as under :- 
Reservation of Seats 
       243 D. (1) Seats shall be reserved for –             
(a) the Scheduled Castes ; and           
(b) the Scheduled Tribes, 
in every Panchayat and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may 
be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that 
Panchayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes in that Panchayat area or of the 
Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area bears to the total population of that area and 
such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat. 
 
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (/) shall be 
reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the 
Scheduled Tribes. 
 

3 
 
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging 
to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be 
filled by direct election in every Panchayat shall be reserved for women and such seats 
may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat.  
 
(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or any other level 
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and wome n in such 
manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide:  
 
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in any State shall 
bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of such offices in the 
Panchayats at each level as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of 
the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the total population of the State:  
Provided further that no t less than one -third of the total number of offices of 
Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women:  
 
Provided also that the number or offices reserved under this clause shall be 
allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.  
 
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of offices of 
Chairpersons (other than the  reservation for women) under clause (4) shall cease to 
have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334. 
 
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision 
for reservation of seats in any Panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at 
any level in favour of backward class of citizens. 
 
 
1.9 The Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009 seeks to 
amend Article 243 D as under :- 
Amendment of article 243 D 
“In article 243D of the Constitution,-       
(i)  in clause (2), for the word "one-third", the word "one-half'   
shall be substituted;  
(ii) in clause (3), for the word "one-third", the word one-half' shall be substituted;  
(iii) for clause (4), the following shall be substituted, namely:-  
"(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or any other level 
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled. Tribes and women in such 
manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide:  
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in any State shall 
bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of such offices in the 
Panchayats at each level as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of 
the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the total population of that State:  
Provided further that not less than one -half of t he total number of offices of 
Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the 
Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes:  

4 
 
Provided also that not less than one -half of the total number of offices of 
Chairpersons (including the number of offices reserved for women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) in the Panchayats at each level shall be 
reserved for women:  
Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this clause shall be 
allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.” 
 
1.10 According to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj , the proposed amendment would 
increase reservation for women in  
(a) total number of seats to be filled in by direct election; 
(b) offices of Chairpersons; and  
(c) the seats and offices reserved for Scheduled Castes  (SCs) and Scheduled 
Tribes (STs) to 50% in all tiers of Panchayats.  
1.11 The Bill seeks to amend Article 243 D of the Constitution dealing with reservation 
of seats in the Panchayats. Article 243 D provides that „not less than one -third‟ of the 
total number of seats and seats reserved for the Scheduled Cas tes and Scheduled 
Tribes as well as offices of the Chairperson s in Panchayats at each level shall be 
reserved for women.  Need to further enhance women‟s participation in Panchayats for 
the twin purpose of empowering women and making Panchayats more inclusi ve 
institutions has been outlined the statement of „Object and Reasons‟ of the Bill.  
Status in States regarding 50 per cent reservation for women 
1.12 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has informed that the following States have 
already made provision of 50 per cent reservation for women.  
S.No. Name of the State Views  
1. Bihar 50% reservation already in force 
2. Chhattisgarh Notification for 50% reservation for women has been 
made and it will be applied to election to be held. 
3. Himachal Pradesh Notification has been made. Effect of Amendment will 
take place during next election in January, 2011. 
4. Kerala Government has decided to increase res ervation for 
women to 50% in PRIs for membership of post of 
Presidents and Vice Presidents. 
5. Madhya Pradesh State Government has decided to increase 
reservation upto 50% for women. 
6. Rajasthan  Notification for 50% reservation for women issued on 
25.6.3008. 
7. Uttarakhand 50% reservation for women has been decided and the 
same has already been implemented in elections held 
in 2008.  

5 
 
1.13 It is observed from the information furnished by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
that in Sikkim reservation for women was increased to 40 percent on 7.7.2009. 
1.14 During the course of examination , the following States have given their 
comments on the issue as shown against each : 
S.No. Name of the State Views  
1. Tripura The State Government has already amended the 
State law 
2. Maharashtra State Cabinet on 17.12.2009 has given consent to the 
proposal for reservation in local bodies upto 50% 
which is under consideration of the Central 
Government.  
3. Haryana The State Government is in favour of the Bill. 
4. Karnataka The State Government supports the Bill. 
5. Punjab  50% reservation of women in Panchayat will be 
beneficial for overall working of the PRIs. 
 
The State-wise details of their comments are shown in Appendix IV. 
 
1.15 In connection with examination of the Bill under reference, the Committee took 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj , representatives of 
four State Governments (Bihar, Uttarakhand, Maharashtra and Karnataka ) as shown in 
Appendix II and also heard the views of four Experts/NGOs as shown in Appendix III. 
The Committee also obtained the views of different State Governments on the Bill  
(Appendix IV). A Press Communiqué soliciting views of public on various provisions of 
the Bill  was also issued . In all 26 memoranda were received including 5 from 
experts/NGOs. 
1.16 The following issues came up for discussion during the examination of the Bill :-  
(i) Enhancing reservation for women in Panchayats; 
(ii) Views on reservation of seats for women in Panchayats by rotation; 
(iii) Issue of inclusion of the word „rural‟ before the word „population‟ occurring in 
Proviso (i) of Clause 2 (iii) of the Bill ; 
(iv) Retaining the words „not less than one-half‟ occurring in the Bill; 
(v) Capacity building and training of elected representatives; 
(vi) Pre-requisites for necessary empowerment of elected representatives of 
Panchayats including elected women representatives; 
(vii) Issue of proxy attendance; 

6 
 
 
1.17 The above issues are discussed in the succeeding sections:- 
(i) Enhancing reservation for women in Panchayats  
 
1.18 Out of 26 memoranda received from public, experts and NGOs al l have 
unanimously supported the Bill except one  organization viz. Raks hak Foundation, 
California, USA. The organization has opposed the Bill on various grounds viz. 
Statement of objects and reasons overlooked reality, insufficient ground f or 50% 
reservation, discrimination on the ground of gender etc.  The Committee during the 
course of examination wanted to have the views of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj on all 
these issues. Pointing out that since women enjoy equal rights as men and as such are 
free to stand in election s and get chosen by men and wome n alike, the Committee 
enquired whether rights of men have been taken into account while enhancing 
reservation of women. T he Ministry of Panchayati Raj , in a written reply , stated as 
under:- 
“Women and men by and large shar e the same set of rights.  The C onstitution 
also does not discriminate between men and women on the ground of gender.  
Both can exploit the avenues of advancement as per their capability and 
capacity.  However as compared to men, women have to put up with a number of 
additional responsibilities on account of their household duties, natural physical 
disadvantage, responsibilities as mothers, social obligations and traditional 
values.  Therefore, it is not fair to assume that providing women reservation is in 
any way violative of the rights of men.” 
1.19 The Committee also enquired as to what extent the 50 per cent reservation for 
women in Panchayats is justified particularly when the current level of women‟s 
participation in Panchayats is already at the level of 42 per cent, the Ministry  of 
Panchayati Raj in a written reply clarified : 
“…Gender equity and inclusiveness are critical to the inclusive growth and 
this factor also results in better dealing of public services, especially in health, 
sanitation, early childhood care, drinking water, etc. that affect the lives of women 
and children.” 

7 
 
1.20 In reply to another query whether increasing the reservation only proves that 
existing reservation policy has not helped adequately, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 
a written reply stated as under :- 
“Women constitute almost 50 per cent of total population of our country. 
Also, there are directions from various C ourts that reservation of any kind cannot 
ordinarily exceed the limit of 50%.  There is already a provision of reservation of 
33% of seats f or women in PRIs at all levels.  A study on the EWRs in 
Panchayats by Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 2008 reveals that the performance 
of EWRs is in sync with participatory style.   Almost 80% of all the women 
representative got elected from reserved seats and this facilitated their first entry 
into politics.  Around 79% of them perceived this as enhancing their self esteem, 
81% found their confidence increased and 74% experienced as equipped with 
decision making ability.  It will show that the reservation o f 33% has already 
proved a boon for the women.   To maintain and increase this tempo it is 
necessary that their percentage of reservation is enhanced to 50%.” 
1.21 During the course of briefing of the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj, the Secretary (Panchayati Raj) clarifying the need for reservation stated as under:- 
“Madam, the first issue was why there should be 50 per cent reservation for 
women in Panchayati Raj Institutions. The answer for this is obvious as women 
constitute 50 per cen t of the total population of our country , it is felt that the size 
of reservation should be 50 per cent.…”  
1.22 In this regard  the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a written reply also state d as 
under :- 
“The proposed amendment has been mooted after considering the matter 
from all angles in depth.  Despite many encouraging measures adopted by the 
Government for the upliftment of conditions of women, it has been found that the 
women still suffer from multiple deprivations of class, caste and gender. Th e 
avenues provided to them in Legislature have not yielded desired results. The 
enhancement of reservations for them at the grass roots level i.e. in PRIs is a 
well conceived attempt initiated to build solid foundation for the Elected Women 
Representatives from bottom up. This move is not contrary to the empowerment 
of women but rather affirms resolve of the Government that they should feel 
responsible and duly empowered towards performing their duties as elect ed 
representatives of the Society.” 
 
1.23 In th is connection , pointing out that there can be no objection to the 
amendments, the Secretary, Legislative Department stated as under :- 

8 
 
“Usually the main function of the Legislative Department while drafting of 
the Bill is to translate the policies of the G overnment or the Administrative 
Ministry into the legislative proposals unless there is a very serious legal or 
Constitutional objection, which is also examined thoroughly by our sister 
Department, namely, Department of Legal Affairs. So, in this case, pro bably in 
the municipalities also, there is 50 per cent, and 1/3 rd was already there. We 
translated and did not find any legal or Constitutional objections to increase it to 
50 per cent.”  
(ii) Views on reservation of seats for women in Panchayats by rotation 
1.24 Another important area that came up for discussion while examining the Bill was 
the issue of reservation of seats in Panchayats by rotation. In this connection last 
proviso of Clause 2 (iii) of the Bill states as under :- 
“…..Provided also that the nu mber of offices reserved under this clause shall be 
allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.” 
1.25 During the course of briefing on the Bill by the representatives of Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj on this issue, the Committee pointed out th at rotating the seats after 
every term would not bring in leadership among women elected representatives as 
under the provision the seat will be given to other. The Committee wanted to know that 
whether the seats reserved for women in Panchayats can be for  three consecutive 
terms, elaborating the view of the nodal Ministry the Secretary (Panchayati Raj) 
submitted as under :- 
“On the issue of reservation of offices in Panchayats by rotation divergent opinion 
have come up before the Committee. Some experts su bmitted before the 
Committee that the mandatory rotation of reservation of post of Chairperson is 
highly de-motivating for women because they know the next time they may not 
be able to represent again.  However, some say it will be useful and on this issue  
States are to be consulted.  This subject whether rotation cycle is of one election 
or two elections is the issue of debate within the Ministry.  One argument is, it 
should be maximum two cycle so that leadership quality is developed.  Those 
who are elect ed they get long term stake.  The second view is, if we give two 
cycles, then one particular segments representation will come after forty years.  
That is also a difficult preposition.  However in Constitution there is no bar as 
such it has been left to th e States. To my knowledge it is two consecutive terms 
in Tamil Nadu.  In Bihar it is under consideration and perhaps it has been 
implemented.  Administrative Reforms Commission has recommended that 
rotation should be only after two elections.  In this subj ect whatever the 
Committee will recommend we will certainly implement it.” 

9 
 
1.26 The Committee also wanted to know whether the term period for rotation of seats 
while providing reservation for women as being observed by each States, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in a written note clarified :- 
“The term period for rotation of seats while providing reservation for women in 
PRIs is decided by the concerned State Governments in accordance with the 
provisions of their respective statues. As per information informally available only 
Tamil Nadu and Bihar have the provision of rotation of seats after two cycles.” 
1.27 The Committee also wanted whether some definite period on the issue of rotation 
can be mentioned in the Bill, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a written reply clarified :- 
 “This could be considered.” 
1.28 The Committee also wanted to enquire whether the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
has ever consulted the Ministry of Law and Justice on this issue and what is the 
considered view of the Ministry in th is regard, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a written 
reply stated as under :- 
“The Ministry of Law is being consulted in a different context.  This Ministry is 
however in agreement with the recommendation of second ARC that reservation 
for at least two t erms is advisable to enable elected representatives to grow as 
genuine leaders. However the Ministry is in the process of obtaining the 
comments of all concerned including State Governments and a firm view will be 
taken after taking into consideration the responses received.” 
(iii) Issue of Inclusion of the word ‘rural’ before the word ‘population’ occurring in 1 st 
Proviso (i) of Clause 2 (iii) of the Bill 
1.29 The first proviso to Article 243 D (4) proposed to be substituted by clause 2 (iii) of 
the Bill reads as under :-  
“(4)  The offices of the Chairperson in the Panchayats at the village or any other 
level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Sche duled Tribes and 
women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide: 
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Schedules Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in 
any State Shall bear , as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total 
number of such offices in the Panchayats at each level as the population  of the 
Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to 
the total population  of that State.” 

10 
 
1.30 Enquired about the views of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj on the question of 
insertion of the word „rural‟ before the word „ population‟ in the first proviso to Article 243 
(D) 4 quoted above, a representative of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a w ritten reply 
clarified as under :- 
“There may be no objection in accepting addition of word “rural” before the 
word “population”. However, such an addition would be more appropriate if a 
similar amendment is made in Chapter IX A i.e. “Municipalities” for r eservation in 
proportion to urban population.”  
1.31 The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) stated in a written note 
in this regard as under :- 
“The first proviso to clause 4 of article 243D already exists in which the 
word “rural” has no t been used and no amendment has been suggested by the 
administrative Ministry. We feel that purpose can be achieved by retaining the 
existing language of the said first proviso.” 
1.32 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj subsequently in a written reply to a que stion 
stated as under : 
“This seems desirable since the proportion of SC and ST in rural areas of 
a State usually differ from their proportion to the population of the State.” 
 
(iv) Retaining the words ‘not less than one-half’ occurring in the Bill  
1.33 During the course of examination of the Bill the Committee had obtained views 
from different State Governments/UTs on the aforesaid Bill. The State Government of 
Rajasthan while submitting their views stated as under :- 
“…..regarding reservation for women in Panchayats, in the total number of 
seats, offices of Chairperson and in the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes across three tiers to be increased from „not less than 
one-third‟ to „not less than one -half‟….. it is submitted that the Government of 
Rajasthan has already made the provision for reservation to women as „not less 
than one-half‟. In this context Hon‟ble High Court, Rajasthan has given directions 
to make the provision for reservation as „not exceeding one -half‟. However, the 
Government is of the view that the provision for reservation fro women be 
introduced as „one-half‟ instead of „not less than one-half‟. 
1.34 Clarifying the position on the above issue, t he Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a 
written reply stated as under :- 

11 
 
“In this connection, it is stated that if in a body, the seats are in odd 
numbers, it will not be possible to arrive at the exact half number of the same. 
However, if the provision is made “not less than one -half” it may exceed the 
constitutional limit of 50%. Therefore, the provision may be made to the effect “as 
near as may be one-half”.  
1.35 The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) has given the following 
opinion stating as under :- 
“The expression “not less than one -half” also occurs in article 243T of the 
Constitution. As the seats are to be in whole numbers, it is not possible to lay it in 
terms of mathematical precision as “one-half”. Such a figure cannot be achieved 
with exactitude. Therefore, we feel that the uses “not less than one-half” would 
be proper and implementable”. 
 
(v) Capacity Building and Training of elected representatives  
1.36 One prominent issue that was examined by the Committee was whether 
increased level of reservation for women in Panchayats alone is sufficient or it should 
be accompanied by their actual empowerment for their capacity building and training 
requirements. Out lining Capacity Building and Training of Elected Representatives of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions in the Annual Report of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, it has 
been stated that the major function of the Ministry has been to provide assistance to the 
States for the capacity building and training of elected representatives of PRIs. It is well 
recognized that many of the elected representatives of PRIs are illiterate or semi -literate 
and know little about development programmes, planning, systems, and procedure s. 
They require training to undertake the tasks expected of them as people‟s 
representatives. A comprehensive National Capacity Building Framework (NCBF) has 
been circulated for the guidance of all concerned. Further, most of the Panchayats do 
not have the ir own office space as well as adequate staff to look after the functions 
assigned to them.  Hence, the Ministry has taken many steps in this direction, which 
include clear guidelines of 23 rd October, 2009 on construction of Panchayat Ghars, 
dated 23.10.2009 on manpower for Panchayats, etc. Further for the implementation of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), the 

12 
 
Panchayats at district, intermediate and village levels are the principal authorities for the 
planning and implementation of NREGA.  
1.37 Even after 17 years of the 73 rd Amendment of the Constitution, the Panchayats 
are yet to come up as the effective units of Self Governance due to several factors. A 
key factor being the inadequate infrastructure. A large number of Gram Panchayats 
(GPs) do not have even office buildings and full -time staff. All the same, their 
responsibilities are increasing progressively with their role in the planning and 
implementation of National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA), Backward 
Region Grant Fund (BRGF), etc. and so on. Keeping in view  the increasing role of PRIs 
in the implementation of various development schemes and to provide civic services to 
the rural peoples in their Panchayat area, Ministry of Panchayati Raj issued a detailed 
guidelines on 23 rd October, 2009 for construction of Gram Panchayat Office Building 
and Rajiv Sewa Kendra by dove-tailing funds from NGNREGA, BRGF and other Central 
and State Schemes 
1.38 For capacity building of Panchayats, three programmes of Backward Region 
Grant Fund (BRGF) for 250 districts, Rashtriya G ram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY) for non -
BRGF 350 districts and third is exclusively for Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti 
Abhiyan (PMEYSA) are being implemented by the nodal Ministry.  
Allocation and utilization of funds for capacity building and training  
1.39 Giving details about the allocation vis -à-vis utilization of funds for capacity 
building and training requirements of Panchayats during the last three years the Ministry 
has given the following figures :-         
            (Rs. In crore) 
Scheme  Year-wise allocation vis-à-vis utilization 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
Allocation  Utilisation Allocation  Utilisation Allocation  Utilisation Allocation Utilisation  
BRGF 250 121.3 250 135.7 250 190.63 250 0 
RGSY 33 30.31 41.85 48.34 34 39.28 34 3.44 
PMEYSA 4 2.02 4.00 4.00 2.60 2.40 2.70 0” 
 
1.40 The Committee wanted to know whether the capacity building of Panchayats 
should go hand in hand with existing level of reservation as also with proposed 

13 
 
increased level in different States , the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a written note 
clarified:- 
“The Government is conscious of the fact that the Capacity Building of 
Panchayats particularly that of the EWRs, is an imperative need to ensure the 
successful functioning of PRIs at all levels. The proposed increase in the 
percentage of reservation for EWR will result in the increase of the EWRs at 
different levels. The expected increase will be about 4 lakh EWRs and this will 
obviously entail the necessity of creating additional capacity building facilities.” 
1.41 At this the Committee also pointed out that d ifferent State Governments like 
Bihar, Karnataka, Uttarakhand, Maharashtra etc. have unanimously agreed with the 
Committee that imparting sufficient training to large number of representatives of PRIs, 
specially women elected representatives is very much essential for their actual 
empowerment.  The Committee pointed out that around 28 lakh elected representatives, 
have been trained during the period of five years from 2005 -06 to 2009 -10 under 
different schemes of BRGF, RGSY and other schemes out of  which 36.87 per cent are 
women.  W ith proposed Constitution amendment, the number of elected women 
representatives is expected to rise to more than 4 lakhs.  Asked about how the Ministry 
will be able to manage to train increased number of elected women representative, the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a written reply informed :- 
“On the basis of information received from the State about the EWRs 
trained during the last three years and also keeping in view the posit ion after the 
reservation of EWRs is statutorily enhanced to 50%, the Government is taking 
stock of the entire position for making appropriate arrangement for capacity 
building and training of the elected representatives.” 
1.42 About details of male and female illiterate elected women representatives in the 
country, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a written reply further clarified :- 
“The Government is all earnest about the availability of appropriately 
literate and trained elected representatives, incl uding Sarpanches for the 
effective functioning of PRIs. The details about the literate and trained number of 
male and female elected representatives are not available. State Governments 
have been requested to provide status of social, educational and econo mic 
background of EWRs in the States.”   

14 
 
1.43 The Committee further enquired that whether present level of flow of funds the 
required capacity building can be achieved, the Ministry  of Panchayati Raj  in a written 
reply clarified:- 
“….. There should not be any financial constraint in capacity building even 
of the increased number.” 
 
Study on Elected Women Representatives (EWRs) 
1.44 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj commissioned a study in 23 States across the 
country on empowerment of EWRs in Panchayats after enactment of 73rd Constitutional 
Amendment Act of 1993 and the study submitted its report in April, 2008. The findings 
contained in the report on the Study confirm the view that mandated political 
participation of women has had a positive impact on society as a whole. The study also 
revealed that reservation facilitated the first entry into politics for most of them. A sizable 
proportion of women representatives perceived enhancement of their self esteem, 
confidence and decision making ability.  
1.45 The Conclusions of the study are as follows :- 
“The last fifteen years of Panchayati Raj in India have contributed significantly 
not only to the political but also the social empowerment of women as is evident 
from the findings of the study on EWRs in PRIs. Earlier notions of wo men being 
mere proxies for male relatives have gradually ceded space to the recognition 
that given the opportunity to participate in the political system, women are as 
capable as their male counterparts. The impact of women's participation in the 
Panchayats is seen in the development priorities identified by them. EWRs have 
used their office to not only mainstream gender issues but also address the 
developmental needs of the community as a whole. The positive contribution 
made by EWRs needs to be sustained by ensuring the continued participation of 
women in the political process. In conclusion it may be said that the political 
participation of women in Panchayati Raj institutions enhances self -esteem and 
self-confidence among them. This is reflected in the c reation of an enabling 

15 
 
environment both within the home and community as well as the professional 
space which in turn improves the performance of the EWRs.”  
1.46 The major recommendations and the nationwide study of EWRs are as detailed 
below :- 
 Education level should be improved 
 Younger women should be encouraged to join politics 
 There should be regular training, covering multiple dimensions, including rules 
regulations, administrative issues, budgeting and finance, and the 
implementation of development schemes 
 In order to increase the effective participation of women they should be given 
more honoraria 
 Membership of groups/committees plays an important role in terms of increasing 
the visibility of women in village. Thus, such entities should be provided g reater 
support 
 The rotation of seats for reservation may be discontinued for the women -headed 
Panchayats and wards  
1.47 Efforts should be made not only to maintain the representation of women in 
politics in terms of their percentage, but also improve their ability to remain in politics.  
1.48 In this connection the attention of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj was drawn that 
as per Supreme Court direction a review Committee to assess the impact of 
empowerment of women in the country can be set up, the Mi nistry in a written reply 
stated as under :- 
“Government would set up such a Review Committee within a month.” 
1.49 In order to look into the issue of actual empowerment of women in Panchayats, 
the Committee also sought the views of State Governments/exper ts and that of the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. While examining the witnesses of four State Governments, 
the Committee enquired as to whether in view of existing level of reservation for women 
in Panchayats, do the women still need their necessary empowerme nt, the Secretary, 

16 
 
Department of Panchayati Raj, Government of Bihar while deposing before the 
Committee explained :- 
“Participation of women in Panchayats in Bihar has come in a large scale….. But 
yet there is a lot to be done….” 
1.50 On the issue of capa city building of elected women representatives, the 
Secretary, (Department of Panchayati Raj), Government of Bihar submitted as under :- 
“….So far as capacity building of elected women representative s that is major 
area, there is need to work. Here we have  focused on women, because we have 
50 per cent women in Panchayats. On capacity building we have started in an 
organized and structured way… We are doing it based on National Capacity 
Building Framework (NCBF). First State level Resource person s have been 
developed, followed by district level resource person, then every Panchayat was 
covered with different training modules. Now we will train the elected 
representatives in a structured way….. This is in brief how we are progressing.” 
1.51 The witness further added :- 
“This depends on how much initiative we take at local level since all 
concepts are already available. In each Block and Panchayat crore of 
rupees are being spent but there is no toilet which is generally constructed 
at a cost ten to twenty thousa nd. A mind set has not been evolved. As I 
have already said that we are moving in a structured way, there all these 
things are to be remembered thus in years to come all these things would 
improve…We are insisting that the SIRD in Bihar is not working in a n 
effective manner. It needs to be strengthened. Not only that there should 
be an institute of excellence for Panchayats”. 
1.52 He further added :- 
“….In this capacity building exercise, one of the major constraints which 
we face is in respect of the fund flow. Generally, there is a problem with 
the fund flow because for these institutions, we have not developed the 
capacity. So far as capacity development is concerned, there should be 
some kind of a freedom to the State. Also, there should be some kind of a 
relaxation of norms so that we can use the fund properly. The issue now is 
whether we develop the capacity, first we utilise it or the other way. So, as 
a result, many times, capacity building is not there. Funds are available 
but they are not being util ized properly. So, there should be some lenient 
view on that. There should be some kind of a policy so that the funds 
earmarked for capacity building are utilized.….”  
1.53 Similarly, the Secretary, (Department of Panchayati Raj), Government of 
Uttarakhand narrating the experience of Uttarakhand stated as under :- 

17 
 
“In Uttarakhand women are more active….. Here change is discernible in 
planning process in formulation of plans at district, block and village levels and it 
has been seen that issues related with women like drinking water, women and 
child care, women education and public distribution system women have 
received priority…..” 
1.54 Likewise the Principal Secretary (Rural Development and Panchayati Raj), 
Government of Karnataka explaining the position on the twin issues of capacity building 
and training informed the Committee stating as under :- 
“In Karnataka, we have one advantage. Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
together, they do not have two separate departments. Therefore, the funds from 
the ru ral development, which are in very large scale, are now available for 
Panchayati Raj functioning. Therefore, for capacity building, we get a lot of funds 
from the Ministry of Rural Development. From each of the programmes that we 
have, we have enough money  to take care of capacity building. But we have to 
see the problem also. Even in a State like Karnataka, we have more than 92,000 
gram panchayat members. To train them, it is taking at least more than two 
years. The half of the term is over before we train  all the members. Madam, you 
have raised a very valid issue.”  
1.55 The Committee thereafter heard the views of Experts/NGOs on the issue of 
capacity building and training of elected women representatives. In this context Ms. 
Nirmala Buch, President Mahila  Chetna Manch, Bhopal expressed her views stating as 
under :- 
“….On capacity building, I feel it is absolutely necessary. Most of the capacity 
building exercises are about giving nuts and bolts of how to do it. It should focus 
more on understanding the politics of democracy, the politics of representation, 
the politics of how to take people together and how to be responsible leader. 
Therefore, we must support them to build teams, allow other members to 
participate and to take up issues so that they can d emand what is necessary. In 
some States what was given to Panchayats was gradually withdrawn without any 
protest.” 
1.56 Another expert Shri N.C. Saxena, former Secretary, Planning Commission also 
submitted before the Committee :- 
“I believe that the propos ed level of reservation for women in Panchayats will 
empower the women and will enhance their self esteem since in Indian society 
there are wider disparities on the issue of gender. The reservation will reduce 
such disparities. To understand that the propo sed reservation will bring about 
improvement in the working of Panchayats is not true. It is also not correct that 
50 per cent reservation will bring change in the status of women in a big way but, 

18 
 
at the same time, we have to think of the measures which w ill strengthen 
Panchayats, which will make them effective, which will make them more pro -
people, more pro -poor, more pro -marginalised people. At the same time, we 
have to think of measures which will empower women. The most important is the 
non-implementation of the Hindu Succession Act which was amended in 2005 
and which said that women have an equal right in inheritance of inherited 
property, agricultural property. These have not been properly perculated among 
the masses. Most of the State Governments are  not even aware about this law. 
Therefore, it is necessary that steps should be taken for empowerment of women 
in Panchayats.”  
1.57 At this the Committee wanted to know in what way issue of slow progress on 
devolution and excessive control of bureaucracy over Panchayats as outlined by the 
expert is coming in the way of empowerment of Panchayats, the witness clarified :- 
“Madam, in this context my suggestion is we must bear in mind both the issue of 
responsibility and authority. It is essential that the Pan chayats be transferred 
necessary funds, functions and finances and more and more schemes are 
implemented through the Panchayats….” 
1.58 The Committee also enquired about how social audit of Panchayats be done 
where many Sarpanches are illiterate, the witness clarified as under :- 
“It is essential that for audit of Panchayats we should devise a system wherein 
civil society or representative from press are associated alongwith Government 
officials and it should be timely reviewed…” 
 
(a) Training  
1.59 On the issue of training to elected representatives of Panchayats, the Secretary, 
(Department of Panchayati Raj), Government of Uttarakhand elaborated as under :- 
“Madam, training is very essential…. There are women Sarpanches. The money 
is drawn by the joint signatu res of Sarpanch and Gram Sevak. Today in large 
number of Central Governments‟ scheme funds are being given in villages. 
Financial management is a big issue. There are large number of women those 
who are illiterate, they also become Sarpanches. In that leve l training is 
essential. That training should be done in such a way that it must include 
somewhat accounting. So on this pattern a focused training is essential wherein 
some kind of training on information technology should be given. Alongwith this 
some legal aspects should also be told to trainees. This kind of provision should 
be made. For this it is essential that women elected representatives will have to 
be taken outside and 2-3 days training has to be given…..” 

19 
 
1.60 Principal Secretary (Rural Developm ent and Panchayati Raj),  Government of 
Karnataka on the issue of the nature and duration of training suggested as under :- 
“For that, face to face training with all these things is not possible. It is because 
we have got a satellite training network establ ished. In every State, the satellite 
training network is there.” 
“….. we have to have capacity building ….. Through SIRD through network 
institutions, we are taking up capacity building for women. ….We have to give 
higher thrust on training.” 
 
1.61 The Com mittee pointed out that the Ministry itself had admitted before the 
Committee that through normal system of National Institute of Rural Development 
(NIRD) and State Institute of Rural Development (SIRD) the results are not as per 
expected lines.  Further, the proposed Bill will lead new set of untrained persons 
entering electoral fray thus leading to their greater representation in these Panchayats. 
The Committee wanted to know as to how the Government plan to address this issue 
given the fact that Panchayats are already being criticized for not performing well due to 
lack of trained pool of persons representing these bodies, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
in a written note clarified :- 
“Government is taking measures to strengthen SIRDs and other training 
institution besides Public – Private – Partnership for Capacity Building.” 
1.62 At this the Committee also dr ew the attention of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
that indicating a departure from the conventional way , the Secretary (Panchayati Raj)  
had earlier submitted before the Committee that  for the purpose of capacity building of 
Panchayats the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has started discussing the issue with Non -
Governmental people like NGOs, Corporate sector, the training organizations and 
different State Governments also by offering service providers for each States of their 
choice and that the process would be finalized by March, 2010 . The Committee wanted 
to know the latest position in this regard, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a written note 
clarified :- 
“The Ministry had organized a PRIs CB&T Business Meet on 07.01.2010 
at New Delhi well over 100 organisations participated. The process is being 

20 
 
carried forward in association with the State Governments / UTs.  These 
initiatives will help in better coverage and improvement in the quality of training.” 
1.63 The Committee also pointed out that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj  has brought 
out a comprehensive programme of „National Capacity Building Framework (NCBF) for 
the above purpose.  However, it has not reportedly worked well so far. The Committee 
wanted to know in what way the aforesaid progress could be made attractive and 
acceptable to States, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a written note stated as under :- 
“In order to take up the capacity buil ding and training activities as per the 
NCBF in a Mission Mode …..  The States were impressed upon to give thrust to 
the CB&T activities through preparation of integrated perspective plan for CB&T 
covering BRGF, RGSY as well as other Schemes for the curren t year and the 
next year.  11 States have already finalised their perspective plan while other 
States are in the process of doing so. The workshops also provided a platform for 
States to come together, exchange ideas, communicate their success stories as 
well as difficulties and deliberate on issues of common concern.” 
1.64 In this connection the Committee pointed out that in villages all are not generally 
literate how the important work of capacity building can be done in the light of 50 per 
cent reservati on for women already proposed. The Committee also wanted to know 
whether it be done alone through channelizing funds or through institutions responsible 
for training while reaching at village level, clarifying all these points , the Secretary 
(Panchayati Raj) stated as under :- 
“Your concern is very genuine that giving of reservation welcome but main aim 
behind it is empowerment. Besides this you have mentioned that in capacity 
building the progress is unsatisfactory and we are going to take measure in this 
regard. In this context we have two strategies. First besides State Institute of 
Rural Development (SIRD) we should set up District cum resource Centre s so 
that the person who comes  for training he/she has to travel a less distance and 
he gets the training. In this NGOs are to be involved specially the women who 
are illiterate and first time have come out of the family fold, these should be 
trained. In this direction we are taking up  steps as to how NGOs are involved so 
that those women who become Sarpanches or Panches they should given be not 
only training but quality training. Secondly National Literacy Mission is to be 
implemented through Panchayats. We have interacted with HRD Min istry and in 
that special attention is being paid for training such women representatives…..” 
 
  

21 
 
(vi) Pre-requisites for necessary empowerment of elected representatives of  
Panchayats including elected women representatives  
1.65 While examining the aforesaid Bill, an equally important issue that came up 
before the Committee for examination was whether with the available amenities to 
elected representatives of Panchayats including women representatives in different 
States are sufficient enough for discharge of the Panchayat works judiciously. In this 
connection the State -wise monthly/daily allowance remuneration etc. available to office 
bearers of Gram Panchayats, Intermediate Panchayats and Zilla Panchayats level have 
been given at Appendix V. In this connection the Committee had taken up the issue of 
adequacy of these amenities with Secretary level officials of Department of Panchayati 
Raj in four State Governments of  Bihar, Uttarakhand, Maharashtra and Karnataka and 
also with Experts.  Similar details for Mahar ashtra have not been submitted by the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj . The State -wise position of available amenities in following 
three States is as under :- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            Bihar  
    Gram Panchayat  
Name of the Post Mukhia Up-Mukhia 
 
Sarpanch 
 
Up-
Sarpanch 
 
 
Sadasya 
(member) 
 
 
Monthly/Daily allowance 100 100 100 100 100 
Meeting fee @5 per km @5 per km @5 per km @5 per km @5 per km 
Remuneration 600 300 600 300 0 
Honorarium      
Others sitting fee      
    Intermediate Panchayat  
Name of the Post Pramukh Up-Pramukh Sadaysa 
(member) 
  
Monthly/Daily allowance 100 100 0   
Meeting fee @5 km @ 5km @ 5 km   
Remuneration 3000 1500    
Honorarium      
Others sitting fee      
    Zilla Parishad 
Name of the Post Adhayaksh Up-
Adhayaksh 
Sadaysa 
(member) 
  
Monthly/Daily allowance 100 100 100   
Meeting fee @5 km @5 km @5 km   
Remuneration 4000 3000 0   
Honorarium      
Others sitting fee      

22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.66 During the course of evidence of representatives of four State Governments, the 
Committee pointed out that in the present context where 50 per cent reservation for 
          Karnataka 
 Gram Panchayat  
Name of the Post President Vice-
President 
Member 
 
  
Monthly/Daily allowance      
Meeting fee      
Remuneration      
Honorarium 500 300 Nil   
Others sitting fee 100 100 100   
    Intermediate Panchayat  
Name of the Post President Vice-
President 
Member 
 
  
Monthly/Daily allowance      
Meeting fee      
Remuneration      
Honorarium 2000 1300 700   
Others sitting fee 150 150 150   
    Zilla Parishad 
Name of the Post President Vice-
President 
Members   
Monthly/Daily allowance      
Meeting fee      
Remuneration      
Honorarium 2750 2050 1200   
Others sitting fee 200 200 200   
            Uttarakhand 
        Gram Panchayat  
Name of the Post Sarpanch Naib 
Sarpanch 
 
Ward 
member 
 
  
Monthly/Daily allowance      
Meeting fee      
Remuneration      
Honorarium 600     
Others sitting fee      
    Intermediate Panchayat  
Name of the Post Chairman Vice-
Chairman 
Member   
Monthly/Daily allowance      
Meeting fee      
Remuneration      
Honorarium 3000     
Others sitting fee 200 200 200   
    Zilla Parishad 
Name of the Post President Vice-
President 
Members   
Monthly/Daily allowance      
Meeting fee      
Remuneration      
Honorarium 4000     
Others sitting fee 300 300 300   

23 
 
women is being proposed, whether adequate level of amenities like transport facility, 
daily allowance, accommodation are being given to the elected representatives of 
Panchayat who largely have to cover an area of 50 kms and even beyond that, the 
Secretary, (Panchayati Raj), Government of Bihar informed as under :- 
“So far as the facilities or be nefits are concerned so that they can easily 
commute in their area …the system of  honorarium and travelling allowance  is 
there… In our State there are long distances. Chairm an Zila Parishad is the 
Chairman of DRDA. He ex -officio is entitled for vehicle and gets the staff of 
District office….So far as honorarium is concerned, the quantity of honorarium 
has to be enhanced, In my opinion nobody will deny it…..” 
1.67 Similarly on the issue of remunerable transport allowance being given in the 
State of Uttarakhand, the Secretary, Rural Development and Panchayati Raj appearing 
before the Committee clarified:- 
“It is very meagre. It is Rs.500/ - for Gram Pradhan, Rs.1500/ - for Pramukh and 
Rs.5000/- for Chairmen Zilla Parishad.” 
1.68 When asked about the sim ilar entitlement for members, the Secretary, 
(Department of Panchayati Raj, Government of Uttarakhand clarified :- 
“Madam the Member gets TA/DA for attending meeting that too at Block and Zila 
Parishad level. This is very less. States do not have finances so that these can 
be enhanced.” 
1.69 The Principal Secretary , (Department of Panchayati Raj), State Government of 
Maharashtra elaborating the problem coming in the way of training of elected women 
representatives in Maharashtra submitted :- 
“Women will have to travel all the way. Then, there is the norm for giving capacity 
per person. Per Zilla Parishad, it is only Rs.500; for a Gram Panchayat, it is only 
Rs.100. We are talking of the flexibility. Ultimately, each person has to be trained. 
Whether he is com ing from the village or the Zilla Pa rishad does not matter. So,  
kind of a flexibility is needed.” 
1.70 In order to have a broader view on the issue, the Committee also had the views 
of eminent experts. In this connection the Committee wanted to know from D r. Ratna M. 
Sudarshan, Director, Institute of Social Sciences Trust, New Delhi about adequacy of 
remuneration and amenities etc., the Committee were informed as under :- 

24 
 
“The first thing is that several of the women that we spoke to, said that they were 
not aware of it. They did not receive the remuneration. It was being pocketed by 
other persons. So, the first problem, I think, is that this awareness itself has to be 
generated. Once they get to know, then, they have to fight…..So, I think, even 
before we come to the issue of adequacy, we must ensure that everyone knows 
about it. We have to address the problem why they are not receiving the money. 
But, definitely, transport is a big problem. It takes time even to walk to the main 
road from any of these villa ges. So, arrangements for stay would be very much 
welcome and it would be a good thing.”  
1.71 In reply to a similar question another expert Dr. Sneha Palnitkar, Director, All 
India Institute of Local Self Government, Mumbai, submitted before the Committee  as 
under :- 
“….after interaction with these PRIs we feel that allowances be enhanced. 
Normally it happens that some women elected members bring their children at 
the site of training we try to give them day care. Therefore, they should be given 
allowances in such a way that may enhance their efficiency…. Now when 50 per 
cent reservation of women in Panchayats is being proposed, it is necessary that 
for their capacity building they should be given facilities also and it must be given 
in every State…..” 
1.72 Thereafter, during the course of evidence of representatives of the Ministry  of 
Panchayati Raj, on being enquired about the issue of adequacy of remunerations , the 
Secretary (Panchayati Raj) informed :- 
“……So far as giving of remuneration, emolument or co nveyance allowances is 
concerned, we had requested before the Thirteenth Finance Commission that 
their requirement is most pressing and justified. However, the recommendation 
that has come from Thirteenth Finance Commission, no clear recommendation 
has been made on this issue. However, whatever amount the Panchayats and 
States will get that is untied grants. The Panchayats and State Governments are 
free to use it in whatever way they like. As you have already stated that 
allowances are widely varying among the States and in most of the States these 
are largely unsatisfactory. Therefore, in the light of observation of the Committee 
we will pursue with States a strategy of consideration.” 
1.73 At this the Committee further enquired whether leaving the issue th e task of 
providing much needed remunerations and amenities to the State Governments will not 
make it impossible and some way a system has to be devolved, the Secretary 
(Panchayati Raj) informed :- 

25 
 
“….So far as the issue of remunerations to elected represe ntative of Panchayats 
is concerned the view of the Committee is correct……Now the matter is left to 
State Governments. If the august Committee recommend that we from Central 
Government should take some initiative, based on the recommendation, we will 
take action thereon. Within the Ministry we can‟t do anything.” 
1.74 Elaborating further on the issue the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a written reply 
has given the following information :- 
“In the Memorandum submitted to the 13 th Finance Commission, Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR) had proposed an allocation of 4% of the divisible pool for 
PRIs for the activities related to construction of Panchayat Ghars, provision for 
skeleton staff for each Panchayat as well as honoraria and s itting fee for elected 
representative, office expenses and e -governance. Another 1% of the divisible 
pool was proposed as specific purpose grant for preparation of data -bases, 
incentivisation of State Governments to empower Panchayats and grants for 
area planning and capacity building.  
The 13th Finance Commission has recommended a basic grant at the rate 
of 1.5% of the divisible for the period 2010 -11 to 2014 -15 and a performance 
grant at the rate of 0.5% payable from the year 2011 -12 and at the rate of 1%  
thereafter, for the local bodies. In addition, a special area basic and performance 
grant amounting to Rs. 1357 crore has also been recommended. As per present 
estimates, the share for PRIs works out to Rs. 63,050 crore for the five year 
period. The special area grant is combined for rural and urban local bodies. 
The grant for local bodies is „untied‟ and purpose for which it is to be used 
has not been stipulated by the 13 th Finance Commission. The 13 th Finance 
Commission has also not made any specific rec ommendation for allocation of 
funds for providing amenities to the office bearers of Panchayats at different 
levels.” 
1.75 The Committee further enquired how far the funds availability will be met by the 
Thirteenth Finance Commission Report for emerging tr aining requirements of elected 
representatives of Panchayats in the country , the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a written 
reply clarified :- 
“Necessary guidelines on the release and utilization of 13 th Finance 
Commission grant for PRIs are yet to be issued by the Ministry of Finance, 
However, Since the 13 th Finance Commission grant for PRIs is „untied‟, and 
States and PRIs would be free to use the grant for the activities as may be 
considered appropriate.  Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has advised the 
States to consider using these funds for manpower, office buildings and other 
infrastructure for Panchayats, ICT (e-Panchayats), etc.”  

26 
 
(vii) Issue of proxy attendance  
 
1.76 During the course of examination it came out before the Committee that a large 
number of elected women representatives are illiterate and there have been instances 
that their spouses/close relatives sometimes act as de-facto Pradhans in Panchayats. 
The Committee wanted to know as to what action, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has 
taken in this regard. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a written note clarified :- 
“This Ministry is seized of this issue and has issued two communications 
to the States / UTs.  V ide D. O. letter dated 19.01.2010, the States / UTs were 
informed that the Government of Maharashtra had informed their PRIs vide their 
circular dated 17.07.2007 to the effect that running of PRIs by the close relatives 
of the Elected Women Representatives  would be treated as misconduct under 
the relevant PRIs Act and the action against the lady office bearer who allow the 
relatives to interfere in office action would be taken. The States and UTs were 
requested to consider taking similar action in this rega rd. Subsequently, another 
communication was sent to the States / UTs on 16.02.2010 to the effect that if 
such proxy attendance takes place in the meetings of PRIs, the concerned 
Government officers / Secretaries who allow relatives to attend instead of off ice 
bearers should be proceeded against department.” 
1.77 During the course of briefing on the Bill by the representative s of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj wherein representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department) were also present , the Committee wanted to know the comment of the 
Legislative Department  (Ministry of Law and Justice ) in this regard, Secretary, 
Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice) submitted before the Committee :- 
“Probably this issue needs to be examined  in depth. But my first reaction 
to this would be that any person w ho is legitimately elected to an elected body, 
you see, I would say it is a sort of making a distinction between de jure and de 
facto. As a spokesman or Secretary in the Ministry of Law, I  have to examine the 
same whether a duly elected person who is acting as an extra -Constitutional 
authority or who have the de facto power can be debarred.”  
  

27 
 
     PART II 
 Recommendations/Observations of the Committee  
1. The Committee note that the proposed ‘Constitution (One 
Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009’ seeks to amend Article 
243 D so that t he reservation for women in Panchayats in the total 
number of seats, offices of Chairpersons and in the seats reserved for 
the Scheduled Castes and t he Scheduled Tribes across three tiers  is 
raised from ‘not less than one -third’ to ‘not less than one -half’. 
Reservation for women belonging to the Scheduled Caste and 
Scheduled Tribe categories in the offices of Chairperso ns in 
Panchayats at each level is  also proposed to be ‘not less than one -
half’.  The Committee are of the firm view that enhancement of 
reservation for women in Panchayats would not only ensure their 
increased representation and participation in Panchayats, but would 
also facilitate women  in general and women from the most 
marginalized communities becoming politically active. Incidentally, 
the Committee find that almost all experts/NGOs and representatives 
of State Governments who have tendered evidence before the 
Committee have unanimousl y supported the Bill. According to the 
Secretary, Legislative Department, there is no legal or Constitutional 

28 
 
objection to increase the reservation for women to 50 per cent in 
Panchayats. Having considered all aspects, the Committee agree with 
the proposed amendments and recommend consideration of the Bill 
subject to certain modifications suggested in this report.  
 
2.  The Committee note that the modalities  regarding rotation of 
reserved seats has been left entirely to the States with the result there 
will be no uniformity among States in the matter of rotation. The 
Committee have been informed that only Tamil Nadu and Bihar have 
the provision of rotation of seats after two cycles and that the Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj is in the process of interacting with State 
Governments on this issue. The Committee desire that action should 
be taken through this Constitutional amendment to achieve a 
measure of uniformity  in the modalities of rotation of seats by 
ensuring that rotation of seats after at least two cycles is provided for. 
3. First Proviso of Clause (2) (iii) of the Bill provides for reservation 
of offices of chairpersons in Panchayats for Scheduled Castes an d 
Scheduled Tribes in proportion to the total number of such offices in 
the Panchayats as the population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes in the whole State. It is observed that the Proviso relates the 

29 
 
reservation of offices of chairpersons in Panc hayats to the entire 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes population. The Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes population is spread in ‘rural’ as well as 
‘urban’ areas. The Committee feel that reservation of offices of 
chairpersons in Panchayats should b e linked only to the ‘rural’ 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes population so that it reflects 
appropriate demographic representation. As agreed to by the Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj, the Committee recommend that the w ord ‘rural’ 
should be added before the word ‘population’ occurring in Proviso (i) 
of Clause (2) of the Bill. Suitable amendment will also be necessary in 
Article 243 (T).   
4. The Committee note that the intention of the Bill is to provide for 
enhancement of reservation of seats for women to 50 per cent. As the 
seats are to be in whole numbers, it is not possible to lay it in term of 
mathematical precision as ‘one -half’. The Committee, therefore, 
suggest that as proposed by the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department), the provisi on may be retained to the effect 
‘not less than one-half’.  
5. The Committee are of the view that enhancement of reservation 
for women in Panchayats ought to be accompanied by sound 

30 
 
measures for capacity building and training of Elected Women 
Representatives (EWRs) in Panchayats. With the proposed increase in 
the percentage of reservation for EWRs, there will be expected 
increase of about 4 lakh EWRs which will call for augmented efforts in 
capacity building. On hearing the representatives of State 
Governments, NGOs/experts in this regard, the Committee received 
an impression that efforts in capacity building and training of EWRs 
so far leave much to be desired. The Committee feel that ‘the National 
Capacity Building Framework (NCBF)’ is under -funded and has  not 
been effectively implemented so far. This must be corrected. In this 
connection, the Committee suggest that in order to meet the Capacity 
Building and Training requirements of PRIs, one per cent of the funds 
for centrally sponsored schemes of different Ministries related to rural 
development be earmarked for Capacity Building and Training under 
NCBF. This amount may also be utilized for catering to promote         
e-governance in PRIs by utilizing the information and communication 
technology network of  the National Informati cs Centre (NIC).  As in 
the case of Karnataka, West Bengal and some other States, e-systems 
and satellite-based training and capacity building should be promoted 
countrywide to ensure adequate outreach to elected representatives 

31 
 
of P RIs particularly EWRs. The  Government is stated to be taking 
measures to strengthen State Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs) 
and other training institutions besides promoting public -private-
partnership for capacity building. The Ministry of Panchayati  Raj has 
also proposed to set -up District -cum-Resource Centres involving 
NGOs for imparting quality training to EWRs. The Committee desire 
that immediate steps should be taken to ensure effective 
implementation of all capacity building plans so that the pr oposed 
enhancement of reservation of seats for women in Panchayats really 
yield intended results. 
6. One of the inadequacies which impedes women  empowerment 
relates to lack of amenities and inadequate remuneration to elected 
women representatives. There has also been wide disparity among 
States in the grant of allowances and remuneration to elected 
representatives. There is unanimity among different experts and State 
Governments that there should be adequate enhancement of 
remuneration and allowances to elected representatives of 
Panchayats to enable them to perform their duties effectiv ely. The 
Thirteenth Finance Commission has recommended a Basic  Grant at 
the rate of 1.5 per cent and a further Performance Grant of 0.5 per 

32 
 
cent rising to one per cent of the total divisible pool, amounting to a 
minimum absolute amount of Rs. 63,050 crore and possibly upto      
Rs. 90,000 crore over the five year cyc le. The Committee suggest that 
the Panchayats may be advised to provide for honorarium and sitting 
fee for elected representatives out of the ‘un -tied’ Basic and 
Performance Grants recommended by the Thirteenth Finance 
Commission.  The Committee hope that in order to ensure effective 
performance of elected representatives of Panchayats, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj will take up the matter appropriately with State 
Governments and ensure adequate amenities to elected 
representatives.  
7. It transpired during the Committee’s examination that there have 
been instances of some Panchayats being run by spouses/close 
relatives of the Elected Women Representatives (EWRs). The 
Committee note that in order to deter such unconstitutional practices, 
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has issued communications to different 
States/UTs in January, 2010 and in February, 2010.  The Committee 
hope that the State Governments would take the issue of proxy 
attendance seriously and take effective steps to prevent this. The 
Committee desire that as has already been made clear, if such proxy 

33 
 
attendance takes place in the meetings of the PRIs, the concerned  
Government Officers/Secretaries who allow relatives to attend instead 
of office bearers should be proceeded against by the Department. 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;       SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
 26 July, 2010                 Chairperson, 
4 Sravana, 1932 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
  
  

34 
 
 
     APPENDIX I 
As introduced in Lok Sabha  
Bill No. 99 of 2009  
 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009  
   A  
BILL   
-     further to amend the Constitution of India.  
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-  
1 .(1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Short title  
Act, 2009.                        and 
                   commencement 
      (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by       
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. In article 243D of the Constitution,-                     Amendment  
 (i) in 243D clause (2), for the word "one-third", the word "one-half' shall be       of article 
substituted;        
(ii) in clause (3), for the word "one-third", the word one-half' shall be substituted;  
(iii) for clause (4), the following shall be substituted, namely:-  
 
"(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or any other 
level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled.Tribes and women in 
such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide:  
 
Provided that the numbe r of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in any State shall bear, as 
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of such offices in the 
Panchayats at each level as  the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the 
Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the total population of that State:  
 
Provided further that not less than one -half of the total number of offices of 
Chairpersons reserved for the Schedul ed Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the 
Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes 
or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes:  
 
Provided also that not less than one -half of the total number of offices of 
Chairpersons (including the number of offices reserved for women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) in the Panchayats at each level shall be 
reserved for women:  
 
Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this clause sha ll be 
allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level." 

35 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
Panchayats have a vital role to play in the welfare and development of the weaker 
sections of society, including women. The representation of the marginali sed sections of the 
society in Panchayati Raj Institutions serves to enhance their voice within these bodies and 
promotes inclusive governance which is essential for inclusive growth.  
 
2. It needs to be recognised that women suffer multiple deprivations o f class, caste 
and gender. The existing provisions in the Constitution relating to reservation for women in 
Panchayats have facilitated women, in general, and women from even the most marginalised 
communities, becoming politically active. Further, reservat ion of offices of the Chairpersons 
in the Panchayats for women has brought them into leadership positions. This has enhanced 
the image of women in the society, especially in rural areas, and has made Panchayati Raj 
Institutions more inclusive institutions.  
 
3. Article 2430 of the Constitution provides that not less than one -third of the total 
number of seats, and seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes as 
well as offices of Chairpersons in Panchayats at each level, shall be reserve d for women. 
There is a further need to enhance women's participation in Panchayats, as it would serve the 
twin purpose of empowering women and making Panchayats more inclusive institutions.  
 
4. Accordingly, it is proposed that the reservation for women i n Panchayats in the 
total number of seats, offices of Chairpersons and in the seats reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes across three tiers should be raised from not less than one -
third to not less than one -half. Reservation for women belonging to the Scheduled Caste and 
Scheduled Tribe categories in the offices of Chairpersons in Panchayats at each level should 
also be not less than one-half.  
 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
The 6th November, 2009.         C.P.JOSHI.  

36 
 
ANNEXURE  
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
 
 *   *   *   *  * 
 
Reservation of seats.  
 (2) Not less than one -third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (/) 
shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled  Castes or, as the case may be, 
the Scheduled Tribes. 
 
243D. (1)*           * 
*     *  
(3) Not less then one -third (including the number of seats reserved for women 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats 
to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat shall be reserved for women and such 
seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat.  
 
(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or any other 
level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in 
such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide:  
 
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in any State shall bear, as 
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of such offices in the 
Panchayats at each level as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the 
Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the total population of the State:  
 
Provided further that not less than one -third of the total number of offices of .. 
Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women:  
 
Provided also that the number or offices reserved under this clause shall be 
allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.  
 
*   *    *    *   *  
 
  

37 
 
 
          Appendix II  
 
 
List of representatives of the State Governments of Bihar, Uttarakhand, 
Maharashtra and Karnataka who tendered oral evidence before the 
Committee on ‘the Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth  
Amendment) Bill, 2009’ 
   
1. Dr. Deepak Prasad - Secretary, Panchayati Raj, Government of  
     Bihar  
 
2. Shri Om Prakash - Secretary, Panchayati Raj, Government of  
     Uttarakhand  
 
3. Shri Sudhir Khatare - Secretary, Panchayati Raj, Government of  
     Maharashtra  
 
4. Shri P. Ravi Kumar - Principal Secretary (Rural Development  
     and Panchayati Raj), Government of   
     Karnataka  
 
 
 
 
 
  

38 
 
          Appendix III 
List of NGOs/experts who had tendered oral evidence before the Committee on 
‘the Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009 
 
Names and addresses of Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs)/Experts 
 
1. Ms. Nirmala Buch, Mahila Chetna Manch, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh 
 
2. Dr. Ratna M. Sudarshan, Director, Institute of Social Studies Trust, India 
Habitat Centre,  Lodhi Road, New Delhi  
 
3. Ms. Sneha Palnitkar, Director All India Institute of Local Self Government, 
Bandra Mumbai.  
 
4. Dr. Rekha Pande, Coordinator, Centre for Women‟s Studies, School of 
Social Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad 
 
5. Shri N.C. Saxena, Former Secretary Planning Commission, New Delhi. 
 
  

39 
 
 
          Appendix IV 
State-wise comments on ‘the Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009’  
Sl.
No. 
Name of the State 
from where 
comments on the 
Bill ha ve  been 
received 
 
Nature of comments 
1. Delhi Panchayats were suspended in 1990 and have not been revised as on 
today. Thus nil report 
 
2. Haryana The State Government is in favour of the Bill 
 
3. Himachal Pradesh Already amended the State Act 
 
4. Kerala The State Government has decided to amend the State Act 
 
5. Madhya Pradesh The State Government has already amended the State Act and is in 
favour of the Bill 
 
6. Maharashtra State Cabinet on 17.12.2009 has given consent to the proposal for 
reservation of women in the local bodies upto 50 per ce nt (As per 
Indian Constitution Part 243 -D) which is under consideration by 
Central Government, and agreed to send this decision to the Central 
Government which is as follows :- 
1) Posts in PRIs by direct election should have 50 per cent 
reservation for women 
2) The posts for Sarpanch/Chairman/President in the PRIs 
should have 50 per cent reservation for women 
3) The posts reserved in the PRIs for the SC/ST (i.e. Schedule 
Caste/Scheduled Tribes) should have 50 per cent reservation 
for women 
As per the decision of the  State Cabinet, above decision for the 
reservation of women in the PRIs increasing upto 50 per cent is 
accepted and conveyed by the letter dated 18.12.2009 to the Central 
Government 
 
7. Manipur The issue is under consideration of the State Cabinet and no final 
decision  has been taken 
 
8. Punjab 50 per cent reservation of women in Panchayats will be beneficial for 
overall working of the PRIs 
 
9. Rajasthan  The State Government has already made this provision .  In this 
context Hon‟ble High Court Rajasthan  has given direction to make 
provision for reservation as „not exceeding one -half‟. However 
Government of Rajasthan is of the view that the provision s for 
reservation for women be  „one-half‟ instead of „not less than one half‟. 
 
10. Tripura  The State Government has already amended the State Law 
 

40 
 
11. Bihar Already amended State Law and enforced 
 
12. Uttarakhand Already amended State Law and enforced 
 
13. Karnataka The State Government supports the provisions of the Bill to provide at 
least 50 per cen t reservation for women in seats and posts in 
Panchayati Raj Institutions at all levels in the State 
 Union Territories  
1.   
2.   
3.   
4.   
5.   
6. Lakshadweep  The Lakshadweep being a Union Territory without legislative, 
whatever decision the Central Government takes on the matter will be 
binding and acceptable to the Administrator.  
(i) States of Nagaland, Mizoram and Meghalaya are excluded as 73 rd (Amendment) Act is not 
applicable there as there are no Panchayats as these States have traditional councils. 
(ii) Jammu & Kashmir elections have not been held after adoption of Panchayat Act to 
Panchayats.  
(iii) Panchayat elections have not been held in Jharkhand. 
(iv) No comments have been received from 10 States and 5 Union territories. These States are 
Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Orissa, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, 
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal and the Union territories are Andaman and Nicobar Isl ands, 
Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and Puducherry  
  

41 
 
Appendix V 
The State-wise monthly/daily allowance, remuneration etc. available  to office bearers  of Gram 
Panchayats, Intermediate Panchayats and Zilla Parishads as furnished by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj are 
as under: 
 
State 
  Gram Panchayats  
 
   Intermediate Panchayats    Zilla Parishad  
Name of 
the post 
Monthly/ 
Daily 
Allowanc
e 
Meeting 
fee 
Remune-
ration  
 
Honora
rium 
Others 
sitting 
fee 
Name of 
the post 
Monthly/ 
Daily 
Allowance 
Meeting 
fee 
Remune-
ration  
 
Honora
rium 
Others 
sitting 
fee 
Name of 
the post 
Monthly/ 
Daily 
Allowanc
e 
Meet
ing 
fee 
Remune
-ration  
 
Honora
rium 
Others 
sitting 
fee 
 
 
Andaman 
and 
Nicobar 
Pradhan    2400  Pramukh    3150  Adhayaks
h 
   4125  
Up-
Pradhan 
   1900  Up-
Pramukh 
   2475  Up-
Adhayaks
h 
   3375  
Sarpanch    1900  Chairman    2250  Chairman    3150  
Up-
Sarpanch 
   1800              
Member    1050  Member    1875  Member   
 
 
 
2475 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Bihar 
Mukhia 100 @ 5 per 
km 
 
 
600   Pramukh 
 
100 @ 5 per 
km 
 
3000 
 
  Adhayaks
h 
100 @ 5 
per 
km 
4000   
Up-
Mukhia 
 
100 
 
@ 5 per 
km 
 
300 
 
  Up-
Pramukh 
100  @ 5 per 
km 
 
1500   Up-
Adhayaks
h 
100 @ 5 
per 
km 
3000   
Sarpanch 
 
100   @ 5 per 
km 
600 
 
              
Up-
Sarpanch 
 
100 @ 5 per 
km 
 
300 
 
              
Sadasya 
(member) 
 
100 @ 5 per 
km 
 
0   Sadasya 
(member) 
0 @ 5 per 
km 
   Sadasya 
(member) 
100 @ 5 
per 
km 
0   
  

42 
 
 
 
 
Chandigar
h  
Sarpanch      Chairman 1000     Chairman 2000     
Panches      Vice-
Chairman 
750     Vice-
Chairman 
1500     
      Member  0  Rs.50 
(attending 
one 
meeting 
 
   Member - Rs. 
100 
(atten
dign 
one 
meeti
ng) 
   
 
 
 
Chhattisga
rh 
Sarpanch     300  Chairman 60     President 80     
Naib 
Sarpanch 
     Vice-
Chairman 
60     Vice-
President 
80     
Ward 
member 
     Member 60     Member 80     
    
 
Goa 
Deputy 
Sarpanch 
750 1000    Adhyaksha
@@@@@ 
 @ @@ 3000 Entitled 
to 
sumptua
ry 
allowan
ce of 
Rs.500 
p.m 
      
Member 500 1000    Up-
Adhyaksha 
 @@@    Member @@@@    200 
 
 
 
 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Pradhan    Rs.1000/- 
pm 
 Chairperso
n 
   1500  Chairpers
ons 
   3000  
Up-
Pradhan 
   Rs.750/-  
pm 
 Vice-
Chairperso
ns 
   1200  Vice-
Chairpers
ons 
   3000  
Member    Rs.125/- 
as sitting 
fee to the 
maximum 
for 2 
sitting in a 
month 
 Member    1000  Member    1350  
 
@ Entitled to the use of the motor car and services of Chauffeur, for the official work, subject to maximum consumption of 200 litres of petrol/diesel per month, if no motor car  and services provided 
he shall be entitled to travelling allowance @ of Rs.2500/- p.m. 
 
@@ Entitled to medical reimbursement as laid down from time to time under the Central Service (Medical  Attendance) Rules, 1994 as in force  
 
@@@ Entitled to daily and travelling allowances as admissible to Group ‘A’ officers of the Government in the pay scale of Rs.10000-15200/- 
 
@@@@Entitled to daily and travelling allowances as admissible to Group ‘A’ officers of the Government in the pay scale of Rs.8000-13500/- and entitled to Rs.200/-  
@@@@@ Goa_ No travelling allowance shall be paid to any member or Adhyaksha or Upadhaksha if the journey is less than 8 km 
 
 
 

43 
 
 
 
 
 
Haryan
a 
Sarpan
ch 
Gram 
Pancha
yat 
   1500  Chairman 
Panchayat 
Samiti 
   4500  President 
Zila 
Parishad 
   6000  
Panche
s of 
Gram 
Pancha
yat 
   400  V. 
Chairman 
& Member 
of 
Panchayat 
Samiti 
   1000  Vice 
President 
Zila 
Parishad 
   4500  
            Member 
Zila 
Parishad 
   2000  
 
 
 
Karnat
aka 
Preside
nt 
   500 100 President    2000 150 President    2750 200 
Vice-
Preside
nt 
   300 100 Vice-
President 
   1300 150 Vice-
President 
   2050 200 
Memb
ers 
   Nil  100 Members    700 150 Members    1200 200 
 
 
 
Kerala 
Preside
nt 
   4600 75 President    5300 75* President    5900 75 
Vice-
Preside
nt  
   3300 75 Vice-
President  
   4000 75* Vice-
President  
   4600 75 
Standi
ng 
Comm
ittee 
Chair
man 
   2100 75 Standing 
Committee 
Chairman 
   2400 75* Standing 
Committe
e 
Chairman 
 
 
 
   2700  
Memb
er 
   1500 60 Member    1800 60** Member    2400  
 
* Kerala _Subject to max Rs.360 p.m 
** Kerala_Subject to max Rs.300 p.m  

44 
 
 
 
Lakshd
weep 
Sarpan
ch 
3500 
(Salary) 
   80 Chairman      President* 4500   900 100 
Naib 
Sarpan
ch 
2500 
(Salary) 
   80 Vice-
Chairman 
     Vice-
President 
3500   900 100 
Ward 
membe
r 
    80 Member      Member     100 
 
 
 
 
Manipu
r 
Pradha
n 
   400        Adhyaksh
a 
   2500  
Up-
Pradha
n 
   350        Up-
Adhyaksh
a 
   2000  
Memb
ers 
   300        Members      
Co-
opted 
Memb
ers 
   50 per 
sitting for 
3 days in 
a month 
             
 
 
 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
Orissa 
Sarpan
ch 
@ Rs.15 
per 
meeting 
in a 
month 
  300 @ Rs.15 
per 
meeting 
in a 
month 
Chairman 15   750 15 President 30   3500 20 
Naib 
Sarpan
ch 
   300  Vice-
Chairman 
15   750 15 Vice-
President 
30   2500 20 
Ward 
membe
r 
   300  Panchayat 
Samiti 
Member 
15   300 15 Zila 
Parishad 
Members 
30   1000 20 
 
 
 
 
Puduch
erry 
Preside
nt  
    1000 Chairman      3000       
Vice-
Preside
nt 
    750 Vice-
Chairman 
    2000       
Ward 
Memb
er 
    500 Counsellors     1000       
    
 
 
              
 
* Lakshadweep_For President of District Panchayat Rates as admissible to employees o f the Central Governments drawing Basic Pay of Rs.16400/- or more as per notified vide U-11024/4/99 UTL 
dated 18/3/2003 by MHA. 
  

45 
 
 
Punjab 
Sarpan
ch 
   600  Chairman 1000        
       @ 
   Chairman 2000 @@    
Panche
s 
     Vice-
Chairman 
750     Vice-
Chairman 
1500     
      Members      Rs.50 
per 
sitting 
Members    Rs.100 
per 
sitting 
  
 
 
 
 
Rajasth
an  
Sarpan
ch 
 Rs.32 
(T.A) 
 400 30 Chairman Rs.65(T.A)   2000 30 President Rs.75(TA
) Rs.1000 
(HRA) 
  3000 Rs. 40, 
Rs.900 
(telepho
ne) 
Naib 
Sarpan
ch 
 Rs.32 
(T.A) 
  20 Vice-
Chairman 
Rs.65(T.A)    25 Vice-
President 
Rs.75(TA
) 
   30 
Ward 
membe
r 
    20 Members  Rs.55(T.A)    25 Members Rs.70(TA
) 
   30 
 
 
 
 
Sikkim 
Sabhap
ati  
Rs.50(per 
day) 
  400         
@@@
@ 
      Members Rs.70 per 
day 
@@
@@
@ 
 800 @@@
@@@ 
Memb
ers of 
GPs 
other 
than 
Sabhap
atis 
Rs.50(per 
day) 
          
          
@@@      
 300              
 
 
 
Tamil 
Nadu 
Village 
Pancha
yat 
Preside
nt 
 Rs.500 
(Monthly 
Fixed TA) 
  50 Panchayat 
Union 
Chairperso
n 
Rs.750 
(Monthly 
Fixed TA) 
   75 District 
Panchayat 
Chairpers
on 
 1500 
(Mon
thly 
fixed 
TA) 
  100 
Village 
Pancha
yat 
Memb
er 
    25 Panchayat 
Union 
Member 
Rs.400 
(Monthly 
Fixed TA) 
   50 District 
Panchayat 
Member 
 500 
(Mon
thly 
fixed 
TA) 
  100 
 
@ Allowed to travelling allowance, which is admissible to a class II officer o the State Government  
 
@@ Allowed to traveling allowance, which is admissible to a class I officer of the State Government  
 
@@@ When a member of GP outside the Sikkim to participate in a conference organized by the GOI or other State Government or UTs. State Capital and UT Rs.90 per day. Oth er places Rs.60 per day  
 
@@@@ A member of GP shall be paid the actual fair paid by him for to and fro journey as per the rates fix ed by the SNT for buses plying under them. Provided that, in case a member who is travelling from a place where SNT 
bus service is not available, he shall be paid the actual fare of private transport fixed by the Motor Vehicle Department  
 
@@@@@ When a member of GP outside the Sikkim to participate in a conference organized by the GoI or other State Governments or UTs. State Capi tal and UT Rs.120 per day. Other places Rs.100 per day  
 
@@@@@@  Rs.100 per day per meting as sitting allowances for attending meet ing of the Zila Panchayat, as the case may be. And a member of ZP shall be paid the actual fair paid by him for to and from j ourney as per the rates 
fixed  by the SNT for buses plying under them. Provided that in case a member who is travelling from a plac e where SNT bus service is not available, he shall be paid the actual fare of private transport fixed by the Motor Vehicle 
Department.  
  

46 
 
 
 
 
 
Tripura 
      Chairman 1000 @    Sabhaphip
ati 
1500  500 pm 
as HRA 
 @@@ 
      Vice-
Chairman 
800     Sahakari 
Sabhadhip
ati 
1200    
@@ 
   
      Member     Entitled 
to sitting 
fees @ 
Rs.50 
per 
member 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Sarpan
ch 
   600  Chairman    3000 200 President  4000   300 
Naib 
Sarapa
nch 
     Vice-
Chairman 
    200 Vice-
President 
    300 
Ward 
membe
r 
     Member     200 Members     300 
    
 
 
Uttarak
hand 
Sarpan
ch 
   600  Chairman    3000 200 President    4000 300 
Naib 
Sarapa
nch 
     Vice-
Chairman 
    200 Vice-
President 
    300 
Ward 
membe
r 
     Member     200 Members     300 
 
 
@ Travelling on duty beyond 8 km from usual place of residence, be entitled to draw TA/DA at the rate applicable to a Group B O fficer serving in the State of Tripura 
@@ Travelling on duty beyond 8 km from usual place of residence, be entitled to draw TA/DA at the rate applicable to a Class II Gazetted Officer of the State Government  
@@@ For one day sitting they shall be entitled to get three days DA in addition TA. Abse nt members shall not be entitled to receive sitting fee for that sitting  
  

47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
West 
Bengal 
Pradha
n  
2000 Fixed TA  
@ Rs.500 
pm 
   Sabhapati 2800 pm     Sabhapati 3500 pm    @@@ 
Up-
Pradha
n  
 Fixed TA 
@ Rs.200 
pm 
 1500  Sahakari 
Sabhapati 
2500 pm  
 
   Sahakari 
Sabhapati 
3200 pm     
Sancha
lak of 
a Up-
Samiti  
   400  Karmadhya
ksha of a 
Sthayee 
Samiti 
        @  2000 pm  Karmadhy
aksha, 
Sthayee 
Samiti 
3000 pm      
@@ 
   
Genera
l 
Memb
ers 
(includ
ing ex-
officio 
membe
rs) 
 Fixed TA 
@ Rs.150 
pm 
  @@@
@ 
General 
Members 
     General 
Members 
     
      Members 
directly 
elected to 
the 
Panchayat 
Samiti 
 Fixed TA 
@ Rs.200 
pm 
  @@@
@@ 
Adhyaksh
a District 
Council 
for 
Panchayat 
   3000 Subject 
to 
attendan
ce in 
Zilla 
Parishad 
office 
for at 
least 10 
days in a 
month 
@ As are admissible to the Group II State Government Officers pay Scale Rs.8000 pm or more but less than Rs.16400 pm including TA at the same rate 
@@ As are admissible to the Group II State Government Officers pay Scale Rs.8000 pm or more but less than Rs.16400 pm including TA at the same rate  
@@@ Rs.600 p.m. or the actual house rent paid per month at the head quarter town of the district which ever is less. Rs.1000 p.m (Sumptuary) 
@@@@ Subject to attendance in the meeting of the Upa -Samiti or the body primarily constituted in the Gram Panchayat once in a month  
@@@@@  Subject to attendace in the meeting of Upa-Samiti of the Gram Panchayat/body primarily constituted once in a month  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  

48 
 
APPENDIX VI 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, THE 20 JANUARY, 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 16 15 hrs. in Committee Room „ B‟, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan      -  Chairperson   
Members 
         
        Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
3. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
4. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
5. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
6. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
7. Shri Jagdanand Singh  
8. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
9. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh 
10. Shrimati Usha Verma 
11. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Silvius Condpan 
        
Secretariat 
1. Shri P.K. Grover  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.R. Ramesh  - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Shah  -  Additional Director 
 
      
      
 
 
 

49 
 
***   ***  ***  *** 
 
2. ***   ***   ***   *** 
 
3. ***   ***   ***   *** 
 
4. ***   ***   ***   ***  
The Hon‟ble Chairperson also informed the Committee that „The Constitution (One Hundred and 
Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009‟ as introduced in Lok Sabha on 26 November, 2009 which inter alia  
provides for fifty percent reservation for women in Panchayats has been referred to the Committee by 
Hon‟ble Speaker on 21 December, 2009 for examination and report within three months.  In this regard, 
it was decided that in the first instance a sitting of the Committee be convened for briefing of the nodal 
Ministry i.e. Ministry of Panchayati Raj on various provisions of the Bill. It was also decided that a Press 
Communiqué soliciting views of public on various provisions of the Bill may be issued  and with the 
permission of Hon‟ble Speaker, views of State Governments/UT Administrations on the Bill be obtained 
since the subject matter of the Bill concerns the State Governments/UT Administrations.  
 
***   ***   ***    
5. ***   ***   ***   *** 
6. ***   ***   ***   *** 
***   ***   ***    
The Committee then adjourned.  
 A record of the verbatim proceedings has been kept.  
  
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
**** Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately 
 

50 
 
APPENDIX VII 
 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 
10 FEBRUARY, 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room „C‟, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan      -  Chairperson   
Members 
         Lok Sabha 
 
1.  
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
6. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
7. Shri Rakesh Pandey 
8. Shri P.L. Punia 
9. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
10. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
11. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
12. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
13. Shrimati Usha Verma 
14. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
 
Rajya  Sabha 
15. Shri Silvius Condpan 
16. Dr. Ram Prakash 
17. Shri P.R. Rajan 
18. Miss Anusuiya Uikey 
    
Secretariat 
1. Shri P.K. Grover  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.R. Ramesh  - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Shah  -  Additional Director 
 

51 
 
Witnesses 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
5. Shri A.N.P. Sinha, Secretary 
6. Shri  J.M.Phatak,  Additional Secretary  
7. Smt. Rashmi Shukla Sharma, Joint Secretary  
Representatives of Legislative Department (Ministry of Law & Justice) 
 
1. Shri V.K.Bhasin, Secretary 
2. Shri  N.K.Nampoothiry,  Joint Secretary & Legal Counsel 
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcome d the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and  the 
Legislative Department (Ministry of Law & Justice) on various provisions of „the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009‟ as introduced in Lok Sabha on 26 November 
2009 and referred to the Committee by Hon‟ble Speaker  on   21 December, 2009 for 
examination and report. 
[The representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Legislative Department 
(Ministry of Law & Justice) were then called in.] 
 
3. The Chairperson w elcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and 
the Legislative Department (Ministry of Law & Justice) for the briefing on „the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009‟ that inter-alia proposes reservation for 
women in P anchayats in the total number of seats, Offices of Chairperson and in the seats 
reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes across three tiers  to be 
increased from  “not less than One -third” to “not less than One –half”.  The Committee  
highlighted certain issues viz. need for actual empowerment of women in Panchayats across 
the country, need for prohibiting the husbands of Elected Women Pradhans from  acting as 
de-facto Pradhans in the guise of Pradhan Pati in various States of the country etc. On the 
issue of actual empowerment of Elected Women Representatives (EWRs) in the country, the 

52 
 
Committee, through nationwide study submitted by the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of  
Panchayati  Raj,  were  given       to  understand   that  consequent   upon  enactment    
of Constitution Seventy -Third (Amendment) Act, 1993  high degree of social and political 
transformation of Elected Women Representatives (EWRs) in Panchayats in the country has 
taken place.  However, in the light of prevailing status of women in Panchayats across the 
country, the Committee expressed apprehensions about the extent to which the facts and 
figures brought out in the aforesaid study could be relied upon.  
 [The witnesses then withdrew].  
4. Thereafter, the Committee decided to take oral evidence of some Non-Government 
Organizations (NGOs) associated with the subject matter of the aforesaid Bill  and 
representatives of some of the State Governments, for their  viewpoint on the issue  in the 
subsequent sittings of the Committee. 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 A record of the verbatim proceedings has been kept.  
 
 
  

53 
 
APPENDIX VIII 
 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE  
9 MARCH, 2010 
 
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1830 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘E’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok  Sabha 
19.  
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
4. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
5. Shri P.L. Punia 
6. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
7. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
8. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
9. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
 
 
Rajya  Sabha 
 
10. Dr. Ram Prakash 
  
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri P.K. Grover   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V. R. Ramesh  - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Shah  - Additional Director 
      
 

54 
 
Witnesses 
1. Dr. Deepak Prasad - Secretary, Panchayati Raj, Government of Bihar 
2. Shri Om Prakash - Secretary, Panchayati Raj, Government of Uttarakhand 
3. Shri Sudhir Thakre - Secretary, Panchayati Raj, Government of Maharashtra 
4. Shri P. Ravi Kumar - Principal Secretary (Rural Development and Panchayati  
    Raj), Government of Karnataka 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee convened 
for taking evidence of the representatives of State Governments of Bihar, Uttarakhand, Maharashtra 
and Karnataka on „The Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009‟. The aforesaid 
Bill was referred to the St anding Committee on Rural Development by Hon‟ble Speaker on 21 
December, 2009 for examination and report within three months i.e. by 21 March, 2010. Apprising the 
Committee about the progress of the examination of the Bill by the Committee, Chairperson inf ormed 
that the Committee was yet to receive memoranda from experts, public, NGOs etc. and take their 
evidence wherever felt necessary followed by the evidence of the nodal Ministry viz. Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj. The Chairperson observed that during the r ecess of the Parliament, the Committee 
have to complete examination of Demands for Grants (2010 -11) of the three Departments of the 
Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Panchayati Raj under their purview and present four 
reports thereon in the cur rent session. Besides the Committee have to present four reports on action 
taken by Government on the four reports presented to Parliament on Demands for Grants (2009 -10). 
Keeping in view the aforesaid status of examination of the Bill and other mandatory work relating to the 
Demands for Grants (2010 -11) before them, the Committee, felt that it would not be possible to 
complete the examination of the Bill and present a report thereon by 21 March, 2010. The Committee 
decided that the Hon‟ble Speaker may be r equested to grant extension of time upto the last day of the 
first week of the next session for presentation of the report on the said Bill.   

55 
 
3. The Committee thereafter decided that the next sitting s of the Committee may be held on 19 
and 29 March, 2010 for taking oral evidence of the representatives of different Departments/Ministries 
in connection with examination of Demands for Grants  (2010-11).  
[The witnesses were then called in] 
4. The Chairperson then welcomed the witnesses to the sitting of the C ommittee and drew their 
attention to direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. Thereafter, the Committee 
took evidence of the representatives of State Governments of Bihar, Uttarakhand, Maharashtra and 
Karnataka on the aforesaid Bill. T he witnesses submitted the views of the respective State 
Governments on the Bill before the Committee one by one. Subsequently, the Chairperson and 
members raised their queries which were responded to by the witnesses. 
5. The main issues that came up for  discussion include,  need to provide adequate amenities to 
district and block level Panchayat members, need for providing adequate remuneration for attending 
meetings of district and block level Panchayats on the line of elected representative of Parliamen t and 
State Assemblies, need for imparting training to elected Panchayat representatives and officials  for 
capacity building,  need for amending the relevant provision in the Bill relating to rotation of seats for 
women in Panchayats at each level so as t o provide for reservation for a particular seat for women for 
at least two consecutive terms etc.  Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing 
before the Committee. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

56 
 
          APPENDIX IX 
 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 
THE 19 MAY, 2010 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room „B‟, Ground Floor,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
Members 
Lok  Sabha 
11.  
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
6. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
7. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
8. Shri Rakesh Pandey 
9. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
10. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
11. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu 
12. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
Rajya  Sabha 
13. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
14. Shri Ganga Charan 
15. Dr. Ram Prakash 
16. Shri P.R. Rajan 
17. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri V. R. Ramesh - Director 
2. Shri A.K. Shah - Additional Director 
3. Shri Raju Srivastava - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

57 
 
Witnesses 
 
Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) 
 
1. Ms. Nirmala Buch  - President, Mahila Chetna Manch,   
      Bhopal 
 
2. Dr. Ratna M. Sudarshan -  Director, Institute of Social Studies   
      Trust, New Delhi  
 
Experts 
 
1. Dr. Sneha Palnitkar  - Director, All India Institute of Local  
      Self Government, Mumbai 
 
2. Shri N.C. Saxena  - Former Secretary Planning    
      Commission, New Delhi 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee convened 
for taking oral evidence of the representatives of Non -Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and 
Experts on „the Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2 009‟ as introduced in Lok 
Sabha on 26 November, 2009 and referred by Hon‟ble Speaker to Standing Committee on Rural 
Development for examination and report. The Chairperson also welcomed  Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, 
MP Rajya Sabha on his nomination as a member of the Committee.  
3.  The Committee then took oral evidence of the following representatives of NGOs and experts 
on the aforesaid Bill at time indicated against each : 
Name of representatives    From  To 
of NGOs/experts 
1. Ms. Nirmala Buch    1500 hrs. 1530 hrs. 
2. Dr. Ratna M. Sudarshan   1530 hrs. 1550 hrs. 
3. Dr. Sneha Palnitkar    1550 hrs. 1610 hrs. 
4. Shri N.C. Saxena    1610 hrs. 1635 hrs. 
 
[The representatives of Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and Experts were then called 
in one by one] 
 

58 
 
4. The Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and drew their attention to the provisions of 
direction 55(1) of the „Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha‟. The Committee inter-alia deliberated the 
issue of enhancing the existing level of reservation of „no t less than one -third‟ of the total number of 
seats, and in the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled tribes as well as offices 
of the Chairpersons in Panchayats at each level for women to „not less than half‟, need for 
empowerment of w omen at each level of Panchayats by way of their training and capacity building, 
making available adequate amenities like travelling allowance and daily allowance to the elected 
representatives, issue of reservation of number of offices in the Panchayats f or women by rotation etc. 
The witnesses responded to the queries raised by members on the above issues.  
 [The witnesses then withdrew] 
  
5. Thereafter, the Committee decided to undertake on -the-spot study tour to Dharamsala, 
Dalhousie and Amritsar from 14  to 18 June, 2010 in order to oversee the implementation of various 
schemes of Ministries of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj in connection with examination of 
different subjects selected by the Committee during 2009-10.   
 
6. The Committee also decided that next sitting of the Committee will be held on 7 June, 2010 for 
taking the evidence of the representative of the nodal Ministry i.e. the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 
connection with examination of „the Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009‟.  
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
  
The Committee then adjourned.  
    
    
 
 
  

59 
 
         APPENDIX X 
 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 
07 JUNE, 2010 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room „C‟, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
Members 
Lok  Sabha 
18.  
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
6. Shri Gobind Chandra Naskar 
7. Shri Rakesh Pandey 
8. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
9. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
10. Shrimati Usha Verma 
 
Rajya  Sabha 
 
11. Shri Ganga Charan 
12. Shri Silvius Condpan 
13. Dr. Ram Prakash 
14. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
15. Miss Anusuiya Uikey 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri V. R. Ramesh - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah - Additional Director 
3. Shri Raju Srivastava - Deputy Secretary 
 

60 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
1. Shri A.N.P. Sinha   - Secretary 
2. Shri  J.M.Phatak   - Additional Secretary  
3. Smt. Rashmi Shukla Sharma - Joint Secretary 
 
 
Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative Department) 
 
1. Shri V.K.Bhasin   - Secretary 
2. Shri  N.K.Nampoothiry  - Additional Secretary 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for taking oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj on „the 
Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009‟.  
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the witnesses.  
[The representatives o f Ministries of Panchayati Raj and Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department) were then called in] 
4. The Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and drew their attention to the provisions of 
direction 55(1) of the „Directions by the  Speaker, Lok Sabha‟. The major issues that came up for 
discussion include, examining „the Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009‟ not 
merely for enhancing the number of women elected representatives at each levels of Panchayats from 
existing level of „not less than one third‟ in total number of seats and in offices of Chairperson and in the 
seats reserved for Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs) to „not less than one half‟ but 
also to ensure their actual empowerment by way o f ensuring adequate flow of funds for their capacity 
building and training requirements, need for interaction of nodal Ministry with different States on the 
issue of bridging the gap among different States on the issue of amenities like transport, remunera tion 
etc., need for examining the scope of the Bill from economic aspect for holistic empowerment of elected 
representatives of Panchayats at each level, need for examining the possibility of assisting illiterate 
elected women representatives with the help  of a literate and trusted person for their actual 
empowerment, need for wider consultation with different State Governments on the issue of rotation of 
seats for women, need for inclusion of the word „rural‟ in the context of population determining the 

61 
 
criteria for reservation for women in Panchayats etc. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by 
the members on the above issues.  
[The witnesses then withdrew] 
5. Thereafter, the Committee discussed the progress regarding on -the-spot study visit of th e 
Committee to Dharamsala, Dalhousie and Amritsar from 14 to 18 June, 2010. 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
 The Committee then adjourned.  
  
 
 
 
  

62 
 
APPENDIX XI 
 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE       
20 JULY, 2010 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room „C‟, Ground Floor,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson  
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
3. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
4. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
5. Shri P.L. Punia 
6. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
7. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
8. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
9. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
10. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
11. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
13. Shri Silivus Condpan 
14. Dr. Ram Prakash 
15. Shimati Maya Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah  - Additional Director 
 
 

63 
 
2. The Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee convened for 
consideration of Draft Report on „the Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009‟ that 
was referred by the Hon‟ble Speaker to the Standing Committee on Rural Development for examination 
and report.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the Draft Report on the aforesaid Bill and after 
some discussion adopted the same with certain modifications/additions as given in Annexure. 
4.  The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid Draft Report in the light 
of above modifications/additions and also on the basis of factual verification from the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
  The Committee then adjourned.  
  
  

64 
 
         Annexure  
Modifications/additions made by the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2009-10) in the 
Draft Report on ‘the Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009’ 
 
Para Page 
No. 
Line   Modifications/additions  
1 30 4 for : modification 
read : modifications 
 
2 31 1 
 
 
3 
 
 
7 
 
 
9 
 
 
10 
 
 
10 
after : The Committee  
delete : regret to  
 
substitute : is 
with : will be 
 
delete : the process of consultation in the matter should be completed expeditiously and  
after : The Committee desire that  
 
add : through this Constitutional amendment  
after : action should be taken 
 
delete : reserved  
before : seats 
 
add :   by ensuring that rotation of seats after at least two cycle is provided for. 
after : seats  
 
4 33 2, 3 & 4 
 
 
7 
 
 
8 
delete : The Committee feel that the usage of words ‘not less than one-half’ in this 
context may result in reservation of seats in excess of 50 per cent.  
 
substitute : Panchayati Raj 
with :   Law and Justice (Department of Legislative Department) 
 
substitute : made  
with : retained 
 
substitute : as near as may be 
with : not less than 
 
5 34 11 delete : has not worked well so far 
add : (NCBF)’ is under -funded and has not been effectively implemented so far. This 
must be corrected. In this connection, the Committee suggest that in order to meet the 
Capacity Building and Training requirements of PRIs, one per cent of the funds for 
centrally sponsored schemes of different Ministries related to rural development be 
earmarked for Capacity Building and Training under NCBF. This amount may also be 
utilized for catering to promote e -governance in PRIs by utilizing the information and 
communication technology network of the National Informatics Centre (NIC).  As in the 
case of Karnataka, West Bengal and some other States, e -systems and satellite -based 
training and capacity building should be promoted countrywide to ensure adequate 
outreach to elected representatives of PRIs particularly EWRs. 
 
6 35 1 
 
 
8& 9 
 
read : impedes 
for : impede 
 
delete : The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has stated in this connection that  
 

65 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 from 
bottom 
 
2 from 
bottom 
 
delete : as against 4 per cent proposed by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for PRIs for 
different activities including honorarium and sitting fee for elected representatives. 
According to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, the Thirteenth Finance Commission has not 
made any specific recommendation for allocation of funds for providing amenities to the 
office bearers of Panchayats. It has been stated that since Thirteenth Finance 
Commission grants for PRIs is ‘untied’ and States and PRIs would be free to use the 
grant for the activities as may be considered appropriate. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
has reportedly advised the States to consider using these funds for manpower, office 
buildings and other infrastructure for Panchayats, ICT (e-Panchayats), etc.  
add : a fu rther Performance Grant of 0.5 per cent rising to one per cent of the total 
divisible pool, amounting to a minimum absolute amount of Rs. 63,050 crore and 
possibly upto   Rs. 90,000 crore over the five year cycle. The Committee suggest that the 
Panchayats may be advised to provide for honorarium and sitting fee for elected 
representatives out of the ‘un -tied’ Basic and Performance Grants recommended by the 
Thirteenth Finance Commission.  The Committee hope that in order to ensure effective 
performance of elected representatives of Panchayats, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj will 
take up the matter appropriately with State Governments and ensure adequate amenities 
to elected representatives.  
 
add : the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
before : will take up the matter 
 
delete : the 
before : State Governments  
 
7 37 6 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
3 from 
bottom 
 
2 from 
bottom 
 
Last 
line 
after : in February, 2010 
delete : to the effect that running PRIs by the close relatives of EWRs would be treated 
as misconduct under relevant PRIs Act and action against lady office bearer who allows 
the relatives to interfere in office action should be taken.  
 
delete : It has also  
before : been made clear 
 
add : The Committee desire that as has already 
before : been made clear 
 
delete : that 
before : if such proxy 
 
add : the issue of 
before : proxy attendance 
 
substitute : them  
with : this 
 
delete : in the light of the communications issued by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
 
 
 
 
 