THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Rural Development)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 18.12.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 83
Price : Rs. 58.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-2013) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government ............................................................ 18
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .............................................................................. 35
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee ............................................................... 36
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ......... 41
A
PPENDICES
I. General Status of SECC 2011 as on 31 July, 2012 ......... 47
II. Extracts of the Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the
committee held on 14 December, 2012 .............................. 49
III. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development .................................................................. 51
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013)
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Thangso Baite
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
5. Shri Premchand Guddu
6. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique
7. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
8. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
9. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
12. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy
13. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
14. Dr. Sanjay Singh
15. Shri Uma Shankar Singh
16. Smt. Supriya Sule
17. Smt. Annu Tandon
18. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar
19. Smt. Usha Verma
20. Shri P . Viswanathan
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Munquad Ali
23. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay
(iii)

25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Shri C.P . Narayanan
30. Shri Mohan Singh
31. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma — Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Committee Officer
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2012-2013) having been authorised by the Committee to
present the Thirty-seventh Report on their behalf on the action taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirtieth
Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Rural Development).
2. The Thirtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to
Lok Sabha on 03 May, 2012. The replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on
06 September, 2012.
3. The draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee
at their sitting held on 14 December, 2012.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-III.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
14 December, 2012 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2012-13) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Thirtieth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) for the year
2012-2013.
2. The Thirtieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 03 May, 2012
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The
Report contained 21 Observations/Recommendations.
3.Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been examined and categorised as
follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 2, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20 and
21
Total: 14
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government:
Serial No. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Serial Nos. 7, 8, 13 and 17
Total: 04
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 1, 3 and 5
Total: 03
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of
Observations/Recommendations for which only interim replies have
been submitted by the Government and Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that
require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Eleventh Five Year Plan—Review of performance and Funds for
12th Five Year Plan
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
6. In the context of huge amount of unspent balances in major
programmes being run by Department of Rural Development during
Eleventh Five Year Plan, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that various schemes/programmes of rural
development have not received the desired level of allocation of
funds from the Planning Commission during the Eleventh Plan
period (2007–12). For instance, as against the proposal of about
Rs. 3.97 lakh crore for Eleventh Plan, the Ministry received only
Rs. 2.90 lakh crore. Coming to the utilization, the Committee are
concerned to note that the overall performance of the Department
has not been encouraging. For instance, against the available
allocation of around Rs. 2.90 lakh crore, the total expenditure during
Eleventh Plan was around 2.78 lakh crore leaving about Rs. 12000
crore unutilized. Considering the importance of Rural Development,
the Committee feel that there should be higher allocation for the
flagship programmes provided that the department is able to
properly plan their priorities and strategize their work programmes.
They, therefore, recommend that the Department should work out
a two-pronged strategy i.e., to increase their financial-absorption
capacity and thereafter again take up the matter with the
Planning Commission for a realistic higher allocation for the
Twelfth Five Year Plan.”
7. The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Indira Aawas Yojana
Total outlay in the 11th Five Year Plan (2007–12) under Rural
Housing was initially Rs. 26882.21 crore, against which Rs. 41997.50
crore were provided. The 11th Plan document had aimed for

3
construction of 150 lakh houses over the period of five years from
2007–12. However, with an allocation of Rs. 26882.21 crore for total
11th Plan Period and with the then existing financial assistance of
Rs. 25,000 (plain areas) and Rs. 27,500 (difficult and hilly areas),
only 137 lakh houses could have been constructed as fund
allocation was not corresponding to the physical target. Further,
with the increase in financial assistance twice over last four years
from Rs. 25,000 (plain areas) and Rs. 27,500 (hilly areas) to
Rs. 35,000/-(Plain areas) and Rs. 37,500/- (for hilly and difficult
areas) w.e.f. 1st April, 2008 and to Rs. 45,000/- in plain areas and
Rs. 48,500/- (for hilly and difficult areas) w.e.f. 1st April, 2010, the
physical target got reduced further. Therefore only 139.83 lakh
houses were expected to be constructed over 11th Plan period
against target of 150 lakh houses even when initial allocation of
Rs. 26882.21 crore for 11th Plan actually turned out to be
Rs. 41977.50 crore. The physical target got further reduced as 78
Left Wing Extremist Districts [35 Left Wing Extremist districts (LWE)
vide order dated 7.10.2010, 25 Left Wing Extremist districts (LWE)
vide order dated 23.2.2011 and 18 Left Wing Extremist districts
(LWE) vide order dated 10.4.2012] were treated as difficult areas
and were made eligible for higher rate of unit assistance provided
to hilly/difficult areas.
The final report of the working Group for Rural Housing for
the Twelfth Five Year Plan has been submitted to the
Planning Commission on 13.10.2011. A Committee of Group of
Officers on IAY (GOIAY) has been constituted by the
Planning Commission to examine the recommendations of the
Working Group on Rural Housing for the 12th Five Year Plan and
to suggest changes in IAY in the 12th Five Year Plan. It has been
proposed to enhance unit assistance for house construction under
IAY to Rs. 75,000 and that unit assistance be enhanced incrementally
each year to absorb escalation in cost of materials and labour.
The issue of enhancement of allocation for Indira Aawas Yojana
for the 12th Five Year Plan was placed before the Planning
Commission. The budget proposed for the year 2012-13 i.e. the
first year of 12th Five Year Plan was Rs. 28569.90 crore (as grant
for 15 million houses and subsidy for 5 million houses). However,
against this, Planning Commission has allocated Rs. 11075 crores
for Indira Aawas Yojana.
Aajeevika — National Rural Livelihood Mission
The SGSY has been restructured as National Rural Livelihoods
Mission (NRLM). Under NRLM sensitive and dedicated support
structures at the National, State, district and sub-district levels

4
would be set up. The Ministry under NRLM has set up National
Mission Management Unit for providing technical assistance to all
States/UTs and facilitating in implementation of the programme.
The State Governments under NRLM will set up State Programme
Management Units at State level, District Programme Management
Units at district level, and sub-district units at block and/or cluster
levels. These sensitive and dedicated support structures would have
suitable linkages with PRIs and other line departments. These
support structures would be staffed with professionally competent
and dedicated human resources through appropriate arrangements
including partnerships and outsourcing of services. A clear objective
of this support structure is to incubate an internal sensitive support
structure, consisting of the institutions of the poor, their staff and
other social capital. The demand driven strategies of NRLM and
sensitive support structure at various levels would facilitate the
states in implementing NRLM properly and also increasing the
financial absorption capacities.
As NRLM follows a demand driven strategy, the States have the
flexibility to develop their livelihoods-based perspective plans and
annual action plans for poverty reduction.
After taking into account all the requirements of NRLM for the
12th Plan period the Ministry has proposed for an amount of
Rs. 48906 crore this plan period. The Ministry also had discussions
with Planning Commission on providing the proposed outlay to
the Ministry under NRLM for the 12th Plan Period.
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
(MGNREGA)
MGNREGA provides a legal guarantee for up to 100 days of wage
employment to every household in a financial year for doing
unskilled manual work, on demand to be made following
prescribed process. Provisions of MGNREGA are effected as
demand driven schemes, to be prepared and implemented by
State Governments. There is no allocation of funds to States.
MGNREGA is a demand driven and funds are released to States/
UTs based on advance projection of labour demand by States/UTs
and performance in the generation of actual persondays vis-à-vis
projected labour demand. Under the Act, Central Government is
legally committed/bound to bear the entire expenditure towards
wages to be paid to unskilled manual workers along with other
expenditure as per provisions of the Act. There has been no
shortage of funds for this purpose in the past.

5
Pradhan Mantri Gramin Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
PMGSY is implemented through State Governments. Absorption
capacity of the States has increased during the last few years. To
sustain this and to meet cost escalations, adequate funds are
required for achieving the physical targets so that physical pace of
implementation does not slow down.
Accordingly financial requirement for the 12th Five Year Plan has
been worked out at Rs. 2,12,000 crore has been submitted to
Planning Commission.”
8. The Committee while noticing less than desired level of
allocation of funds to the rural development programmes as well as
huge amount of unspent balances, had recommended the Department
to work out a two-pronged strategy i.e. to increase their financial-
absorption capacity and thereafter take up the matter with the
Planning Commission for a realistic higher allocation for the Twelfth
Five Year Plan. In response the Department has furnished information
about the funds sought for various schemes run by the Department
from Planning Commission. It is evident from the details furnished
that either the allocations are much below than the quantum of
funds sought or the Planning Commission is yet to decide in the
matter. The Committee also note that the Department is silent on
the issue of fine tuning of financial absorption capacity of the
Department and States concerned. The Committee expect that the
replies of the Government should be complete and elaborate. They
therefore, await Government response to their recommendation. While
reiterating their recommendation, the Committee desire that the
Department should continue pursuing with the Planning Commission
for higher allocation of funds for all the schemes run by the
Department of Rural Development. The Committee find that it has
been proposed to enhance unit assistance per house construction
under IAY to Rs. 75,000/-. The Committee desire that as per the
practice so far, assistance quantum should be higher for hilly areas.
B. BPL Survey
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
9. The Committee in the context of slow pace of Socio Economic
and Caste Census (2011) had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have been informed that in June, 2011, the
Ministry of Rural Development commenced the Socio Economic
and Caste Census (SECC) through a comprehensive door to door

6
enumeration across the country. The Committee have also been
informed that the shortcomings of the 2002 BPL Survey are being
addressed comprehensively in the SECC, 2011 with the threefold
objectives, namely (i) to enable households to be ranked based on
their socio-economic status thereby enabling the State Governments
to prepare a list of families living below the poverty line; (ii) to
make available authentic information that will enable caste-wise
population enumeration of the country; and (iii) to make available
authentic information regarding socio-economic condition, and
education status of various castes and sections of the population.
The Secretary, Rural Development in his deposition before the
Committee spelt out various facets of delivery mechanism of the
programme viz., automatic inclusion/exclusion criteria, deprivation
indicators, incremental weightage to indicators, enumeration blocks
etc. The Committee find that the pace of the Census is not
progressing as pre-defined targets. Out of total 24.57 lakh
enumeration blocks initially identified by the Government, so far,
the enumeration has been completed only in respect of 10.26 lakh
Blocks i.e., about 42% of the overall target. The Committee are
also unhappy to note that the process of enumeration is still to
commence in States like Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Manipur and
Uttar Pradesh. With the current pace of Census and its uneven
coverage, the Committee are not very sure that the entire exercise
which was scheduled to be completed by June, 2012 would be
completed in stipulated time. The Committee, therefore, are not
satisfied with the pace of this programme and recommend that
more action oriented approach including regular monitoring of the
progress made is called for in co-ordination with the concerned
States so that survey could be completed in the right earnest.”
10. The Department in their Action Taken Reply have stated as
under:—
“The Ministry of Rural Development has been making continuous
efforts to ensure that the Socio Economic and Caste Census, 2011
is completed at the earliest. Close monitoring of the progress of
the Census operation is being made with the States/UTs through
visits and Video Conferencing to sort out the various issues faced
by them. The process of enumeration has since been commenced
in the States of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Manipur and Uttar Pradesh.
The enumeration has been completed in 1591523 Enumeration
Blocks out of the total number of 2482219 EBs, which is 64.12%.
The State wise status of the progress of SECC 2011 as on 31.07.2012
is given in the Annexure.”

7
11. In their action taken reply, the Department has stated that
the process of enumeration has since been commenced in the States
of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Manipur and Uttar Pradesh. They have also
informed that enumeration has been completed in 64.12% Blocks.
However, from the State-wise details (as on 31.07.2012), the Committee
are dismayed to note that the process of enumeration which is the
first stage of BPL survey, has been completed in only 14.35% and
7.47% of the Blocks in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. This is alarming
particularly in the context that these States cover a major chunk of
BPL population. The Committee, therefore, would like the
Department to give adequate priority to BPL survey and make sincere
efforts in order to ensure availability of up-to-date list of rural poor.
The Committee, therefore once again reiterate the need of more action
oriented approach as well as regular monitoring and coordination
with the States concerned for early completion of BPL survey.
C. Revamping of District Rural Development Agency (DRDA)
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
12. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that the task of restructuring of DRDA was
assigned to a Committee headed by Shri V . Ramachandran which
was to submit its Report by May, 2011. However, the Ramachandran
Committee have submitted its Report to the Ministry of Rural
Development in January, 2012 and the Report is under examination
by the Government. Considering the importance of functioning of
DRDA, the Committee are unhappy to note that the scheme of
restructuring of DRDA, which is one of the main implementing
agencies of all rural development schemes at District level, is still
at the infancy stage and any further delay in implementation of
the Ramachandran Committee Report, the process of merger of
District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) with District
Panchayats has not been completed in majority of States in the
country. The Committee recommend that urgent steps be taken to
examine the Report and to implement the recommendations of
Ramachandran Committee Report followed by necessary
followup action to expedite the crucial reforms in DRDA
Administration Scheme.”
13. The Department in their Action Taken Reply have stated as
under:—
“The comments of the States/UTs on the Report have been received
and examined. The recommendations of the Committee have

8
generally been accepted by the Government. The main
recommendations of the Committee are:—
(i) The society structure of DRDA should be dissolved
forthwith following due process. The existing staff should
be absorbed by the respective line departments.
(ii) District Plan Support Unit (DPSU) to be set up with the
responsibility to prepare a district level holistic anti-poverty
sub plan converging all the centrally sponsored schemes
directly related to the poverty reduction along with similar
schemes of the state and local governments and oversee
and guide convergent implementation.
(iii) DPSU to be a lean and coherent professional team driven
by a shared vision to eliminate poverty, and it should be
located within the District Planning Committee (DPC) as a
distinct part of its technical secretariat. However, as DPCs
are still in the nascent stage in almost all the states, in the
interim during the period of Twelfth Five Year Plan, this
unit could be part of the Zila Parishad except in States
where DPCs are fully functional.
(iv) Besides preparing anti-poverty sub plan, DPSU would also
be responsible for capacity building, monitoring and
evaluation, conducting surveys and studies and
documentation of best practices.
(v) In the North-East wherever Autonomous District Councils
(ADCs) are in charge of planning for poverty reduction,
the DPSU would support the ADCs.”
14. The Committee note that the Government is in process of
taking follow-up action on the recommendations of the Committee
constituted under chairmanship of Sh. V . Ramchandran. The
recommendations of Ramchandran Committee inter-alia include
dissolving DRDA and entrusting the responsibility to PRIs at District
level. Since, the institution of DRDA was set up with some given
responsibilities, the Committee expect that the Government would
take the final decision in regard to dissolving DRDAs after ensuring
that the process does not have any adverse impact on any of the
ongoing rural schemes.
D. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
(MGNREGA)
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
15. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that MGNREGA is a flagship programme of
the Government which aims at providing livelihood security of
people in rural areas by guaranteeing at least 100 days of wage

9
employment in a financial year to every household whose adult
members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. The Committee
note with concern that as against the minimum of 100 days of
work, the Department could provide an average of 42 days of
work during the fiscal year 2011-12. They further find that during
the previous years, the number of days of work provided under
the scheme was 47 days in 2010-11 and 54 days in 2009-10. The
Committee are constrained to believe that the basic methods of
assessment of demand are flawed due to which the number of
days of employment are receding. The committee are further
dismayed to note that number of work days in States like Bihar,
Uttar Pradesh was as low as 31 as if people did not need any
work. Similarly, in populated States like Uttar Pradesh and Bihar,
the percentage of families who got 100 days work was less than
10 percent. It appears that in the name of “demand driven”, no
real efforts are made at local level to ensure that work is given to
the people. The Committee are also not very sure about the
involvement of Panchayats/Gram Sabhas in the matter. The
committee, therefore, would like the Government to re-examine
the entire implementation process including creation of durable
assets to take remedial measures.”
16. The Department in their Action Taken Reply have stated as
under:—
“The objective of MGNREGA is to supplement the income of a
rural household and it is not intended to be the sole means of
earning livelihood for the rural population. It is demand driven
and households holding job cards are required to demand
employment following a prescribed process. The workers are free
to avail any other employment opportunities available to them.
Provisions of MGNREGA are effected as demand driven schemes,
to be prepared and implemented by the State Governments and it
is the responsibility of the State Governments concerned to provide
the number of days of employment guaranteed under section 3 of
the Act, if demanded. As employment is provided on demand,
households provided employment and persondays generated under
MGNREGA by the States/UTs depend on demand for employment.
Section 16(1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) provides that Gram Panchayats shall
be responsible for identification of projects in the Gram Panchayat
area to be taken up under the scheme as per the recommendations
of the Gram Sabha and Ward Sabhas. Section 13(1) of MGNREGA

10
provides that the Panchayats at district, intermediate and village
levels shall be the principal authorities for planning and
implementation of the schemes made under the Act. Panchayats
have been given a pivotal role in the planning and implementation
of projects under MGNREGA. The Act [Section 16(5)] mandates
that the Programme Officer shall allot at least 50% of the works
in terms of cost to be implemented through Gram Panchayats.
However involvement of Gram Panchayats would depend on their
capacities, pro-activeness and of extent of autonomy and assertions
exercised by them.
After review of MGNREGA operational Guidelines, recently a large
number of additional activities/works have been included in
Schedule-I of the Act vide notification dated 4.5.2012 to broaden
scope of works under MGNREGA. The availability of more works
under MGNREGA is expected to increase the number of
persondays.”
17. The Committee while noticing declining trend of employment
generation under MGNREGA specially in States like Uttar Pradesh
and Bihar had desired the Department to re-examine the entire
implementation process including creation of durable assets to take
remedial measures. The Department in their reply, apart from
mentioning about objective of MGNREGA to supplement the income
of a rural household and not intended to be the sole means of
earning livelihood for the rural population has stated that recently
a large number of additional activities/works have been included in
Schedule-I of the Act to broaden scope of works under MGNREGA.
The availability of more works under MGNREGA is expected to
increase the number of persondays. The Committee are of view that
mere inclusion of added categories of work will not help to improve
performance of MGNREGA unless it is augmented by strengthening
capacity of Panchayats for planning. The Committee, therefore desire
the Department to take steps in this regard for effective utilization
of funds of MGNREGA and creation of durable assets.
E. Payment of Uunemployment Allowances
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
18. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are also deeply disturbed that government is yet
to effectively implement Section 7 of MGNREGA which stipulates
the provision of unemployment allowance to households if the

11
work they seek is not given. In cases where work is not given, the
unemployment allowance should be provided by the State
Government and Central Government should also contribute for
the purpose.”
19. The Department in their Action Taken Reply have stated as
under:—
“The provisions in Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) are effected through Schemes to be
formulated by States under Section 4(1) of the Act. All State
Governments are required to make wage payments including
payment of unemployment allowance to the beneficiaries in
accordance with the provisions of MGNREG Act. Payment of
unemployment allowance to entitled MGNREGA applicants is a
legal requirement as per various provisions in the Act. As per
Section 7(3) to 7 (6) of the Act, liability for payment of
unemployment allowance is on the concerned State Government
and it is to be sanctioned and disbursed by the Programme Officer
or such local authority as the State Governments may notify.
Payment of unemployment allowance shall be made not later than
15 days from the date on which it becomes due and the procedure
for payment of unemployment allowance is to be prescribed by
the State Governments. As per the provisions of section 22 (2), the
State Governments are required to meet the cost of unemployment
allowance payable under their respective schemes. The States/UTs
have been advised from time to time to comply with the provisions
in the Act regarding payment of unemployment allowance to
entitled workers following the same pattern as the payment of
wages.”
20. In response to recommendation of the Committee about
payment of unemployment allowances to workers as provided in
the Act and need of sharing responsibility by the Central Government
along with States concerned, the Department has brought out the
existing provision in the Act stating that the State Governments are
required to meet the cost of unemployment allowances payable under
their respective schemes. The Department has further stated that
States/UTs are advised from time to time to comply with the
provisions in the Act regarding payment of unemployment allowance
to entitled workers following the same pattern as the payment of
wages. The Committee are of the view that Department cannot shirk
its responsibility even if as per the Act States are required to
shoulder this expenditure as it will go against the spirit of legal

12
guarantee of employment as provided in the Act. The Committee,
therefore desire that the Department should explore ways to
implement provision regarding payment of unemployment allowances
to the workers.
F. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
21. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that under PMGSY (including Bharat Nirman),
the physical performance was not at all satisfactory. For example,
regarding habitations under new connectivity, the Department could
achieve 52 per cent of the targets, regarding length of new
connectivity, the Department could achieve 56 per cent of the
targets. Further for upgradation, against the targets of 3,74,844
habitations, only 1,37,634 habitations have been achieved till
February, 2012. The Committee apprehend that with the current
pace of implementation of PMGSY, the department may not be
able to achieve the objective of providing all-weather road
connectivity to the rural areas of the country in the near future.
They, therefore, recommend that immediate corrective steps be
initiated by the Government in this regard and the Committee be
apprised accordingly. The Committee also recommend that the
Ministry should also address the specific problems of states like
Kerala where the existing guidelines are hampering the progress
of work so that unconnected habitations are appropriately
connected.”
22. The Department in their Action Taken Reply have stated as
under:—
“It is true that 52% of the habitations were connected upto
February, 2012. However, against the target of 1,58,849 habitations
eligible for connecting under PMGSY, 1,14,433 habitations were
cleared upto February, 2012 which comes to 72%. Out of this,
82,478 habitations were connected and remaining 31,955 habitations
were at various stages of getting connected. Similarly, 76% of the
total eligible road length  i.e. 2,79,811 km. was sanctioned upto
February, 2012. Out of which, 2,05,927 km. was constructed and
construction of remaining 73,884 km. of road length under PMGSY
was at various stages of completion. As regards Upgradation, the
target of 3,74,844 km. road length as mentioned in the para includes
renewal also which is to be done by the State Governments. The

13
target of the Central Government is for Upgradation of
2,24,841 km. of road length against which 1,64,096 km. has been
sanctioned (73%). Out of this, 1,37,701 km. was completed and
remaining 26,394 km. at various stages of completion.”
23. In response to recommendation of the Committee about need
of corrective steps to increase speed of construction of roads under
PMGSY (including Bharat Nirman) and to address specific problems
of States like Kerala, the Department has stated that 82,478
habitations out of 1,14,433 habitations cleared upto February, 2012
i.e. 72% were connected and remaining 31,955 habitations were at
various stages of getting connected. The Department has also
mentioned that 2,05,927 kms. were connected out of sanctioned
eligible road length of 2,79,811 kms. upto February, 2012. The
Committee are of the considered view that there is urgent need to
enhance the pace of construction of roads in rural India in order to
bring them to the mainstream of economic life of the country. The
Committee, therefore reiterate early completion of on-going
construction of roads in over 30,000 habitations. Needless to
emphasise that the Department would work for early solution in
consultation with concerned States like Kerala so that all habitations
across the country are connected with proper roads.
G. Funds Allocation for PMGSY
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
24. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“On the issue of availability of funds for PMGSY, the Committee
find that during the Tenth and Eleventh Plan periods, the
Department has not been able to get the requisite support from
the Planning Commission. For instance, for the Tenth Plan
(2002-07), the Department proposed an allocation of Rs. 55,000 crore,
whereas, the Planning Commission had approved a plan outlay of
Rs. 12,500 crore only. Similarly, for the Eleventh Plan (2007-12), the
Department proposed an allocation of Rs. 81,801 crore, whereas,
the Planning Commission had approved a Plan outlay of Rs. 59,751
crore. For the Twelfth Plan and the funds allocated for the first
year of the Plan viz., 2012-13, the Committee are dismayed to note
that though the Department had proposed an allocation of
Rs. 2.12 lakh crore for the Twelfth Plan, the Planning Commission
has allocated a meagre Rs. 24,000 crore for the fiscal year 2012-13
and at this level, Twelfth Plan allocation will come to about
Rs. 1.20 lakh crore. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the

14
Planning Commission should find ways and means of making
available higher allocation in the Twelfth Plan for PMGSY
particularly when the scheme has been opened for the states for
covering habitations with population below the 1000 set under
Bharat Nirman in stages i.e., 500-900, 250-499 based on coverage of
higher category. This was earlier stopped by the Government in
the name of Bharat Nirman norms and this has added to the
backlog of pending connectivity to habitations through pucca
roads.”
25. The Department in their Action Taken Reply have stated as
under:—
“The position of demand for 10th, 11th and 12th Five Year Plan,
approved outlay and the actual allocation, is as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Demand of Approved Actual allocation
the Ministry outlay
10th Five Year Plan 55,000 12,500 17,786
11th Five Year Plan 81,801 59,751 86,120 (86,101.25)*
12th Five Year Plan 2,12,000 Not yet decided 24,000 against demand
of 30,000 for the year
2012-13.
*The Budgetary Outlay for PMGSY for the year 2011-12 was reduced by Rs. 18.75 crore
at RE stage due to less receipt of Cess amount.
26. The Committee while noticing the trend of less than desired
allocation to PMGSY had recommended that the Planning
Commission should find ways and means of making available higher
allocation in the Twelfth Plan for PMGSY particularly when the
scheme has been opened for the States for covering habitations with
population below the 1000 set under Bharat Nirman in stages i.e.,
500-900, 250-499 based on coverage of higher category. The Ministry
in their action taken reply has stated that Planning Commission is
yet to decide on demand of Rs. 2,12,000 crore for PMGSY. The
Committee are of the view that investment in infrastructure such as
roads in rural areas would provide a momentum to rural economy.
The Committee, therefore once again reiterate their recommendation
for higher allocation to PMGSY and desire the Department to pursue
with the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.

15
H. Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA)
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.17)
27. In context of continuation of PURA as pilot project mode, the
Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that PURA scheme was started as a pilot
project 2003-04 and continued till 2009-10. The Government
restructured PURA in 2010 and decided to initiate new pilot project
in PPP mode, wherein, the private developers will be awarded
projects on meeting certain specified criteria. The Committee further
note that Rs. 156.20 crore was released to DRDA during 2010-11
and 2011-12 for implementation of PURA. Apart from this,
Rs. 30 crore were released in 2009-10 for pilot project undertaken
during 2004-05 to 2006-07. However, the Committee are dismayed
to find that no concrete infrastructure has been created in any of
the pilot projects. The Committee are of considered view that a
period of nine years for any scheme to continue on a pilot project
mode is sufficient to weigh the pros and corns in entirety and
therefore, there is no need to run PURA scheme again on a pilot
mode. The Committee, therefore, are not satisfied with the way
this important shceme is being handled and recommend that more
action-oriented approach is called for and the Ministry would take
conclusive action in the matter.”
28. The Department in their Action Taken Reply have stated as
under:—
“The Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas scheme was
initially implemented on a pilot basis for three years, from the
year 2004-05 to 2006-07. During this period and subsequently steps
were taken to restructure the scheme. The budgetary provision for
the year 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 were Rs. 10.00 crore,
Rs. 30.00 crore and Rs. 30.00 crore respectively. Funds were not
released in these years as the scheme was being restructured.
The restructured PURA scheme was approved for implementation
under PPP mode by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA) on 21.01.2010. The restructured PURA scheme proposes
holistic and accelerated development of compact areas around a
potential growth centre in a Gram Panchayat (or a group of Gram
Panchayats) through Public Private Partnership (PPP) framework
for providing livelihood opportunities and urban amenities to
improve the quality of life in rural areas.

16
The rolling out of the restructured PURA scheme was initiated by
formulation of Guidelines. Subsequently, a notice was issued
inviting Expression of Interest (EoI) from private sector entities for
selecting the private partners. 93 EoIs were received out of which
45 organizations qualified at the EoI Stage. After the RFP stage
evaluations were complete, only nine organizations could submit
14 proposals out of which 11 proposals qualified. The concerned
private entities were asked to submit to Detailed Project Report
(DPR). In response, 6 organizations submitted 9 DPRs. An experts
group evaluated the DPRs and suggested many improvements.
The qualified bidders have been requested to submit the revised
DPRs by 30th September 2011. Inter-Ministerial Empowered
Committee has approved two projects in Kerala, i.e. Thalikulam
and Thirurangadi cluster which have been inaugurated on 24.2.2012.
Efforts are being made to launch the remaining projects in the
coming months.
Thus, the restructured Scheme is being implemented on pilot basis
effectively from 21.1.2010. Budgetary provision of the scheme is
Rs. 248 crore for the 11th Plan period. Of the allocation of
Rs. 124 crore for the year 2010-11 an amount of Rs. 66.24 crore
was released to the DRDAs. The allocation for the year 2011-12
was Rs. 100 crore of which an amount of Rs. 90 crore was released
to DRDAs. The remaining Rs.10 crore pertaining to the North-Eastern
States has been surrendered as no proposals were received for
these States. The two projects inaugurated in Kerala are under
‘condition precedent period’ (six months from the date of signing
of agreement) and the creation of assets will start after this period.
Concentrated efforts are being made to bring the remaining pilot
projects for consideration by the Empowered Committee.
The Working Group constituted by the Planning Commission has
also suggested for taking up of 10-12 more pilot projects during
the 12th Plan. Accordingly, this Ministry has called for ‘Expression
of Interest’ from private developers for PURA 2.0 and the last
date of submission of EoIs is 6th August, 2012.”
29. The Committee while noticing that the Provision of Urban
Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA) scheme which was started as a
pilot project in 2003-04 was restructured in 2010 and decided to be
continued in PPP mode, had expressed the view that there was no
need to run PURA scheme again on pilot mode. The Committee had
desired the Department to adopt more action-oriented approach in
their action taken reply, the Department has stated that it has

17
restructured PURA scheme and Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA) has approved it on 21.01.2010. The Department has
also informed that after due process two projects have been started
in Kerala under PPP mode and Department has also called for
‘Expression of Interest’ from private developers for PURA 2.0 after
suggestion of the Working Group constituted by the Planning
Commission. The Committee are of view that PURA is very noble
concept that may have far reaching benefits for betterment of our
rural prosperity. However, there must be a time limit for completion
of project so that tangible benefits can be seen on the ground. But,
unfortunately experience of earlier projects on PURA has not yielded
any tangible result. The Committee, therefore, once again reiterate
their recommendation and desire the Department to fix a time limit
for completion of projects within approved budget outlays. The
Committee are unhappy to find that the Ministry has further
proposed pilot projects for 12th Plan. With this it is quite clear that
the Government is not very serious about implementation of PURA
scheme. The Committee deplore such half hearted approach of the
Government and accordingly strongly recommend that the scheme
should be implemented at the earliest in proper mode leaving out
pilot mode.

18
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee observe that the outlay for the fiscal year 2012-13
is Rs. 73,175 crore, which is around Rs. 925 crore lower than that of
previous fiscal year. The Committee also note that during this fiscal
year, though there is increase in allocation of funds for various schemes
like Ajeevika (NRLM), Indira Aawas Yojana and Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana, there is significant reduction of funds to the tune of
Rs. 7000 crore under MGNREGA. The Committee regret to note that
reduction of 17.5 percent funds for MGNREGA will retard the
momentum of progress in the vital area of employment and therefore
would adversely impact the rural populace. The increase in allocation
of funds for other schemes is also to be viewed in the context of
inflation, wherein, the funds may not have enhanced in real terms.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the issue of
additional funds for these schemes, especially the MGNREGA, be
vigorously pursued with the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.
The inclusive growth and overall development of 740 million rural
people spread over 625 Districts, especially in view of India’s static
position in the UN Human Development Index over the last two
decades inspite of GDP growth, would only be possible when adequate
funds are allocated for rural schemes.
Reply of the Government
(1) Rural Housing Indra Aawas Yojana
As per the estimation of the Working Group for Rural housing for
the 12th Five Year Plan housing shortage can be assumed as 40 million.
From the current trends of housing in rural India, It can be assumed
about half of the current shortage of 40 million houses would require
financing through IAY and interest subsidy assistance. The rest of the
20 million households would be able to construct their houses through
State Schemes and their own sources including informal sources. The
proposed budget for Rural Housing for the 12th Five Year Plan is
Rs. 1,50,000 crore for construction of 20 million houses(15 million
through grant and 5 million through subsidy).

19
(2) Ajeevika
The outlay of NRLM for the year 2012-13 is Rs. 3915 crore which
has been increased by 34% from the last year outlay which was
Rs. 2914 crore.
(3) Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Gurantee Act
(MGNREGA)
MGNREGA provides a legal guarantee for up to 100 days of wage
employment to every household in a financial year for doing unskilled
manual work, on demand to be made following prescribed process.
Provisions of MGNREGA are effected as demand driven schemes, to
be prepared and implemented by State Governments. There is no
allocation of funds to States. MGNREGA is a demand driven and
funds are released to States/UTs based on advance projection of labour
demand by States/UTs and performance in the generation of actual
persondays vis-à-vis projected labour demand. Under the Act, Central
Government is legally committed/bound to bear the entire expenditure
towards wages to be paid to unskilled manual workers along with
other expenditure as per provisions of the Act. There has been no
shortage of funds for this purpose in the past.
(4) Pradhan Mantri Gramin Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
For the 12th Plan the Department had proposed an allocation of
Rs. 2,12,000 crore. The Planning Commission has allocated Rs. 24,000
crore for the current financial year i.e. 2012-13 whereas allocation in
2011-12 was Rs. 20,000 crore.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee find that under the Socio-Economic and Caste
Census, 2011, the eligibility and entitlements of the households will be
determined only after the survey is completed and the Expert
Committee have given their recommendations on the methodology.
The Committee are unhappy to note that there is an element of
ambiguity on the part of Department in making available the BPL list
soon after the completion of survey under SECC. In this connection,
the most vital aspect with regard to BPL was identification of genuine
poor in the BPL list. Though the Department has informed that under
the SECC, the margine of inclusion/exlusion has been significantly

20
reduced and the automatic exclusion criteria also reduces the possibility
of trespass of ineligible households into the BPL list. The Committee
would like to be ensured that through proposed exclusion mechanism
no genuine BPL family is left out from the list. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that appropriate checks and balances should be
ensured by the Department so that the entire exercise would facilitate
the formulation of improved social welfare schemes for the needy
rural populace of the country.
Reply of the Government
In the ongoing Socio Economic and Caste Census-2011, a series of
measures has been put in place to ensure that there is no misreporting.
All data will be entered in a hand held devices which will greatly
reduce the chances of data entry errors, and no possibility of
interpolation or falsification of information. The information captured
in the hand held device will be read out to the respondent who will
verify it. The data collected will be verified by in the Panchayat. After
all the information is collected from an Enumeration Block, a draft
publication list will be prepared for verification and the list will be
read out at the Gram Sabha in all rural areas. Any person can file
claims/objections and information furnished before designated officers
for the purpose. The draft list will be made available at the Gram
Panchayat, Block Development Office, Charge Centre and District
Collector’s Offices. The list will also be uploaded on the NIC/State
Governments, etc. websites. The methodology is expected to ensure
that no poor or deprived household will be excluded from coverage
under the different Government programmes and schemes.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee find that MGNREGA is a flagship programme of
the Government which aims at providing livelihood security of people
in rural areas by guaranteeing at least 100 days of wage employment
in a financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer
to do unskilled manual work. The Committee note with concern that
as against the minimum of 100 days of work, the Department could
provide an average of 42 days of work during the fiscal year 2011-12.
They further find that during the previous years, the number of days
of work provided under the scheme was 47 days in 2010-11 and
54 days in 2009-10. The Committee are constrained to believe that the
basic methods of assessment of demand are flawed due to which the

21
number of days of employment are receding. The Committee are further
dismayed to note that number of work days in States like Bihar, Uttar
Pradesh was as low as 31 as if people did not need any work. Similarly,
in populated States like Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, the percentage of
families who got 100 days work was less than 10 per cent. It appears
that in the name of ‘demand driven’, no real efforts are made at local
level to ensure that work is given to the people. The Committee are
also not very sure about the involvement of Panchayats/Gram Sabhas
in the matter. The Committee, therefore, would like the Government
to re-examine the entire implementation process including creation of
durable assets to take remedial measures.
Reply of the Government
The objective of MGNREGA is to supplement the income of a
rural household and it is not intended to be the sole means of earning
livelihood for the rural population. It is demand driven and households
holding job cards are required to demand employment following a
prescribed process. The workers are free to avail any other employment
opportunities available to them. Provisions of MGNREGA are effected
as demand driven schemes, to be prepared and implemented by the
State Governments and it is the responsibility of the State Governments
concerned to provide the number of days of employment guaranteed
under Section 3 of the Act, if demanded. As employment is provided
on demand, households provided employment and persondays
generated under MGNREGA by the States/UTs depend on demand
for employment.
Section 16(1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) provides that Gram Panchayats shall be
responsible for identification of projects in the Gram Panchayat area to
be taken up under the scheme as per the recommendations of the
Gram Sabha and Ward Sabhas. Section 13(1) of MGNREGA provides
that the Panchayats at district, intermediate and village levels shall be
the principal authorities for planning and implementation of the
schemes made under the Act. Panchayats have been given a pivotal
role in the planning and implementation of projects under MGNREGA.
The Act [Section 16(5)] mandates that the Programme Officer shall
allot at least 50% of the works in terms of cost to be implemented
through Gram Panchayats. However, involvement of Gram Panchayats
would depend on their capacities, pro-activeness and of extent of
autonomy and assertions exercised by them.
After review of MGNREGA operational Guidelines, recently a large
number of additional activities/works have been included in
Schedule-I of the Act vide notification dated 4.5.2012 to broaden scope

22
of works under MGNREGA. The availability of more works under
MGNREGA is expected to increase the number of persondays.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee’s examination of the works taken up under
MGNREGA, average wage per day person and average earning per
household per year has revealed that there is a mismatch in the
deliverables. For instance, during 2009-10, 46.17 lakh works were taken
up by the implementing agencies and on the basis of average wage of
Rs. 90 per day per person, the yearly earning per household was
Rs. 4860. Similarly, during the fiscal year 2011-12 (upto 15 March,
2012), 68.27 lakh works were taken up under MGNREGA i.e., an
increase of around 48 percent and the average wage has also increased
to Rs. 117 per day per person. However, the yearly earning per
household has decreased to Rs. 4289 and taking into inflation, this
would be even much less in real terms. The Committee are unhappy
to find that MGNREGA is beset with fundamental problems with
regard to attainment of objectives for which the scheme was launched
as a major programme of the Department to give work for minimum
100 days to a family. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department should find ways and means to ensure that there is not
only yearly increase in the works to be taken up under the scheme
but also appreciation in the average earning per household by
increasing the number of work days.
Reply of the Government
During 2011-12 (up to 16 May, 2012), 74.14 lakh works (now and
spill over from previous year) were taken up under MGNREGA and
yearly earning per household has increased to Rs. 4975, as compared
to 46.17 lakh works taken up by implementing agencies during 2009-
10 and the yearly earning per household of Rs. 4860.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee note that SGSY has been rechristened as Ajeevika-
NRLM to implement it in mission mode in a phased manner for
targeted and time bound delivery of results. However, the Committee

23
observe that ambitious mission of the Department is running behind
the schedule. The Committee find that so far twenty-one States and
one UT have set up State level society as SRLM for implementation of
NRLM, whereas, only Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Kerala have
submitted State Perspective Plans and Action Plans for which fund
have been released by the Department during the year 2011-12. The
Committee also note that most of the States except Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar and Kerala are yet to set up dedicated State Project Management
Units (SPMUs), District Programme Management Units (DPMUs) and
Block Programme Management Units (BPMUs). The Committee also
observe that federation of SHGs have not been established at any
level in States/UTs except in Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Odisha, Bihar,
Tamil Nadu and Madhya Pradesh. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the department should take immediate steps in
coordination with State Governments concerned for establishment of
necessary mechanism for time bound achievement of objectives of
NRLM.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry agrees with the comments of the Standing Committee
that in some of the States the implementation of NRLM is running
behind schedule.
For a State to become NRLM compliant, first they have to set up
a new society or designate an existing society as the State Rural
Livelihoods Mission (SRLM). A CEO and a State Project Management
Unit (SPMU) must be positioned in the SRLM. The State’s poverty
reduction action plan should be prepared and submitted to the Ministry.
Several steps are required to be taken in order to complete these
activities. These require inter-departmental consultations and approvals
of the State cabinet. These are all time consuming processes. The action
plans also have to go through a process of desk appraisal and field
appraisal by the Ministry before they can be placed before the
Empowered Committee (EC) of NRLM in the Ministry. Once the plans
are approved by the EC, funds are released to the State Society by the
Ministry for NRLM implementation.
During 2012-13, Annual Action Plans (AAPs) of 7 States have been
approved by the Empowered Committee. These are in addition to the
AAPs of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar & Kerala that were approved during
2011-12. The funds have been released to the State Societies of these
States. These States are in process of implementation of NRLM.
The draft AAPs 2012-13 have also been submitted by 12 other
States. The Ministry has examined these AAPs and communicated the
observations on these plans to the States. These States are now in the

24
process of finalising their AAPs. It is expected that during 2012-13, the
action plans of these States will also be approved by the EC and the
implementation of NRLM will be started in these States. The remaining
States/UTs are in the process of transitions from SGSY to NRLM. It is
expected that most of the remaining States will transit to NRLM by
the end of the financial year 2012-13.
The Ministry is making all the efforts for systematic implementation
of NRLM and time bound achievement of objectives of NRLM. The
Ministry has set up a National Mission Management Unit (NMMU)
by inducting professionals and thematic experts of various streams
under NRLM for providing technical assistance to all States/UTs for
facilitating them in setting up of State Rural Livelihoods Mission,
preparation of Annual Action Plans, identification of intensive districts/
blocks and preparation of various Manuals etc.
Keeping in view that NRLM is a process oriented scheme, the
implementation of the scheme within a State will be done in phases.
The States will start work for setting up of federation in the villages/
blocks as per the phasing strategy of the scheme.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee also note that during the Eleventh Plan, about
Rs. 11,160 crore were released under SGSY/NRLM by the Central
Government and about Rs. 18,000 crore was provided as loan to SHGs.
However, the Committee are surprised to find that even after incurring
huge expenditure under the scheme, the Department does not have
any mechanism to track the progress of beneficiaries who have availed
loan/subsidy under the scheme. The Committee feel that in the absence
of any mechanism to track the progress of beneficiaries, there would
not be any accountability with regard to enormous expenditure incurred
by the Ministry. The Committee are of considered view that tracking
and monitoring of progress of beneficiaries should be a fundamental
requirement for assessing the utility of expenditure made by the
Government for reduction of poverty which is one of its stated
objectives. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
Department should expedite the process of completion of online
monitoring system for tracking the progress of beneficiaries as planned
under NRLM without further loss of time.

25
Reply of the Government
One of the weaknesses of SGSY was that a formal mechanism at
the central level for tracking the progress of beneficiaries (who have
availed loan/subsidy under the scheme) was missing. At the level of
Block banks only records regarding credit and subsidy disbursed to
the beneficiaries. Similar was condition at district and State levels.
There as no continuous monitoring of the well being of the
beneficiaries. One of major reasons being that there was no staff
dedicated for SGSY implementation at block level. These defects are
being rectified in NRLM.
Under NRLM, Monitoring of the programme will be done in three
way— (i) through the community institutions i.e. the federations of
SHGs at various levels; (ii) through the dedicated support structure
provided at the various levels in the States; and (iii) an ICT based
MIS and M&E systems.
(i) Monitoring through Institutions of the Poor (IoPs): Under
NRLM federations of SHGs will be set up at various levels.
These federations will provide the continous hand-holding
support to the SHGs and will also undertake monitoring
of their activities. Mechanisms for monitoring by these
institutions will be put in place. In addition, the IoPs will
also be involved in social audit of the programme.
(ii) Monitoring through the dedicated implementation
structure: NRLM provides for a dedicated implementation
structure for programme implementation right from State
level to block level. The professionals at each level will, in
addition to forming and hand-holding the SHGs and their
federations will also monitor their progress.
(iii) e-NRLMS: Under NRLM the Ministry is in process of
developing complete ICT based system e-NRLMS which
will include a Management Information System (MIS), Fund
Management System (FMS) and a Monitoring and
Evaluation System ( M&ES). This will enable NRLM to
collect all the relevant information regarding the
beneficiaries including monitoring of the progress of the
beneficiaries who have availed bank credit.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

26
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee find that under PMGSY (including Bharat Nirman),
the physical performance was not at all satisfactory. For example,
regarding habitations under new connectivity, the Department could
achieve 52 per cent of the targets, regarding length of new connectivity,
the Department could achieve 56 per cent of the targets. Further
for upgradation, against the targets of 3,74,844 habitations, only
1,37,634 habitations have been achieved till February, 2012. The
Committee apprehend that with the current pace of implementation of
PMGSY, the department may not be able to achieve the objective of
providing all-weather road connectivity to the rural areas of the country
in the near future. They, therefore, recommend that immediate corrective
steps be initiated by the Government in this regard and the Committee
be apprised accordingly. The Committee also recommend that the
Ministry should also address the specific problems of States like Kerala
where the existing guidelines are hampering the progress of work so
that unconnected habitations are appropriately connected.
Reply of the Government
It is true that 52% of the habitations were connected upto February,
2012. However, against the target of 1,58,849 habitations eligible for
connecting under PMGSY, 1,14,433 habitations were cleared upto
February, 2012 which comes to 72%. Out of this, 82,478 habitations
were connected and remaining 31,955 habitations were at various stages
of getting connected. Similarly, 76% of the total eligible road length i.e.
2,79,811 km. was sanctioned upto February, 2012. Out of which,
2,05,927 km. was constructed and construction of remaining 73,884
km. of road length under PMGSY was at various stages of completion.
As regards Upgradation, the target of 3,74,844 km. road length as
mentioned in the para includes renewal also which is to be done by
the State Governments. The target of the Central Government is for
Upgradation of 2,24,841 km. of road length against which 1,64,096 km.
has been sanctioned (73%). Out of this, 1,37,701 km. was completed
and remaining 26,394 km. at various stages of completion.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter-I of the Report)

27
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee note that during the Eleventh Plan period, against
the target of providing financial assistance to 1.39 crore BPL families
for construction of houses, financial assistance was provided to
1.15 crore BPL families leaving a huge backlog of about 24 lakh BPL
families. The Committee also note that various Schemes such as TSC,
RGGVY, Aam Aadmi Bima Yojna, Rashtriya Swastha Bima Yojna, etc.
of other Ministries/Departments have been converged with IAY.
However, on perusal of available information on convergence under
IAY for the period 2011-12, the Committee find that against the target
of about 27 lakh families, only 2,87,641 benificiaries under TSC,
15406 benificiaries under RGGVY, 88,097 beneficiaries under Life
Insurance Scheme, 1,85,384 beneficiaries under Health scheme,
1,613 beneficiaries under bio-gas plant and 2,17,166 beneficiaries under
smokeless chullah scheme have availed benefits of convergence under
IAY. The Committee are of the view that poor performance of
implementing agencies on this count shows lack of awareness among
the beneficiaries regarding the inherent provision of this scheme. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the department should initiate
proactive steps to spread awareness amongst the rural populace so
that they could avail benefits associated with IAY.
Reply of the Government
Total outlay in the 11th Five-Year Plan (2007-2012) under
Rural Housing was initially Rs. 26882.21 crore, against which
Rs. 41997.50 crore were provided. The 11th Plan document had aimed
for construction of 150 lakh houses over the period of five years from
2007-2012. However, with an allocation of Rs. 26882.21 crore for total
11th Plan Period and with the then existing financial assistance of
Rs. 25,000 (plain areas) and Rs. 27,500 (difficult and hilly areas), only
137 lakh houses could have been constructed as fund allocation was
not corresponding to the physical target. Further, with the increase in
financial assistance twice over last four years from Rs. 25,000 (plain
areas) and Rs. 27,500 (hilly areas) to Rs. 35,000 (Plain areas) and
Rs. 37,500 (for hilly and difficult areas) w.e.f. 1st April, 2008 and to
Rs. 45,000 in plain areas and Rs. 48,500 (for hilly and difficult areas)
w.e.f. 1st April, 2010, the physical target got reduced further. Therefore
only 139.83 lakh houses were expected to be constructed over
11th Plan period against target of 150 lakh houses even when initial
allocation of Rs. 26882.21 crore for 11th Plan actually turned out to be
Rs. 41977.50 crore. The physical target got further reduced as
78 LWE districts were treated as difficult areas and were made eligible
for higher rate of unit assistance provided to hilly/difficult areas.

28
On convergence of IAY with other schemes, it is stated that the
numbers given for convergence may be an under estimate as in most
cases uploaded data is not exhaustive.
The recommendation of the Committee on initiating proactive steps
to spread awareness among the rural populace about the various
inherent benefits of the scheme have been noted for compliance.
However, it may be stated that the Ministry has put all the information
about convergence of IAY with other schemes on the Ministry’s website.
Booklets on entitlement of IAY beneficiaries have been printed and
distributed. Audio and video spots have been prepared on IAY and
are being circulated and publicized. Informative programmes have also
been broadcast on radio. Training has been imparted to field level
officers so that they in turn can disseminate information to the
beneficiaries.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
The Committee find that Homestead Scheme launched under IAY
is a pragmatic effort by the Department to provide land to rural BPL
households who do not have any land to construct houses. However,
the Committee find that the scheme has been declared as ‘demand
driven’ and only 9,93,205 sites have been allotted/regularized to
landless rural BPL households in 9 States since the inception of the
scheme. The Committee further observe that no estimates have been
put forth by the Department for Twelfth Plan and they intend to meet
demand for funds from the normal allocation under the scheme. The
Committee have experienced that by making any programme as
‘Demand Driven’, there would not be any pre-determined target and,
therefore, whatever deliverable are attained by the organization within
a specified timeframe are regarded and brought under the category of
achievements. The accountability of optimum utilization of scarce
resources also gets vitiated due to the fact that lower utilization of
funds is often co-related with lower generation of demand. The
Committee are constrained to mention that in order to camouflage the
administrative inefficiency and/or fundamental conceptual flaw in the
schemes, almost every centrally sponsored scheme of the government
is now being transformed to a demand driven approach. The
Committee are of considered view that the Homestead Scheme would
not be able to deliver the desired results if the scheme continue to be
operated on the demand driven mode. The Committee, therefore,

29
recommend that a quick study should be initiated by the Department
to pragmatically analyse the shortcomings of the demand driven
approach of scheme so that timely action for re-transforming the scheme
to target-oriented approach may be taken. The Committee urge the
Government to take the desired steps and apprise the Committee
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
As per NSSO’s estimates, there are 7.7 million rural BPL households
who do not have a house site in the country. In order to make these
landless BPL households eligible for a house, the house-site scheme
was launched by the Government. However, the land to these landless
BPL people has to be provided by the State Governments and the
States are incentivised by allocating additional physical targets equal
to the number of homestead sites provided by regularization of existing
occupied land, allotment of Government land or purchase/acquisition
of land, as the case may be. All the State governments were asked to
submit proposals in this regard. The States which have submitted
proposals in this regard were released funds accordingly. While it was
expected that the State Governments will meet the needs of homestead
sites for all the eligible target groups by 2011-12, the progress in most
States has been slow. The key reasons attributed to the current status
have been inadequate assistance provided given the high cost of land
and as well as insufficient coordination between different Departments
involved in the final access to homestead and house by the family.
However, as recommended by the Committee, steps have been
initiated to get a study done to analyse the shortcoming of the scheme
pragmatically and retransform it from demand driven to target driven
scheme.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
The Committee note that the issue of enhancement of financial
assistance up to Rs. 75,000 and loan facility up to Rs. 50,000 with
repayment period of 15 years for BPL rural households for construction
of house has been pending before the Committee (Group of Officers).
The Committee are of considered view that financial assistance of
Rs. 45000 for plain areas and Rs. 48,500 for Hilly Areas and LWE
Districts is too meagre to construct a house in view of increasing cost

30
of construction material in the country. The committee are of the view
that financial assistance under IAY should be appropriately enhanced
and it may also be linked with Consumer Price Index for automatic
periodic revision. The Committee also desire that decision on
enhancement of assistance and loan facility under IAY as recommended
by the Working Group on Rural Housing for Twelfth Five Year Plan
be expedited by the Committee (Group of Officers). Considering the
proposed hike in assistance per units, the Committee feel that increased
outlay of Rs. 11075 crore for the year 2012-13 from Rs. 10000 crore in
2011-12 may not be adequate to achieve the set goals.
Reply of the Government
The final report of the Working Group for Rural Housing for the
12th Five Year plan has been submitted to the Planning Commission
on 13.10.2011. A committee of Group of Officers on IAY (GOIAY) has
been constituted by the Planning Commission to examine the
recommendations of the Working Group on Rural Housing for the
12th Five Year Plan and to suggest changes in IAY in the 12th Five
Year Plan. It has been proposed to enhance unit assistance for house
construction under IAY to Rs. 75,000 and that unit assistance be
enhanced incrementally each year to absorb escalation in cost of
materials and labour.
The issue of enhancement of allocation for Indira Aawas Yojana
for the 12th Five Year Plan was placed before the Planning Commission.
The budget proposed for the year 2012-13 i.e. the first year of
12th Five Year Plan was Rs. 28569.90 crore (as grant for 15 million
houses and subsidy for 5 million houses). However, against this,
Planning Commission has allocated Rs. 11075 crores for Indira Awaas
Yojana.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 2.18)
The Committee note that NSAP comprising of five schemes namely
Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS), Indira
Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme (IGNWPS), Indira Gandhi
National Disabled Pension Scheme (IGNDPS), National Family Benefit
Scheme (NFBS) and Annapurna is being implemented as Additional
Central Assistance to State Plan. The funds for NSAP and Annapurna
are allocated by the Planning Commission and are released as
Additional Central Assistance (ACA) by the Ministry of Finance to the
State and by the Ministry of Home Affairs to the Union Territories on

31
recommendation of the Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee
also note that an amount of Rs. 24349.59 crore was released to the
States during Eleventh Plan period against which the States could
utilize only Rs. 21585.85 crore. The Committee find that as per 2001
Census, the total number of old age, widows and disabled persons in
the country were 7.7 crore, 3.43 crore and 2.15 crore respectively,
whereas, assistance was provided to 1.92 crore old age people, 36.04
lakh widows and 7.69 lakh disabled persons during 2011-12 under the
relevant schemes of NSAP. The Committee are of considered view that
in order to cover all needy persons under the relevant scheme, a
comprehensive record should be maintained at District level to enroll
each eligible person under these categories. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should take up the matter with the
Planning Commission for transforming NSAP as a model programme
for the welfare of needy people.
Reply of the Government
As per the latest information, during the eleventh plan States have
reported expenditure of Rs. 22656.89 crore.
Under the pension schemes of NSAP , central assistance is provided
to only persons belonging to household living the Below Poverty Line
(BPL) as per the criteria prescribed by Government of India. Further,
as mentioned above, NSAP is under State Plan. States have been given
flexibility in implementation of schemes under NSAP . Identification of
beneficiaries, sanction of pensions and disbursement are done by the
concerned State Government. Universal coverage of all eligible persons
is envisaged under all three pension schemes.
The recommendation of transforming NSAP as a model programme
for the welfare of needy people is being taken up with the Planning
Commission as directed.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 2.19)
The Committee note that NIRD as an autonomous body under the
Ministry of Rural Development for organizing courses on
developmental issues, capacity building of rural development and
Panchayati Raj functionaries. The Committee note that NIRD has
conducted 3132 training programmes as against the target of 2911
training programmes during Eleventh Plan period. The Committee also

32
note that 2941 elected representatives of PRIs have been trained in
98 training programmes organized by NIRD. The Committee are of
view that training programmes organized for PRIs are not adequate in
view of vast number of elected representatives of PRIs in the country.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should take
steps for organizing more training programmes for elected
representatives of PRIs. The Committee are of considered view that
NIRD should provide a platform to elected representatives of PRIs
where they can interact and share their experiences. The Committee
also desire that NIRD should organize symposium on relevant topics
on rural development involving elected members of PRIs.
Reply of the Government
National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) has proposed
22 programmes during 2012-13, out of which three programmes will
be conducted in Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand States,
exclusively for elected representatives of PRIs.
NIRD is also planning to organize regional programmes for elected
representatives of PRIs at various SIRDs/ETCs.
NIRD is taking steps to mobilize more elected representatives of
PRIs for participation by writing to the State Governments.
As suggested, NIRD will also take steps to organize symposium
on Rural Development involving elected members of PRIs.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 2.20)
The committee observe that Vigilance & Monitoring Committee
(V&MCs), as a means of monitoring mechanism, provide crucial role
for the elected representatives of Parliament, State Legislatures and
PRIs in reviewing the implementation of various rural development
programmes. However, the Committee note that adequate co-operation
is not being extended to States and District level V&MCs. The
Committee also note that 4 States/UTs namely Punjab, Goa,
Lakshadweep and Puducherry are yet to re-constitute State Level
V&MCs, whereas, District level V&MCs have not been reconstituted
in 71 Districts after the constitution of Fifteenth Lok Sabha. This
anomalous position has hampered monitoring process of various rural
development programmes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that

33
the Department should impress upon the States for expeditious
constitution of State & District V&MCs. The Committee further observe
that meetings of both State and District level V&MCs are not being
held quarterly as provided in the guidelines of V&MCs. The Committee
note that none of the States have held the stipulated number of
meetings during the entire Eleventh Plan period, whereas, only six
Districts have held the stipulated four meetings in the year 2011-2012.
The Committee have been informed that reasons for less number of
meetings as reported by the States/Districts, include delay on the part
of Chairman in indicating the date(s) for holding the meeting,
postponement due to inability of the Chairman to attend meeting,
preoccupation of Member Secretary etc. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the Department should frame a schedule of
V&MCs meetings at State & District level in consultation with Members
of Parliament including Members of Rajya Sabha, State Legislatures
and PRIs so that the entire process is streamlined and intended benefits
start trickling down at the ground level. The Committee also
recommend that due representation of SCs, STs should be provided in
V&MCs.
Reply of the Government
After the formation of 15th Lok Sabha, the Ministry advised all
State Governments/District administrations to reconstitute the
Committees vide order dated 26th August 2009 and nominated
Chairman/Co-Chairman for district V&MCs. The guidelines have
subsequently been revised and a provision has also been made in the
guidelines to make the Member Secretary of the Committees personally
responsible for convening the Meetings. The importance of
re-constitution of V&MCs at State and District levels and holding
regular meetings, at stipulated intervals, is invariably stressed in the
Performance Review Committee Meetings, which are held on a
quarterly basis, with State Secretaries of Rural Development. This point
was again re-iterated in the Performance Review Committee Meeting
held on 31st May—1st June 2012. Further, all the States/UTs have
been individually addressed on 5th June 2012 advising them to ensure
that V&MCs are re-constituted at all States/UTs at both State level
and District level and four meetings are held every year. The States/
UTs have also been reminded that the guidelines allow the Member
Secretaries to convene the Meeting within 15 days of end of each
quarter, in consultation with Co-Chairman, if the Chairman failed to
indicate a date for the Meeting during the quarter. They have also
been reminded that the Member Secretary shall be personally
responsible for convening Meetings.

34
The Ministry is of the view that scheduling of the meetings at
State/District levels in each State/UT/District, in advance, by the
Ministry may not deliver the desired results, as holding the Meeting
depends primarily on the convenience of the Chairman, which changes
from time to time.
The guidelines of V&MC already stipulate that one representative
each of SC/ST is to be nominated to the district level Committee by
the Chairman in consultation with other Members of Parliament in
the Committee. Also, all the Members of the State Legislative Assembly
elected from the district, including those belonging to SC/ST, are
members of the district level Committee. At the State level, Managing
Director/Head of SC/ST Development Corporation is a member.
Therefore, SC/ST segments already have representation in the
Committees at both State and district levels.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 2.21)
The Committee are constrained the note that even after persistent
recommendations by the Committee, there have been huge amounts
lying unspent in all the programmes being implemented by the
Department. In this connection, the Committee note that Rs. 1204.04
crore in NRLM, Rs. 7703.77 crore in IAY, Rs. 17968.59 crore in
MGNREGS and Rs. 8713.00 crore in PMGSY have been lying as unspent
as on 31.12.2011. The Committee have been informed that proposals
for release of second instalment with necessary financial documents
after reaching the prescribed expenditure level of 60 percent of total
available funds were not received from certain States/Districts. The
Committee feel that in order to ascertain the exact position State-wise,
a study be conducted in different on-going programmes in order to
ascertain the reasons for accumulation of unspent balances with the
States especially the aspect of complacency on the part of the
implementing authorities. Needless to point out that there should be
a fund release/utilization tracking system which should be online and
has access to village Panchayats.
Reply of the Government
Actions have been initiated by the Programme Divisions to
undertake a study, as recommended by the Standing Committee. The
Study shall be completed within six months.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

35
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
-NIL-

36
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee are also deeply disturbed that Government is yet
to effectively implement Section 7 of MGNREGA which stipulates the
provision of unemployment allowance to households if the work they
seek is not given. In cases where work is not given, the unemployment
allowance should be provided by the State Government and Central
Government should also contribute for the purpose.
Reply of the Government
The provisions in Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) are effected through Schemes to be
formulated by States under Section 4(1) of the Act. All State
Governments are required to make wage payments including payment
of unemployment allowance to the beneficiaries in accordance with
the provisions of MGNREG Act. Payment of unemployment allowance
to entitled MGNREGA applicants is a legal requirement as per various
provisions in the Act. As per Section 7(3) to 7(6) of the Act, liability
for payment of unemployment allowance is on the concerned State
Government and it is to be sanctioned and disbursed by the Programme
Officer or such local authority as the State Governments may notify.
Payment of unemployment allowance shall be made not later than
15 days from the date on which it becomes due and the procedure for
payment of unemployment allowance is to be prescribed by the State
Governments. As per the provisions of section 22(2), the State
Governments are required to meet the cost of unemployment allowance
payable under their respective schemes. The States/UTs have been
advised from time to time to comply with the provisions in the Act
regarding payment of unemployment allowance to entitled workers
following the same pattern as the payment of wages.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report)

37
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
In view of less number of days of work, it is not surprising to the
Committee that as against Rs. 40,000 crore that was allocated during
2011-12, the actual utilization of fund was to the tune of around
Rs. 27,350 crore. The Committee are not happy over the dismal financial
performance of the scheme, particularly when the implementation of
MGNREGA is the joint responsibility of the Central as well as the
State Governments. They find it disappointing and deplorable that, on
the one hand, the Ministry pleads helplessness on account of lower
allocation of funds, while, on the other hand, they are unable to utilize
the available resources by observing strict financial discipline. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Rural
Development should draw a realistic plan of action to ensure funds
available to MGNREGA do not remain unutilized.
Reply of the Government
MGNREGA is a demand driven and funds are released to Districts/
States on the basis of agreed to Labour Budget. Under MGNREGA,
provisions are laid down for formulation of a labour budget. In the
month of December every year, the District Programme Coordinator
(DPC) under MGNREGA considers the advance plans to prepare a
labour budget for the next financial year containing the details of
anticipated demand for unskilled manual work in the district and the
plan for engagement of labourers in the works covered under the
scheme for approval of District Panchayat.
The Gram Panchayat has to forward the development plan with
its priorities to the Programme Officer for preliminary scrutiny and
approval prior to the commencement of the year in which it is
proposed to be executed. The Programme Officer has to consolidate
the Gram Panchayat proposals and the proposals of the Intermediate
Panchayat into a block plan and after the approval of the Intermediate
Panchayat, forward it to the District Programme Coordinator. The DPC
will consolidate the Block Plans and proposals from other implementing
agencies and the District Panchayat will approve the block-wise shelf
of projects. Under the Act, Central Government is committed to bear
the entire expenditure towards wages paid to the unskilled manual
workers along with other expenditure as per the provisions of the Act.
The total expenditure as reported by States/UTs for 2011-12 was
Rs. 37656.83 crore as reported till 16.5.2012 by States/UTs on
MGNREGA Management Information System (MIS).
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

38
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
On the issue of availability of funds for PMGSY, the Committee
find that during the Tenth and Eleventh Plan periods, the Department
has not been able to get the requisite support from the Planning
Commission. For instance, for the Tenth Plan (2002-07), the Department
proposed an allocation of Rs. 55,000 crore, whereas, the Planning
Commission had approved a plan outlay of Rs. 12,500 crore only.
Similarly, for the Eleventh Plan (2007-12), the Department proposed an
allocation of Rs. 81,801 crore, whereas, the Planning Commission had
approved a Plan outlay of Rs. 59,751 crore. For the Twelfth Plan and
the funds allocated for the first year of the Plan viz., 2012-13, the
Committee are dismayed to note that though the Department had
proposed an allocation of Rs. 2.12 lakh crore for the Twelfth Plan, the
Planning Commission has allocated a meagre Rs. 24,000 crore for the
fiscal year 2012-13 and at this level, Twelfth Plan allocation will come
to about Rs. 1.20 lakh crore. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Planning Commission should find ways and means of making
available higher allocation in the Twelfth Plan for PMGSY particularly
when the scheme has been opened for the states for covering
habitations with population below the 1000 set under Bharat Nirman
in stages i.e., 500-900, 250-499 based on coverage of higher category.
This was earlier stopped by the Government in the name of Bharat
Nirman norms and this has added to the backlog of pending
connectivity to habitations through pucca roads.
Reply of the Government
The position of demand for 10th, 11th and 12th Five Year Plan,
approved outlay and the actual allocation, is as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
  Five Year Plan Demand of Approved Actual allocation
the Ministry outlay
10th Five Year Plan 55,000 12,500 17,786
11th Five Year Plan 81,801 59,751 86,120 (86,101.25)*
12th Five Year Plan 2,12,000 Not yet decided 24,000 against demand
of 30,000 for the year
2012-13.
*The Budgetary Outlay for PMGSY for the year 2011-12 was reduced by Rs. 18.75 crore
at RE stage due to less receipt of Cess amount.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

39
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 26 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.17)
The Committee note that PURA scheme was started as a pilot
project 2003-04 and continued till 2009-10. The Government restructured
PURA in 2010 and decided to initiate new pilot project in PPP mode,
wherein, the private developers will be awarded projects on meeting
certain specified criteria. The Committee further note that Rs. 156.20
crore was released to DRDA during 2010-11 and 2011-12 for
implementation of PURA. Apart from this, Rs. 30 crore were released
in 2009-10 for pilot project undertaken during 2004-05 to 2006-07.
However, the Committee are dismayed to find that no concrete
infrastructure has been created in any of the pilot projects. The
Committee are of considered view that a period of nine years for any
scheme to continue on a pilot project mode is sufficient to weigh the
pros and corns in entirely and therefore, there is no need to run PURA
scheme again on a pilot mode. The Committee, therefore, are not
satisfied with the way this important scheme is being handled and
recommend that more action-oriented approach is called for and the
Ministry would take conclusive action in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas scheme was
initially implemented on a pilot basis for three years, from the
year 2004-05 to 2006-07. During this period and subsequently steps
were taken to restructure the scheme. The budgetary provision for the
year 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 were Rs. 10.00 crore, Rs. 30.00 crore
and Rs. 30.00 crore respectively. Funds were not released in these
years as the scheme was being restructured.
The restructured PURA scheme was approved for implementation
under PPP mode by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA)
on 21.01.2010. The restructured PURA scheme proposes holistic and
accelerated development of compact areas around a potential growth
centre in a Gram Panchayat (or a group of Gram Panchayats) through
Public Private Partnership (PPP) framework for providing livelihood
opportunities and urban amenities to improve the quality of life in
rural areas.
The rolling out of the restructured PURA scheme was initiated by
formulation of Guidelines. Subsequently, a notice was issued inviting
Expression of Interest (EoI) from private sector entities for selecting

40
the private partners. 93 EoIs were received out of which
45 organizations qualified at the EoI Stage. After the RFP stage
evaluations were complete, only nine organizations could submit
14 proposals out of which 11 proposals qualified. The concerned private
entities were asked to submit to Detailed Project Report (DPR). In
response, 6 organizations submitted 9 DPRs. An experts group
evaluated the DPRs and suggested many improvements. The qualified
bidders have been requested to submit the revised DPRs by 30th
September 2011. Inter-Ministerial Empowered Committee has approved
two projects in Kerala, i.e. Thalikulam and Thirurangadi cluster which
have been inaugurated on 24.2.2012. Efforts are being made to launch
the remaining projects in the coming months.
Thus, the restructured Scheme is being implemented on pilot basis
effectively from 21.1.2010. Budgetary provision of the scheme is
Rs. 248 crore for the 11th Plan period. Of the allocation of Rs. 124
crore for the year 2010-11 an amount of Rs. 66.24 crore was released
to the DRDAs. The allocation for the year 2011-12 was Rs. 100 crore
of which an amount of Rs. 90 crore was released to DRDAs. The
remaining Rs. 10 crore pertaining to the North-Eastern States has been
surrendered as no proposals were received for these States. The two
projects inaugurated in Kerala are under ‘condition precedent period’
(six months from the date of signing of agreement) and the creation
of assets will start after this period. Concentrated efforts are being
made to bring the remaining pilot projects for consideration by the
Empowered Committee.
The Working Group constituted by the Planning Commission has
also suggested for taking up of 10-12 more pilot projects during the
12th Plan. Accordingly, this Ministry has called for ‘Expression of
Interest’ from private developers for PURA 2.0 and the last date of
submission of EoIs is 6th August, 2012.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter-I of the Report)

41
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
Rural Development is the core to sustainable and inclusive growth
through a multi-pronged strategy for eradication of poverty by
increasing livelihood opportunities, providing social safety net and
developing infrastructure for growth and improvement of quality of
life of rural populace. For inclusive growth, participative development
through Panchayati Raj Institutions as mandated by Part IX of the
constitution is essential. Under this backdrop, the Committee note that
various schemes/programmes of rural development have not received
the desired level of allocation of funds from the Planning Commission
during the 11th Plan period (2007-12). For instance, as against the
proposal of about Rs. 3.97 lakh crore for Eleventh Plan, the Ministry
received only Rs. 2.90 lakh crore. Coming to the utilization, the
Committee are concerned to note that the overall performance of the
Department has not been encouraging. For instance, against the
available allocation of around Rs. 2.90 lakh crore, the total expenditure
during Eleventh Plan was around 2.78 lakh crore leaving about
Rs. 12000 crore unutilized. Considering the importance of Rural
Development, the Committee feel that there should be higher allocation
for the flagship programmes provided that the department is able to
properly plan their priorities and strategize their work programmes.
They, therefore, recommend that the Department should work out a
two-pronged strategy i.e., to increase their financial-absorption capacity
and thereafter again take up the matter with the Planning Commission
for a realistic higher allocation for the 12th Five Year Plan.
Reply of the Government
(1) Indira Aawas Yojana
Total outlay in the 11th Five-Year Plan (2007-2012) under Rural
Housing was initially Rs. 26882.21 crore, against which Rs. 41997.50
crore were provided. The 11th Plan document had aimed for
construction of 150 lakh houses over the period of five years from
2007-2012. However, with an allocation of Rs. 26882.21 crore for total
11th Plan Period and with the then existing financial assistance of

42
Rs. 25,000 (plain areas) and Rs. 27,500 (difficult and hilly areas), only
137 lakh houses could have been constructed as fund allocation was
not corresponding to the physical target. Further, with the increase in
financial assistance twice over last four years from Rs. 25,000 (plain
areas) and Rs. 27,500 (hilly areas) to Rs. 35,000/- (plain areas) and
Rs. 37,500/- (for hilly and difficult areas) w.e.f. 1st April, 2008 and to
Rs. 45,000/- in plain areas and Rs. 48,500/- (for hilly and difficult
areas) w.e.f. 1st April, 2010, the physical target got reduced further.
Therefore only 139.83 lakh houses were expected to be constructed
over 11th Plan period against target of 150 lakh houses even when
initial allocation of Rs. 26882.21 crore for 11th Plan actually turned out
to be Rs. 41977.50 crore. The physical target got further reduced as
78 Left Wing Extremist Districts [35 Left Wing Extremist districts (LWE)
vide order dated 7.10.2010, 25 Left Wing Extremist districts (LWE)
vide order dated 23.2.2011 and 18 Left Wing Extremist districts (LWE)
vide order dated 10.4.2012] were treated as difficult areas and were
made eligible for higher rate of unit assistance provided to hilly/
difficult areas.
The final report of the working Group for Rural Housing for the
12th Five year Plan has been submitted to the Planning Commission
on 13.10.2011. A committee of Group of Officers on IAY (GOIAY) has
been constituted by the Planning Commission to examine the
recommendations of the Working Group on Rural Housing for the
12th Five Year Plan and to suggest changes in IAY in the 12th Five
Year Plan. It has been proposed to enhance unit assistance for house
construction under IAY to Rs. 75,000 and that unit assistance be
enhanced incrementally each year to absorb escalation in cost of
materials and labour.
The issue of enhancement of allocation for Indira Aawas Yojana
for the 12th Five Year Plan was placed before the Planning Commission.
The budget proposed for the year 2012-13  i.e. the first year of
12th Five Year Plan was Rs. 28569.90 crore (as grant for 15 million
houses and subsidy for 5 million houses). However, against this,
Planning Commission has allocated Rs. 11075 crores for Indira Aawas
Yojana.
(2) Aajeevika—National Rural livelihood Mission
The SGSY has been restructured as National Rural Livelihoods
Mission (NRLM). Under NRLM sensitive and dedicated support
structures at the National, State, district and sub-district levels would
be set up. The Ministry under NRLM has set up National Mission
Management Unit for providing technical assistance to all States/UTs
and facilitating in implementation of the programme. The State
Governments under NRLM will set up State Programme Management
Units at state level, District Programme Management Units at district

43
level, and sub-district units at block and/or cluster levels. These
sensitive and dedicated support structures would have suitable linkages
with PRIs and other line departments. These support structures would
be staffed with professionally competent and dedicated human
resources through appropriate arrangements including partnerships and
outsourcing of services. A clear objective of this support structure is to
incubate an internal sensitive support structure, consisting of the
institutions of the poor, their staff and other social capital. The demand
driven strategies of NRLM and sensitive support structure at various
levels would facilitate the States in implementing NRLM properly and
also increasing the financial absorption capacities.
As NRLM follows a demand driven strategy, the States have the
flexibility to develop their livelihoods-based perspective plans and
annual action plans for poverty reduction.
After taking into account all the requirements of NRLM for the
12th Plan period the Ministry has proposed for an amount of
Rs. 48906 crore this plan period. The Ministry also had discussions
with Planning Commission on providing the proposed outlay to the
Ministry under NRLM for the 12th Plan Period.
(3) Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
(MGNREGA)
MGNREGA provides a legal guarantee for up to 100 days of wage
employment to every household in a financial year for doing unskilled
manual work, on demand to be made following prescribed process.
Provisions of MGNREGA are effected as demand driven schemes, to
be prepared and implemented by State Governments. There is no
allocation of funds to States. MGNREGA is a demand driven and
funds are released to States/UTs based on advance projection of labour
demand by States/UTs and performance in the generation of actual
person days vis-à-vis projected labour demand. Under the Act, Central
Government is legally committed/bound to bear the entire expenditure
towards wages to be paid to unskilled manual workers along with
other expenditure as per provisions of the Act. There has been no
shortage of funds for this purpose in the past.
(4) Pradhan Mantri Gramin Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
PMGSY is implemented through State Governments. Absorption
capacity of the States has increased during the last few years. To sustain
this and to meet cost escalations, adequate funds are required for
achieving the physical targets so that physical pace of implementation
does not slow down.

44
Accordingly financial requirement for the 12th Five Year Plan has
been worked out at Rs. 2,12,000 crore has been submitted to Planning
Commission.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee have been informed that in June, 2011, the Ministry
of Rural Development commenced the Socio Economic and Caste
Census (SECC) through a comprehensive door to door enumeration
across the country. The Committee have also been informed that the
shortcomings of the 2002 BPL Survey are being addressed
comprehensively in the SECC, 2011 with the threefold objectives, namely
(i) to enable households to be ranked based on their socio-economic
status thereby enabling the State Governments to prepare a list of
families living below the poverty line; (ii) to make available authentic
information that will enable caste-wise population enumeration of the
country; and (iii) to make available authentic information regarding
socio-economic condition, and education status of various castes and
sections of the population. The Secretary, Rural Development in his
deposition before the Committee spelt out various facets of delivery
mechanism of the programme viz., automatic inclusion/exclusion
criteria, deprivation indicators, incremental weightage to indicators,
enumeration blocks etc. The Committee find that the pace of the Census
is not progressing as pre-defined targets. Out of total 24.57 lakh
enumeration blocks initially identified by the Government, so far, the
enumeration has been completed only in respect of 10.26 lakh Blocks
i.e., about 42% of the overall target. The Committee are also unhappy
to note that the process of enumeration is still to commence in States
like Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Manipur and Uttar Pradesh. With the current
pace of Census and its uneven coverage, the Committee are not very
sure that the entire exercise which was scheduled to be completed by
June, 2012 would be completed in stipulated time. The Committee,
therefore, are not satisfied with the pace of this programme and
recommend that more action oriented approach including regular
monitoring of the progress made is called for in co-ordination with
the concerned States so that survey could be completed in the right
earnest.

45
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development has been making continuous
efforts to ensure that the Socio Economic and Caste Census 2011 is
completed at the earliest. Close monitoring of the progress of the
Census operation is being made with the States/UTs through visits
and Video Conferencing to sort out the various issues faced by them.
The process of enumeration has since been commenced in the States
of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Manipur and Uttar Pradesh. The enumeration
has been completed in 1591523 Enumeration Blocks out of the total
number of 2482219 EBs, which is 64.12%. The State-wise status of the
progress of SECC 2011 as on 31.07.2012 is given in the Annexure.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee find that the task of restructuring of DRDA was
assigned to a Committee headed by Shri V . Ramachandran which was
to submit its Report by May, 2011. However, the Ramachandran
Committee have submitted its Report to the Ministry of Rural
Development in January, 2012 and the Report is under examination by
the Government. Considering the importance of functioning of DRDA,
the Committee are unhappy to note that the scheme of restructuring
of DRDA, which is one of the main implementing agencies of all rural
development schemes at District level, is still at the infancy stage and
any further delay in implementation of the Ramachandran Committee
Report, the process of merger of District Rural Development Agency
(DRDA) with District Panchayats has not been completed in majority
of States in the country. The Committee recommend that urgent steps
be taken to examine the Report and to implement the recommendations
of Ramachandran Committee Report followed by necessary follow-up
action to expedite the crucial reforms in DRDA Administration Scheme.
Reply of the Government
The comments of the States/UTs on the Report have been received
and examined. The recommendations of the Committee have generally
been accepted by the Government. The main recommendations of the
Committee are:—
(i) The society structure of DRDA should be dissolved
forthwith following due process. The existing staff should
be absorbed by the respective line departments.

46
(ii) District Plan Support Unit (DPSU) to be set up with the
responsibility to prepare a district level holistic anti-poverty
sub-plan converging all the centrally sponsored schemes
directly related to the poverty reduction along with similar
schemes of the state and local governments and oversee
and guide convergent implementation.
(iii) DPSU to be a lean and coherent professional team driven
by a shared vision to eliminate poverty, and it should be
located within the District Planning Committee (DPC) as a
distinct part of its technical secretariat. However, as DPCs
are still in the nascent stage in almost all the states, in the
interim during the period of Twelfth Five Year Plan, this
unit could be part of the Zila Parishad except in States
where DPCs are fully functional.
(iv) Besides preparing anti-poverty sub-plan, DPSU would also
be responsible for capacity building, monitoring and
evaluation, conducting surveys and studies and
documentation of best practices.
(v) In the North-East wherever Autonomous District Councils
(ADCs) are in charge of planning for poverty reduction,
the DPSU would support the ADCs.
[O.M. No. H-11020/05/2012-GC(P) Dated: 16.08.2012, Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
14 December, 2012 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

47
APPENDIX I
GENERAL STATUS OF SECC 2011 AS ON 31 JULY, 2012
Sl. Name of State/ Total EBs % of EBs
No. Union Territories EBs Enumerated Completed
12 3 4 5
1. Puducherry 2,310  2,310 100.00%
2. Daman and Diu  439 439 100.00%
3. Dadra and Nagar  691 691 100.00%
Haveli
4. Chandigarh  2,067  2,067 100.00%
5. Tripura  7,316  7,316 100.00%
6. Haryana  49,261  49,261 100.00%
7. Punjab  52,243  50,712 97.07%
8. Himachal Pradesh  25,036  25,036 100.00%
9. Nagaland  4,078  4,078 100.00%
10. Lakshadweep  117 117 100.00%
11. Karnataka 126,925  126,925 100.00%
12. Rajasthan 138,064  137,292 99.44%
13. Gujarat  113,507  112,569 99.17%
14. Arunachal Pradesh  6,791  6,791 100.00%
15. Chhattisgarh  49,222  49,169 99.89%
16. Sikkim  1,415 1,415 100.00%
17. Andaman and Nicobar  1,198  1,159 96.74%
Islands
18. Andhra Pradesh  192,143  187,738 97.71%
19. Uttarakhand 27,878  27,797 99.71%
20. Jammu and Kashmir 25,200 25,142 99.77%
21. Madhya Pradesh  156,436  155,428 99.36%

48
22. Goa  3,166 3,072 97.03%
23. Meghalaya  9,116 9,052 99.30%
24. Kerala  68,324  68,172 99.78%
25. Tamil Nadu  138,324  133,669 96.63%
26. Delhi 33,324  32,941 98.85%
27. Assam 64,395  61,771 95.93%
28. Mizoram  2,118  2,094 98.87%
29. Maharashtra  223,583  192,976 86.31%
30. West Bengal  178,293  110,124 61.77%
31. Odisha 96,797  82,315 85.04%
32. Jharkhand 71,719  38,349 53.47%
33. Manipur  6,006  2,565 42.71%
34. Bihar 205,859  29,548 14.35%
35. Uttar Pradesh 394,253  29,467 7.47%
Total 2,477,614 1,769,567 71.42%
12 3 4 5

49
APPENDIX II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2012-2013)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 14 DECEMBER, 2012
The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in Committee Room
No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
3. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy
4. Dr. Sanjay Singh
5. Smt. Supriya Sule
6. Smt. Annu Tandon
7. Smt. Usha Verma
8. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
10. Dr. Chandan Mitra
11. Shri C.P . Narayanan
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
4. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary

50
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee convened for consideration of Memoranda
containing draft Reports of the Committee on action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in four Reports on
Demands for Grants (2012-13).
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Action Taken Reports:—
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** ***
(iv) Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Rural Development).
4. Draft Reports were taken up seriatum. After detailed discussions,
the Committee adopted the Reports with minor modifications. The
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid
Reports and present the same to the Parliament.
5. *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

51
APPENDIX III
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTIETH
REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
I. Total number of recommendations: 21
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the 14
Government:
Sl. Nos. 2, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19,
20 and 21
Percentage to total recommendations: (66.67)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not 0
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Sl. No. Nil
Percentage to total recommendations: (0)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of 4
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl. Nos. 7, 8, 13 and 17
Percentage to total recommendations: (19)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies 3
of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, and 5
Percentage to total recommendations: (14.28)