STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                         (2009-2010) 
 
          
 
       FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY) 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]  
 
TWELFTH REPORT  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
12 


TWELFTH  REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2009-2010) 
 
                
       (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
          MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
   (DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY) 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.07.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.07.2010 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2010/Sravana, 1932 (Saka) 
  


CRD No. 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
© 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and C onduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha. 

CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) ......................................  (iii)   
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................  (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................  1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................  7 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply .............................................................................  32 
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee .....................................................  36 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited .....   37 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee  
held on 7 July, 2010……………………………  39 
 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the  
recommendations contained in the Third Report of   
the Committee (15th Lok Sabha)................................ 42 
  

(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2009-2010) 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
   Members 
Lok  Sabha  
1. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
2. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
5. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
6. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
7. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
8. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
9. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
10. Shri Rakesh Pandey 
11. Shri P.L. Punia 
12. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
13. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
14. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu 
15. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
16. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
17. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
18. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh 
19. Shrimati Usha Verma 
20. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
Rajya  Sabha 
21. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar* 
22. Shri Ganga Charan 
23. Shri Silvius Condpan** 
24. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
25. Dr. Ram Prakash 
26. Shri P.R. Rajan 
27. Shri Arjun Singh 
28. Vacant@ 
29. Shrimati Maya Singh 
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah  - Additional Director 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
*    w.e.f. 15 April, 2010 
**    Re-nominated w.e.f. 3 May, 2010 
@  Consequent upon retirement of Shri Bhagwati Singh, MP, Rajya Sabha from membership of  Rajya Sabha w.e.f.  4 July, 2010.  
  

(iv) 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2009 -
2010) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present the Twelfth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the 
Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development).  
2.  The Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on             
17 December, 20 10. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 24th February,2010. 
3.  The repl ies of the Government were examined and the draft Report was 
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 7th July, 2010. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
  NEW DELHI;     SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
20 July, 2010                  Chairperson, 
29 Asadha, 1932 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 

1 
 
 
 
     CHAPTER I 
 
       REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2009 -10) deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their Third Report on Demands 
for Grants (2009 -10) of the Department of Drinking Water Supply  (Ministry of Rural 
Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 December, 2009. 
 
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 34 
recommendations which have been categorised as follows: 
 
(i) Chapter II   Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Para Nos.: 2.4, 3.7, 3.14, 3.23, 3.24, 4.10, 4.12, 4.14, 4.19, 
4.20, 4.32, 4.33, 4.34, 4.44, 4.45, 4.46, 4.47, 4.59, 
4.61, 4.62, 5.8, 5.11, 5.25, 5.26, 5.27, 5.28, 5.29, 
5.30 and 5.40 
(ii) Chapter III   Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government‟s replies : 
Para Nos.: 3.8 and 4.11 
(iii) Chapter IV  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government  have not been accepted by the Committee :  
Para No.: 4.60 
(iv) Chapter V   Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited : 
Para Nos. : 5.31 and 5.41. 
 
3. The Committee desire that final reply  in respect of recommendation s (paragraph 
nos. 5.31 and 5.41) for which on ly interim replies have  been given by the Government 
should be furnished within three months after presentation of this Report.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of the 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  

2 
 
 
 
A. INITIATING STUDY ON IMPACT OF FUNDS RELEASED FOR SUSTAINABILITY 
AND FOR CHECKING USE OF GROUND WATER AND PROMOTING RAINWATER 
HARVESTING.   
[Recommendation Serial No. 21(Para No. 4.60)] 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
“The Committee also appreci ate that under sustainability component of 
NRDWP, works like artificial recharge/rainwater harvesting structures are 
to be taken up with a view to improving the drinking water availability in 
rural areas and also for reducing effects of depletion of ground  water.  In 
this connection, the Committee desire that a study be undertaken on the 
impact of funds released for sustainability and for checking ground water 
use in the country as the declining ground water is a grave problem at 
present. The Committee feel  that depletion of ground water table is 
reaching a critical level and unless urgent action is taken to promote 
conjunctive use of water through ground, surface and rainwater, a 
situation of extreme water stress and scarcity may emerge. The 
Committee feel that the Department should work in a pro -active mode to 
promote rain water harvesting on a massive scale and simple methods of 
rainwater harvesting may be disseminated widely.” 
 
6. The Department in the action-taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“The Department is promoting rainwater harvesting in a big way by urging 
the States to go in for conjunctive use of ground -water recharge, surface 
water and roof -top rainwater harvesting. A manual on “Bringing 
sustainability to water supply schemes in Rural India” was  published and 
circulated to all States. A manual on “Artificial recharge of groundwater” 
was also prepared and circulated. These two reference documents are 
also uploaded on the departmental website   www.ddws.gov.in.  
 
A National Workshop on Design of Sustainability Structures was 
conducted in the current financial year and PHED engineers were 
sensitized to take up such projects. 
 
HGM maps have been prepared and distributed to 11 States as on 
1/2/2010 and similar work is ongoing for another 9 States. It is also 
proposed that all remaining States will be covered within the next 2 -3 
years. These maps can be used to identify appropriat e locations for 
artificial recharge structures. State Governments have reported   that they 
achieved an increased success rate of borewells drilled and indicated that 
more than 9,000 recharge structures were taken up using these HGM 
maps.” 
 

3 
 
 
 
7. The Committee had recommended that a study be undertaken to a ssess 
the impact of utilization of funds released for the sustainability and also for 
checking depletion of ground water availability. The action -taken reply is, 
however, silent on this issue.  The Committee reiterate that the study on impact of 
utilization of funds in this regard should be initiated immediately under intimation 
to the Committee.   
 
B. PUBLICITY OF NRDWP THROUGH PRINT AND ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
[Recommendation Serial No. 22 (Para No. 4.61)] 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
“The Committee also desire that those responsible for implementing the 
NRDWP in Central Government and State Governments, Project 
Implementing Agencies (PIAs) should first be made very clear about the 
Revised Guidelines for taking the benefits of the NRDWP.  Apart from this, 
more and more advertisements and publicity in radio, T.V. and print media 
should be done in a big way for dissemination of information at grassroots 
level on the pattern of NREGA and other social sector s chemes like Sarva 
Shiksha Abhiyan.  The Committee also desire that a video film or 
documentary be shown in every Gram Panchayat at regular intervals to 
educate the importance of conservation and sustainability of water to rural 
masses and the necessary lit erature about the new programme should be 
made available in the local language of the area to Project Implementing 
Agencies (PIAs).” 
 
9. The Department in the action-taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“The Department has organized meetings with the State Government 
officials   responsible for implementing the guidelines both at Central level 
and in different States to familiarize them on how to implement them in the 
field level.   Further, the revised gu idelines have also been hosted on the 
Department‟s web-site.    Two percent of the allocation under NRDWP is 
meant for support services like Information, Education, Communication, 
Advertising & Publicity, etc.  and this is directly released to the States.  
The States are therefore required to take up various media activities in 
their State language for popularizing NRDWP.” 
 

4 
 
 
 
10.  The Committee are not satisfied with the Department’s reply which gives 
an impression that dissemination of information about Revised Guidelines on 
new programme of NRDWP has entirely been left to the States. The Committee 
desire that the Department of Drinking Water Supply at national level should also 
play an active role in this regard and should take necessary efforts to popularize 
NRDWP.  
 
C. EXPEDITING DECISION ON INCREASING THE COST OF CONSTRUCTION FOR 
INDIVIDUAL HOUSEHOLDS, SCHOOL TOILETS AND ANGANWADIS  
[Recommendation Serial No. 30 (Para No. 5.29)] 
11. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
“Another area that came up for discussion during the course of evidence 
of the representatives of Department of Drinking Water Supply was need 
for enhancement of per unit cost of construction of Individual Household 
Latrine (IHHL) and Anganwadis. The Commit tee have been informed that 
the existing cost of Rs.2500/ - , Rs.5000/ - and Rs.20,000/ - for IHHL, 
Anganwadis and school toilets, is barely sufficient and be suitably 
enhanced. The Secretary, Drinking Water Supply informed the Committee 
that a proposal for h iking the per unit cost of construction for Anganwadis 
from Rs.5000/ - to Rs.8000/ - and for rural school from Rs.20,000/ - to 
Rs.32,000/-  has already been submitted. The Committee would like to 
know whether similar proposal for hiking the per unit cost of I HHL has also 
been made. The Committee desire that a final decision on this issue be 
taken urgently for achieving the school coverage by 2010.”  
 
12. The Department in the action-taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“There is no proposal by the Department to enhance the unit costs of 
IHHL as of now.  However, the proposal for increase in cost of toilet blocks 
for schools and anganwadi from existing Rs.20000/ - and Rs.5000/ - 
respectively to Rs.32000/ - and Rs.8000/ - respectively is under 
consideration with the Expenditure Finance Committee.”     
 
13. The Committee are unhappy to note that no final decision has been taken 
on the issue of increasing the cost of toilet blocks for schools and anganwadis 

5 
 
 
 
from Rs.20,000 to Rs.32,000  and from Rs.5000 to Rs.8000 respectively. The 
Committee hope that Expenditure Finance Committee will take a decision on the 
matter expeditiously keeping in view the objective of achieving school coverage 
by 2010.  
 
D. ACTUAL SANITATION IN NIRMAL GRAM PURASKAR AWARDED VILLAGES 
 
[Recommendation Serial No. 32 (Para No. 5.31)] 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
“On the issue of verification of Nirmal  Grams with a view to have an idea 
of actual Grams sanitized, the Committee have been informed by the 
Secretary, Drinking Water Supply that this issue is already receiving the 
attention of the Department and after having found large number of other 
wise in eligible applications for receiving the Nirmal Gram Puruskars 
(NGPs), the Department has curtailed the list of such Gram Panchayats. 
The Committee desire that a survey be undertaken for this purpose in 
different States to ascertain whether recipients of NG Ps have actually 
maintained such standards subsequently also.  The Committee may also 
be apprised of the result of the survey.” 
       
15. The Department in the action-taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“The Department is in the process of identifying a surv ey agency to carry 
out survey of NGP villages for verification of their sustaining NGP status.”        
 
16. The Committee are glad to note that the Department is in the process of 
identifying a survey agency to carry out survey villages which have been awarded 
Nirmal Gram Puraskar s  for verification of their sustaining NGP status. The 
Committee hope that the process will be completed soon and the proposed 
survey carried out within a specified timeframe.   
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
 
E. ACCELERATING THE PERFORMANCE OF JALMANI SCHEME 
 
[Recommendation Serial No. 33 (Para No. 5.41)] 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
“On the issue of quality of drinking water supply for the school going 
children, the Committee feel that the issue merits serious attention and 
sincere efforts need to be made in this regard. The information relating to 
treating polluted water through various techniques and other related 
issues needs to be incorporated in the syllabus of the school students so 
that the future generation of the country are saved from t he scourge of 
contaminated drinking water.” 
       
  
18. The Department in the action-taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“The Department has requested the Department of School Education & 
Literacy to take action on the recommendation of the Committee regarding 
incorporating these issues in the school syllabus. 
 
19. The Committee would like the Department of Drinking Water Supply to 
pursue the matter with the Department of School Education & Literacy and inform 
the Committee of the final outcome in this regard.  
 
  

7 
 
 
 
Chapter II  
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.4) 
The Committee note with dismay that Department of Drinking Water Supply has 
not been able to comply with the direction 73 A of „Direction s by the Speaker‟.  The 
Statement by the Minister on the Thirty -Seventh Report of the Committee (2008 -09) 
was required to be made by 21 October, 2008 as per the provisions of this Direction.  
However, the statement was made only on 26 February, 2009.  In C ommittee‟s opinion 
this reflects lack of promptness on the part of Department of Drinking water Supply on 
the one hand and retards the consequent action on various recommendations on the 
other. The Committee recommend that in future it should be ensured th at the 
Statements under Direction 73 A is made within the prescribed time limit. 
 
  Reply of the Government   
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted and it will be ensured 
that the Statements under Direction 73A are made within the prescribed time line. 
 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 3.7) 
The Committee note that with 16 per cent of worlds‟ population and 2.45 per cent 
of worlds‟ land resources India has only 4 per cent of world‟s fresh water resources.   
The Committee are also concerned that per capita availability of water has worsened 
from the level of 5,1 77 cubic meter in 1951 to the level of 1,820 cubic meter by 2001 
which may further decline to 1,341 cubic meter by 2025 i.e. after fifteen years from now. 
The Committee note that the Revised Guidelines for the modified ARWSP renamed as 
NRDWP envision to en sure permanent drinking water security in rural areas. However, 
the impending threat of climate change and global warming in Committee‟s opinion may 
also affect rural water supply.  In view of the disturbing scenario, the Committee desire 
that the Department of Drinking Water Supply should prepare a national perspective on 
the issue of rural water supply in the country. 
 
 
 

8 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
Work has been started on preparation of a national perspective document for 
drinking water supply. As the first step, in order to plan for the medium and long term in 
the rural drinking water supply and sanitation sector, the Government of India organized 
a policy Round table discussion with seventy -six participants, including 42 from outside 
New Delhi, representing  the Government, civil society, academia, research 
organizations and international donor organizations on the 21 st October 2009. As 
recommended by this Round Table, a Working Group has been constituted to look into 
the recommendations of the Round Table, w hich also include issues highlighted by the 
Committee, and prepare a plan for action. A Steering Committee is also being set up to 
prepare the Strategic/Perspective Plan for the Department by end of 2010. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 3.14) 
The Committee while reviewing the utilization position of funds during Tenth Plan 
(2002-2007) and Eleventh Plan (2007 -2012) in rural wat er supply and rural sanitation 
sector, find with dismay that there had been under -utilisation in both the sectors to the 
level of 9.50 per cent and 33.60 per cent respectively.  For under -utilisation under rural 
water supply, the Committee find that the De partment has taken the plea of 10 per cent 
allowable carry over of funds under the guidelines.  On rural sanitation, the Committee 
have been informed that 40 per cent of funds are released when 60 per cent of the 
funds are utilized so that the projects do not suffer due to want of funds.  Thus, 40 per 
cent funds are always available as working funds for projects. In the Committee‟s 
opinion while such plea may be correct to some extent there has certainly been a 
degree of complacency on the part of the Depar tment/States.  The Committee, 
therefore, feel that attitudinal changes are desirable for approaching to the entire issue 
of utilization of funds. They, therefore, recommend that the Department should also set 
the targets for utilizing 60 per cent of the fu nds so that next installment is meaningfully 
utilized during that financial year itself. 
 
Reply of the Government  
Total Sanitation Campaign is implemented in a project mode. There are 593 
district projects being implemented under TSC.  The funds are relea sed to the districts 
in four instalments (30%, 30%, 30%, 10%) based on eligibility. They become eligible for 
the next instalment only after 60% of funds released in the previous instalment have 
been utilized along with 60% utilization of matching state sha re. The last instalment of 
10% as per guidelines is released after utilization of 80% of earlier released funds. Thus 
the instalments released to an eligible district under Total Sanitation Campaign are not 
necessarily annual. Strict monitoring methods are  adopted to obtain the progress of 
each District on real time basis using the online monitoring system.  Regular review 

9 
 
 
 
meetings/Video Conferences etc. are organized by the DDWS to discuss issues relating 
to implementation of the TSC. Further to minimize t he unspent balance, transfer of 
funds from one district to another eligible district within the same State has been 
permitted.  States have also been advised this year that they have to speed up 
implementation of the progress and minimize the unspent balances as on 31.03.10. 
 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 3.23) 
While examining the overall Budget of the Department during the last two years 
viz. 2007 -2008 and 2008 -2009, the Committee find that there is an enhancement of 
Rs.1,000 crore and Rs.700 crore during the years 2008 -2009 and 2009 -2010 
respectively. The Commi ttee have been informed that funds are allocated to all States 
by a pre -defined criterion and any increased allocation is thus disbursed to all States.  
The Committee are unable to comprehend from the cryptic reply of the Department as 
to how the increased  allocation were proportionately disbursed to the State 
Governments without taking into account their past performance. The Committee desire 
a categorical reply in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government  
It is submitted that allocation of funds under NRDWP is done based on 
prescribed criteria viz.  rural population with weightage of 60%, rural population 
managing rural drinking water supply schemes with weightage of 10% and States under 
DPAP, HADP and special category Hill States in terms of rural areas with  weightage of 
30%.  It may be noted that on allocation of the funds, only the 1 st installment is 
automatically released to the States.  For release of the 2 nd installment, the State has to 
send a request in the prescribed format when the utilization of ava ilable funds has 
exceeded 60%.  In the case of non -performing states where unspent balance at the 
beginning of the financial year is high, the unspent amount in excess of 10% of 
available funds is deducted from the amount of the second installment.  Hence non-
performing states lose on account of excess unspent balances.  Poor performing States 
also cannot apply for the 2 nd installment if they do not utilise 60% of the available funds.  
The savings thus accrued are released to better performing States. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 

10 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.24) 
While reviewing the allocation vis -à-vis expenditure position during Eleventh 
Plan, the Co mmittee find that as against the agreed outlay of Rs.47,306 crore, the 
expenditure was Rs.16077 crore during first two years viz. 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 of 
the Plan. The Committee find that if the Budget estimates of Rs. 9300 crore for 2009 -
2010 are added , the total comes to Rs. 25,377 crore. The Committee feel that for 
optimal utilization of Eleventh Plan allocation, annual expenditure of the order of over 
Rs.9,500 crore per annum is desirable.  In this connection, the issue of resource crunch 
on rural sa nitation for current year as also for remaining two years viz. 2010 -2011 and 
2011-2012 has been highlighted before the Committee by the Secretary, DWS.  The 
Committee have been informed that during 2009 -2010 with a Budget of Rs. 1200 crore 
for rural sanitation, the Department is facing the resource crunch of the order of Rs.500 
crore.  The Committee have been informed that as against Central share of Rs.11,094 
crore required to be made during the Eleventh Plan, Rs.4700 crore has so far been 
released to States indicating a shortfall of Rs.6300 crore.  The Committee also conclude 
from the aforesaid analysis that in order to achieve the targets of rural sanitation by 
2010 and targets for school coverage by 2012 adequate allocation is not being made.  
Besides, these  schemes of the Department have tremendous impact on improving rural 
infrastructure. The Committee strongly recommend to the Department to take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission for getting adequate allocation 
commensurate with the requirements, with a view to achieve inclusive growth so that 
the benefits are shared by the poorest of the poor in the country and make sincere 
efforts to fulfill their mandate of providing safe adequate drinking water to the rural 
people. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The matter of higher allocation of fund under TSC was taken -up with Planning 
Commission.  In response, it was informed that it was not possible to allocate additional 
funds during the current financial year.  However, during the discus sions for Annual 
Plan 2010 -11, Planning Commission had assured the Department about higher 
allocation for the year 2010 -11.  The Planning Commission has communicated an 
allocation of Rs. 10,580 crore for the Department for 2010 -11 (an increase of 15% over 
the 2009-10 allocation) of which Rs. 9,000 Crore is proposed for NRDWP and Rs. 1,580 
crore for TSC. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 4.10) 
The Eleventh Plan document has brought out grave scenario prevailing in the 
country on Drinking Water and Rural Sanitation characterized by large number of 
slipped back habitations, huge number of quality -affected habitations, declining grou nd 

11 
 
 
 
water table, declining per capita availability of drinking water and staggering 39 per cent 
of rural population without basic sanitation. The Committee‟s examination has revealed 
that even after decades of planning and huge investment of the magnitude of Rs.15,200 
crore in this sector, the actual coverage of rural water supply has reached to the level of 
only 74 per cent and for rural sanitation it is only 61 per cent as on today. This speaks 
volumes about actual implementation of various schemes that ha ve been run by the 
centre from time to time. The Department has made out their case before the 
Committee explaining that increased water pollution due to industrial activities, growth 
of population and increasing requirement of water for agricultural secto r have been 
largely responsible for the above scenario in rural water supply. Coupled with these, the 
Committee have also been informed that there has been a general reluctance by States 
for pricing of water and regulating its extraction. Increased populat ion and enhanced 
infrastructure activities have been given as reasons for slow progress in rural sanitation. 
The Committee urge the Department to make all out efforts to achieve full coverage in 
providing safe drinking water and sanitation in rural areas in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The Department is making all efforts to achieve full coverage in providing safe 
drinking water and sanitation in rural areas in the country.   
As stated in reply to para  3.8 all efforts will be made to achieve full coverage of 
the remaining 627 uncovered habitations by 2010 -11 and the quality affected 
habitations by end of 2011 -12 in Bharat Nirman Phase II. In order to halt slippage of 
already covered habitations, the Dep artment will be monitoring the implementation of 
sustainability measures for all drinking water sources. The Department will continue its 
efforts to dialogue with the Ministry of Water Resources and the States on regulating 
and controlling the extraction o f ground water in the critical and over -exploited blocks. 
The IMIS monitoring system enables linking of habitation to census code to scheme and 
target. While preparing the Annual Action Plan for 2010 -11, the States have been 
requested to give first priorit y to the coverage of uncovered and quality affected 
habitations as identified by them. The Department will hold discussions with the States 
on the Annual Action Plan for 2010 -11 to ensure this.  The States that have performed 
well in providing drinking water access to rural areas will be encouraged to move up the 
Water Ladder in terms of providing more quantity and reliable piped water through 
household connections. 
The TSC was started taking reference of Census 2001 for providing sanitation 
facilities to t he uncovered rural households.  With the same base, the sanitation 
coverage in the rural area is 68.2 % as of now.  The broader aim of the TSC is to cover 
total households including the new households arising because of increased population.  
It was estima ted at the time of 11 th Plan that a total of 7.29 crore households shall be 
required to be covered with sanitation facilities.  With the revision in district projects it is 
now estimated that a total of 8.89 crore households are required to be covered with  
sanitation facilities on the same base, out of which, 2.94 crore households have since 
been covered with sanitation facilities.  The present achievement taking into 
consideration the increased number of households to be covered as per the TSC 
projects is at 61.44 %. The spread of schools and anganwadis has also increased. 
Besides, it is felt that the number of toilets in schools should be in proportion to the 

12 
 
 
 
student strength and separate toilet blocks should be available for girl students in co -ed 
schools. This entails higher investment in the TSC. 
  
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 4.12) 
The Committee have been informed that 80 per cent of  rural drinking water 
supply is based on ground water and less than 1 per cent of this, is used for drinking 
water purposes. The remaining is used for other purposes like irrigation and industries 
causing slippages in coverage.    As a resul t, transport of drinking water in rural areas 
has to be made from far flung areas at huge cost.  The Department has admitted before 
the Committee that various other reasons like shortage of technical manpower and 
resource constraints in most of the States are the reasons for slower progress.  In order 
to address all these issues the Department has come out with a new approach for rural 
water supply under Revised Guidelines which inter -alia envisage a paradigm shift on 
surface water, ground water and rain wa ter in a big way for future needs, enhancing 
funds for sustainability and operation and maintenance to help the States after taking 
into confidence different State Governments.  In Committee‟s opinion, since the 
Programme has been started from April 2009 i t is too early to comment on its 
implementation.  However, the Committee feel that the Department should see that the 
new Programme is implemented in letter and spirit so that the Committee can review 
the progress under the new approach while examining Dem ands for Grants (2010 -
2011) of the Department.  In order to overcome the shortage of slippages of rural water 
sources, the Department should hold consultations with other related Ministries like 
Irrigation and Industry to bring forward a new approach on th e pattern of Revised 
Guidelines so that necessary policy initiatives are taken in those areas also. The 
Committee would like to know the views of Department in this regard.  
Another area that has attracted the attention of the Committee is about State‟s 
reluctance on the issue of pricing of water and regulation of its extraction. The 
Committee feel that since water is a State subject, the need of the hour is to arrive at a 
consensus on the complex issue of pricing and regulation of extraction of water. The 
Committee, therefore, would impress upon the Department to start the process among 
different States on this issue. The Committee may also be apprised of the outcome of 
the exercise.”  
 
Reply of the Government  
Water is a State subject. At Government of Ind ia level, as per Allocation of 
Business Rules, „water resource‟ as a subject is with the Ministry of Water Resources. 
Drinking water sector uses a very small fraction of total water resources. As pointed out 
by the Committee, pricing and regulation of extr action of water pertains to States. The 
Ministry of Water Resources has circulated a Model Ground Water Bill to regulate and 
control the development of ground water for among the States for adoption.  

13 
 
 
 
As part of the National Action Plan on Climate Change a  National Water Mission 
with the objective of “conservation of water, minimizing wastage and ensuring its more 
equitable distribution, both within and across States through integrated water resource 
development and management “ has been set up. The Departm ent of Drinking Water 
Supply is represented in the Advisory Board of the Mission headed by the Union 
Minister of Water Resources and the High Level Steering Committee of the Mission. 
Through this Mission, the Department will pursue the goal of ensuring dri nking water 
security, in consultation with related Ministries like Water Resource, Agriculture and 
Industry, through policy initiatives for regulation and control of groundwater 
development, increasing efficiency of water use in agriculture, industry and u rban water 
use so as to protect existing drinking water sources in rural areas.  
In the rural drinking water sector, States are encouraged to devolve the power to 
operate/ maintain water supply systems to PRIs for which financial incentive has also 
been pr ovided in the NRDWP. These PRIs can also decide about the charges to be 
levied for water services. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 4.14) 
The Committee‟s examination has revealed that in the area of policy intervention 
the rural water supply sector has become a testing laboratory of the Department of 
Drinking Water Supply.  The Committee find that starting with ARWSP in 1 972-73 for 
providing adequate drinking water; in 1985 -86, the Department started with major focus 
on water quality; in 1999 -2002 the Department experimented with Swajaldhara concept 
involving community participation and in 2009 National Rural Drinking Wate r 
Programme (NRDWP) was started.  The Committee feel that the new approach is a 
welcome step in rural water supply.  However, the Committee feel that there is no need 
for frequent policy changes and from now onwards emphasis should be on actual 
implementation on war footing basis. 
 
Reply of the Government  
Service delivery in the drinking water sector is constantly evolving, often due to 
developments in the States and new challenges that come up.  The Department 
undertakes changes in policy accordingly.  It is making all efforts to ensure that the new 
guidelines are implemented in a professional manner by holding regular meetings with 
the State officials at the Central and State level, conducting workshops and 
Conferences so that there is a regular interchange of ideas and emerging issues are 
resolved. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 

14 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 4.19) 
The Committee are dismayed to note that performance in rural drinking water 
supply  which is one of the six components of mega Programme of Bharat Nirman has 
not been well so far during 2009 -2010 in terms of coverage of uncovered, slipped back 
and quality -affected habitations.  For instance, for uncovered habitations, the 
Committee find against  the target of 624 the achievement is only 3.  Similarly, for 
slipped back habitations against the target of 25,482 the achievement is as low as 439.  
Coming to quality-affected habitations against the target of 75,000 the achievement has 
plummeted to 93 o nly.  The Committee have been informed that such dismal 
performance is owing to variety of reasons like considerable time taken by different 
State Governments for mainstreaming activities consequent upon enforcement of new 
guidelines, time taken in tacklin g natural calamities like drought and floods witnessed 
early this year in many States.  The Committee desire that a separate mechanism be 
evolved to tackle the natural calamities so that the assigned tasks before the 
Department relating to the important sc hemes do not suffer. The Committee would like 
to be apprised about the steps taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The views of the Committee to evolve a separate mechanism to tackle natural 
calamities have been conveyed to all States. 
The latest  (18.2.2010) State -wise achievement in terms of coverage of the 
targeted uncovered, slipped back and quality affected habitations is at Annex I. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 4.20) 
The Standing Committee had been persistently recommending for achieving of 
targets in this area.  In the Thirty -Seventh Report also (para no. 5.10 refers), the 
Committee had impressed upon about the same.  Though the Department are optimistic 
about achieving the target, the ground reality in this regard suggest otherwise. The 
Committee would like the Department to shed their complacent approach and undertake 
concrete and strict measures to ensure achievement of the targets by the States.  The 
Committee may be apprised of the concrete action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government  
As reported by the States, during the Bharat Nirman period (2005 -2009), 50168 
habitations had been fully covered with potable water supply in the water quality 
affected habitations. In respect of 2.59 lakh water quality affected habitations, projects 
had been given technical and administrative approvals. As these projects are long 

15 
 
 
 
gestation projects, the goal of the Department is to cover all water quality affected 
habitations with safe drinking water by the end of 2011. During 2009 -10, the target is to 
cover 34,596 of these habitations, of which 10,195 have been reported covered as on 
31.01.2010. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 4.32) 
The Committee are  amazed over the fact that on the one hand the coverage of 
rural drinking water supply is only 74 per cent and for rural sanitation it is still lower at 61 
per cent.  On the other hand, there are huge unspent balances as on 31.10.2009 to the 
tune of Rs.310 9.46 crore for rural water supply and Rs.1259.59 crore for rural 
sanitation.  The Committee find that this is piquant situation and as such the Committee 
do not approve of the same.  The Committee‟s examination has revealed that the 
figures of unspent bala nces as given in Outcome Budget (2009 -10) of the Department 
laid before Parliament were not updated and were not even indicated to be provisional 
in the case of rural sanitation.  The Committee have now been given updated figures.  
The Committee, however, feel now that coming with provisional and old figures on the 
ground that States have not updated these figures, does not augur well with the 
Department.  The Committee, therefore, feel that since Outcome Budget is a public 
document and authentic source of information, the Department should come out before 
the Parliament with updated figures. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The observation of the Committee to report the updated figures in the outcome 
budget will be complied with. The opening balances under NRDWP w ere Rs. 1470.75 
crore as on 1/4/2009. The 1st and 2nd installments amounting to Rs. 5824.83 crore have 
been released so far.  The expenditure from Central funds as on 22/2/2010 is Rs. 
3604.60 crore.  Cumulatively it may thus be seen that expenditure is mor e than the 
opening balance as on 1.4.2009.  
The central share out of the total Project outlay for TSC for all 593 project 
districts is Rs.11,094 crore as of now, out of which, an amount of Rs.4169.32 crore was 
released till 31.3.2009.  As per the existing guidelines, an amount of Rs.1667 crore 
(maximum amount as per 40% balance to become eligible for next instalment) could be 
available with the States.  Further, an amount of Rs.517.76 crore was released during 
the current year upto 31.10.2009.  Thus against  a cumulative amount of Rs.2184.70 
crore with the States, the unspent balance as on 18/2/2010 was Rs.1206.96 crore.  It is 
expected that with further expenditure reported by the States, as being pursued by the 
Department this figure will further come down. 
 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 

16 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 4.33) 
The Committee have analysed that there are volumes of unspent balances in 
rural water supply and rural sanitation.  The Committee find in rural water supply as per 
the latest figures such balances amount to Rs. 3109.47 crore. The major States where 
these unspent balances are lying are Bihar (Rs.570.38 crore), Maharashtra (Rs.359.34 
crore), Uttar Pradesh (Rs.201.73 crore) etc.  Similarly, on rural sanitation as per the 
latest figures of Rs.1259.60 crore, the major States against which unspent balances are 
lying are Bihar (Rs.143.63 crore), Andhra Pradesh (Rs.130.39 crore), Uttar Pradesh 
(Rs.126.58 crore) etc.  During the course of evidence, the Committee have been 
informed by the Secretary, Drinking Water Supply that on the issue of unspent balances 
some money always lies with States.  On the rural water supply, the Committee have 
also been informed that States have already liquidated unspent balance as per latest 
information.  The Committee appreciate this development. However, in the absence of 
latest figures, the Committee are unable to comment further on the issue.  The 
Committee desire that the required information be made available to the Committee so 
as to arrive at a logical conclusion. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The information of State wise figures of opening balances as on 1.4.2009, 
releases during the year and expenditure upto 22/2/2010 is given in Annex II. As can be 
seen, except in the States of Bihar and Jharkhand, all the other States have liquidated 
their unspent balance of 1/4/2009. 
The reasons for slow financial progress are given below: 
1. Many States had not reported their targets as well as achievements during 
the period due to delay in plan allocation being conveyed. Targets for 
those States were fixed by the Department. 
 
2. Severe drought affecting nearly half the districts the country, forcing 
States to utilize calamity  fu nds and Departmental manpower for taking up 
contingency measures to tackle the immediate drinking water crisis to the 
detriment of regular expenditure on ongoing projects. This has affected 
the progress adversely. 
 
3. Physical and Financial progress of scheme s are to be reported only 
through the online IMIS reporting system from 1/4/2009 leading to teething 
problems in reporting by many States. 
Steps taken: 
 

17 
 
 
 
1. State-wise reviews with poor performing States, Video -conferences with 
States, and State Secretaries Co nference were held; monitoring visits 
were made; letters were written to expedite progress in utilization of funds. 
2. IMIS was launched to ensure fast reporting. Difficulties in reporting by 
some States are being sorted out. Video conference with States was held 
on IMIS. Meeting with MIS coordinators was also held in February, 2010.   
 
3. Second installment of NRDWP funds was released to all eligible States by 
31st December 2009 to expedite progress.”  
 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 4.34) 
On the issue of unspent balances in rural sanitation, the Secretary, Drinking 
Water Supply candidly admitted before the Committee that the situation has not at all 
improved.  Various reasons like 40 per cent release after expenditure of 60 per cent of 
the funds have been advanced in this regard. The Committee, however, recommend 
that the States be advised to submit timely proposals for releases leaving no room for 
unspent balances.  They also suggest, the States should be asked to furnish specific 
reasons f or unspent balances/non -utilisation of resources.  Such mechanism will not 
only make the States accountable but would also help the Union as well as the State 
Governments to take remedial measures. 
 
Reply of the Government  
As desired, all the States have been advised to analyze the reasons for 
outstanding unspent balances and inform the Department.  Further, all the States have 
been requested to bring the balances down to the minimum. As mentioned earlier, to 
reduce the unspent balance, transfer of funds from one district to another eligible district 
within the same State has been permitted.  
 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 4.44) 
The Committee are disappointed to note that there are large number of quality -
affected habitations in the country largely due to problem like arsenic, fluoride, iron, 
salinity and nitrate even when a full fledged programme of „National Rural Drinking  
Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance Programme‟ for tackling the above problem 
was in operation since February, 2006.  The Committee are also concerned to note that 

18 
 
 
 
after the launch of the above Programme not only the number of quality affected 
habitations but the number of States having such habitations has increased from 5 
States in 2006 to 14 States in 2009.  The Committee also find that the number of quality 
affected habitations except for nitrate affected habitations has significantly increased. 
The Committee have been informed that many of the habitations in the country which 
are reported as water quality affected have been addressed with projects which are 
under various stages of implementation.  The Committee find the reply as very vague 
since it does not spell out category wise number of quality affected habitations in 
different States.  In the absence of the requisite data the Committee are unable to 
comprehend about the work actually done in this regard.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department should furnish detailed data in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The aim of National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
programme is to create awareness among the rural community about various water 
quality problems and to sensitize them for affirmative action to address these problems.  
It has been observed that once water quality monitoring and surveillance started, more 
number of habitations was tested for various water quality problems and more quality 
affected habitations were identified and reported. 
At the start of Bharat Nirman, there were about 2.17 lakh rural habitations 
affected with various water quality problems.  During the first phase of Bharat Nirman 
(2005-06 to 2008 -09), in all, 2.59 lakh rural hab itations, reported to be affected with 
water quality problems, have been “addressed” with projects by the States. In four years 
(2005-06 to 2008 -09), as per manual reports received, 50,168 quality affected 
habitations have been covered. Since quality probl ems of groundwater sources 
depends on a number of factors viz. over exploitation, poor recharge, drought, leaching 
of domestic sewage and industrial effluents, geogenic leaching, etc., the number of 
such quality-affected habitations keeps on changing and i t is a dynamic figure. As per 
the online IMIS of the Department, as on 1.4.2009, States have reported about 1.80 
lakh rural habitations into the online IMIS, having different kinds of water quality 
problems. Out of these, 33,317 habitations have been repor ted on the online IMIS as 
covered with completed schemes upto 31.3.2009 and during the current year 2009 -10 
(as on 19/2/2010), 13,715 habitations are reported to be covered with completed 
schemes.  The discrepancy between the previously manually reported c overage figure 
of 50,168 habitations during Bharat Nirman period and online IMIS figure of 33,317 
covered habitations may be because some of the State Governments are yet to update 
their statistics online. For the remaining quality -affected habitations, pr ojects are at 
different stages of planning and execution 
Of the 9,504 Arsenic affected habitations as on 1/4/2009, 1,968 habitations have 
been covered with provision of safe drinking water prior to 2009 -10 and in the current 
year a further 672 habitations were reported covered during the completed schemes.   
Of the 33,357 Fluoride affected habitations as on 1/4/2009, 7,114 habitations 
have been covered with provision of safe drinking water prior to 2009 -10 and in the 

19 
 
 
 
current year a further 2,702 habitations  were reported covered during the completed 
schemes.   
Of the 1,01,872 Iron affected habitations as on 1/4/2009, 20,715 habitations have 
been covered with provision of safe drinking water prior to 2009 -10 and in the current 
year a further 9,105 habitations were reported covered during the completed schemes.   
Of the 32,689 Salinity affected habitations as on 1/4/2009, 3061 habitations have 
been covered with provision of safe drinking water prior to 2009 -10 and in the current 
year a further 976 habitations were reported covered during the completed schemes.   
Of the 2,577 Nitrate affected habitations as on 1/4/2009, 459 habitations have 
been covered with provision of safe drinking water prior to 2009 -10 and in the current 
year a further 260 habitations were reported covered during the completed schemes.   
The Statement of category-wise number of quality affected habitations covered in 
different States is at Annex III. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 4.45) 
The Committee are aware that tackling the arsenic and fluoride affected 
habitations in the country is the priority of the Government.  However, the Committee 
are constrained to note that required work in this r egard has not been done in the right 
earnest. It is needless to point out that contaminated harmful sources of water in rural 
areas in the country may cause a severe crisis.  The Committee emphasize that all the 
efforts made with regard to improving the co verage status and bringing about 
sustainability of sources and the systems become meaningless in the absence of clean 
and safe drinking water.  The Committee, therefore, desire that efforts aimed at tackling 
the contamination of water should be intensified .  They would like to be informed of the 
measures taken in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government  
Arsenic in drinking water is a slow killer while fluoride is a slow crippler. 
Therefore the Department has given highest priority in tackling these two w ater quality 
problems. In West Bengal, a State level Arsenic Task Force was constituted in 
May‟2001 to provide expert advice on tackling arsenic problems in drinking water 
sources. Planning Commission had also set up a National Task Force which prepared a 
strategy paper for tackling arsenic problems in the country in July, 2007. A Strategy 
paper on arsenic mitigation in rural drinking water sources has been prepared in 
October, 2008 and sent to those States which are affected. Both for arsenic and fluoride 
contamination, States have been advised to move away from affected ground water 
sources to safe surface water sources. Further, during dialogues/ review meetings/ 

20 
 
 
 
video-conferences held with the State Government officials, suggestions were made to 
them to adopt dilution of excess fluoride through artificial recharge and roof -top 
rainwater harvesting systems for augmenting drinking water in fluoride affected areas.  
Special projects for providing safe drinking water through rainwater harvesting and 
artificial recharge in fluoride affected areas were also taken up in collaboration with 
NGRI, Hyderabad. In addition, various R&D projects have been taken up to arrive at 
environment friendly and user friendly domestic/ community level treatment systems for 
arsenic and fluoride removal, duly tackling reject management issues. 
In pursuance of the directions of the Supreme Court, the Department of Science 
and Technology has started a Mission on “Winning, Augmentation and Renovation of 
Water Resources”.  The mission‟s objective is, to find “timely, urgent, cost -effective, 
socially viable and sustainable techno -management solutions” for solving the problems 
of water scarcity including that of water quality. The Mission has identified arsenic, 
fluoride, iron, biological c ontamination and salinity as water related challenges for 
tackling which, proven technological solutions will be tried out in selected locations. The 
results of the application of these solutions will help the Department and the States in 
introducing new s olutions to tackle the contamination of water on a sustainable and 
cost-effective basis.  
As suggested by the Standing Committee, every effort will be made by the 
Government to tackle Arsenic and Fluoride contaminated habitations at an early date. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 4.46) 
The Committee also find that under the Revised Guidelines, 20 per cent funds 
are being given  for tackling the quality affected habitations with 100 per cent funding 
from the Centre.  The Committee feel with this, there should not be any alibi for not 
performing in this important area. The Committee has been constantly recommending 
for expeditious work in their previous Reports and had also dealt with the issue in their 
latest 37 th Report (para no. 5.10 refers).  The Committee, therefore, desire that all out 
and time bound efforts should be made in this regard.  The Committee expect  the 
Department to gear up on these lines. 
 
Reply of the Government  
As per NRDWP guidelines, that  are effective from 1/4/2009, upto  20% of funds 
are earmarked for tackling water quality problems on 50:50 sharing basis between the 
Central and State Governments.   The States have been asked to prioritize tackling 
quality affected habitations while preparing their Annual Action Plan.  Th e Department 
will monitor the preparation and implementation of these Plans to ensure that quality 
affected habitations are tackled in a time-bound manner. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 

21 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 4.47) 
 
The Committee also note with disappointment that even after online Integrated 
Management Information System (IMIS) monitoring of quality affected habitations and 
full fledged water qu ality testing apparatus available in the country, the contaminated 
water is not being treated in various quality affected habitations. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that available testing facilities be fully utilized for treating the 
contaminated quality affected habitations spread over various States of the country. On 
the issue of salinity affected habitations, the  Committee are surprised to hear from the 
Department that they have no scientific proof about increase in number of such 
habitations. The C ommittee wonder how in the absence of such scientific data the 
Department is going to solve the problem of salinity affected habitations in the country. 
The Committee, therefore, expect a categorical reply in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The data  on water quality affected habitations is updated by the State 
Government every year based on water quality testing being done. In order to 
strengthen the efforts of State Government in conducting water quality testing of large 
number of sources, a provisi on has been made in the NRDWP guidelines, to set up 
water quality testing laboratories at the sub -divisional level in the State Public Health 
Engineering Department/Board dealing with rural drinking water supply.   
The State Governments have reported setti ng up of 607 district water quality 
testing laboratories for regular testing of quality of drinking water sources.  State 
Governments have also reported setting up of 127 water quality testing laboratories at 
the sub-divisional level.  As reported by different States during 2009-10, 1.33 lakh water 
samples have been tested in laboratories. 
In addition 1.28 lakh field test kits have been procured and distributed to Gram 
Panchayats and 6.07 lakh people have been trained for carrying out regular testing at 
village level of their own drinking water sources under the National Rural Drinking Water 
Quality Monitoring & Surveillance Programme. More than 87,000 water samples have 
been tested by rural grassroots level persons using field test kits.  
Water samples are also tested for salinity using standard laboratory tests in the 
district and sub -divisional laboratories. Based on these water quality test results the 
salinity affected habitations are identified by the States. When the same are reported on 
the Departmental IMIS, these are taken into account by the Department.  
To tackle salinity affected habitations, the State Governments have been advised 
to adopt the following methods: 
1. Wherever, feasible, the inland salinity concentrators may be diluted 
through artificial recharge. 
2. Move away from salinity affected sources to alternate safe water sources 
in the vicinity. 

22 
 
 
 
3. Augment availability of safe drinking water by roof water harvesting. 
4. When all the above measures fail, RO technology may be adopted with 
appropriate reject management strategy. 
 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 4.59) 
The Committee appreciate that a paradigm shift from over dependence on 
ground water to surface water and roof water for addressing the availability of drinking 
water in rural areas has been evolved under the modified ARWSP renamed as „National 
Rural Drinking Water Programme‟ (NRDWP) that is being implemented w.e.f. 1st April, 
2009.  The Committee also appreciate that for sustainability and for Operation & 
Maintenance (O&M) purposes, the distribution of annual budget allocation has been 
hiked to 20 per cent and 10 per cent respectively.  The Committee trust that this will get 
desired results in covering slipped back habitations as also making available funds for 
O&M purposes for repairs of existing drinking water supply assets.  However,  here 
again the Commi ttee apprehend that inspite of major policy interventions, the ground 
situation may remain the same and last man in the row in rural areas may not get the 
benefit of enhanced funds for rural water supply programme.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that mechanism available under the revised guidelines should be 
put in place in all States in a time bound manner for getting the desired results. 
 
Reply of the Government  
All States have been asked to set up institutional mechanisms for implementation 
of the Guidelines. These are the State Water and Sanitation Mission, District Water and 
Sanitation Mission, Village Water and Sanitation Committee and the Water and 
Sanitation Support Organisation. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 4.61) 
The Committee also desire that those responsible for implementing the NRDWP 
in Central Government and State Governments, Project Implementin g Agencies (PIAs) 
should first be made very clear about the Revised Guidelines for taking the benefits of 
the NRDWP.  Apart from this, more and more advertisements and publicity in radio, T.V. 
and print media should be done in a big way for dissemination o f information at 
grassroots level on the pattern of NREGA and other social sector schemes like Sarva 
Shiksha Abhiyan.  The Committee also desire that a video film or documentary be 

23 
 
 
 
shown in every Gram Panchayat at regular intervals to educate the importanc e of 
conservation and sustainability of water to rural masses and the necessary literature 
about the new programme should be made available in the local language of the area to 
Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs). 
Reply of the Government  
The Department h as organized meetings with the State Government officials   
responsible for implementing the guidelines both at Central level and in different States 
to familiarize them on how to implement them in the field level.   Further, the revised 
guidelines have al so been hosted on the Department‟s web -site.    Two percent of the 
allocation under NRDWP is meant for support services like Information, Education, 
Communication, Advertising & Publicity, etc.  and this is directly released to the States.  
The States are therefore required to take up various media activities in their State 
language for popularizing NRDWP. 
 [(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 4.62) 
The Committee also learn  that the Department has brought out two sets of 
documents and has forwarded these to States for implementation - one pertains to 
sustainability captioned „Bringing Sustainability to drinking water systems in rural India‟ 
and the other on convergence under  the Caption „Convergence of various 
watershed/water conservation‟. The Committee feel that these valuable things do not 
percolate at grassroots level at all.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that such 
important documents be made available to PIAs for effective implementation of the 
revised guidelines so that they do not remain on paper. 
 
Reply of the Government  
It is submitted that the publication titled “Bringing Sustainability to drinking water 
systems in rural India” was published in 2007 -08 and th e same is also available in the 
Department‟s web-site.  The PIAs are free to access the publication. 
 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 

24 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 5.8) 
While reviewing the project planning and implementation, the Committee are 
astonished to find that all is not well on this important area also.  The Committee find 
that as per latest figures out of the total of around 1.62 lakh schemes (0.4 9 lakh PWS 
schemes and 1.13 lakh other schemes) under the Department, only 39,454 have been 
completed while the remaining are ongoing or proposed schemes.  The Committee are 
also constrained to note that in PWS scheme the major States that are not performi ng 
well are Bihar, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa and Rajasthan.  The Committee 
have been informed that on line monitoring in all the States is at present available.   In 
view of this, the Committee are unable to understand as to why large number o f on -
going schemes are still waiting for completion.  The Committee desire that all out efforts 
should be made by the Department for completion of the pending projects. 
Reply of the Government  
As desired by the Committee, the Department will try to ensure  completion of all 
ongoing schemes at the earliest. In the Annual Action Plan preparation guidelines the 
States have been requested to take up ongoing schemes for completion in the first 
instance. This will be emphasized during the Plan discussions to be held in March, 2010 
with the States and will be further monitored during the year. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 5.11) 
The Committee‟s examination has revealed that various World Bank funded 
drinking water projects are being implemented in the country out of which some have 
been completed. The Committee are constrained to note that out of the five projects 
under implementatio n, in three such projects in Kerala, Karnataka and Maharashtra 
there is a time overrun. Two of these were to be completed in 31.12.2007 and the third 
was to be completed in June, 2007. The Committee have been informed that on the 
request of the State Gover nments these projects are surviving on extensions 
recommended by Department of Economic Affairs (DEA). The Committee would like the 
Department to ensure completion of these projects in time. 
 
Reply of the Government  
It is submitted that the externally aid ed projects are implemented by the 
concerned State. The Department facilitates the process and ensures that the key 
policy aspects are taken in account while designing and implementing the projects. The 
reasons for seeking extension for such project are al so scrutinized before 
recommending them to Department of Economic Affairs. Usually, additional 
components are agreed for implementation from additional funding being made 
available in Rupee terms due to fluctuating Dollar rates. Also, time overruns occur a s 

25 
 
 
 
these projects are reform oriented and consultations with PRIs and community take 
longer time than estimated.  
  
The reason for extension for Maharashtra project was that out of 3022 Gram 
Panchayats, work in 368 GPs was lagging due to local problem at the Gram Panchayat 
level, elections of several such Gram Panchayats and consequent changes in 
constitution of VWSC. B y September 2009, exit process in 784 GPs had been fully 
completed, another 1961 GPs were expected to complete the exit process by March 
2010 and in the balance 277 GPs where the schemes would be completed by March 
2010, it would take a few more months aft er March 2010 to complete the exit process. 
Completion of accounts and audit process also would take at least six months. 
Therefore, the Jalswarajya Project was extended for one year i.e. upto September 
2010. 
 
In case of Kerala, all physical targets envisa ged in the Project Appraisal 
Document had been achieved on time. However, saline intrusion had taken place due to 
the Tsunami. To rectify this condition, a joint venture scheme with Kerala Water 
Authority had been taken up with World Bank Assistance in the extended period. 
 
In Karnataka, the second Karnataka Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project, 
Jal Nirmal was ending during 2009. They had further requested for the third project 
under this programme. Appreciating the encouraging results emanating from t he 
implementation progress of the ongoing World Bank assisted Jal Nirmal Project (Feb. 
2002-June 2009), the World Bank had conveyed its willingness to continue its support 
to the development initiatives of the State Government in Rural Water Supply and 
Sanitation sector in Karnataka by way of a repeat project, mainly to address the issues 
of water quality affected habitations in Karnataka.  
 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 5.25) 
The Committee wish to emphasise that like rural water supply sector, another 
equally important sector is rural sanitation since there is a direct relationship between 
water, sanitation and health . The Committee feel that rural sanitation has to improve if 
India has to find a place among the developed nations.  However, the Committee‟s 
examination has revealed that as against the huge investment of around Rs. 8000 
crore, the actual rural sanitation  has reached only upto 61 per cent in the country.  The 
Department has submitted before the Committee that rural sanitation is being taken 
care of under Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) started in 1999.  This is a demand -
driven scheme with project cost bein g shared among Centre, States and beneficiary 
and  the goal of TSC is to achieve full household coverage by 2012.  The Committee 
apprehend whether with the present pace of activities, the project objectives in all the 
components of TSC like construction of  Individual Household Latrine (IHHL), school 

26 
 
 
 
toilets, Anganwadi and community complex would be achieved as scheduled. For 
instance, as against the project objective of 11.98 lakh individual household latrines, the 
achievement is as low as 5.83 lakh.  Simil arly, for school toilets against the target of 
11.96 the achievement was 9.15 lakh and in Anganwadi toilets, against the target of 
4.38 lakh, the achievement was 2.86 lakh.  The above figures speak volumes about the 
performance of Department under TSC sche me. The Committee desire that the pace of 
the Programme should be accelerated keeping in view that only 61 per cent coverage 
has been achieved with regard to rural sanitation in the country when the target is to  
achieve full household coverage by 2012. 
Reply of the Government  
There are 593 district projects being implemented under TSC.  The total project 
outlay for completion of project objectives has been estimated at Rs.17885 crore.  Thus 
with the investment of Rs.8000 crore, 61 percent sanitation cover age in the rural areas 
has been achieved. The updated figures on achievements are as under:  
    
Component Objective (Units) Achievement (as 
on 02.02.2010) 
IHHL 12.02 crore 6.12 crore 
School Toilets 11.96 lakh 9.48 lakh 
Toilets for Anganwadis 4.38 lakh 3.01 lakh 
 
All the States are being continuously pursued to accelerate the pace of 
implementation of TSC so as to achieve the project objectives as per the set goals. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 5.26) 
About lower performance on Anganwadis the Secretary, Drinking Water Supply 
expressed her helplessness on this issue as Aganwadis  are largely being run in private 
buildings and State Governments are reluctant to spend Government money on private 
buildings. In this connection the Committee find that the TSC Guidelines brought out by 
the Department are very clear on the issue. As per the Guidelines where Anganwadis 
are being run on private buildings the owner must be asked to construct the toilet as per 
design, and he/she may be allowed to charge enhanced rent for the building to recover 
the cost of construction. The Committee desire t hat the Guidelines on TSC must be 
followed.   The Committee observe that it is a matter of shame for the country that after 
more than five decades of planned development our children in the school do not have 
the basic facility of toilet.  The Committee ag ain strongly recommend to take all out 
initiatives to ensure that all the schools in rural areas have the toilet facility within the 
shortest possible time. 

27 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
The directives of the Committee have been noted.  All the States are bein g 
continuously pursued to accelerate the pace of provision of School toilets so as to 
achieve the project objectives as per the set goals. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 28, Para No. 5.27) 
The other area which in Committees‟ opinion needs urgent attention is 
generation of awareness on inculcating the habit of using the toilets by rural masses so 
that toilets constructed are at least used. In this connection, the Secretary, Drinking 
Water Supply, agreed with the Committee that non -usage of toilets already constructed 
largely in schools is due to weakness on the part of project authorities at field level. The 
Committee feel that there may be several instances where toilets constructed may not 
have adequate water availability and may become dysfunctional over a period of time or 
the people do not have the mindset to use the toilets.  The Committee urge to the 
Department to take steps so that spreading awareness about the use of toilets is 
included as part of the programme itself. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The Total Sanitation Campaign is a demand driven software based campaign.  
As per the provisions contained in the guidelines, 15% of the project outlay is to be 
utilized on IEC activities to crea te awareness about need for sanitation and hygiene to 
generate demand for toilets and promote their usage.  State are being requested from 
time to time to use innovative IEC methods like behavior change communication (BCC) 
and community led approaches to g enerate demand and accelerate the pace of TSC 
implementation. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 29, Para No. 5.28) 
The Committee have been informed that necessary awareness can be generated 
by way of emulating the examples of forming of Eco. Club or School Cabinets amongst 
school teachers and students for supervising sanitation work. The Committee feel that 
this is a noble idea. The Committ ee desire that Sate -wise details of such mechanism 
available in different States be furnished to the Committee. At the same time, other 
States should be advised to move on similar lines for achieving awareness in this 
regard.  

28 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
The concept of creating awareness and maintaining school toilets through school 
cabinets amongst students for supervising sanitation work and good hygiene practices 
was communicated to all State Secretaries in charge of sanitation and school education 
& li teracy through a letter jointly signed by Secretary, DWS and Secretary, Dept of 
School Education and Literacy during Sept 2008. As per the information available with 
the Department, the states of Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamilnadu, Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal are already following the concept of school cabinet. Other 
states are also being pursued to adopt the above concept for achieving awareness in 
this regard.  
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 30, Para No. 5.29) 
Another area that came up for discussion during the course of evidence of the 
representatives of Department of Drinking Water Supply was need for enhancement of 
per unit cost of construction of Individual Household Latrine (IHHL) and Anganwadis. 
The Committee have been informed that the existing cost of Rs.2500/ - , Rs.5000/- and 
Rs.20,000/- for IHHL, Anganwadis and school toilets, is barely sufficient and be suitably 
enhanced. The Secretary, Drinking Water Supply informed the Committee that a 
proposal for hiking the per unit cost of construction for Anganwadis from Rs.5000/ - to 
Rs.8000/- and for rural school from Rs.20,000/ - to Rs.32,000/ -  has already been 
submitted. The Committee would like to know whether similar proposal for hiking the per 
unit cost of IHHL has also been made. The Committee desire that a final decision on 
this issue be taken urgently for achieving the school coverage by 2010.  
 
Reply of the Government  
There is no proposal by the Department to enhance the unit costs of IHHL as of 
now.  However, the proposal for increase in cost of toilet blocks for schools and 
anganwadi f rom existing Rs.20000/ - and Rs.5000/ - respectively to Rs.32000/ - and 
Rs.8000/- respectively is under consideration with the Expenditure Finance Committee.  
[(O.M. No. 11 -RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.13 of Chapter I of the Report) 

29 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 31, Para No. 5.30) 
Two other important issues relate to the convergence of sanitation work in 
NREGA works and linking health with sanitation; and the verification of Nirmal Grams 
which have been recipients of Nirmal Gram Puruskar  in previous years. On the first 
issue the Committee have been informed by the Secretary, Drinking Water Supply that 
by and large, the required convergence has already started as works relating to digging 
of pits for rural toilets are being done under the NREGA. On the issue of linking 
sanitation with health the Committee would like to hear the views of the Department.  
 
Reply of the Government  
The Department has been promoting the need for sanitation linking it with the 
impact on health.  In convergence  with NRHM under Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, the Village Water and Sanitation Committee has already been named as 
Village Water, Health and Sanitation Committee.  As a result, the workers/volunteers 
linked to NRHM like Accredited Social Health A ctivists (ASHA) and Auxiliary Nurse and 
Mid-wife (ANM) are the key motivators for demand generation for sanitation facilities 
and hygiene education.   
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 33, Para No. 5.40) 
The Committee are glad to note that Jalmani  stand alone water purification system has 
been started in November last year to provide safe and clean drinking water to children 
studying in schools with an allocation of Rs.100 crore. The Committee have been 
informed by Secretary, Drinking Water Supply that under the programme, State 
Governments have been asked to identify schools facing quality related problem. As per 
latest figures 12,00 schools have been covered and in December, 2009 the progress 
would be reviewed. However, the Committee find that aga inst the target of 50,000 
schools the actual coverage has been only 12,00 so far and only Rs.32.34 lakh have 
been spent  on the scheme out of Rs.100 crore. In view of this position, the Committee 
recommend that greater efforts are necessary for the success of the programme.  
(Recommendation Para No. 5.40) 
Reply of the Government 
During 2008 -09, an amount of Rs. 100 crore was released to various State 
Governments under Jalmani  Programme for installing 50,000 Standalone Water 
Purification Systems in rural schools of the States.  
 As regards the observation made by the Committee on the slow pace of the 
progress of implementation of Jalmani Programme, it is submitted that the scheme was 
launched in November 2008 and the first installment funds were released in February 

30 
 
 
 
2009.  The States were sent the list of suggested technologies and products. They had 
to identify suitable technologies and products appropriate to their requirement s and 
also identify rural schools where there were bacteriological contamination, iron and/or 
turbidity problems in drinking water sources. Further, they had to go through the 
process of tendering and short -listing before contracts were awarded.  In some S tates 
like Tamilnadu, Gujarat, Punjab and Mizoram this process has been completed. As on 
date, systems have been installed in 10,663 schools and an expenditure of Rs 8.95 
crore has been reported into the online IMIS as on 19/2/2010. Many other States have 
completed the procurement process and have stated that systems will be installed in 
schools by March, 2010. This Department has constituted a High Level Monitoring 
Committee for Jalmani Programme to review its progress and to ensure speedy 
implementation.  The progress of the scheme has been reviewed with poor performing 
States through individual State reviews, by videoconferences and by sharing good 
models from good performing States. 
 The Department has requested the Department of School Education & Liter acy 
to take action on the recommendation of the Committee regarding incorporating these 
issues in the school syllabus. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
  

31 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 3.8) 
The Committee also note  that under the aforesaid guidelines the norms of per 
capita availability of water has been replaced with ensuring drinking water security for 
all.  In the light of declining per capita availability in coming years and in the light of 
impending effect of c limate change and global warming the Committee would like to 
know as to how in the absence of per capita availability norm, the Department of 
Drinking Water Supply is going to achieve the aforesaid objective of ensuring 
permanent drinking water security in  rural areas in the country. The Committee are 
unhappy to observe that the revised guidelines do not spell out the time -frame for 
achieving the objective. The Committee would like to know a categorical reply in this 
regard after interaction with the Minist ry of Water Resources, if necessary, in order to 
arrive at a logical conclusion so as to have a better understanding of the subject in view 
of the Copenhagen Summit on climate change being held during December this year. 
Reply of the Government  
The Ministry of Water Resources has set up a National Water Mission, based on 
the National Action Plan of Climate Change. The Department of Drinking Water Supply 
is represented in the Advisory Board of the Mission headed by the Union Minister of 
Water Resources and the High Level Steering Committee of the Mission. There is also 
an ongoing interaction with the Ministry of Water Resources with regard to availability of 
water resources, monitoring of ground water for level and contaminants and technical 
solutions for re charge. Concerns of the Department for rural water supply have been 
included as one of the goals in the National Water Mission as follows: 
Goal 3 - Focused attention to over-exploited areas 
 Intensive rainwater harvesting and groundwater recharge programme to 
cover 1120 over -exploited, critical and semi -critical blocks during XI Plan 
and rest to be covered in XII Plan and 30% of the urban areas by March 
2012. 
 Intensive rainwater harvesting and groundwater recharge programme to 
cover all the blocks by March 2017. 
 
As per the Report of Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change titled “Climate 
Change and Water” published in June 2008, climate change alone may not be 
responsible for declining availability of drinking water. Other factors like increasing 
population in concentrated areas, increasing urbanization, increasing drawal of water for 
irrigation and industry and need to improve water governance are other major factors 
affecting availability of drinking water.  

32 
 
 
 
 
These have been sought to be addressed in the National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme guidelines. In the revised guidelines of National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme (NRDWP), the Department has set aside 20% of the allocation for 
“Sustainability” component on 100% Central share basis to ensure sustai nability of 
drinking water sources and drinking water security.  Under this component, States are 
required to prepare district-wise Drinking Water Security Plans (DWSP) in convergence 
with schemes like MNREGS, Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWM P), 
afforestation schemes etc. The NRDWP Sustainability component will be used to fund 
the gaps in this plan.  The DWSPs have specific sustainability measures for sources 
and systems with major emphasis on areas where ground water availability is low, 
rainfall is limited and habitations suffer from quality related factors.  
  
In the old guidelines, a habitation constituted 20 households or 100 persons with 
permanently settled population with no safe water sources.  In the revised guidelines, 
this restrictio n has been removed and all households are now to be covered with 
uniform norms of water supply, as decided by the respective State. 
The earlier norm of coverage was to supply 40 lpcd at a distance of 1.6 kms in 
plains and 100 mts elevation in hilly areas.  Many States had progressed much ahead in 
providing better access.  Hence under the new Guidelines, the States have been given 
flexibility to fix their own norms.  However for the purpose of comparability of coverage 
figures, the Department has requested States to report coverage against the norm of 40 
lpcd at a distance of 500 mts in plains and 50 mts elevation in hilly areas. 
The Department has planned to cover all the remaining 627 uncovered 
habitations (as on 1.4.2009) with safe drinking water by 2010-11.   
Under Bharat Nirman , the quality affected habitations were sought to be 
“addressed” with approval of projects. The achievements reported under Bharat Nirman 
were for approval of projects to tackle quality problems, which was taken to mean 
“addressal”. However actual number o f projects completed is different from “addressal”. 
This is because the projects approved and undertaken to tackle water quality have a 
longer implementation period of 2 -3 years, as developing a safe alternate source and 
treatment plants and pipelines etc. take longer.  In the last year of Bharat Nirman Phase 
I, i.e. end of 2008-09, out of a total of 2,05,930 habitations reported as addressed during 
the year, 21,531 habitations were reported as covered with completed projects. The 
remaining 1,84,399 habitat ions were reported as addressed with projects. However on 
the online IMIS, the States have reported that there are 1,79,999 quality affected 
habitations as on 1/4/2009. Out of these, during the Bharat Nirman period(2005 -06 to 
2008-09), on the online IMIS, 32,751 habitations have been reported covered with 
completed schemes leaving a balance of 1,47,248 quality affected habitations 
remaining to be covered in Bharat Nirman Phase II. Of these the States have targeted 
to cover 36,875 habitations in 2009 -10 of which 13,715 have been reported covered as 
on 19.02.2010. It is also submitted  that with more testing, over -extraction of 
groundwater, leaching of fertilizers, contamination of sources by untreated industrial 
effluents, sewage etc the number of quality aff ected habitations may increase from the 
present reported figures. However, all efforts will be made to cover the quality -affected 
habitations by end of 2011-12.   

33 
 
 
 
As regards, slipped back habitations this is a dynamic process due to various 
factors like dr ying up of sources, contamination of sources with chemical or 
bacteriological contamination, population increase, systems outliving their lives etc. This 
is sought to be tackled by emphasizing on taking up sustainability measures to achieve 
sustainability of drinking water sources and water supply systems. It may not be 
possible to give any time-frame for covering slipped back habitations for this reason. 
 
The above figures are for coverage of habitations. However in a habitation some 
households may have access to safe and adequate drinking water whereas others may 
not have access. A habitation is considered as covered only when all households in the 
habitation have access to safe and adequate drinking water. Under the new NRDWP 
guidelines the goal is to pro vide all households with drinking water security. Therefore 
the percentage of households having access to improved or protected sources of 
drinking water is also an indicator of coverage of drinking water security. This indicator 
is used by the United Nati ons for measuring a country‟s progress towards achieving the 
Millennium Development Goal for drinking water. As far as this indicator is concerned 
the latest available sample survey of households i.e. NFHS -3 2005-06 data shows that 
84.2% of rural household s obtained drinking water from an “improved” i.e. a safe 
drinking water source.  
 
The same NFHS -3 survey also reported that 12% of rural households got piped 
water within their premises and 16% from public taps. Some of the more developed 
States have covered more than half of their rural population with piped water supply. It 
is the vision of the Department that gradually all rural areas should be covered with 
piped water supply systems and all rural households should get access to piped water 
within their premises.   
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 4.11) 
Tracing out the progress in rural water supply, the Committee have been 
informed that with the Department‟s sustained efforts, the coverage of drinking water in 
rural areas has improved from 55.45 per cent in 1991 to the level of 86.77 per cent in 
2001. By 2006, as per the Department‟s information 97 per cent rural coverage has  
been achieved. Similarly, on rural sanitation, the Committee have been informed that 
coverage of 21.9 per cent in 2001 has gone upto 61.29 per cent in October, 2009. Thus, 
two sets of figures have been provided to the Committee in respect of drinking wate r 
coverage and rural sanitation. The Committee, express their displeasure over supply of 
two different sets of data relating to the important schemes of the Department. The 
Committee are of the opinion that these figures of coverage in terms of rural drink ing 
water supply and rural sanitation are deceptive and are not at all convincing. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that a time bound village to village survey should be 
carried out to arrive at figures of actual coverage at ground level.  
 
 

34 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
  
The Department relies on information provided by the State Governments in 
presenting the progress in rural water supply coverage. However, recognizing the lack of 
consistent and reliable figures of coverage, the Department has put in place the online 
Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) for NRDWP to provide more 
consistent and authentic habitation level data. Under the IMIS, every habitation in rural 
areas has been uniquely linked to a census village code and every scheme taken up 
under NRDWP has  to be linked to an identified habitation. The field level staff of the 
State Department in charge of rural water supply enter the data of population in every 
habitation that is covered by safe and adequate water supply. It is also submitted that the 
first phase of Census 2011 comprising house listing and housing census is being done 
from April, 2010. This will provide the most authentic data of actual coverage of drinking 
water at ground level for all villages in the country. Hence it is submitted that at the 
present stage, a separate village to village survey for this purpose may not be needed.  
The sanitation coverage reported in the rural areas from time to time is on real 
time basis based on online monitoring system.  The Gram Panchayat has been identif ied 
as the smallest unit for the purpose of sanitation coverage.  The data in respect of every 
Gram Panchayat in the 593 TSC districts is updated by the District level officials. 
Besides, program evaluation is also being carried out by PEO Division of Plan ning 
Commission. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
  

35 
 
 
 
     Chapter IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 4.60) 
The Committee also appreciate that under sustainability component of NRDWP, 
works like artificial recharge/rain water harvesting structures are to be taken up with a 
view to improving the drinking water availability in rural areas and also for reducing 
effects of depletion of ground water.  In this connection, the Committee desire that a 
study be undertaken on the impact of funds released for sustainability and for checking 
ground water use in the country as the declining ground water is a grave problem at 
present. The Committee feel that depletion of ground water table is reaching a critical 
level and unless urgent action is taken to promote conjunctive use of water through 
ground, surface and rain water, a situation of extreme water stress and scarcity may  
emerge. The Committee feel that the Department should work in a pro -active mode to 
promote rain water harvesting on a massive scale and simple methods of rain water 
harvesting may be disseminated widely. 
Reply of the Government  
The Department is promotin g rainwater harvesting in a big way by urging the 
States to go in for conjunctive use of ground -water recharge, surface water and roof-top 
rainwater harvesting. A manual on “Bringing sustainability to water supply schemes in 
Rural India” was published and circulated to all States. A manual on “Artificial recharge 
of groundwater” was also prepared and circulated. These two reference documents are 
also uploaded on the departmental website   www.ddws.gov.in.  
A National Workshop on Design of Sustainability Structures was conducted in the 
current financial year and PHED engineers were sensitized to take up such projects. 
HGM maps have been prepared and distributed to 11 States as on 1/2/2010 and 
similar work is ongoing for another 9 States. It is also proposed that all remaining States 
will be covered within the next 2 -3 years. These maps can be used to identify 
appropriate locations for artificial recharge structures. State Governments have reported   
that they achieved an in creased success rate of borewells drilled and indicated that 
more than 9,000 recharge structures were taken up using these HGM maps. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

36 
 
 
 
Chapter V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 32, Para No. 5.31) 
On the issue of verification of Nirmal Grams with a view to have an idea of actual 
Grams sanitized, the Committee have been informed by the Secretary, Drinking Water 
Supply that this issue is already receiving the attention of the Department and after 
having found large number of other wise ineligible applications for receiving the Nirmal 
Gram Puruskars (NGPs), the Department has curtailed the list of such Gram 
Panchayats. The Committee desire that a survey be undertaken for this purpose in 
different States to ascertain whether recipients of NGPs have actually maintained such 
standards subsequently also.  The Committee may also be apprised of the result of the 
survey.  
Reply of the Government  
The Department is in the process of identifying a survey agency to carry out 
survey of NGP villages for verification of their sustaining NGP status.        
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 34, Para No. 5.41) 
On the issue of quality of drinking water supply for the school going children, the 
Committee feel that the issue merits serious attention and sincere efforts need to be 
made in this regard. The information relating to treating polluted water through vario us 
techniques and other related issues needs to be incorporated in the syllabus of the 
school students so that the future generation of the country are saved from the scourge 
of contaminated drinking water.  
 
 
 
 

37 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
During 2008 -09, an amount of Rs. 100 crore was released to various State 
Governments under Jalmani Programme for installing 50,000 Standalone Water 
Purification Systems in rural schools of the States.  
 As regards the observation made by the Committee on t he slow pace of the 
progress of implementation of Jalmani Programme, it is submitted that the scheme was 
launched in November 2008 and the first installment funds were released in February 
2009.  The States were sent the list of suggested technologies and products. They had 
to identify suitable technologies and products appropriate to their requirements and 
also identify rural schools where there were bacteriological contamination, iron and/or 
turbidity problems in drinking water sources. Further, they had to go through the 
process of tendering and short -listing before contracts were awarded.  In some States 
like Tamilnadu, Gujarat, Punjab and Mizoram this process has been completed. As on 
date, systems have been installed in 10,663 schools and an expenditur e of Rs 8.95 
crore has been reported into the online IMIS as on 19/2/2010. Many other States have 
completed the procurement process and have stated that systems will be installed in 
schools by March, 2010. This Department has constituted a High Level Monit oring 
Committee for Jalmani Programme to review its progress and to ensure speedy 
implementation.  The progress of the scheme has been reviewed with poor performing 
States through individual State reviews, by videoconferences and by sharing good 
models from good performing States. 
 The Department has requested the Department of School Education & Literacy 
to take action on the recommendation of the Committee regarding incorporating these 
issues in the school syllabus. 
[(O.M. No. 11-RD(2)/2/(1)-CRD/2009 dated February, 2010 Department of Drinking 
Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paragraph No.19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
      NEW DELHI;     SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
    20 July, 2010                      Chairperson, 
    29 Asadha, 1932 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 

38 
 
 
 
APPENDIX I 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD 
ON WEDNESDAY, THE 07 JULY, 2010 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room „D‟, Ground Floor,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson         
 Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
3. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
4. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
5. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
6. Shri P.L. Punia 
7. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
8. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
9. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
10. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
11. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh 
12. Shrimati Usha Verma 
13. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Ganga Charan 
15. Shri P.R. Rajan 
16. Shimati Maya Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah  - Additional Director 
 
2. The Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee convened for 
consideration of Memoranda containing draft Reports of the Committee on action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in  four Reports on Demands for Grants           
(2009-10).  

39 
 
 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following memoranda and draft action-
taken Reports :-  
(i)  ****   ****   ****    ****  
(ii)  ****   ****   ****    ****  
(iii)  Memorandum No. 5 and draft Report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Third Report on Demands for Grants            
2009-10) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Drinking Water 
Supply); and 
(iv)  ****   ****   ****    ****  
 
4. ****   ****   ****    ****  
5.  The Committee adopted the draft action-taken Reports at serial no. (iv) above with slight 
modification and those at serial nos. (ii) and (iii) above without any  modification.  
6.  The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid draft Reports 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned to meet on 20th July, 2010.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
**** Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately 
 

40 
 
 
 
   APPENDIX II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations :     34  
    
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted     
  by the Government :       29  
Para Nos. 2.4, 3.7, 3.14, 3.23, 3.24, 4.10, 4.12, 4.14, 4.19,  
      4.20, 4.32, 4.33, 4.34, 4.44, 4.45, 4.46, 4.47, 4.59,  
     4.61, 4.62, 5.8, 5.11, 5.25, 5.26, 5.27, 5.28,  
     5.29 and 5.30 
    
Percentage to total recommendations  :    (85.30)       
     
III. Recommendations which the Committee do    
not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government‟s replies :      2 
  Para No.:  3.8 and 4.11  
         
Percentage to total recommendation        (5.88) 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of   
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee :        1 
Para No.: 4.60 
 
Percentage to total recommendations  :    (2.94) 
      
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies   
of the Government are still awaited :     2 
  Para Nos. : 5.31 and 5.41 
  Percentage to total recommendation  :           (5.88) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 