CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2009-10) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in their Forty-first Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Drinking Water Scenario in Rural Areas
in the Country’ of the Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha
on 21 October, 2008.
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 33 recommendations which have been categorised
as follows:—
(i) Chapter II Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos.: 2.10, 2.11,  2.12, 2.20, 2.21, 2.27,
2.29, 3.13, 3.14, 3.16, 4.14, 4.16, 4.22, 4.23, 5.20,
5.21, 5.23, 5.24, 5.25, 5.29, 6.11, 6.12 and 6.13.
(ii) Chapter III Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s
replies:
Para No.: Nil
(iii) Chapter IV Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos.: 2.13, 2.28, 3.15, 4.15, 4.17, 4.21, 5.26
and 6.15.
(iv) Chapter V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos.: 5.19 and 6.14.

2
3.3.3.3.3. The Committee trust that utmost imThe Committee trust that utmost imThe Committee trust that utmost imThe Committee trust that utmost imThe Committee trust that utmost im portance would beportance would beportance would beportance would beportance would be
given to the implementation of the recommendations/observationsgiven to the implementation of the recommendations/observationsgiven to the implementation of the recommendations/observationsgiven to the implementation of the recommendations/observationsgiven to the implementation of the recommendations/observations
accepted by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible foraccepted by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible foraccepted by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible foraccepted by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible foraccepted by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for
the Department to implement the recommendations in letter andthe Department to implement the recommendations in letter andthe Department to implement the recommendations in letter andthe Department to implement the recommendations in letter andthe Department to implement the recommendations in letter and
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to thespirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to thespirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to thespirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to thespirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the
Committee with reasons for non implementation. The CommitteeCommittee with reasons for non implementation. The CommitteeCommittee with reasons for non implementation. The CommitteeCommittee with reasons for non implementation. The CommitteeCommittee with reasons for non implementation. The Committee
further desire that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/further desire that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/further desire that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/further desire that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/further desire that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/
observations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken repliesobservations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken repliesobservations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken repliesobservations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken repliesobservations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken replies
to the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this reportto the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this reportto the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this reportto the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this reportto the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this report
should be furnished to them at an early date.should be furnished to them at an early date.should be furnished to them at an early date.should be furnished to them at an early date.should be furnished to them at an early date.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Expeditious updation of data regarding coverage of habitations
with drinking water
Recommendations Serial Nos. 1 & 2
(Para Nos. 2.10 & 2.11)
5.  The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Provision of access to clean and safe drinking water is one of
the biggest challenges facing the country at present. In this regard,
having authentic and reliable data is crucial for planning future
strategies for providing people sufficient, safe, accessible and
affordable water for domestic and personal use. The Committee
in their previous Reports had consistently been recommending
to the Department to undertake measures to obtain authentic and
reliable data with regard to FC, PC and NC habitations in rural
areas of the country. At the same time, the Committee expressed
apprehension over the tall claims made by the Department of
coverage status of more than 90 per cent over the last few years.
While acknowledging the efforts made by the Department in this
regard by initiating Habitation Survey in 2003, the Committee had
felt that the process of revalidation of results of Habitation Survey
by IIPA should not be prolonged, as within the said period the
entire scenario of coverage status would undergo transformation

3
again which would render the entire exercise futile and irrelevant.
Further, the Committee in their Twenty-Eighth Report on
Demands for Grants had expressed concern in the strongest terms
over the discrepancy highlighted between the updated data of
CAP 99 and the Habitation Survey 2003 results. However, despite
the shortcomings, the Committee appreciate the fact that the
Department have managed to have the corrected data of
Habitation Survey after the revalidation by IIPA and verification
by the Monitoring Division of the Ministry, which has not been
put in the public domain. The Committee hope that this data will
serve as the basis for future planning and projections by the
Department and will be regularly updated by the States so as to
give a transparent picture of the real scenario of availability of
drinking water in rural areas.”
[Recommendation (Para No. 2.10)]
“Further, as informed by the Department, the said baseline data
is to be updated on yearly basis by the States through software
developed for the purpose by enabling online data entry. The
Committee commend the efforts of the Department in this regard
and hope that the Centre would provide all kind of assistance
to the States to ensure purposeful utilization of the said software.
The PHED and Panchayati staff should be familiarized with the
system for effective reporting of the situation on the ground. The
Committee may be suitably apprised about the performance of
the various States regarding the online data entry system.”
[Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)]
6. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as
under:—
“The Habitation survey was conducted in 2003 and the data was
validated through IIPA and hosted on Departmental website in
August, 2006. Since then this data has been updated in 2007 and
2008. Presently this data is being realigned and updated for
implementation of the revised RWS guidelines.”
[Reply to Recommendation 1 (Para No. 2.10)]

4
“The Department has organized a series of training programmes
to familiarise the States with the software. Also, special training
programmes have been conducted at the request of the States. The
Department has also developed an online feedback section, where
queries can be sent directly to the concerned officer of the
Department. The status of data entry is also monitored every
month. With all these efforts, all States have now started using
the online system. A few States still have some problems which
are not related to the software. These are:—
1. Jammu and Kashmir, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and
Sikkim are not very regular in data entry due to local
network connectivity problems.
2. Andhra Pradesh was not regular in the last five months due
to re-organization of the department dealing with rural water
supply.
However, corrective action is being taken with these States also,
so that their performance becomes better in the coming months.”
[Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)]
7.  The Committee are happy to note that with the consistent
pursuance of the issue, the Department of Drinking Water Supply
has been able to update the data regarding coverage of habitations
for drinking water purposes during 2008 and the same is being
realigned and further updated for implementation of Revised
National Rural Drinking Water Programme Guidelines. The
Committee urge that the process of further updation and
realignment of data should be spurred up so that it can be used
for the new programme which has already commenced from
1st April, 2009.
On the related issue of using the online system of data entry
with regard to coverage of habitations by drinking water in
different States, the Committee appreciate that with the consistent
efforts made by the Department most of the States are using the
system. However, some of the States like Jammu and Kashmir,
Manipur, Nagaland, Mizoram and Sikkim are not very regular in

5
data entry due to local network connectivity problems. Besides,
Andhra Pradesh is also facing problems for the last five months
due to reorganization of the Department dealing with rural water
supply. The Committee feel that the problems of Jammu and
Kashmir and some of the North Eastern States and Sikkim as stated
above may be due to their location in difficult geographical
condition. The issue of network connectivity problems need to be
taken up with the concerned States as well as the Union Ministry
of Information Technology. As regards problems of the State of
Andhra Pradesh, the Committee hope that everything would have
been settled by now and the State would be regular in data entry.
The Committee may be kept apprised about the follow up in this
regard.
The Committee in the earlier recommendation had also
emphasized on the training of PHED and the Panchayati Raj staff
with regard to the online system for effective reporting of the
situation on the ground. In the action taken reply, the Department
has informed about a series of training programmes to familiarize
the States with the software. The Committee would like to the
apprised whether the PHED and the staff of Panchayati Raj
Institutions have also been provided the requisite training in this
regard.
B. Need for mechanism for objective verification of coverage of
habitations for drinking water purposes
Recommendation Serial No. 4
(Para No. 2.13)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“xxxxx Besides, the Committee would like to emphasise that
merely entering the data online by the States is not adequate, but
objective verification of the claimed coverage status is of prime
importance. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the
Department should evolve a mechanism of objective verification
of the data provided by the States at the ground level. The
Committee feel that such monitoring and verification procedure
would be facilitated as and when the names of the habitations

6
under different categories from the States are also made available.
The Committee recommend to the Department to take concrete
action on the lines suggested above to make the Panchayat,
District and State authorities more accountable and the data more
authentic. The Committee emphasise that water is central to the
life of each and every individual and given the magnitude of the
problem, a sound knowledge and information with regard to
coverage status is extremely pertinent for the sector. Such
information in public domain is crucial for the State to evolve
any long term policy and planning to improve the delivery system
and also help mobilize communities and civil society around
water related issues. The Committee would like the Department
to consider their recommendations/suggestions with all the
seriousness and provide specific response on the issues raised
above.”
[Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)]
9. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The names and categories of each habitation has now been made
available in public domain. Any person can access the habitation
data base online and view details of water supply schemes of his/
her village from the main page of the website under “Citizens
Corner”. A feedback section has also been added to the website
for accepting any comment from the public.”
[Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)]
10. The Committee are unhappy to find from the reply that
the onus of verifying the actual status of coverage with regard to
drinking water resources has been left to the public. The Committee
feel that it is the responsibility of the Department to ensure
meaningful utilization of crores of rupees being allocated every year
to different State Governments for ensuring drinking water supply
to the rural masses. It was in this context that the Committee had
earlier recommended for objective verification of data provided by
the States in this regard. It seems that the Department has not taken
the recommendation of the Committee in the right perspective. The

7
Committee would like concrete action on the recommendation of
the Committee to be taken by the Department and the Committee
be informed accordingly.
C. Coverage of habitations with less than 100 population on
priority basis
Recommendations Serial Nos. 5 & 6
(Para Nos. 2.20 and 2.21)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“As already emphasised by the Committee, water is the lifeblood
of a community and hence on section of the population should
be deprived of the valuable water resource. The Committee
in their previous Demands for Grants Reports had been
recommending to the Department to give due importance to
habitations having population less than 100 which are not
included under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of ARWSP. The
Committee have persistently been recommending to the Depart-
ment to shun their complacency and insensitivity in this regard
and take urgent action to cover such habitations with less than
100 population on a priority basis. The Committee are perturbed
to note that a total of 46,000 such habitations i.e. only 50 per cent
have been covered so far, while the rest have not been covered
with drinking water facilities. The Committee would like to
emphasize to the Department that shifting the responsibility to
the State Governments would not fulfil the objective of improving
access of all rural households to drinking water facilities as
presently the States are not even able to fulfil their targets of
coverage of habitations with population of more than 100 persons
are 20 households. The Committee are dismayed to learn from
the replies of the Department that none of the States have reported
coverage of habitations with population less than 100, which itself
is a telling reminder to the Union to undertake this huge
responsibility as these habitations may be in most difficult and
backward areas requiring more financial resources.”
[Recommendation (Para No. 2.20)]

8
“The Committee were further informed by the Department that
such habitations are proposed to be covered in the post Bharat
Nirman period of Eleventh Plan. The Committee would like to
state that in many sparsely populated areas within States, there
may be large number of habitations with scattered population and
uneven development. This, however, should not deny this
segment of the population their basic human right of access to
clean and safe drinking water. The Government should undertake
all endeavours for full realization of universal access to clean and
safe drinking water. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend to the Department to cover all rural habitations,
irrespective of their size, on a priority basis and undertake
appropriate exercise viz. revision of ARWSP norms and provide
100 percent funds for the same. The Committee would like the
Department to devise concrete strategies for the purpose and keep
the Committee informed.”
[Recommendation (Para No. 2.21)]
12. No Department in the action taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The recommendation of the Committee has been implemented
now in the revised guidelines. According to paragraph 1 of the
revised guidelines, the goal is, “to provide every rural person with
adequate water for drinking, cooking and other domestic basic
needs on a sustainable basis. This basic requirement should meet
certain minimum water quality standards and be readily and
conveniently accessible at all times and in all situations.”
The restriction of only covering habitations with 100 or more
population or 20 households has now been removed. The funds
are now to be used to provide potable drinking water to all
habitations, irrespective of the size of the habitation.”
[Reply to Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.20 and 2.21)]
13. The Committee are glad to note that finally the revised
guidelines of National Rural Drinking Water Programme have
removed the restriction of covering habitations only with 100 or

9
more population or 20 households for the purpose of getting
benefit under the programme related to drinking water. With
the continuous pursuance of the issue, the long pending
recommendation of the Committee has been implemented. The
Committee feel that this is a welcome step and would go a long
way in tackling the problems of water shortage in sparsely
populated or inaccessible areas in the country. They now expect
that concerted efforts would be made to cover such thinly populated
habitations.
D. Needs for covering Not Covered (NC) habitations on priority
basis
Recommendations Serial No. 8
(Para No. 2.28)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Further, an analysis of the achievements vis-à-vis the targets
during Tenth Plan and Bharat Nirman period indicates that
underachievement is much more in the category of Not Covered
habitations over the last many years. The Committee feel that
these Not Covered habitations may be in the most difficult
geographical and backward areas. The Department should,
therefore, ask the States to cover these Not Covered habitations
in a priority basis and provide necessary support to the States
to help them achieve the objective. The Committee would like
the Department to give necessary directions to the States in this
regard and communicate the same to the Committee.”
[Recommendation (Para No. 2.28)]
15. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as
under:—
“All States have been specifically asked to target not covered
habitations. The status of coverage has been given in reply to
Recommendation no. 2.27. Only Rajasthan will not be able to
achieve the targets, and will continue the work in 2009-10.”

10
As far as reply to recommendation at S.No. 2.27 is concerned, the
Government have states as follows:—
“The Department of Drinking Water Supply held review meetings
with States throughout the year. Also, the poor performing States
were reviewed periodically for improving their performance
during 2007-08 and 2008-09. As a result, the cumulative
performance upto March, 2009 under Bharat Nirman as reported
by States so far indicates that 54,430 habitations which were under
uncovered category have been covered with potable water supply.
In regard to the slipped back habitations as per the reports
received from the States so far 354,015 habitations have been
covered with potable water supply. This figure also includes some
habitations which although belonging to the slipped back category
were not included in the original Bharat Nirman target. This
explains the reason for covering more number of targets than the
target stipulated under slipped back category under Bharat
Nirman. The new Guidelines under National Rural Drinking
Water program introduced with effect from 1.4.2009 focuses on
ensuring sustainability in the drinking Water supply programme
through source strengthening as well as systematic improvements
for O&M purposes. The action plan outlined in the Guidelines
in this regard will lessen the slipping back of covered habitations
in the future.”
[Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.28)]
16. On the recommendation of the Committee regarding the
need for giving priority by State Governments to the coverage of
not covered habitations, the Department has given a contradictory
reply. In the reply given with regard to the concerned
recommendation 
i.e. 2.28 the Department has also referred to the
reply given to recommendation No. 2.27. The reading of the
aforesaid two replies together indicates the said contradictions. On
the one hand, it has been stated that only Rajasthan will not be
able to achieve the targets and will continue the work in
2009-10, on the other hand, it has been stated that all States have
been specifically asked to target not covered habitations. Further

11
in reply to recommendation No. 2.27 it has been stated that the
cumulative performance upto March, 2009 indicates that 54,430
habitations which were under not covered habitations have been
covered with potable water supply. In the opinion of the Committee,
if all the habitations have been covered, the question of Rajasthan
continuing the work in this regard all the states being asked to
target the not covered habitations does not arise. The Committee
take strong objection to the way the recommendation has been dealt
with and contradictory position with regard to not covered
habitations indicated. The Department should indicate clearly the
data will regard to not covered and partially covered habitations
in different States as on date as well as the number of such
habitations covered during the last three years so as to have a clear
picture of not covered habitations in the country.
E. Identifying under-performing States for checking under
spending
Recommendations Serial No. 12
(Para No. 3.15)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Besides, the Committee would urge that apart from adequate
Government funding for the purpose, the Department should
place more emphasis on the issue of meaningful and optimal
utilisation of resources in order to make significant progress
with regard to provision of clean and safe drinking water to
rural masses. The utilisation position plan-wise indicates
under-utilisation of ARWSP funds during the sixth, Seventh,
Eighth and Ninth Plans as well as during the Annual Plans of
1990-91 and 1991-92. Further, the same data indicates
underutilization from the State share during the Seventh, Eighth,
Ninth and Tenth Plans. Besides, if year-wise performance is
analysed, the underutilization of allocation can be seen to be a
recurrent feature though the situation seems to have improved
to certain extent over the last few years especially with regard
to utilization of Central share. The delay in utilization of funds
by the States, which results in large unspent balances with the
State Governments is a major cause of concern. The Centre

12
through review meetings and close interaction should identify the
under-performing States and suggest remedial measures to
redress the problem of underspending. The Committee would like
the Department to take all concrete steps to ensure accountability
from the States regarding optimal utilization of the resources from
both Central as well as State share. The Committee may be
apprised of the specific measures taken with regard to the same.”
[Recommendation (Para No. 3.15)]
18. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as
under:—
“All poor performing States were reviewed on a monthly basis
to help them improve performance. As a result, almost all States
showed improved spending and physical progress. Only Jharkhand
could not improve performance in 2008-09, and Uttarakhand was
marginally below full achievement.”
[Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.15)]
19. Pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee to
identify underperforming States and to suggest remedial measures
to address the problem of under spending, the Committee have been
informed that performance of all poor performing States was
reviewed on monthly basis for their improvement and as a result
improvement has been discernible both in terms of their spending
and also physical progress in different States except Jharkhand and
Uttarakhand. On the contrary, the Committee find from the
Outcome Budget (2009-2010) of the Department [refer statement at
page 25 - of Outcome Budget 2009-10 indicating total State-wise
availability of funds 
vis-à-vis expenditure during the year
(2008-09)] that a large number of States like Maharashtra,
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh,
Gujarat, Orissa, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu etc. still have huge
gaps between funds available 
vis-à-vis expenditure reported for
drinking water purpose. For instance, in the case of States like
Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar against the total availability
of funds of Rs. 703.32 crore, Rs. 688.25 crore and Rs. 578.94 crore,

13
the expenditure reported was as low as Rs. 291.49 crore, Rs. 461.19
crore and Rs. 164.74 crore respectively. Similar was the case with
some of the other States also. In respect of Gujarat, Orissa, Tamil
Nadu, West Bengal as against the available funds of Rs. 376.06
crore, Rs. 298.68 crore, Rs. 287.82 crore and Rs. 392.56 crore, the
expenditure reported was abysmally low to the level of Rs. 145.26
crore, Rs. 125.55 crore, Rs. 145.46 crore and Rs. 152.85 crore
respectively.
The Committee are anguished to note the casual way in which
the Department has tried to furnish a positive picture of the
financial achievement of the States on one of the most important
programmes i.e. ARWSP whereas the actual position is quite
dismal as evident from the data provided in the Outcome Budget
2009-10. The Department owe an explanation for providing
misleading information to the Committee in this regard. The
Department should take utmost care before furnishing the desired
information to the Parliamentary Committee.
F. Special emphasis for remote and inaccessible areas
Recommendation Serial No. 15
(Para No. 4.15)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“xx on the question of under-utilisation of funds by States, the
Committee have been informed that sometimes States face
difficulty in providing Utilisation Certificates, while at other times
there are certain habitations in remote and inaccessible areas in
some States. On timely receipt of UCs from States, the Committee
have already recommended to make use of the online monitoring
system upto the district and Panchayat level in previous part of
the Report. However, the Committee feel that the primary
challenge before the Department is not mere utilization of funds
on paper, but to ensure that the funds are directed to sectors and
segments where they are required the most. In view of this, the
Department should provide all kinds of technical assistance to
the States to redress the situation through constant and regular

14
interaction with them by holding review meetings, training
programmes/workshops for State/District level officials and
provide solutions for the specific requirements of States. The
Committee suggest to the Department to give special emphasis
to habitations which are in remote and inaccessible areas by
providing enhanced resources to them so as to universalize
the access of this basic service to each and every part of the
country.”
[Recommendation (Para No. 4.15)]
21. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The Department has been organizing a series of workshops
across the country for State and District level officers. Funds are
being provided to all States to organize such workshops for
panchayat and block level persons. Each State has also been asked
to identify a Technical Agency which can assist in matters
requiring technical inputs. Each State has also formed a
Communication & Capacity Development Unit whose work is
human resource development for all stakeholders also. Training
has been imparted on diverse subjects like Workshop on
Swajaldhara, Community participation, Water quality monitoring
and surveillance, Operation and maintenance, Sustainability
of Water sources, Capacity building for Anganwadi workers
etc.”
[Reply to Recommendation (Para Nos. 4.15)]
22. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had
emphasized (i) to provide all kinds of technical assistance to the
States to redress the problems faced by the various State
Governments in furnishing the utilization certificates and (ii) to
give special emphasis to habitations which are in remote and
inaccessible areas by providing enhanced resources. The Department
has addressed the first issue and has chosen not to respond at all
to the second issue. The Committee would like the reaction of the
Department on this aspect of the recommendation which has not
been responded to in the action taken reply.

15
G. Operation and Maintenance Activities
Recommendation Serial No. 17
(Para No. 4.17)
23. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Another problem faced by the States in management of water
supply schemes relate to O&M costs. As per the current norms,
15 percent of ARWSP funds are to be spent by the
State Governments for O&M purposes. As pointed out by the
Department, large schemes are commissioned for water supply
which later suffer due to the problems in O&M. The Committee
would like the Department to keep vigil relating to the feasibility
and sustainability of water supply schemes. However, since most
of the O&M activities are being undertaken by PRIs who do not
have the capacity for the same, the Union Government should
provide all technical guidance to the States for the same. The
Department may also engage the expertise of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj and insist upon them to work towards capacity
building of Panchayats, which is crucial for the maintenance of
water supply schemes in rural areas. Besides, monitoring of O&M
activities by the State, through some institutional mechanism
should also be undertaken. The Committee hold that the
Department of Drinking Water Supply being nodal Department
must ensure that States do not face difficulties in implementation
of water supply schemes. The Centre should not shy way from
their responsibility by stating that water is a State subject as
providing access to safe drinking water to rural masses is the
mandate of the Department of Drinking Water Supply. The
Committee, therefore, emphasize that the Union Government
should provide all kinds of backing through aid, technology
transfer, capacity building and partnership with the States
through both formal and informal methods, and pursue with them
to treat the issue as a foremost developmental agenda. The
Committee may be apprised of the desired action taken for
coordination with the States with regard to all the issues discussed
above.
[Recommendation (Para No. 4.17)]

16
24. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as
under:—
“Under Communication and Capacity Development units (CCDU)
all States have been requested to impart extensive training to the
Panchayati Raj Members as well as VWSC members on operation
and maintenance of the water supply schemes. The State
Governments are advised to consult and choose the technology
options before finalising the water supply schemes for particular
village/habitations.”
[Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.17)]
25. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had dealt
in detail with the issue of operation and maintenance of drinking
water schemes and emphasized that the Union Government should
provide all kinds of backing through formal and informal methods.
Even when the guidelines of the restructured programme 
i.e.
National Rural Drinking Water Programme being implemented
w.e.f. 1st April, 2009 addresses the issue of operation and
maintenance, comprehensively, the Department has furnished an
incomplete and vague reply stating that all States have been
requested to impart extensive training to PRIs as well as VWSC
members on O&M of the water supply schemes. The Committee
are anguished to note the casual approach of the Department while
responding to their recommendation. The Committee would like
that the action should be taken on all the aspects related to water
schemes as raised in their recommendation and they be informed
accordingly.
H. Expeditious completion of on-going Drinking Water Schemes
under ‘Swajaldhara’
Recommendation Serial No. 18.
(Para No. 4.21)
26. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Department had initiated reforms programme and the
Swajaldhara Scheme to institutionalize community participation

17
in the drinking water supply sector. However, there were serious
problems identified in the implementation of Swajaldhara, which
were regularly highlighted by the Committee in their respective
Reports. These problems related to inadequate planning and
homework before launching the Scheme, lack of motivation
among States/Districts to come forth with projects, lack of demand
among communities, problems regarding 10 per cent community
contribution etc. Pursuant to the strong recommendations of the
Committee in their previous Reports, the Department considered
and reviewed the Scheme and decided that from the Eleventh
Plan, there will be only one Scheme viz. ARWSP which will have
an element of community participation but may not insist on
community contribution. The Scheme will involve signing
Memorandum of Understanding with the States which will entail
capacity building programmes for PRIs, empowerment of PRIs to
levy user changes for O&M etc. Besides, the new guidelines
stipulate that it is upto the States to have community contribution
from the 50 per cent funds provided by them, the quantum of
which is to be decided by the State. In view of the above discussed
scenario, the Committee would like the Department to first and
foremost ensure that the ongoing projects under Swajaldhara are
completed and are not neglected as the Scheme is sought to be
discontinued. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that every effort should be taken by the Department to give
emphasis on pending/incomplete projects under Swajaldhara in
consultation with the State Governments. The Committee feel that
in view of the poor financial and physical performance of the
Scheme earlier, it becomes imperative for the Department to
monitor the ongoing projects of Swajaldhara and ensure their
timely achievement. The Department must provide additional
funds, if required to incomplete/pending projects under
Swajaldhara. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
latest position State-wise of projects undertaken and completed
under the Swajaldhara Scheme.
[Recommendation (Para No. 4.21)]

18
27. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
The number of Schemes completed up to March, 2009 under
Swajaldhara is as follows:—
State Approved Completed
Andhra Pradesh 3131 2812
Arunachal Pradesh 72 54
Assam 3765 3735
Bihar 4 0
Chhattisgarh 304 278
Gujarat 1426 864
Haryana 113 13
Himachal Pradesh 1865 1204
Jammu and Kashmir 75 25
Jharkhand 339 208
Karnataka 1007 735
Kerala 360 316
Madhya Pradesh 1488 1037
Maharashtra 1590 1265
Mizoram 14 12
Orissa 1432 1200
Punjab 63 34
Rajasthan 1603 699
Tamil Nadu 1623 1622
Tripura 793 497
Uttar Pradesh 1361 542
Uttarakhand 204 187
West Bengal 104 42

19
In so far as the incomplete schemes are concerned, the States can
utilize funds for completing the same from the funds allocated
under National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) for
the year 2009-10 w.e.f. 1.4.2009 and onwards.
[Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.21)]
28. The Committee find from the data that out of 22,736
approved projects, 17,381 projects were completed by March, 2009
which means that 5,355 projects are still ongoing under
Swajaldhara, a community contribution based drinking water
programme which has now been discontinued. Even when the
Committee in the earlier recommendation had strongly emphasized
the need to pay social attention to the pending/incomplete projects
under Swajaldhara, the action taken reply indicates the insensitivity
of the Department towards the projects for which crores of rupees
have already been sanctioned. The Department has tried to shift
the responsibility of completion of ongoing projects to the State
Governments by stating that they can utilize funds from allocation
made under National Rural Drinking Water Programme. While
expressing unhappiness over the way the Department has
responded to the issue, the Committee would like to reiterate their
earlier recommendation that the Department should monitor the
ongoing projects of Swajaldhara even if some additional funds have
to be provided for the same.
I. Updating software of online monitoring for addressing the
problem of slippages of habitations for drinking water
purposes.
Recommendation Serial No. 21
(Para No. 5.19)
29. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Standing Committee in their earlier Reports had considered
the issue of slippages with utmost seriousness and made series
of recommendations to arrest the problem of slippages. The
Committee in their Reports on Demands for Grants 2007-2008 and

20
2008-2009 had expressed strong displeasure over the factual
position with regard to coverage status as revealed by the
Habitation Survey results indicating huge incidences of slippages
negating all progress made in the drinking water sector. The
Committee, however, appreciated the efforts of the Department
made with regard to the online data entry system where States
furnish the data online on an annual basis. Such a measure, the
Committee feel would substantially help the Department to have
a clear picture regarding coverage status. The Department should
continue efforts in this regard through regularly imparting
training to officials so that the discrepancies and anomalies in the
Survey Results are never repeated in future. Further, the
Committee would also like the Department to make provision for
entry of State-specific reasons for slippages so that timely
corrective measures may be taken through technical and financial
support from the Centre. Besides, strict monitoring and
verification of the data is imperative for more transparency and
reliability. The Committee may be apprised of the performance
of the online system and suggestions, if any, for improvement
of the software, as already pointed out in the earlier part of the
Report.”
[Recommendation (Para No. 5.19)]
30. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as
under:—
“Provision for entering state specific reasons for slippage is being
developed in the online system. The online system has been
accepted by all States and their suggestions have also been
incorporated. The software is now being modified to capture the
Census population that has been covered with drinking water
supply schemes.”
[Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 5.19)]
31. The Committee are happy to note that the Department has
agreed to their recommendation for making provision for entry of
State specific reasons for slippages in the online system which has
been accepted by all States and the software is being modified. The

21
Committee would like that the software should be modified
expeditiously as it would help the Government to a great extent
in finding the State specific problems instantly and taking
corrective action accordingly. The Committee may also be apprised
of the performance of the online system.
J. Incentive mechanism for sustainability
Recommendation Serial No. 27
(Para No. 5.26)
32. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Another very important issue which surfaced during
examination of the subject related to conjunctive use of water.
The Secretary during evidence stated that they are encouraging
States and PRIs to revive traditional sources. The Committee
would like to suggest to the Department to convince the Planning
Commission to provide more funds to the States for the purpose.
Further, as communicated by the Department, some mechanism
may be evolved for providing incentives to the villages, for taking
up sustainability measures. The Committee would like to suggest
to the Department that incentive mechanism on the lines of NGP
for rewarding villages, which are promoting sanitation practices
must be evolved for water conservation, management, rainwater
harvesting, revival of traditional sources and other sustainability
measures. In this regard, related schemes of other Departments/
Ministries must be coordinated and consultations with all
Ministries held so that the modalities and components of the
incentive mechanism are expeditiously evolved. The Committee
feel that such practical policy initiatives would help achieve
sustained progress in the field of providing drinking water. The
Department should update the Committee on the efforts
undertaken by them on all the aforesaid aspects.”
[Recommendation Serial No. 27 (Para No. 5.26)]
33. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as
under:—
“After the deliberations with all concerned Ministries including
the Planning Commission and approval of the Cabinet, the funds

22
for sustainability of drinking water sources have been increased
from 5% (on 75:25 Centre to State share) to 20% on 100% GOI
assistance. Therefore, the Central fund provided to the States the
building in sustainability component has been sustainability
component has been substantially increased.”
[Reply Recommendation (Para No. 5.26)]
34. The Committee recommended that an incentive mechanism
should be evolved on the lines of Nirmal Gram Puraskar being
awarded to villages for promoting the sanitation practices. However,
they are perturbed to note that the reply of the Government is silent
on the action taken in this regard. It simply states that the funds
of sustainability of drinking water have been increased from 5%
to 20%. The Committee would like the Government to furnish a
specific reply in this regard.
K. Need for time bound manpower training for testing water
quality
Recommendation Serial No. 33
(Para No. 6.15)
35. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The National Rural Drinking Water Quality Management and
Surveillance Programme launched in 2006 aimed at testing of all
drinking water sources by grass-root level workers in each
Panchayat by simple-to-use field test kits. So far, 1.96 lakh such
workers have been trained out of 11.66 lakh who need to be
trained for water quality monitoring and surveillance activities.
The Committee, during examination of previous Demands for
Grants, have been informed about the deadline which have been
extended thrice as States could not complete the training within
the time period. The Department further informed that the
training is coupled with supply of kits to Gram Panchayats and
for large number of States such as Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Jharkhand, Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan
Sikkim, Tripura, Uttarakhand and all UTs since Gram Panchayat

23
level training has not been completed, the kits could not be
supplied. The Committee on the aforesaid issue would like the
Department to seek time-bound commitment from States to
complete the training of Gram Panchayats for testing water
quality in village Panchayats. The Department on their part
should provide all assistance to the States after identifying the
bottlenecks faced by them. The Committee would like to suggest
that through PRIs, the community has to be made conscious of
water quality and the testing kits should be made available to
other institutions also such as schools, colleges and qualified
NGIOs etc. in the area. Further, through these institutions, low
cost technologies for water treatment at household habitation level
may be marketed with the aid of district level authorities. The
Committee maintain that a multi-pronged strategy with the
involvement of various related ministries is imperative for
implementing measures for improvement in water quality and a
systematic and holistic approach for linking both quality and
quantity aspect of water management must be evolved. The
Committee would like the Department to earnestly consider the
aforesaid aspects and formulate effective strategies for water
management.”
[Recommendation (Para No. 6.15)]
36. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as
under:—
“As per the National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring
and Surveillance Programme, about 3.39 lakh people have been
trained in the country, as per reports available as on 16/4/2009.
States have been requested to complete all training programmes,
latest by December, 2009 and also to enter data online into the
Integrated Management Information System developed by the
Department. Analysis of such data would then, provide
opportunity to the Department to provide necessary assistance to
the States after identifying the bottlenecks faced by them.
Household based and Community based Terracotta filters
are being promoted for tackling iron and bacteriological
contamination. The technology is very simple and the products
could be locally produced by trained NGOs/Women Self Help

24
Groups. Such action has already been initiated in Karnataka and
Tripura States. Treatment of Arsenic, Fluoride and Salinity are
not advised locally as these treatment plants/filters are difficult
to operate and maintain and involve serious reject management
problems. Another new programme called “Jalmani” was
launched on 14/11/2008 for providing stand alone drinking water
purification systems in rural schools in the country for providing
pure drinking water to rural school children at the consumption
point.”
[Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 6.15)]
37. The Committee are dismayed to learn from the action taken
reply that as against the target of manpower training of 11.66 lakh
persons for testing water quality in the country at grass root
Panchayat level, only 3.39 lakh persons could be trained in a time
span of four years starting from 2006 to 2009. The Committee have
been informed that State Governments have been requested to
complete the ongoing training programme by December, 2009 and
action has already been taken in two States of Karnataka and
Tripura. The Committee are at a loss to understand how the task
which the Department could not achieve in four years time can
now be achieved in coming four months time. The Committee
deplore the way the Department has handled the important issue
of manpower training for water quality testing in the country
during the preceding four years. The Committee, therefore, would
like the Department to have a relook at its strategy on the issue
and rework its action plan in close coordination with States as the
progress is not satisfactory at all.

25
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10)
Provision of access to clean and safe drinking water is one of the
biggest challenges facing the country at present. In this regard, having
authentic and reliable data is crucial for planning future strategies for
providing people sufficient, safe, accessible and affordable water for
domestic and personal use. The Committee in their previous Reports
had consistently been recommending to the Department to undertake
measures to obtain authentic and reliable data with regard to FC, PC
and NC habitations in rural areas of the country. At the same time,
the Committee expressed apprehension over the tall claims made by
the Department of coverage status of more than 90 per cent over the
last few years. While acknowledging the efforts made by the
Department in this regard by initiating Habitation Survey in 2003, the
Committee had felt that the process of revalidation of results of
Habitation Survey by IIPA should not be prolonged, as within the said
period the entire scenario of coverage status would undergo
transformation again which would render the entire exercise futile and
irrelevant. Further, the Committee in their Twenty-Eighth Report on
Demands for Grants had expressed concern in the strongest terms over
the discrepancy highlighted between the updated data of CAP 99 and
the Habitation Survey 2003 results. However, despite the shortcomings,
the Committee appreciate the fact that the Department have managed
to have the corrected data of Habitation Survey after the revalidation
by IIPA and verification by the Monitoring Division of the Ministry,
which has not been put in the public domain. The Committee hope
that this data will serve as the basis for future planning and projections
by the Department and will be regularly updated by the States so as

26
to give a transparent picture of the real scenario of availability of
drinking water in rural areas.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Habitation survey was conducted in 2003 and the data was
validated through IIPA and hosted on Departmental website in August,
2006. Since then this data has been updated in 2007 and 2008. Presently
this data is being realigned and updated for implementation of the
revised RWS guidelines.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)
Further, as informed by the Department, the said baseline data
is to be updated on yearly basis by the States through software
developed for the purpose by enabling online data entry. The
Committee commend the efforts of the Department in this regard and
hope that the Centre would provide all kind of assistance to the States
to ensure purposeful utilization of the said software. The PHED and
Panchayat staff should be familiarized with the system for effective
reporting of the situation on the ground. The Committee may be
suitably apprised about the performance of the various States regarding
the online data entry system.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Department has organized a series of training programmes
to familiarise the States with the software. Also, special training
programmes have been conducted at the request of the States. The
Department has also developed an online feedback section, where
queries can be sent directly to the concerned officer of the Department.
The status of data entry is also monitored every month. With all these
efforts, all States have now started using the online system. A few States

27
still have some problems which are not related to the software. These
are:—
1. Jammu and Kashmir, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and
Sikkim are not very regular in data entry due to local
network connectivity problems.
2. Andhra Pradesh was not regular in the last five months due
to re-organization of the department dealing with rural water
supply.
However, corrective action is being taken with these States also,
so that their performance becomes better in the coming months
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
After comprehensively examining the issue and problems related
to data management, the Committee would further like the Department
to evolve some mechanism for ascertaining the names of the FC/PC
and NC habitations for each State. A provision for inclusion of such
names should be made in the online monitoring system and hosted
on the website in order to make the data more reliable. Appropriate
changes should be made in the format of the software as well as in
the Monthly Progress Report in this regard. This would not only help
the Department to have a clear record of coverage status as well as
slippages in each State but with continuous updation, the Department
would also be able to keep a track of other relevant details such as
time required to cover NC/FC habitation in particular areas, the funds
required and spent for the same for each habitation etc. This would
go a long way in not only ensuring reliability of the coverage status
but also aid in tackling specific problems of certain habitations. The
Committee urge the Department to take expeditious measures to

28
implement the recommendation of the Committee and inform them
about the steps initiated in this regard.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The names of all habitations have also been hosted on the
web-site. The changes have also been made in the software to enter
the habitations targeted to be covered each year and all States have
been asked to enter this data from 2009 onwards. As noted by the
Committee, this will help in tracking the funds required and spent on
each habitation.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.20)
As already emphasised by the Committee, water is the
lifeblood of a community and hence no section of the population
should be deprived of the valuable water resource. The Committee
in their previous Demands for Grants Reports had been recommending
to the Department to give due importance to habitations having
population less than 100 which are not included under the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme of ARWSP. The Committee have persistently been
recommending to the Department to shun their complacency and
insensitivity in this regard and take urgent action to cover such
habitations with less than 100 population on a priority basis. The
Committee are perturbed to note that a total of 46,000 such habitations
i.e. only 50 per cent have been covered so far, while the rest have not
been covered with drinking water facilities. The Committee would like
to emphasize to the Department that shifting the responsibility on to
the State Governments would not fulfil the objective of improving
access of all rural households to drinking water facilities as presently
the States are not even able to fulfil their targets of coverage of
habitations with population of more than 100 persons or 20 households.
The Committee are dismayed to learn from the replies of the
Department that none of the States have reported coverage of
habitations with population less than 100, which itself is a telling

29
reminder to the Union to undertake this huge responsibility as these
habitations may be in most difficult and backward areas requiring more
financial resources.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been implemented
now in the revised Guidelines. According to paragraph 1 of the revised
guidelines, the goal is, “to provide every rural person with adequate
water for drinking, cooking and other domestic basic needs on a
sustainable basis. This basic requirement should meet certain minimum
water quality standards and be readily and conveniently accessible at
all times and in all situations”.
The restriction of only covering habitations with 100 or more
population or 20 households has now been removed. The funds are
now to be used to provide potable drinking water to all habitations,
irrespective of the size of the habitation.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.21)
The Committee were further informed by the Department that
such habitations are proposed to be covered in the post Bharat Nirman
period of Eleventh Plan. The Committee would like to state that in
many sparsely populated areas within States, there may be large
number of habitations with scattered population and uneven
development. This, however, should not deny this segment of the
population their basic human right of access to clean and safe drinking
water. The Government should undertake all endeavours for full
realization of universal access to clean and safe drinking water. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Department to cover all
rural habitations, irrespective of their size, on a priority basis and
undertake appropriate exercise viz. revision of ARWSP norms and

30
provide 100 percent funds for the same. The Committee would like
the Department to devise concrete strategies for the purpose and keep
the Committee informed.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been implemented
now in the revised Guidelines. According to paragraph 1 of the revised
guidelines, the goal is, “to provide every rural person with adequate
water for drinking, cooking and other domestic basic needs on a
sustainable basis. This basic requirement should meet certain minimum
water quality standards and be readily and conveniently accessible at
all times and in all situations”.
The restriction of only covering habitations with 100 or more
population or 20 households has now been removed. The funds are
now to be used to provide potable drinking water to all habitations,
irrespective of the size of the habitation.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.27)
The Committee feel that fixation of realistic targets and timely
achievement of the same is of vital importance in order to extend the
basic amenity of drinking water to vast majority of rural people. The
data regarding targets and achievements during the Ninth and the
Tenth Plan reveal that for many years viz., 1999-2000, 2000-2001,
2001-2002, 2003-2004, 2004-2005, there is underachievement of targets.
Further, as per the Bharat Nirman targets, about 55,067 Not Covered/
Partially Covered habitations are to be covered during the target period
of 2005—2009, the details of which are indicated in the earlier
paragraphs. The above indicated data with regard to Bharat Nirman
programme signify that even after completion of three years of the
Bharat Nirman period, the achievement reported has been only about
67 per cent. The Committee take strong exception to the under

31
achievement of targets during many years of Ninth and Tenth Plan
period. Further, the Committee are deeply dissatisfied with the
achievements made under Bharat Nirman wherein about 36 per cent
of the target habitations still needed to be covered although less than
12 months remain of the Bharat Nirman period. In this scenario, the
Committee have strong apprehensions about achieving the targets
under Bharat Nirman. With the tardy pace of implementation of Bharat
Nirman programme, the Committee would like the Department to work
with sense of urgency to ensure that the objectives of this ambitious
programme of the Government are fulfilled within schedule. This
becomes more important in view of the fact that the latest Survey
indicates there are about 3.4 lakh NC and PC habitations which need
to be addressed right away so as to bring about any positive impact
on the lives of the people. The Committee would like the Department
to work out a clear cut strategy to fulfil the set targets within the time
period and ascertain reasons for underachievement from the States in
this regard. The Department should also insist upon them to take
corrective measures accordingly. Besides, the targets fixed should be
commensurate with the ground reality. The Department must hold
extensive review meetings with the States and provide all kind of
support, incentives and financial and technical guidance to them to
ensure that gross underachievement of this kind is not repeated. The
Department may inform the Committee of the necessary measures
undertaken by them in this regard.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Department of Drinking Water Supply held review meetings
with States throughout the year. Also, the poor performing States were
reviewed periodically for improving their performance during 2007-08
and 2008-09. As a result, the cumulative performance upto March, 2009
under Bharat Nirman as reported by States so far indicates that
54,430 habitations which were under uncovered category have been
covered with potable water supply. In regard to the slipped back
habitations  as per the reports received from the States so far 354,015
habitations have been covered with potable water supply. This figure
also includes some habitations which although belonging to the slipped
back category were not included in the original Bharat Nirman target.

32
This explains the reason for covering more number of targets than the
target stipulated under slipped back category under Bharat Nirman.
The new Guidelines under National Rural Drinking Water programme
introduced with effect from 1.4.2009 focuses on ensuring sustainability
in the Drinking Water Supply programme through source strengthen-
ing as well as systematic improvements for O&M purposes. The action
plan outlined in the Guidelines in this regard will lessen the slipping
back of covered habitations in the future.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.29)
Another important aspect noted by the Committee relates to
inclusion of the category of ‘slipped back habitations’ in the overall
targets under the Bharat Nirman programme. The Habitation Survey
2003 and the updated data indicated only FC/PC and NC categories
and does not include any ‘slipped back category’. However, the targets
under Bharat Nirman include NC, PC, slipped back and quality
affected habitations, wherein higher achievements are quoted by
including the coverage of slipped back habitations. Further, there is
marginal achievement under the category of uncovered habitations,
which include both NC and PC habitations. The Committee would like
to reiterate their recommendation made in the Thirty-Seventh Report
on Demands for Grants to set clear-cut targets for NC/PC habitations
under the Bharat Nirman and the ‘slipped back habitations’ should
be depicted separately. This would enable the Committee to analyze
the position with regard to achievements of NC/PC habitations for each
year and avoid the confusion created due to inclusion of various
categories in the Bharat Nirman programme. The Committee would
like the Department to take serious note of the observation made by
the Committee and take remedial measures. The Committee may be
apprised of the concrete action taken in this regard.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
As recommended by the Committee, separate targets were set for
uncovered habitations and NC/PC habitations, which were categorized
under “slipped back”, from 2008-09. A report indicating uncovered,
slipped-back and quality-affected habitations separately has been

33
devised and hosted in the Department’s website under the Bharat
Nirman link.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.13)
During the international decade for Action ‘Water for Life’
2005-2015, national governments and international organisations need
to expand the provision of basic services to all its citizens especially
the rural masses, and to achieve the said objective substantial
investment in the sector is of vital importance. The Committee are
perturbed to note that even after investments to the tune of
approximately Rs. 75,000 crores over the last six decades for the sector,
more than 3.7 lakh habitations are still Not Covered or Partially
Covered, the problem being further compounded by large incidences
of slippages. The Committee acknowledge the fact that investments in
the sector have been gradually increasing over the years, as reflected
by the Plan-wise data of allocation provided by the Planning
Commission indicated above. However, with the average investment
of less than 0.2 per cent of GDP for the sector, the Committee feel
that there is an urgent need to enhance the allocation commensurate
with the mammoth task of addressing large number of NC/PC , slipped
back and quality affected habitations. In view of the above, adequate
financing by the State for such essential service as drinking water
especially in a developing country like India, is of prime importance.
The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to continue with
the efforts for seeking enhanced allocation for the sector, in order to
be able to make meaningful achievements in the sector.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Department had got Rs. 7300 crore for the year 2008-09 and
was able to utilize the full amount. It also got an additional Rs. 200
crore for Jalmani programme. For the year 2009-10, the Department has
sought Rs. 8500 crore.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]

34
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
The Committee are further constrained to note that against the
allocation proposed to the Planning Commission, the outlay provided
to the Department is comparatively lesser for the last many years. Even
for the Eleventh Plan against the proposal of Rs. 55,099 the outlay
provided by the Planning Commission was only Rs. 39,490 marking
a huge shortfall of resources. The Committee are also disappointed to
note that during 2006-07 and 2007-08, the funds were reduced at the
RE stage. The Department had informed that the fund requirement was
projected on the basis of Action Plan from States for Bharat Nirman
programme. In view of this scenario, the Committee feel that there is
urgent need to step up the outlay in consonance with the requirement
for the purpose. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
the Department should make efforts so that the outlay proposed is
provided by the Planning Commission and is not reduced further at
the RE stage. The Department should strongly putforth their case in
this regard to the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance so that
important schemes for providing drinking water to rural masses do
not suffer due to resource crunch. The Committee should be informed
of the specific measures taken by the Department with regard to the
issues discussed above.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
There was no reduction in RE stage during 2008-09. The
Department was able to obtain an additional Rs. 200 crore for its
Jalmani programme.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)
The Committee have been informed that some States
facing resource crunch are not able to provide matching share while
in other cases, there is delay in Utilisation Certificates. The specific
recommendations of the Committee regarding matching share have
been made in the subsequent part of the Report. However, regarding

35
UCs from States, the Committee strongly recommend to make the best
use of online monitoring system to obtain the UCs from the States in
time. Besides, sincere efforts should be made by the Department to
ensure that underspending is reduced to minimum so that the public
spending on this social sector becomes more constructive and fruitful.
The Committee should be duly informed about the specific steps taken
in the light of the concerns expressed above.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Guidelines have been changed so that from 2009, all progress
is to reported online and monitored accordingly. Regarding
underspending, all poor performing States were reviewed on a monthly
basis to help improve their performance. In 2008-09, only two States
could not show full utilization of available funds, as mentioned in reply
to Recommendation no. 3.15.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.14)
The Committee recognize the fact that water being a State subject,
the ultimate responsibility for implementation of drinking water
schemes rests with the State Governments. The Centre, however,
provides financial and technical assistance to the States in this regard
through the Centrally sponsored scheme viz. ARWSP. However, as
pointed out by the Department, some of the States facing resource
constraints are not able to provide matching share as under ARWSP
(normal) the funding pattern between the Centre and the States is
50:50. Even the Secretary, during oral evidence, admitted that some
States are not able to provide matching share which causes serious
problems in implementation of the Scheme. Thus, such a condition
of providing matching share by the States irrespective of their
capability to do the same, deprives a large section of population from
drinking water provision. Besides, inability to provide matching share
cause further delay in release of Central funds and consequent
underspending which lead to further difficulties in effective

36
implementation of ARWSP. Reiterating their recommendation made
in Thirty-seventh Report, the Committee would, therefore, like the
Department to identify such States which face difficulty in providing
matching share. The Department of Drinking Water Supply should
then undertake comprehensive exercise to evolve a mechanism to assist
such special category States by providing additional funds to them
for the purpose. The ARWSP guidelines with regard to matching share
contribution for those States may be suitably modified, so that drinking
water schemes do not suffer due to the lack of provision of matching
share by those States. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the concrete action taken in this regard.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The North East States (including Sikkim) and Jammu and
Kashmir were facing difficulty in providing the 50% matching share.
From 2009-10, the funding pattern for these States has been changed
to 90:10 and the Guidelines have been accordingly modified.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.16)
The problem of water crisis can be solved meaningfully and in
a sustainable way only through close partnership between the Centre
and the States. Under ARWSP the Centre is providing financial
assistance to the States. However, the Department’s accountability goes
much beyond financial assistance and for this reason, all kind of
technical support must be provided to the States to make significant
progress towards making universal water provision possible. The
Department have informed that technical inputs are being provided
by representative of CGWB who is represented in State level
sanctioning committee. With regard to water availability in the ground,
the Department has circulated HGM to ten States which may be
utilized to know about the underground water availability. The
Committee hold that similar HGM maps may be prepared and
circulated to the remaining States also, in collaboration with the

37
Ministry of Water Resources. The Committee would like the
Department to ensure optimal usage of these maps as well as other
technology manuals by the States through regular and frequent
coordination with them. The Committee would also appreciate holding
of regular technical workshops in each State with guidance from
experts under the aegis of Ministry of Water Resources. The Committee
would like proactive involvement of the Department in this regard.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Department go prepared 2,303 Hydro-Geo-Morphological
(HGM) maps or ground water prospect maps on 1:50,000 scale using
satellite data in 10 States viz., Andhra Pradesh (part), Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and Kerala and distributed to the State
Governments. Services of National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC),
ISRO have been utilized for preparation of these maps. Similar map
preparation has also been undertaken in another 10 States viz., Andhra
Pradesh (remaining part), J&K, Haryana, Punjab, West Bengal (part),
Uttar Pradesh (part), Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and
Maharashtra. In order to build capacities of State implementing
agencies, the Department has been regularly conducting National
Workshops focusing Sustainability and Drinking Water Security. The
National Workshops and State level reviews held in April’ 2007,
July’ 2007, May’ 2008 have all emphasized on Sustainability of drinking
water sources and experts from CGWB, Ministry of Water Resources
were invited to participate actively. The latest National Workshop held
Thiruvananthapuram on 9-3-2009 focused on creating drinking water
security, which was followed by a field visit to Vivekananda Kendra,
Kanyakumari to show various models of rainwater harvesting to the
State Government representatives.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)
The Committee appreciate the fact that due to the serious
problems in implementation of the Scheme, the Department have

38
decided to discontinue the Scheme and introduce reforms which will
entirely depend on the State Governments. The State Governments
are supposed to sign Memorandum of Understanding in this regard
with the Union. The Department must collaborate with all States to
sign the Memorandum of Understanding and chalk out their Action
Plan on the reforms within a stipulated timeframe. The Committee
may be apprised of the feedback from the States in this regard.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The new Guidelines have incorporated the signing of MoU in
2009. The Department of Drinking Water Supply will collaborate with
all States to sign the MoU.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.23)
Further, the Committee would like the Department to undertake
more efforts to ensure that the problems encountered during
implementation of Swajaldhara are not repeated while implementing
reforms by the States from the Eleventh Plan. Towards this end, all
measures must be undertaken to pursue the States to strengthen PRIs.
The Department must proactively work in consultation with the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj to help in capacity building of PRIs, which
is crucial to the success of reforms to be introduced by the States.
Further, the Union Government should assist the States to promote
reforms principle through extensive campaigning within the States and
ensure that all the groundwork is done by the States before launching
the Reforms Scheme by the States. Thus, for these reforms to be
realized in letter and intent, both the Central and the State
Governments need to deal with drinking water provision in rural areas
as a strong political, social and an economic issue and work in close
cooperation and partnership to achieve the objective.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The main purpose of funding Communication and Capacity
Development Units in each State is to improve the capacity of PRIs.

39
The States will also be given incentive for transferring assets to PRIs,
in the form of 10% weightage during allocation of funds itself. This
criteria was also supported by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 5.20)
Further, the Committee were informed about a variety of reasons
for slippages such as sources going dry due to lowering ground water
table, systems working below rated capacity etc. The Department also
informed that they are strongly pursuing with States to adopt
sustainability measures and proposal for incentives to States for
ensuring sustainability is under consideration. The Committee would
like the Department to expeditiously finalise the proposal so that States
can be motivated to take up sustainability measures and incidences
of slippages are minimized. In this regard, the State-level sanctioning
Committee could play a vital role by insisting upon the States to
include sustainability component in each project before sanctioning
funds from the Central Sector. The Committee would like a categorical
response and the details of the incentive measures proposed in this
regard, so that this important aspect is accorded its due priority.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The proposal to provide for incentives to States to take up
sustainability measures has been finalized. 20% of the funds of the
scheme can now be used for such measures, with no State share. Earlier,
the State had to provide 25% as its share to use only 5% of the total
funds for sustainability. Flexibility has also been given to States to use
this fund for coverage, in which case they will have to provide the
50% matching share. Thus if a State uses the sustainability component,
it will be required to provide less funds in its budget as matching share.
Detailed guidelines of the works that can be taken up under this
component have also been issued, which include convergence with
other schemes, recharge measures, rain water harvesting, etc.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]

40
Recommendation (Para No. 5.21)
Besides, as per targets set under Bharat Nirman, about 3.31 lakh
slipped back habitations were proposed to be covered during 2004-
2005 to 2008-2009. However, during examination of Demands for
Grants (2008-2009), the latest information with regard to coverage
status was provided indicating only about 64 per cent achievement
so far. The Committee in their Thirty-Seventh Report had expressed
serious apprehension regarding achievements of targets in the
remaining one year of the Bharat Nirman programme with the tardy
progress made under this programme with regard to coverage of
slipped back habitations. The Department, however, justified the
situation and expressed optimism about achieving the targets by
March, 2007 as maximum coverage is reported in the last quarter of
the financial year. Further, during the last year viz. 2007-2008, the
achievement as reported upto March 2008 was only 50 per cent. In
this scenario of unfulfilled targets of previous year along with huge
target of last year of Bharat Nirman period, the Committee feel that
the Department should immediately chalk out an action plan to
ensure that the incidences of slippages are arrested within the
deadline set under Bharat Nirman. The action plan must include
not only the solutions for addressing the current incidences of
slippages but also preventive measures so that there is no
recurrence of such slippages in future. The Department must give clear
guidelines to the States to identify reasons and implement both
preventive and corrective measures to address this crucial aspect
related to drinking water. The Committee may be apprised of the
concrete measures taken by the Department in this direction and
response of the States.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Department of Drinking Water Supply held review meetings
with States throughout the year. Also, the poor performing States were
reviewed periodically for improving their performance during
2007-08 and 2008-09. As a result, the cumulative performance up to

41
March, 2009 under Bharat Nirman as reported by States so far indicates
that 354,015 habitations under the slipped back category have been
covered with potable water supply. This figure also includes some
habitations which although belonging to the slipped back category
were not included in the original Bharat Nirman target. The action plan
outlined in the Guidelines in this regard will lessen the slipping back
of covered habitations in the future.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 5.23)
In order to work meaningfully towards full realization of the
right to clean and safe drinking water, sustainability of the sources
and the systems is of vital importance. The Committee in all their
previous Reports have made useful and valuable suggestions regarding
the aforesaid aspect. One very serious challenge related to
sustainability of sources related to depleting ground water as large
number of drinking water sources are dependent on ground water
such as stand pipes, hand pumps, ponds etc. Depletion of ground
water table not only affects the water availability, but also contributes
to deterioration of water quality, which adversely impacts the health
and well being of the people. The Committee, therefore, have
repeatedly emphasized on the need to reduce over dependence on
ground water in drinking water schemes and to take all initiatives
for rainwater harvesting measures to augment the ground water table.
The Ministry of Water Resources, during evidence on the subject had
informed that the Central Ground Water Board provides information
on ground water availability unit-wise, over-exploited and critical
block and other related inputs through ground water prospect maps
and Hydro-geomorphological maps. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend the Department to ensure that such vital
information is utilised by the States in their drinking water projects.
In this regard, merely advising the States to utilise that data will not
serve the purpose. Rather, specific guidelines should be issued to the

42
State Governments to make use of this vital information available
district-wise in each p roject so that a long term solution may be
formulated for the depleting ground water table. Besides, the
Committee would like the Department to evolve mechanism for
getting regular feedback from the States in this regard and inform
accordingly. On the issue of regulatory framework for over-
extraction of ground water, the Committee in the previous Reports
had been insisting upon the Department to request States to put
in place such a legislation at the earliest. As per the information
provided by the Department, so far only States of Andhra Pradesh,
Goa, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, West Bengal, Himachal Pradesh along
with Union Territories of Lakshadweep and Pondicherry have
enacted and are implementing the ground water legislation. The
Department have been avoiding serious response on the said issue
by stating that this is the mandate of the Ministry of Water
Resources and as such, Department of Drinking Water Supply  has
a limited role to play. Reiterating their earlier recommendation,
the Committee would like to categorically assert that since more
than 95 per cent of water supply schemes are dependent on ground
water sources, some kind of regulation on over-extraction of
ground water is imperative and to that end, the Department of
Drinking Water Supply should work in close cooperation and
coordination with the Ministry of Water Resources for implement-
ing the Model Bill for regulating over-extraction of ground water.
The Committee are disturbed to note that despite the issue
becoming significant in view of the utilization of ground water
by Multinational Companies, so far only six States have managed
to enact the legislation. The Committee would, therefore, like the
Department to take proactive initiatives in this regard and apprise
the Committee about the same.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Department has already informed the State Governments to
move away from over dependence of ground water to conjunctive use

43
of surface water, ground water and rainwater harvesting. Technical
inputs like HGM and other ground water maps should be utilized for
citing appropriate locations for recharge structures. In this regard, the
Department got prepared 2,303 HGM maps on 1:50,000 scale using
satellite data in 10 States viz., Andhra Pradesh (part), Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and Kerala and distributed to the State
Governments. Services of National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC),
ISRO have been utilized in preparation of these maps. As informed
by NRSC, these States have utilized HGM maps and constructed
7,030 recharge structures. Similar map preparation has also been taken
up in another 10 States viz., Andhra Pradesh (remaining part), J&K,
Haryana, Punjab, West Bengal (part), Uttar Pradesh (part), Assam,
Arunachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Maharashtra. The Online
Integrated Management Information System now developed allows
State Governments to select habitations on-line which are being
considered for new projects. It is also emphasized that sustainability
component has to be ensured in every project which will be approved
by the State level Scheme Sanctioning Committees. Co-ordination
meetings with Ministry of Water Resources are held periodically and
instructions were issued that a representative from the Regional Office
of the Central Ground Water Board will have to be present in every
SLSC meeting for ensuring that all projects approval by the Committee
incorporate provision for sustainability of sources. Further, during the
monthly review and special review meetings held with States, they are
being requested repeatedly to understand the importance of ground
water legislation and enact the legislation on ground water regulation
and control, so that sustainability of drinking water sources is also
ensured. As per latest reports available, 11 States/UTs viz. Andhra
Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Himachal
Pradesh, Kerala, Lakshadweep, Pondicherry, Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal, have enacted such legislation.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]

44
Recommendation (Para No. 5.24)
Another issue related to ground water availability is the issue
of recharge of ground water through artificial means and rainwater
harvesting. The Committee have taken note of the efforts made in
this direction through workshops, Seminars, theme documents etc. as
narrated above highlighting the use of surface water harvesting.
Besides, the Ground Water Advisory Council gave certain suggestions
on this theme such as making rainwater harvesting mandatory through
local bodies, regulating withdrawal of ground water by industries,
integrating modern recharge technologies with traditional water
harvesting technologies. The Committee believe that these are
extremely pertinent suggestions and as and when implemented in true
letter and spirit, can provide a durable solution for the drinking water
needs of rural masses. The Committee would like to recommend
inclusion of specific proposals incorporating the suggestions in the
Model Bill. The Committee may also be apprised of the action taken
in this regard.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Chief Secretaries of all State Governments have been
requested to take stringent action against the agencies/authorities
polluting underground water sources. The States have also been
requested to initiate coordinated efforts between PHED, Local bodies/
Civic agencies and Pollution Control Board to put in place, the
discipline and regime by which any water body including ground
water, which is source of most of the drinking water supply projects
in rural areas is given the highest priority for projection under the
existing law. This was also discussed in National Workshop for
‘Protection of Drinking Water Sources and provisions of potable Water’
in May, 2008. It was attended by leading legal experts, the concerned
Ministries and State agencies in the Central/State Governments and
other stake-holders.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]

45
Recommendation (Para No. 5.25)
The Committee while acknowledging the efforts of the
Department for promoting rainwater harvesting, would like the
Department to also pursue with the States for raising mass awareness
with regard to this issue. Besides, the Government during evidence
conveyed to the Committee that the State of Mizoram has pioneered
the model of rooftop rainwater harvesting. The Committee recommend
that such success stories should be replicated in other States and
concrete action should be taken by them.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
In order to promote rainwater harvesting in a big way, a National
Workshop on creating drinking water security was organized in
Thiruvananthapuram in March, 2009, wherein State Government
representatives, Panchayat representatives, NGOs, local engineering
college students, Technical experts totalling to about 5,000 have
participated. This was the first National Workshop on Sustainability
seen as a nation-wide drive to bring awareness for shifting focus
towards conjunctive use of ground water, surface water and roof-water
harvesting instead of over-dependence on single source of water.
During the monthly review meetings of States, they are being suggested
to follow the success model of Mizoram of roof water harvesting
systems. Also similar success stories on rural water supply collected
from Orissa, Uttarakhand, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat,
Madhya Pradesh have been uploaded into the departmental website
for wider dissemination. Two difficult areas viz., hilly area (Tripura)
and islands (Andaman and Nicobar) were selected by the Department
and a multi-disciplinary Central Team was deputed to study the
existing water supply system and prepare Strategy papers on
Sustainable drinking water supply. These two strategy papers are also
uploaded into the departmental website at www.ddws.gov.in for
replication by other States.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]

46
Recommendation (Para No. 5.29)
The Committee are concerned to note the underutilization by
various States of 5 per cent ARWSP funds meant exclusively for
sustainability. In this regard, the Secretary during the course of oral
evidence has submitted that the Department is now proposing that
100 per cent allocation provided by the Department would be linked
project-wise and the project which has been funded for sustainability
would be taken on board. The Secretary has further informed that
the proposal for the same has been forwarded to the EFC. The
Committee while appreciating the initiatives taken by the Department
would like that such innovative reforms must be introduced at the
earliest for making marked improvements in the drinking water sector
and Committee be kept apprised in this regard.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
After obtaining approval of the EFC and the Cabinet, The
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) was launched
in the country with effect from 1-4-2009. According to the NRDWP
guidelines, funds for sustainability of drinking water sources have been
increased from earlier 5% under ARWSP (on 75:25 Centre to State
share) to 20% on 100% GOI assistance. Further, projects under
Sustainability component have to be implemented on “Swajaldhara”
mode i.e., involving community mobilization and participation in
decision making.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.11)
An analysis of the drinking water sector while examining
Demands for Grants of previous years revealed that there are many
aspects to the challenges confronting the drinking water sector today.
One of the central issues related to the subject is the quality of drinking
water. The Committee, while examining previous Demands for Grants,

47
have made the aforesaid aspect a key concern and made various
pertinent observations/recommendations to ensure safe drinking water
in a sustainable manner to all across the country.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Department agrees with the Committee’s observations that
drinking water quality is one of the pertinent areas of concern and
all out efforts have to be made to provide safe drinking water to all
villages in the country.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.12)
The Water Quality Survey conducted by States indicated about
2 lakh habitations affected with various contaminants like arsenic,
fluoride, iron, nitrate, salinity or a combination of them. Such
contaminated water is the major factor responsible for many of the
deaths in a developing country like India due to water-borne diseases.
Water scarcity also forces people to consume contaminated water
affecting their health and well-being. In this regard, the Committee
recommend that all necessary investments should be made to address
the quality of drinking water as it has a profound impact on health
and economic status of the people. The Standing Committee in their
Thirty-seventh Report have made detailed recommendation for
launching a nationwide awareness programme to educate masses about
the hazards of contaminated water on the model of AIDS, Polio
campaigns etc. Such a programme should involve all stakeholders,
such as policy-makers, Centre, State and local authorities, Civil Society,
NGOs etc. active in the field. The programme should clearly spell
out the linkages between safe drinking water, health, environment,
poverty alleviation and economic benefit of improved access to safe
and uncontaminated water. The programme must involve women,
communities, PRIs and school students as active participants in the
process. Thus, coordination and consultation with other related

48
Ministries such as Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department
of Women and Child Development, Ministry of Environment and
Forests, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Department of Elementary
Education etc. must be held and all efforts should be made to sensitise
and educate people in regard to the benefits of safe drinking water.
Further, the Secretary during evidence stated that for iron and salinity,
the easiest way is to dilute contaminated water with better quality
water. Besides boiling, chlorine tablets for disinfection and such low
cost technologies must be popularized in the aforesaid campaign. The
Committee strongly recommend to the Government to treat quality
of drinking water as a core developmental issue and to take up the
matter in a mission mode.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
Water Quality and Water Scarcity are amongst the most important
concerns as far as drinking water management in the country is
concerned. Over-exploitation of ground water also leads to leaching
of chemical contamination into aquifers while excessive use of
inorganic fertilizers result in increase in nitrate content in surface and
ground water sources. Open defecation practices in rural areas and
disposal of untreated/partially treated domestic sewage from cities and
urban local bodies also contaminate drinking water sources bacterio-
logically. Therefore, PRIs and people at large are required to be made
aware of drinking water quality and personal hygiene habits including
storing, handling of drinking water and its crucial relationship with
health. The National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring and
Surveillance Programme focuses at generating such awareness and also
builds capacity of local community to test their own drinking water
sources through simple field test kits. For this purpose, 100% Central
assistance has been provided to all States. This programme envisages
training of 5 grassroot level workers in each Panchayat which could
include ASHA worker, Anganwadi worker, Science teacher, High
School Girl Child, Panchayat member, Women, Retired Army/Defence
personnel, Community leader, etc. Some of these grassroot workers are
also lower level functionaries related to the programmes implemented

49
by Ministries of Health and Family Welfare, Women and Child
Development, Environment and Forests, Panchayati Raj and HRD.
Further, disease surveillance being the mandate of the State Health
Department, services of district level Surveillance co-ordinator from
local Health Department are envisaged to link disease burden with
drinking water quality for taking necessary remedial action by the State
rural water supply agency. State Governments have been advised to
tackle arsenic and fluoride problems by providing alternate safe surface
water sources, iron by dilution/terracotta filters, salinity by artificial
recharge of ground water and sub-surface dykes, nitrate by dilution
and generating awareness on ecological sanitation (urine diversion
composting toilets).
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.13)
As per the objectives of Bharat Nirman Programme of the
Government, 2.17 lakh quality-affected habitations were to be treated
during the period 2005-2009. However, as informed by the Department
during examination of Demands for Grants (2008-09), only about 94,000
habitations were treated during the period first three years of the
programmes leaving about 1.23 lakh habitations to be addressed
during the last year of the Bharat Nirman period. The Committee in
their Thirty-Seventh Report have taken strong exception to this
underachievement of targets under this ambitious programme of the
Government. The Secretary during evidence had clarified that number
of times, projects from States are not in good shape and therefore,
do not get clearance which is the reason for slow progress of the
programme. The Committee would like the Department to assist the
States in overcoming their limitations and undertake comprehensive
exercise to know about the problems being faced by the States so that
more projects are forwarded and cleared for tackling quality-affected
habitations. The Department should apprise the Committee about the
concrete measures initiated in this regard.

50
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
Under the new NRDWP guidelines, a provision has been made
for States to create a State Technical Agency, which could utilize
services of Technical experts available in the State or elsewhere, for
tackling scarcity, sustainability and quality issues. States can utilize
funds provided under “Support services” of NRDWP guidelines for
necessary professional services. This would ensure that the projects
prepared by the State implementing agency will address all the three
important issues mentioned above, before they are submitted for
approval of the State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee before
implementation on the ground.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H.11011/2/2009 dated 11 June, 2009]

51
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
-Nil-

52
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)
Besides, the Committee would like to emphasis that merely
entering the data online by the States is not adequate, but objective
verification of the claimed coverage status is of prime importance.
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department should
evolve a mechanism for objective verification of the data provided by
the States at the ground level. The Committee feel that such monitoring
and verification procedure would be facilitated as and when the names
of the habitations under different categories from the States are also
made available. The Committee recommend to the Department to take
concrete action on the lines suggested above to make the Panchayat,
District and State authorities more accountable and the data more
authentic. The Committee emphasise that water is central to the life
of each and every individual and given the magnitude of the problem,
a sound knowledge and information with regard to coverage status
is extremely pertinent for the sector. Such information in public domain
is crucial for the State to evolve any long term policy and planning
to improve the delivery system and also help mobilize communities
and civil society around water related issues. The Committee would
like the Department to consider their recommendations/suggestions
with all the seriousness and provide specific response on the issues
raised above.
Reply of the Government
The names and categories of each habitation has now been made
available in public domain. Any person can access the habitation data

53
base online and view details of water supply schemes of his/her village
from the main page of the website under “Citizens Corner” (please
see the sample below).
Habitation Profile
State Name : Assam District Name : Cachar
Block Name : Raja Bazar Gram Panchayat Name : Dewan
Village Name : Lalang Grant Habitation Name : Lalong Grant
Expected Rain Fall (in mm) - 3312.50
Actual Rain Fall (in mm) — 0 of District (Cachar: in year 2007)
Abstract Data
Total Population GEN - 4880 SC - 520 ST - 0
Population Covered GEN - 4880 SC - 520 ST - 0
LPCD 40,000
No. of Households 1080
No. of Cattles 410
No. of Existing Sources/Delivery 2
Points/Stand Post
No. of Safe Sources/Delivery Points/ 2
Stand Post
Water Supply Coverage Status Fully Covered
As on 01-04-2009
Nearest Water Source (Km.) 0
A feedback section has also been added to the website for
accepting any comment from the public.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.28)
Further, an analysis of the achievements vis-à-vis the targets
during Tenth Plan and Bharat Nirman period indicates that

54
underachievement is much more in the category of Not Covered
habitations over the last many years. The Committee feel that these
Not Covered habitations may be in the most difficult geographical and
backward areas. The Department should, therefore, ask the States to
cover these Not Covered habitations on a priority basis and provide
necessary support to the States to help them achieve the objective. The
Committee would like the Department to give necessary directions to
the States in this regard and communicate the same to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
All States have been specifically asked to target not covered
habitations. The status of coverage has been given in reply to
Recommendation No. 2.27. Only Rajasthan will not be able to achieve
the targets, and will continue the work in 2009-10.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15)
Besides, the Committee would urge that apart from adequate
Government funding for the purpose, the Department should place
more emphasis on the issue of meaningful and optimal utilisation of
resources in order to make significant progress with regard to provision
of clean and safe drinking water to rural masses. The utilisation
position plan-wise indicates under-utilisation of ARWSP funds during
the Sixth, Seventh, Eighth and Ninth Plans as well as during the Annual
Plans of 1990-91 and 1991-92. Further, the same data indicates
underutilization from the State share during the Seventh, Eighth, Ninth
and Tenth Plans. Besides, if year-wise performance is analysed, the
underutilization of allocation can be seen to be a recurrent feature
though the situation seems to have improved to certain extent over
the last few years especially with regard to utilization of Central share.

55
The delay in utilization of funds by the States, which results in large
unspent balances with the State Governments is a major cause of
concern. The Centre through review meetings and close interaction
should identify the under-performing States and suggest remedial
measures to redress the problem of underspending. The Committee
would like the Department to take all concrete steps to ensure
accountability from the States regarding optimal utilization of the
resources from both Central as well as State share. The Committee may
be apprised of the specific measures taken with regard to the same.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
All poor performing States were reviewed on a monthly basis to
help them improve performance. As a result, almost all States showed
improved spending and physical progress. Only Jharkhand could not
improve performance in 2008-09, and Uttarakhand was marginally
below full achievement.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.15)
Further, on the question of under-utilisation of funds by States,
the Committee have been informed that sometimes States face difficulty
in providing Utilisation Certificates, while at other times there are
certain habitations in remote and inaccessible areas in some States. On
timely receipt of UCs from States, the Committee have already
recommended to make use of the online monitoring system upto the
district and Panchayat level in previous part of the Report. However,
the Committee feel that the primary challenge before the Department
is not mere utilization of funds on paper, but to ensure that the funds
are directed to sectors and segments where they are required the most.

56
In view of this, the Department should provide all kinds of technical
assistance to the States to redress the situation through constant and
regular interaction with them by holding review meetings, training
programmes/workshops for State/District level officials and provide
solutions for the specific requirements of States. The Committee suggest
to the Department to give special emphasis to habitations which are
in remote and inaccessible areas by providing enhanced resources to
them so as to universalize the access of this basic service to each and
every part of the country.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Department has been organizing a series of workshops across
the country for State and District level officers. Funds are being
provided to all States to organize such workshops for panchayat and
block level persons. Each State has also been asked to identify a
Technical Agency which can assist in matters requiring technical
inputs. Each State has also formed a Communication & Capacity
Development Unit whose work is human resource development for all
stakeholders also. Training has been imparted on diverse subjects like
Workshop on Swajaldhara, Community participation, Water quality
monitoring and surveillance, Operation and maintenance, Sustainability
of Water sources, Capacity building for Anganwadi workers
etc.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.17)
Another problem faced by the States in management of water
supply schemes relate to O&M costs. As per the current norms, 15
percent of ARWSP funds are to be spent by the State Governments
for O&M purposes. As pointed out by the Department, large schemes
are commissioned for water supply which later suffer due to the
problems in O&M. The Committee would like the Department to keep

57
vigil relating to the feasibility and sustainability of water supply
schemes. However, since most of the O&M activities are being
undertaken by PRIs who do not have the capacity for the same, the
Union Government should provide all technical guidance to the States
for the same. The Department may also engage the expertise of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj and insist upon them to work towards
capacity building of Panchayats, which is crucial for the maintenance
of water supply schemes in rural areas. Besides, monitoring of O&M
activities by the State, through some institutional mechanism should
also be undertaken. The Committee hold that the Department of
Drinking Water Supply being nodal Department must ensure that
States do not face difficulties in implementation of water supply
schemes. The Centre should not shy away from their responsibility by
stating that water is a State subject as providing access to safe drinking
water to rural masses is the mandate of the Department of Drinking
Water Supply. The Committee, therefore, emphasize that the Union
Government should provide all kinds of backing through aid,
technology transfer, capacity building and partnership with the States
through both formal and informal methods, and pursue with them to
treat the issue as a foremost developmental agenda. The Committee
may be apprised of the desired action taken for coordination with the
States with regard to all the issues discussed above.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
Under Communication and Capacity Development Units (CCDU)
all States have been requested to impart extensive training to the
Panchayati Raj Members as well as VWSC—members on operation and
maintenance of the water supply schemes. The State Governments are
advised to consult and choose the technology options before finalising
the water supply schemes for particular village/habitations.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)

58
Recommendation (Para No. 4.21)
The Department had initiated reforms programme and the
Swajaldhara Scheme to institutionalize community participation in the
drinking water supply sector. However, there were serious problems
identified in the implementation of Swajaldhara, which were regularly
highlighted by the Committee in their respective Reports. These
problems related to inadequate planning and homework before
launching the Scheme, lack of motivation among States/Districts to
comeforth with projects, lack of demand among communities, problems
regarding 10 per cent community contribution etc. Pursuant to the
strong recommendations of the Committee in their previous Reports,
the Department considered and reviewed the Scheme and decided that
from the Eleventh Plan, there will be only one Scheme viz. ARWSP
which will have an element of community participation but may not
insist on community contribution. The Scheme will involve signing
Memorandum of Understanding with the States which will entail
capacity building programmes for PRIs, empowerment of PRIs to levy
user charges for O&M etc. Besides, the new guidelines stipulate that
it is upto the States to have community contribution from the
50 per cent funds provided by them, the quantum of which is to be
decided by the State. In view of the above discussed scenario, the
Committee would like the Department to first and foremost ensure that
the ongoing projects under Swajaldhara are completed and are not
neglected as the Scheme is sought to be discontinued. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that every effort should be taken by
the Department to give emphasis on pending/incomplete projects
under Swajaldhara in consultation with the State Governments. The
Committee feel that in view of the poor financial and physical
performance of the Scheme earlier, it becomes imperative for the
Department to monitor the ongoing projects of Swajaldhara and ensure
their timely achievement. The Department must provide additional
funds, if required to incomplete/pending projects under Swajaldhara.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the latest position State-
wise of projects undertaken and completed under the Swajaldhara
Scheme.

59
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The number of Schemes completed up to March, 2009 under
Swajaldhara is as follows:—
State Approved Completed
Andhra Pradesh 3131 2812
Arunachal Pradesh 72 54
Assam 3765 3735
Bihar 4 0
Chhattisgarh 304 278
Gujarat 1426 864
Haryana 113 13
Himachal Pradesh 1865 1204
Jammu and Kashmir 75 25
Jharkhand 339 208
Karnataka 1007 735
Kerala 360 316
Madhya Pradesh 1488 1037
Maharashtra 1590 1265
Mizoram 14 12
Orissa 1432 1200
Punjab 63 34
Rajasthan 1603 699
Tamil Nadu 1623 1622
Tripura 793 497
Uttar Pradesh 1361 542
Uttarakhand 204 187
West Bengal 104 42

60
In so far as the incomplete schemes are concerned, the States can
utilize funds for completing the same from the funds allocated under
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) for the year
2009-10 w.e.f. 1.4.2009 and onwards.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.26)
Another very important issue which surfaced during
examination of the subject related to conjunctive use of water. The
Secretary during evidence stated that they are encouraging States and
PRIs to revive traditional sources. The Committee would like to suggest
to the Department to convince the Planning Commission to provide
more funds to the States for the purpose. Further, as communicated
by the Department, some mechanism may be evolved for providing
incentives to the villages, for taking up sustainability measures. The
Committee would like to suggest to the Department that incentive
mechanism on the lines of NGP for rewarding villages, which are
promoting sanitation practices must be evolved for water conservation,
management, rainwater harvesting, revival of traditional sources and
other sustainability measures. In this regard, related schemes of other
Departments/Ministries must be coordinated and consultations with all
Ministries held so that the modalities and components of the incentive
mechanism are expeditiously evolved. The Committee feel that such
practical policy initiatives would help achieve sustained progress in
the field of providing drinking water. The Department should update
the Committee on the efforts undertaken by them on all the aforesaid
aspects.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
After due deliberations with all concerned Ministries including
the Planning Commission and approval of the Cabinet, the funds for
sustainability of drinking water sources have been increased from 5%

61
(on 75:25 Centre to State share) to 20% on 100% GOI assistance.
Therefore, the Central fund provided to the States building in
sustainability component has been substantially increased.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 34 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.15)
The National Rural Drinking Water Quality Management and
Surveillance Programme launched in 2006 aimed at testing of all
drinking water sources by grass-root level workers in each Panchayat
by simple-to-use field test kits. So far, 1.96 lakh such workers have
been trained out of 11.66 lakh who need to be trained for water quality
monitoring and surveillance activities. The Committee, during
examination of previous Demands for Grants, have been informed
about the deadline which have been extended thrice as States could
not complete the training within the time period. The Department
further informed that the training is coupled with supply of kits to
Gram Panchayats and for large number of States such as Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Jharkhand, Jammu and
Kashmir, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Orissa,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttarakhand and all UTs since
Gram Panchayat level training has not been completed, the kits could
not be supplied. The Committee on the aforesaid issue would like the
Department to seek time-bound commitment from States to complete
the training of Gram Panchayats for testing water quality in village
Panchayats. The Department on their part should provide all assistance
to the States after identifying the bottlenecks faced by them. The
Committee would like to suggest that through PRIs, the community
has to be made conscious of water quality and the testing kits
should be made available to other institutions also such as schools,
colleges and qualified NGOs etc. in the area. Further, through these
institutions, low cost technologies for water treatment at household

62
habitation level may be marketed with the aid of district level
authorities. The Committee maintain that a multi-pronged strategy with
the involvement of various related ministries is imperative for
implementing measures for improvement in water quality and a
systematic and holistic approach for linking both quality and quantity
aspect of water management must be evolved. The Committee would
like the Department to earnestly consider the aforesaid aspects and
formulate effective strategies for water management.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
As per the National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring
and Surveillance Programme, about 3.39 lakh people have been trained
in the country, as per reports available as on 16/4/2009. States have
been requested to complete all training programmes, latest by
December, 2009 and also to enter data online into the Integrated
Management Information System developed by the Department.
Analysis of such data would then, provide opportunity to the
Department to provide necessary assistance to the States after
identifying the bottlenecks faced by them. Household based and
Community based Terracotta filters are being promoted for tackling
iron and bacteriological contamination. The technology is very simple
and the products could be locally produced by trained NGOs/Women
Self Help Groups. Such action has already been initiated in Karnataka
and Tripura States. Treatment of Arsenic, Fluoride and Salinity are not
advised locally as these treatment plants/filters are difficult to operate
and maintain and involve serious reject management problems.
Another new programme called “Jalmani” was launched on 14/11/2008
for providing stand alone drinking water purification systems in rural
schools in the country for providing pure drinking water to rural school
children at the consumption point.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 37 of Chapter I of the Report)

63
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 5.19)
The Standing Committee in their earlier Reports had considered
the issue of slippages with utmost seriousness and made series of
recommendations to arrest the problem of slippages. The Committee
in their Reports on Demands for Grants 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 had
expressed strong displeasure over the factual position with regard to
coverage status as revealed by the Habitation Survey results indicating
huge incidences of slippages negating all progress made in the drinking
water sector. The Committee, however, appreciated the efforts of the
Department made with regard to the online data entry system where
States furnish the data online on an annual basis. Such a measure, the
Committee feel would substantially help the Department to have a clear
picture regarding coverage status. The Department should continue
efforts in this regard through regularly imparting training to officials
so that the discrepancies and anomalies in the Survey Results are never
repeated in future. Further, the Committee would also like the
Department to make provision for entry of State-specific reasons for
slippages so that timely corrective measures may be taken through
technical and financial support from the Centre. Besides, strict
monitoring and verification of the data is imperative for more
transparency and reliability. The Committee may be apprised of the
performance of the online system and suggestions, if any, for
improvement of the software, as already pointed out in the earlier part
of the Report.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
Provision for entering state specific reasons for slippage is being
developed in the online system. The online system has been accepted

64
by all States and their suggestions have also been incorporated. The
software is now being modified to capture the Census population that
has been covered with drinking water supply schemes.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/4/2008-GC dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.14)
Besides, contaminants like nitrate and iron are mostly related to
the industrial wastes which are indiscriminately released into the
ground. The Committee would like to reiterate the recommendation
made in their Report on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) to make
pollution of drinking water sources an offence and would like to be
informed of the punitive legislative measures for checking water
contamination as proposed in the model legislation being worked out
by the Ministry.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The issue of punitive legislative measures to make pollution of
Drinking Water Sources an offence is being examined by the
Department at present.
[Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/4/2008-GC dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
 N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
16 December , 2009 Chairperson,
25 Agrahayana , 1931  (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

65
APPENDIX IAPPENDIX IAPPENDIX IAPPENDIX IAPPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY,
THE 14 DECEMBER, 2009
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar
6. Shri Rakesh Pandey
7. Shri P.L. Punia
8. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh
9. Shrimati Usha Verma
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Ganga Charan
11. Shri Silvius Condpan
12. Shrimati Maya Singh
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shri V.R. Ramesh — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
4. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Under Secretary

66
2. *** *** *** *** ***
3. *** *** *** *** ***
4. The Committee then took up for consideration Memoran-
dum No. 2 regarding draft Action-taken Report on Forty-First Report
of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Drinking Water Scenario
in rural areas in the country’ and adopted the same without any
modification.
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalise
the aforesaid Draft Reports on the basis of factual verification from
the concerned Ministry/Department and present the same to both the
Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

67
APPENDIX IIAPPENDIX IIAPPENDIX IIAPPENDIX IIAPPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
FORTY-FIRST REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (14TH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 33
(ii) Recommendations which have been accepted 23
by the Government:
Para Nos.: 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.20, 2.21, 2.27, 2.29,
3.13, 3.14, 3.16, 4.14, 4.16, 4.22, 4.23, 5.20, 5.21,
5.23, 5.24, 5.25, 5.29, 6.11, 6.12 and 6.13.
Percentage to the total recommendations 69.70
(iii) Recommendations which the Committee do Nil
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s
replies:
Nil
Percentage to the total recommendations
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which replies 8
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Para Nos.: 2.13, 2.28, 3.15, 4.15, 4.17, 4.21,
5.26 and 6.15
Percentage to the total recommendations 24.24
(v) Recommendations in respect of which final 2
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos.: 5.19 and 6.14
Percentage to the total recommendations 6.06

FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER
SUPPLY)
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Forty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Drinking Water Scenario in
Rural Areas in the country]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17 December, 2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17 December, 2009
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.R.D. No. 005
Price : Rs. 74.00
© 2009 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
PAGE
(iii)
(v)
1
25
51
52
63
65
67
C
OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) ...............................................
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................
CHAPTER I Report....................................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government..........................................................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies..........
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee.............................................................................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited...........................
APPENDICES
I Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee
held on 14 December, 2009............................................
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Forty-First Report
of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha).............................

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2009-2010)
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit
7. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
10. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar
11. Shri Rakesh Pandey
12. Shri P.L. Punia
13. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
14. Shri Jagdish Sharma
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Jagdanand Singh
17. Dr. Sanjay Singh
18. Shri Makansingh Solanki
19. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh
20. Shrimati Usha Verma
21. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ganga Charan
23. Vacant*
24. Shri Silvius Condpan
25. Shrimati Kanimozhi
26. Dr. Ram Prakash
27. Shri P.R. Rajan
28. Shri Arjun Singh
29. Shri Bhagwati Singh
30. Shrimati Maya Singh
31. Miss Anusuiya Uikey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shri V.R. Ramesh — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
*Conseqent upon the resignation of Shri Ajay Singh Chautala from the membership
of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 3rd November, 2009 vide Notification No. RS.10/2009-T
dated 6 November, 2009.
(iv)

 N EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
16 December , 2009 Chairperson,
25 Agrahayana , 1931  (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2009-2010) having been authorized by the Committee to
submit the Report on their behalf, present the Fifth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Forty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2008-09) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Drinking Water Scenario in Rural
Areas in the Country of the Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Forty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was presented
to Lok Sabha on 21 October, 2008. The replies of the Government to
all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on
11 June, 2009.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held
on 14 December, 2009.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Forty-First Report of the Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appexdix-II.

STANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENTRURAL DEVELOPMENTRURAL DEVELOPMENTRURAL DEVELOPMENTRURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
55555
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING
WATER SUPPLY)
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Forty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Drinking Water Scenario in
Rural Areas in the country]
FIFTH REPORTFIFTH REPORTFIFTH REPORTFIFTH REPORTFIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
December, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”