STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                         (2012-2013) 
      
 
        FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
   
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirty Second Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Council for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural Technology(CAPART)}  
 
 
FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
44 


FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2012-2013) 
          (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
   
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Thity Second Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Council for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural Technology(CAPART)}  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.08.2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.08.2013 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August,2013/Sravana, 1935 (Saka) 


 
CRD No. 90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Pr ocedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
 

i 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-2013) ......................................   (ii)   
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................   (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................   1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................   6 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies ...........................................................................  8 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee .....................................................   9 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ..............  12 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I.          Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 24 July, 2013 …… 17  
II.         Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations   
    contained in the Thirty-second Report  (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing  
Committee on Rural Development ………………………................................. 19 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013) 
 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
5. Shri Premchand Guddu 
6. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
7. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
8. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
9. Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy 
12. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy 
13. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
14. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
15. Vacant* 
16. Smt. Supriya Sule 
17. Smt. Annnu Tandon 
18. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar 
19. Smt. Usha Verma 
20. Shri P. Viswanathan 
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Munquad Ali 
23. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
29. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
30. Shri Mohan Singh 
31. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri A. K. Shah  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Ravi Kant Prasad Sinha - Committee Assistant 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
* Vacancy caused on account of demise of Shri Uma Shankar Singh on 24.01.2013. 
  

iii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Comm ittee on Rural Development (2012 -2013) having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the Forty-fourth Report on the 
action taken by the Government on the re commendations contained in the Thirty-second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Council for Advancement 
of Peoples Action and Rural Technology ’ of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development). 
2.  The Thirty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha  on 28 August, 2012 . 
Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 26 June, 
2013. 
3.  The draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 24 July, 
2013. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Gove rnment on the recommendations contained in the           
Thirty-second Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;        SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
7 August, 2013                         Chairperson, 
16 Sravana, 1935 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Comm ittee on Rural Development (2012 -13) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Thirty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Council for 
Advancement of People’s Action and Rural Technology’.  
 
2. The Thirty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28.08.2012 and was 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the s ame date.  The Report contained  9 
Observations/ Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government.  These have been 
examined and categorised as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos.  4 and 6 
Total: 2 
Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
 
Serial No.  3 
Total: 1 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Serial No. 5 and 7 
Total: 2 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 8 and 9 
Total: 4 
Chapter-V 
 
  

2 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that final repl ies in respect of recommendations for 
which only interim replies have been submitted by the Government included in 
Chapter V of this Report and replies to recommendations made in the Chapter-I of 
this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
Restructuring of CAPART 
6. The Committee in their Thirty-second Report have made the following 
recommendations/ observations:   
 
(i) The CAPART was set up in 1986 for assisting NGOs for implementation of 
projects for rural prosperity, promote voluntary efforts in rural development a nd 
dissemination of technologies, to promote, plan, undertake projects through Self 
Help Groups (SHG) and to create awareness amongst rural population. The 
Committee highlighted that CAPART has hardly achieved any of its objectives 
and admittedly there hav e be en problems in the organization  from the very 
beginning.  
 
[Recommendation Serial No.1] 
 
(ii) In the context of composition of CAPART’S Committees, the Committee 
highlighted that the General Body of CAPART consisting of 100 members was 
too large . The Committee recommended for review of membership of the 
General Body to make this body slim and efficient to enable it to take timely, 
effective decisions. The Committee also recommended that the Chairman of the 
CAPART should be professional person wit h proven track record of rural 
development work. 
 
[Recommendation Serial No.2] 
 
(iii) The Committee expressed their unhappiness to find that during the last 
seven years there have been as ma ny as 7 incumbents to the post of Chief 
Executive of the organizat ion. The Committee recommended that henceforth the 
post should have a fixed tenure to carry out plans and programmes of the 
organization in an organized, systematic manner.  
 
[Recommendation Serial No.4] 
 

3 
 
(iv) The Committee highlighted that the allocation of funds for the six schemes 
of the CAPART have come down drastically during the last few years and there 
has been hardly any utilization of funds allocated.  
 
[Recommendation Serial No.5] 
 
(v) In the context of large number of complaints, the Committee 
recommended that the CAPART should take action against corrupt 
organizations/individuals and also against its own officers found guilty of 
malpractices/connivance with NGOs/VOs, inefficiency, etc. 
 
[Recommendation Serial No.6] 
 
(vi) The Committee noted that from 1996 onwards there have been a number 
of reviews carried out by various Committees to improve the working of the 
organization and the last one was the Study by Institute of Rural Management 
Anand (IRMA). The Committee asked the G overnment to take a final decision in 
regard to future restructuring of CAPART without further delay.  
 
[Recommendation Serial No.8] 
 
(vii) Considering the role of Panchayati Raj Institutions which has been 
enlarged over a period of time, the Committee asked the CAPART apart from 
assisting NGOs/VOs should also co-ordinate with PRIs in implementation of its 
various schemes/programmes.  
       
        [Recommendation Serial No.9] 
 
7. The Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) in their 
reply have inter-alia stated. 
 “In the 49th Meeting of the Executive Committee of CAPART held in August, 2009 “it 
was decided that no further project funds will be disbursed by the  Regional Centres 
until the matter is reviewed by a sub -committee with regard to time overrun,  if any, 
and in case of time overrun, the feasibility and rationale of disbursement”.   
 Pursuant to the decision taken in 49 th EC meeting, six sub groups were no tified. 
However, only 4 sub groups became functional. Further in the 52 nd EC meeting held 
on 30 th April, 2010 it was decided that an independent assessment by professional 
third party may be done. The institution so appointed will prepare a report on the 
“State of Organization and Roadmap for Future”.  It was also decided that the report 
of the sub groups along with comments of members if any may be made available to 
third party so appointed. 
 
 Subsequently IRMA was engaged to prepare a report on the “State of Organization 
and Roadmap for Future”.  
 

4 
 
 All project funding was kept in abeyance of both RCs and CAPART head quarter as 
per the order of MoRD dated 30th September, 2010.  
 IRMA submitted its report and made a detailed presentation on the study report on 
“State on the Organization and Road Map for CAPART” in 54 th EC meeting held on 
8th December, 2010. Subsequently IRMA conveyed their inability for taking up the 
assignment further.  
 
 As per the decision of the Executive Committee in its 56 th meeting held on 20 th 
January, 2012 all the Regional Committees of CAPART were abolished and 
Regional Offices were closed down and regular staff shifted to Delhi.  
 The posts of DG/DDG  have been removed from the purview of the Civil Services 
Board and will now be filled up from open market through search -cum-Selection 
Committee.   
 Draft recruitment rules for the post of DG and DDGs’ have been framed by the 
MoRD, which have been approved  by DoPT. Further, the recruitment rules were 
circulated to all the members of EC under Rule 32 of Rules of CAPART for their 
comments. The comments of the members of EC were incorporated in the draft RRs 
by MoRD and approved by the Competent Authority.  
 The task of restructuring has been entrusted to an independent agency namely Tata 
Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai. The first meeting/visioning work shop 
on restructuring of CAPART was organized by TISS on 8 th January, 2013 at 
CAPART, New Delhi. I n March 2013, TISS has further submitted a concept note, 
highlighting proposed strategies for restructuring, and the same is under 
consideration."  
 
 
8. The Committee had expected that on the basis of report submitted by IRMA 
the Government would take  final decision in regard to restructuring and future of 
the CAPART. However, IRMA conveyed their inability in taking up the assignment 
further. Subsequently, the task of restructuring has been entrusted to an 
independent agency, namely, Tata Institute of Socia l Sciences (TISS), Mumbai 
and they organized first workshop on restructuring of CAPART as late as in 
January, 2013. TISS has further submitted a concept note highlighting proposed 
strategies for restructuring and the same is under consideration  of the 

5 
 
Government. The Committee regret to note that it has taken over 4 years when 
the CAPART first decided in 2009 to go for restructuring of CAPART and the 
Government has not moved f urther in spite of a number of C ommittees which 
were appointed in between. The delay in taking a decision has resulted in closing 
of its 9 regional offices, non -utilisation of funds  and bringing  activities of 
CAPART to halt . The Committee once again urge the G overnment to take a final 
decision in regard to restructuring/ future  of CAPART so that intended 
organizations/populace is served and intended benefit groups get due benefits of 
the schemes. The Committee would await conclusive action in the matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No.4) 
The Committee express their unhappiness to find that there have     been 
frequent changes in the post of Director General, the Chief Executive    of the 
organization.  During the last 7 years there have been as many as     seven incumbents 
to this post. The non -continuity of the Chief Executive     has affected the working of 
CAPART in a big way.  The  Committee  expect     that henceforth the  post  will carry a 
fixed  tenure so as to ca rry out the     plans and programmes of  CAPART in an 
organized and systematic   manner. This would also ensure accountability of the Chief 
Executive of the organization.     
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The posts of Director General and Deputy Director Generals have  been taken 
out from the purview of the Civil Services Board of  the Department of Personnel & 
Training and will now be filled up from open market through search -cum-Selection 
Committee.   
 The Recruitment Rules for these posts have been finalized by the Ministry in 
consultation with the Department of Personnel & Training.  The incumbents to these 
posts will now be appointed on Deputation/ Short Term Contract basis initially for a 
period of three years extendable by another two years. 
[O.M. No.15-RD(4)/1-CRD/2011 dated 28 August 2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No.6) 
The Committee noted that CAPART  has a number of guidelines for monitoring 
the implementation of the projects by the funded NGOs/VOs before sanction of the 
projects, during execution of the projects and post implementation of the projects.  The 
Committee, however, find the CAPART has bla cklisted as many as 634 organizations 

7 
 
since 2001 on account of non -furnishing of account documents, fake documents, etc. 
This shows the magnitude of misappropriation of funds by the funded NGOs/VOs 
whereby the impact of CAPART schemes has turned out to be invisible. The Committee 
feel that merely blacklisting of VOs/NGOs would not suffice. Strict action needs to be 
taken against them which may serve as a deterrent to others.  Moreover, the monitoring 
mechanism of CAPART also needs to be strengthened. The Co mmittee therefore, 
would like the Ministry to ensure that CAPART takes action against corrupt 
organizations/individuals and also against its own Officers found guilty of malpractice/ 
connivance with NGOs/VOs, inefficiency etc.  Also the list of black -listed NGOs/VOs 
should be made available to other Central Ministries/State Governments so that these 
black-listed organizations do not get assistance from other Government sources. 
Reply of the Government 
 A three-tier monitoring mechanism has been introduced by CAPART (pre-funding 
appraisal, mid-term & post evaluation) to meet the requirement of monitoring during the 
course of project implementation. Suitable action against corrupt organizations/ 
individuals and its own  officers are being initiated as per CAPAR T guidelines and 
Government norms.  The list of blacklisted NGOs/VOs is already made available to 
other Central Ministries/State Governments through the NGO Portal so that these 
blacklisted organizations do not get assistance from other Government sources. 
[O.M. No.15-RD(4)/1-CRD/2011 dated 28 August 2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No.3) 
CAPART’s headquarters are located at New Delhi and it has 9 Regional Offices 
spread across the country viz., Ahmedabad, Bhubneshwar, Chandigarh, Dharwad, 
Guwahati, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Lucknow and Patna.  The Committee regret to find that in 
spite of spread of the organization across the country, the various activities carried out 
by CAPART are declining year after year.  The Committee strongly recommend that 
these Regional Offices should be strengthened so that they f ocus in their respective 
regions to have wider reach to the rural areas across the country.  Besides, there 
should be small advisory committees at Regional level having elected representatives 
on board for wider and meaningful consultations.   
The Committee would also like the Government to engage institutions of national 
importance like IIMs/IRMA, etc. geographically located near to the respective Regional 
Centers in evaluation of the working of Regional Centres of CAPART so that timely 
remedial/corrective measures are taken on the shortcomings pointed out during such 
review/evaluation.                                   
 
Reply of the Government 
 As regard the Regional Offices, it is stated that the Executive Committee 
in its meeting held on 20.01.2012 decided to dissolve all the Regional Committees of 
CAPART.   Accordingly, all the Regional Offices of CAPART were closed in March, 
2012. 
[O.M. No.15-RD(4)/1-CRD/2011 dated 28 August 2012] 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No.5) 
CAPART has been carrying out 6 Schemes, viz..  Public Cooperation  (help to 
Self Help  Groups), Advancement  of  Rural Technology  Scheme (ARTS), Organization 
of Beneficiaries, Help to Disabled,  Marketing of Rural Products  and  Extending  Help to  
Young  Professionals.  From the information furnishe d to the Committee by the Ministry 
it is seen that during the last 3 years, i.e., after 2008 -09,  activities of CAPART have 
almost     been standstill. For instance, in the Scheme for Helping Self Help Groups, the 
number of beneficiaries during 2010 -11 has come down to 303 from 9974 in 2008 -09. 
Similarly, under Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme and Disability Action, 
Marketing, Gram Shree Melas, etc., the activities have come down drastically.  The 
Committee  are of the opinion that the Ministry should not take refuge of  the  impending 
restructuring of the CAPART which is under planning process for the years together. 
The CAPART should have motivated the States to participate in the Gram Shree Melas 
which is a wonderful platform for the rural artisans to showcase their talent and products 
to the outer world. Similarly the CAPART should have assisted the VOs who are doing 
credible work in enhancing the skills and living conditions of the rural masses.  Similarly, 
CAPART should have utilized the allocated funds fully. The Committee are anguished to 
find that the Ministry also failed in guiding the CAPART to carry out its given 
responsibilities efficiently. The Committee deplore such casual approach on the part of 
the Ministry.    
Reply of the Government 
The six mentioned schemes are kept under abeyance as restructuring of CAPART is 
under process by the Ministry since 2009.  The chronology of events and progress 
made in this regard is as follows: 
 In the 49 th Meeting of the Executive Committee of CAPART held in August, 2009 “it 
was decided that no further project funds will be disbursed by the Regional Centres 
until the matter is reviewed by a sub -committee with regard to time overrun,  if any, 
and in case of time overrun, the feasibility and rationale of disbursement”.   
 Pursuant to the decision taken in 49 th EC meeting, six sub groups were notified. 
However, only 4 sub groups became functional. Further in the 52 nd EC meeting held 
on 30 th April, 2010 it was decided that an independent assessment by professional 
third party may be done. The institution so appointed will prepare a report on the 
“State of Organization and Roadmap for Future”.  It was also decided that the report 

10 
 
of the sub groups along with comments of members if any may be made available to 
third party so appointed. 
 
 Subsequently IRMA was engaged to prepare a report on the “State of Organization 
and Roadmap for Future”.  
 
 All project funding was kept in abeyance of both RCs  and CAPART head quarter as 
per the order of MoRD dated 30th September, 2010.  
 IRMA submitted its report and made a detailed presentation on the study report on 
“State on the Organization and Road Map for CAPART” in 54 th EC meeting held on 
8th December, 20 10. Subsequently IRMA conveyed their inability for taking up the 
assignment further.  
 
 As per the decision of the Executive Committee in its 56 th meeting held on 20 th 
January, 2012 all the Regional Committees of CAPART were abolished and 
Regional Offices were closed down and regular staff shifted to Delhi.  
 The posts of DG/DDG have been removed from the purview of the Civil Services 
Board and will now be filled up from open market through search -cum-Selection 
Committee.   
 Draft recruitment rules for the pos t of DG and DDGs’ have been framed by the 
MoRD, which have been approved by DoPT. Further, the recruitment rules were 
circulated to all the members of EC under Rule 32 of Rules of CAPART for their 
comments. The comments of the members of EC were incorporat ed in the draft RRs 
by MoRD and approved by the Competent Authority.  
 The task of restructuring has been entrusted to an independent agency namely Tata 
Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai. The first meeting/visioning work shop 
on restructuring of C APART was organized by TISS on 8 th January, 2013 at 
CAPART, New Delhi. In March 2013, TISS has further submitted a concept note, 
highlighting proposed strategies for restructuring, and the same is under 
consideration. 
 
[O.M. No.15-RD(4)/1-CRD/2011 dated 28 August 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No.7) 

11 
 
The Government has been providing a grant of Rs.100 crore to CAPART  to carry 
out its various activities including administrative expenses.  However, in the recent 
years it has never utilized its funds fully.  For instance, against the target of Rs.50 crore 
in 2007-08 there was unspent balance of Rs.26 crore which increase d to Rs.61 crore 
and Rs.50 crore in 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 respectively.  It appears that during the last 
three years instead of giving any assistance for rural activities or to Self Help Groups, 
the CAPART has been incurring expenditure on the salary of its employees and other 
administrative expenditure only.  The reason put forth by the Ministry that pending 
restructuring of CAPART,  the funding of new projects has been kept in abeyance is not 
convincing to the Committee.  The Committee feel that this step h as only hampered the 
development of the rural populace.  The Committee therefore, desire that the ongoing 
projects should continue to be funded till the final decision of restructuring of CAPART is 
taken, so that the developmental activities in rural areas are not stopped altogether.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Restructuring of CAPART is under process by the Ministry.  After 
restructuring of CAPART, fresh proposals can be considered as per the outcome of the 
restructuring process. 
[O.M. No.15-RD(4)/1-CRD/2011 dated 28 August 2012] 
 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No.1) 
  The Council for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural Technology 
(CAPART) set up in 1986 by merging two organizations, viz.,People’s Action and 
Development India (PADI) and Council for Advancement of Rural Technology (CART) 
has been functioning as an autonomous body under the aegis of the Ministry of Rural 
Development.  It was  set up with the vision to play a dynamic and catalytic role in the 
many sided development of rural India through its network with the various 
Governmental agencies and Non -Governmental Organizations (NGOs).  Even though 
the objectives of CAPART are laudab le which, inter alia, include to encourage, promote 
and assist voluntary action for implementation of projects for rural prosperity, promote 
voluntary efforts in rural development and dissemination of technologies suitably 
modified for  serving rural popul ation, to promote, plan undertake projects through Self 
Help Groups (SHGs) and to create awareness amongst rural people, etc., the 
committee’s examination has revealed that CAPART has hardly achieved any of its 
objectives.  The Department of Rural Developm ent themselves have conceded that 
there have been problems in the organization since its beginning and it is plagued by 
poor image, ineffectiveness and inefficiency.  Further admittedly, and disregard of the 
objectives.  The Committee’s findings are detailed in succeeding paragraphs.    
Reply of the Government 
 In 1986, a unique body was created under the Rural Development Ministry – 
namely, CAPART – with the purpose of funding VOs engaged in rural development and 
coordinating the activities of such agencie s. To fulfill  the objectives of CAPART as laid 
down in the Memorandum of Association, CAPART has been sanctioning projects to 
NGOs under various schemes. The Council in the past has facilitated various NGOs to 
build successful models on various developmen t issues and has published some 
success stories.  
 The Executive Committee in its 49 th meeting held on 24 August, 2009 decided 
that a roadmap may be drawn for reorganization and rationalization of CAPART offices. 
The Ministry has taken a decision to assign the task of restructuring exercise to Tata 
Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai which may go into specific details of all 
aspects of the organization and its functioning and render assistance in the 
restructuring exercise. 
[O.M. No.15-RD(4)/1-CRD/2011 dated 28 August 2012] 
 

13 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No.2) 
The organizational structure of CAPART is a broad spectrum     consisting of 100 
members out of which 40 are from voluntary societies, 20 from other institutions, 25 ex -
officio members and 10% individuals. The     General Body is the highest governing 
body of CAPART comprising of its   members presided over  by  the Hon'ble Mini ster of  
Rural  Development   which  gives  overall  policy guidelines  and approves  the  annual  
budget,  balance sheet,  etc.  Besides it has Executive Committee Chaired by the   
Hon'ble Minister of Rural Development, Director General of CAPART being the 
Secretary to the Executive Committee, and the Secretary of the Ministry its ex -officio 
Vice-Chairman.   Also there is a Standing Committee on     Finance and Administration 
headed by Director General.  The Committee are  unhappy to find that an institution 
entrusted with rural development under the overall control of the Minister of Rural 
Development and the Secretary of Rural Development, has been allowed to die a silent 
death. It is high time that it is taken out of slu mber to make this institution vibrant, so as 
to achieve its stated objectives. The Committee feel that there is also a need to review 
the membership of General Body to make this body slim and efficient to enable it to take 
timely effective decisions. The C ommittee also recommend that the Chairman of 
CAPART should be a professional   person with proven track record of rural 
development work. The Committee   would like to be apprised of the specific action 
taken by the Government in regard to reorganization o f CAPART's General 
Body/Executive Committee, its Chairman and composition of other Committees.     
                              
Reply of the Government 
 In the meeting held on 20th January, 2012 the General Body and 
Executive Committee of CAPART considere d the proposal that the President of the 
Society may be a person of eminence in the field of public service, rural development, 
voluntary action or other such field and such a person should be appointed as the 
President of the General Body of CAPART by the  Ministry of Rural Development.  The 
proposal was approved in principle, to be implemented in due course as part of 
CAPART’s restructuring exercise.  Reorganisation of both Executive Committee and 
General Body will be part of the restructuring exercise.   
 
Thereafter, the Ministry has taken a decision to assign the task of restructuring 
exercise to Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai which may go into specific 

14 
 
details of all aspects of the organization, its functioning and examination of curren t 
governing structure including General Body/Executive Committee, its Chairman and 
composition of other Committees.  The first meeting/visioning work shop on 
restructuring of CAPART was organized by TISS on 8th January, 2013 at CAPART, 
New Delhi  in  which   broad issues  relating  to  restructuring  exercise were discussed. 
In March  
 
2013, TISS has further submitted a concept note, highlighting proposed 
strategies for restructuring, and the same is under consideration. 
[O.M. No.15-RD(4)/1-CRD/2011 dated 28 August 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No.8) 
The Committee find  that since 1996 onwards there have been a number of 
reviews carried out by various Committees to improve the working of the CAPART and 
to bring efficiency and accountability in the working of CAPART.  These Committees, 
inter-alia, include strategy and Org anization Review (TCS) (1996), Short review of the 
Structure (2000), Review of Secretary RD (2005), Vittal Committee Review (2005), 
Vinay Shankar Committee (2005 -06), Sayeed Hameed Report (2005 -06) and Sevottam 
(2008-09).  The Committee are surprised to no te that with so many reviews carried out 
by various Committees on the working of CAPART and visible non -functioning of the 
system coupled with corruption and black listing of several NGOs, did not prompt the 
Ministry of Rural Development to take any action  or initiative to root out the inefficiency 
in the institution.  It was only in 2009 that 6 Sub -Committees of the Executive 
Committee (EC) were constituted to suggest reforms in CAPART and the reports 
submitted by these Sub -Committees have been evaluated b y a third party viz, the 
institute of Rural Management Anand (IRMA).   The Committee have now been 
informed that based on IRMA Study Report, the Government is in the process of taking 
a decision in regard to restructuring of the CAPART.  The measures sugge sted in the 
Report range from creating a new focus for CAPART on capacity building, focus on 
marketing, creating institutional networking of stakeholder organizations, structural 
reorganization including open selection of DG’s post, etc.  The Committee hop e that the 
measures suggested in the Reports of Sub - Committees will help CAPART to come out 
of slumber and give it a new life.  The Committee, therefore, recommended the 
Government to take a final decision in regard to future, restructuring of CAPART with out 
further delay. 

15 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
         As far as functioning / restructuring of CAPART is concerned it is 
under process. IRMA submitted its report and made a detailed presentation on the 
study report on “State of Organization and Road Map for  CAPART”  in 54th EC meeting 
held on 8th December, 2010. Subsequently,  IRMA conveyed their inability for taking up 
the assignment further. Thereafter, the Ministry has decided to engage an agency viz. 
Tata Institute of Social Science (TISS) which may go i nto specific details of all aspects 
of the organization and its functioning and render assistance in the restructuring 
exercise. The first meeting with TISS officials was held on 08.01.2013 wherein broad 
issues relating to Restructuring of CAPART were disc ussed.  In March 2013, TISS has 
further submitted a concept note, highlighting proposed strategies for restructuring, and 
the same is under consideration. 
The posts of Director General and Deputy Director Generals have  been taken 
out from the purview of t he Civil Services Board of  the Department of Personnel & 
Training and will now be filled up from open market through search -cum-Selection 
Committee.  The Recruitment Rules for these posts have been finalized by the Ministry 
in consultation with the Depart ment of Personnel & Training.  The incumbents to these 
posts will now be appointed on Deputation/ Short Term Contract basis initially for a 
period of three years extendable by another two years. 
[O.M. No.15-RD(4)/1-CRD/2011 dated 28 August 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9 Para No.9) 
The Committee are anguished to find that the CAPART though associated with 
the rural activities, does not have any coordination with the Panch ayati Raj Institutions 
so far and it mainly has been dealing directly with the NGOs/VOs.  Even though the 
Panchayati Raj Institutions were strengthened by the 73rd and 74th Constitution 
Amendments as far back as 1992, which made Panchayati Raj Institutions  as 
institutions of Self Government, CAPART did not find it necessary to associate PRIs 
with its activities.  Under article 243G read with Schedule XI of the Constitution, the 
State Government, may, by law, endow the Panchayats with powers to function as 
institutions of Self government in the areas of agriculture, land improvement, minor 
irrigation, water management/ watershed development, fisheries, minor forest produce, 
drinking water, roads, culverts, bridges, education, technical training, library, market and 
fairs, health and sanitation, woman and child development, PDS, social welfare 

16 
 
including welfare of the handicapped and mentally retarded, etc.  While the CAPART 
has lost valuable time of over two decades in searching right module for helping the 
rural populace, the role of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) has increased substantially 
during this period.  Similarly, from the information made available to the Committee, it is 
seen that CAPART has hardly any presence in backward regions/ scheduled are as for 
carrying out welfare activities.  The Committee are of the strong view that while taking a 
final decision in regard to future of the CAPART, assist the PRIs  in terms of capacity 
building, training and providing necessary technology inputs in implem entation of 
various schemes.  Since Panchayati Raj Institutions are getting direct funding from the 
Central Schemes as also the State’s share in some of the schemes, the pro -active role 
of CAPART can help the PRIs in a big way.  The Committee therefore, de sire that 
CAPART apart from assisting NGOs/VOs should also coordinate with PRIs in 
implementing its various schemes/programmes.  The Committee would await the final 
decision of the Government in the matter within three months of the presentation of the 
Report to the Parliament. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The mission of CAPART is to work in close coordination with rural NGOs and 
empower them by engaging them in dialogue, respecting their thought and ideas,  
listening to their voice, harnessing their resources,  funding their activities, 
strengthening their hands, particularly the women, the weaker section of the rural 
society and disabled and other underprivileged sections of rural society, walking hand in 
hand with them on the road to rural prosperity. Any intervention in rural areas cannot be 
successful without involvement of Panchayats. However, there is no structural 
mechanism presently under CAPART for this purpose. The suggestions of the Hon’ble 
Committee have been noted and will be taken up as part of the restructuring exercise.  
[O.M. No.15-RD(4)/1-CRD/2011 dated 28 August 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
7 August, 2013                         Chairperson, 
16 Sravana, 1935 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Rural Development 

17 
 
APPENDIX - I 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 24 JULY, 2013 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1235 hrs. in Committee Room '074', Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. 
             Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Shri Premchand Guddu 
4. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
5. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
6. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
7. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
8. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy 
9. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
10. Smt. Annu Tandon 
11. Smt. Usha Verma 
12. Shri P. Viswanathan 
13. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
16. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
17. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
18. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
19. Shri Mohan Singh 
20. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah   - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
 
  

18 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
1. Smt. L.M. Vas -  Secretary 
2. Dr. Avtar Singh Sahota -  Senior Economic Adviser 
3. Shri Sushil Kumar -  Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Maha Bir Pershad -  Director 
 
2. XXX    XXX    XXX     
 
 
3. XXX    XXX    XXX   
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
4. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft Reports:  
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-Second Report on the "Council for Advance ment of People's Action and Rural 
Technology (CAPART) 
(ii)            XXX  XXX  XXX 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
5. After discussion the the committee adopted both the Draft Reports.  
   XXX  XXX  XXX 
6. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise  the Draft Reports after taking into 
account consequential changes arising out of factual verification, if any by the concerned Ministries and to 
present the same to both Houses of Parliament in ensuing session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
XXX  Relevant portions of the minutes  not related to the subject have been kept separately. 

19 
 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
[Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report] 
  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SECOND  REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations:     9  
    
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted     
  by the Government :         
  Serial Nos.:  4 and 6 
   
Total:         2 
Percentage:         22.22 %      
      
III. Recommendations which the Committee do    
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies :     
   Serial No.:  3 
  Total:         1 
  Percentage:        11.11% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of   
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:    
 Serial Nos: 5 and 7 
   
Total: 2        2 
  Percentage:        22.22 % 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies   
of the Government are still awaited :      
  Serial No. 1, 2, 8 and 9         
   
  Total:         4 
  Percentage:        44.45 % 
 
 
 