STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
                         (2012-2013) 
      
 
        FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
   
 
 
CAPACITY BUILDING OF PANCHAYATI RAJ INSTITUTIONS (PRIs) 
  
 
 
FORTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
       
45 


 
FORTY-FIFTH REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2012-2013) 
               
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
   
 
 
CAPACITY BUILDING OF PANCHAYATI RAJ INSTITUTIONS (PRIs) 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.08.2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.08.2013 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
     August, 2013/Shravana, 1935 (Saka) 


 
 
CRD No. 91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business i n Lok Sabha ( Thirteenth 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
  
 

(i) 
 
       CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2009-10)……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
Page No. 
(iii) 
(2010-11)……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… (iv) 
( 2012-13) ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………. (v) 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………………………… ….. (vi) 
REPORT  
Part I  
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
I. Introductory  
 A. Role of Panchayats 1 
 B. Need for capacity building of Panchayats 2 
 C. Role of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 3 
II. Schemes for capacity building of Panchayats  
A.        Schemes under Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
10 
  (i) Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) 
 (a) Districts Planning Committees (DPCs) 
 (b) Allocation of Resources and main features 
      (c) Allocation, releases and Utilization of Capacity Building under BRGF 
      (d) Mid Term Review  
10 
10 
11 
12 
13 
  (ii) Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY) 
(a)  Allocation, releases and utilization  
(b)  Mid Term Review  
(c)  Restructuring of BRGF/RGSY Schemes 
17 
17 
18 
20 
  (iii) Rajeev Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan  (RGPSA) 22 
  (iv) The Panchayat Empowerment & Accountability Incentive Scheme (PEAIS)  23 
   B. Capacity Building un der the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural 
Development)  
24 
  (i) MGNREGA 24 
  (ii) NRLM  24 
 C. Role in capacity building of Panchayats under  the Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation 
25 
III. Ensuring Capacity Building & Training of Panchayats 26 
 A. Devolution of 3 Fs 28 
 B. Availability of Staff 32 
 C. Availability and Infrastructure and ICT facilities 34 
 D. Training of elected representatives and functionaries of Panchayats 
(i)      National Capacity Building Framework 
(ii)     Number of Elected Representatives trained 
(iii)    Training Infrastructure 
44 
44 
49 
53             

(ii) 
 
IV. Thirteenth Finance Commission Grants to PRIs 56 
   
 PART II  
 Recommendations of the Committee                                                                                   63 
 
 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 I. List of BRGF Districts 82 
 II. Funds released and utilization reported under Capacity Building Component under 
BRGF w.e.f. 2009-10 to 2012-13 
86 
 III. Status of devolution of departments/subjects with funds, functions and functionaries to 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) for major States/UTs.  
87 
 IV. State-wise/UT-wise details of Gram Panchayats (G.P.) Ghars. 91 
 V. Minutes of the Twenty-Third Sitting of the Committee held on 10.08.2010 92 
 VI. Minutes of Second Sitting of the Committee held on 27.10.2010 95 
 VII. Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee held on 09.01.2013 98 
 VIII. Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of the Committee held on 24.07.2013  100 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(iii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
   Members 
Lok  Sabha  
1.  
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
6. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
7. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
10. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
11. Shri Rakesh Pandey 
12. Shri P.L. Punia 
13. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
14. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu 
16. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
17. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
18. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
19. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh 
20. Shrimati Usha Verma 
21. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
 
Rajya  Sabha 
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar* 
23. Shri Ganga Charan 
24. Shri Silvius Condpan** 
25. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
26. Dr. Ram Prakash 
27. Shri P.R. Rajan 
28. Shri Arjun Singh 
29. Vacant@ 
30. Shrimati Maya Singh 
31. Miss Anusuiya Uikey 
 
 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
*    w.e.f. 15 April, 2010 
**    Re-nominated w.e.f. 3 May, 2010 
@  Shri Bhagwati Singh, MP, Rajya Sabha ceased to exist as the member of the Committee, cons equent upon his retirement from 
membership of  Rajya Sabha w.e.f.  4 July, 2010.  
& consequent upon the resignation of Shri Ajay Singh Chautala from the membership fo Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 3 November 2009 vide 
Notification No. RS.10/2009-T dated 6 November 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(iv) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2010-2011) 
 
1.  
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
Members 
          Lok  Sabha 
 
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
6. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
7. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
10. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
11. Shri Rakesh Pandey 
12. Shri P.L. Punia 
13. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
14. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu 
16. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
17. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
18. Shri Makansingh Solanki 
19. Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh 
20. Shrimati Usha Verma 
21. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
 
 
          Rajya  Sabha 
 
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
23. Shri Ganga Charan 
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa* 
25. Dr. Ram Prakash 
26. Shri P.R. Rajan 
27. Vacant*** 
28. Shrimati Maya Singh 
29. Shri Mohan Singh** 
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey 
31. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan* 
___________________________________________________________ 
         * Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa MP, Rajya Sabha and Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan MP, Rajya Sabha have been nominated t o 
this Committee vide Bulletin No. 47668  dated 21 Septemeber,2010. 
          ** Consequent upon change in  nomination of Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav, MP. Rajya Sabha to Committee on Petroleum and Natural 
Gas, Shri Mohan Singh  has been  nominated to this Committee  vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part -II No. 47687 dated                    
11 October, 2010. 
         ***    Vacancy caused consequent upon the demise of Shri Arjun Singh, MP, Rajya Sabha on 4 March, 2011 . 

 
(v) 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2012-2013) 
 
        Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
5. Shri Premchand Guddu 
6. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
7. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
8. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
9. Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy 
12. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy 
13. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
14. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
15. Vacant 
16. Smt. Supriya Sule 
17. Smt. Annu Tandon 
18. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar 
19. Smt. Usha Verma 
20. Shri P. Viswanathan 
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
                                                   RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Munquad Ali 
23. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
29. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
30. Shri Mohan Singh 
31. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri Brahm Dutt, Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri A.K. Shah, Additional Director 

(vi) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Rural Development  (2012-13), having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Forty -Fifth Report on ‘Capacity 
Building of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)’ 
 2.  The Committee  (2009-10) took evidence of the former Member, Thirteenth Finance  
Commission, representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) at their sitting held on 10 August, 2010. The Committee (2010-11) took further evidence of the 
representatives of the Planning Commission and Min istry of Panchayati Raj at their sitting held on 27 
October, 2010. The Committee  (2012-13) took further evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj at their sitting held on 09 January, 2013. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Thirteenth Finance Commission, Planning Commission and Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj for appearing before the Committee for evidence and furnishing the information, desired by the 
Committee in connection with the issues relating to the subject.  
 3. The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 24 July, 
2013. 
 4. The Committee place on record their deep sense of appreciation of the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        SUMITRA MAHAJAN, 
12 August, 2013             Chairperson, 
21 Sravana, 1935 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Rural Development. 

1 
 
      REPORT 
PART -1 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
 
A.          Role of Panchayats 
1.1 The dream of 'Gram Swaraj' of Mahatma Gandhi and motto of 'Power to People' are essence of 
true democracy. The 73 rd Amendment to the Constitution in 1992 gave Constitutional status to the 
Panchayats as institutions of local self government and also for planning and implementing programmes for 
economic development and social justice through 2. 53 lakh Panchayats comprising of 589 District 
Panchayats, 6323 Block level Intermediate Panchayats and 2.41 lakh village Panchayats with a total of 28 
lakh elected representatives and about 10 lakh  and functionaries. Out of which about 10 lakh are women 
elected representatives.  Article 243 G of the Constitution bestows powers and authority to the Panchayats. 
It stipulates: 
 "Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow the 
Panchayats with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as 
institution of self-government and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and 
responsibilities upon Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such conditions as may be 
specified therein, with respect to – 
 
(a) The preparation of plans for economic development and social justice; 
(b) The implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be 
entrusted to them including those in relation to the matter listed in the Eleventh Schedule." 
1.2  The Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution specifies the following 29 subjects to be dev olved from 
State Goverments to the Panchayats by way of enacting State Legislations: 
1.   Agriculture, including agricultural extension.  
2.   Land improvement, implementation of land reforms, land consolidation and soil conservation.  
3.   Minor irrigation, water management and watershed development.  
4.   Animal husbandry, dairying and poultry.  
5.   Fisheries.  
6.   Social forestry and farm forestry.  
7.   Minor forest produce.  
8.   Small scale industries, including food processing industries.  
9.   Khadi, village and cottage industries.  
10.  Rural housing.  
11.  Drinking water.  
12.  Fuel and fodder.  

2 
 
 
13.  Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means of communication.  
14.  Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity.  
15.  Non-conventional energy sources.  
16.  Poverty alleviation programme.  
17.  Education, including primary and secondary schools.  
18.  Technical training and vocational education.  
19.  Adult and non-formal education.  
20.  Libraries.  
21.  Cultural activities.  
22.  Markets and fairs.  
23.  Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centers and dispensaries.  
24.  Family welfare.  
25.  Women and child development.  
26.  Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and mentally retarded.  
27. Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes.  
28.  Public distribution system.  
29.  Maintenance of community assets. 
 
B. Need for Capacity Building of Panchayats 
1.3 The task of capacity building of these large number  of Panchayats is quite gigantic exercise.   As 
per the assessment of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj even after 20 years of enactment of 73 th 
Constitutional (Amendment) Act and also after having three rounds of Panchayat elections in many States 
the empowerment of  Panchayats has not taken place as envisioned in the 73rd Constitution(Amendment) 
Act in 1992.    
1.4 During the course of examination of the subject th e Ministry of Panchayati Raj  outlined the 
following constraints and challenges coming in the way of capacity building of Panchayats in the country: 
(i) slow pace of  devolution of Powers to Panchayats  by most States  on account of 
discretionary Constitutional provisions. 
 
(ii) Non-empowerment of women in Panchayats on account of illitera cy, corruption and unfair 
practices of patriarchial society. 
 
 (iii) Absence of physical verification of Panchayat work at ground level. 

3 
 
 (iv) Delay in releases by the State Governments to PRIs  under prominent schemes for 
Panchayats i.e.BRGF. 
1.5 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their publication namely  'Roadmap for Panchayati Raj (2011-17): 
An All India Perspective' for Twelfth Plan has also enumerated a large number of constaints like inability of 
Panchayats to function effi ciently with insufficient staff and  office space and infrastructure, slow pace of 
devolution of Functions, Functionaries and Finances from State Governments to Panchayats, barring a few 
States, slow pace of decentralized plannin g as provided under Article 243 (G), poor implementation of 'the 
Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act (PESA), 1996'  etc.  
1.6 Highlighting the role of Panchayats (third tier of Government) with reference to the need for growth 
accompanied with demonstrable difference to the lives of the poorest and most vulnerable citizens, the 
Thirteenth Finance Commission made the following observations: 
"Inclusive growth is the cornerstone of India's development project.   India's recent 
economic growth performance has, indeed, been creditable.   However, such growth must 
make a demonstrable difference to the lives of the poorest and most vulnerable citizens.   
On this, as reflected in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) there is global 
consensus, of which our nation is a part.   India has the potential and the means to secure 
such a future for its citizens.   The stress laid on in clusive growth in the Eleventh Plan has 
meant that such growth has been accompanied by a concerted effort, by all levels of 
Government, to invest in the delivery of public service, particularly those which promote 
progress in achievement of the MDGs.   But  to achieve this potential, it is necessary that 
resources be mobilized and deployed in such a manner that the recent high rates of 
growth are maintained and even increased.   Thus, s ustainable and inclusive growth are  
prerequisites for achieving the MDGs. 
For achieving a greener and more growth path we need a fiscally strong, fiscally strong 
States and fiscally strong bodies, or the third tier of government." 
 
C. Role of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
1.7 With a view to provide a focus to the decentralization of powers and empowerment of the 
Panchayats as institutions of local self government , the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) was formed in 

4 
 
May, 2004 after carving out the Panchayati Raj Division from the Ministry of Rural Development. The major 
functions of the Ministry are to oversee the implementation of Part IX of the Constitution, inserted by the 
Constitution (Seventy Third Amendment)Act, 1992, the provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the 
Scheduled Areas) Act (PESA), 1996 and Article 243 ZD of Part IX -A of the Constitution relating to the 
District Planning Committees read with the Eleventh Schedule  which illustratively sets out a list of 29 
matters, which might be considered by the State Legisla tures for devolution to the Panchayats so as to 
ensure that they function as 'u nits of S elf-Government.' Other functions include, servicing of the 
Empowered Sub-Committee of the National Development Council (NDC) on Administrative and Financial 
Empowerment of the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), review of the Centrally Sponsored  Schemes of 
Ministries which deal with subjects included in the Eleventh Schedule  to enable role & responsibilities of 
PRIs, capacity building and training of elected representati ves of PRIs and promoting efficiency, 
transparency and accountability on the part of the PRIs. 
1.8 Asked about whether the Con stitutional provisions have been implemented fully, the MoPR in a 
written note stated as under: 
"Provisions of Part IX of the Constitution relating to Panchayats may be broadly categorized into 
Mandatory and Discretionary provisions. 
 
  
1.9 Mandatory provisions include: 
 
(a) Constitution of Panchayats (Article 243B) 
(b) Reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in proportion 
to their respective population (Article 243 D(1)); reservation of not less than one 
third of the respective number of SC and ST seats to women belonging 
respectively to SC and ST (Article 243 D(2)); not les s than one-third (including the 
number of seats reserved for women belonging to SCs and STs) of the total 
number of seats to be filled by direct elections in every Panchayat shall be 
reserved for women (Article 243 D(3)). 
(c) Timely election to Panchayats every five years (Article 243 E) 
(d) Constitution of State Finance Commission (Article 243I) 
(e) Setting up of State Election Commission (SEC) and vesting the superintendence, 
directions and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for and the conduct  of all 
election to the Panchayats in SEC (Article 243K). 
 

5 
 
1.10 The application/operation of the following provisions i n Part IX have been left to the 
discretion of the respective States: 
(a) Powers of Gram Sabha (Article 243A) 
(b) Composition of Panchayats (Article 243 C) 
(c)  Reservation of seats in Panchayats in favour of backward class of citizens  [Article 
243D (6)]. 
(d)  Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats (Article 243G) 
(e)  Powers to impose taxes by and fund of, the Panchayats (Article 243H) 
 
 Mandatory provisions have been generally complied with by all States. The discretionary 
provisions, as stated above, have been incorporated in Part IX keeping in view that 
Panchayats being in the realm of „local government‟ is a State subject in terms of Article 
246 read with List II - State List of the Schedule 7. Devolution of powers to Panchayats in 
terms of Article 243G and 243H is entirely dependent on the discretion of the State 
Legislatures which may by law, endow the Panchayats with appropriate powers, authority 
and responsibilities to enable them to function as institution of self -government. Therefore 
the profile of devolution of powers to Panchayats differ across the States. It requires 
willingness on the part of State Governments and Legislatures to accelerate the process of 
devolution of powers through Panchayats." 
  
1.11 On being enquired whether the MoPR has e xamined the issue of making  the provision mandatory 
instead of discretionary in consultation with the Ministry of Law, the MoPR in a written note clarified:  
"Keeping in mind the Constitutional provisions in Part IX and the fact that Panchayats is a 
State subject, MoPR has a scheme of incentivizing States/UT‟s to devolve the 3F‟s. In the 
proposed new scheme Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA), a 
provision has been made for release of 20% of resources under RGPSA to performance 
conditions that include devolution. Making provisions of devolution of powers by States to 
Panchayats mandatory would require amendment to the Constitution in respect of Article 
246, Seventh Schedule and Article 243 of the Constitution which would not be in line with 
the spirit of federalism underlined in the Constitution. "  
 
1.12 When asked about effort s needed for facilitating the process of devolution of subjects from State 
Governments to Panchayats, the MoPR in a written note stated: 
"Under the new Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) proposed to be 
implemented during t he Twelfth Five Y ear Plan, the S tates will b e required to draw a 
roadmap on among other aspects, devolution to be eligible for grants. This is expected to 
both incentivize and give responsibility to the States to devolve to Panchayats powers and 
responsibilities. " 
 
1.13 Explaining it further, the Secretary MoPR during the course of evidence stated: 

6 
 
 
"About the issue of devolution through the RGPSA, I would again say that we are making it 
an instrument whereby the States are being nursed to do more and more devolution. 
Yesterday, I was in Mewat (Haryana). In the panchayats, the criticism was that the State 
Governments are not doing adequate devolution for the pa nchayats to be able to take up 
their roles and responsibilities at the grass -roots level. The Constitution provide s that the 
States may, by legislation, do this devolution. They are also given an indicative list in the 
Eleventh Schedule of the 29 subjects. Many of the States have devolved very adequate 
functions to the panchayats alongside funds and functionaries. Som e States have simply 
devolved the functions but they have not devolved the functionaries nor the funds. So, 
through the RGPSA, the progress that the States are making on the devolution will also be 
monitored from the State Plan and linked to their performances as also linked to the 
Budgetary Support that they seek." 
1.14 Enquired about the assess ment of the Ministry about the progress made during the last two 
decades in the country with reference to capacity building of Panchayats, the MoPR  informed in a note:- 
"While the efforts for providing training to the ERs of PRIs have been going on for past 
several years, the training activities have not received adequate focus and attention at the 
State level.  Hence, these activities did not have the desired impact on the empowerment 
of PRIs."     
 
1.15 In this connection the Secretary (MoPR) also stated during evidence:  
 
"Madam, as you have rightly said it (training of elected representatives and functionaries) 
is an important subject and the task is challenging. Out of 29 lakh panchayat 
representatives, about 36 per cent ar e elected women representatives, 19 per cent are 
SCs and another 11 per cent are STs.  So, in this whole scenario, we are looking at 
varying requirements.  A lot of them are first timers in public office.  Their background, 
educational qualifications and a ttitudes also vary.  Many of them have not received any 
formal education as such.  There are some functional literacy needs to be satisfied besides 
educating them on the roles and responsibilities of panchayats and how they will deliver in 
their capacities as elected Panchayat representatives." 
 
1.16 The Committee pointed out that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj was formed in May, 2004 to provide 
focus to the decentralization of powers and the empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions as true local 
self Governments and admittedly, the Panchayats are yet  to come up as effective units of self governance.   
On being equired by t he Committee whether the MoPR has been discharging its functions effectively, the 
MoPR in a written note stated: 
"Panchayati Raj is a State subject under the Constitution and the rol e of Central 
Government is mainly for promoting the attainment of Constitutional intent in relation to the 

7 
 
PRIs, which is to empower the Panchayats with adequate functions and responsibilities so 
as to enable them perform their expected role as institution s of local self -government.  
Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has been attempting to discharge these responsibilities 
by way of issuing advisories, model rules and financial incentives to the States through 
Schemes such as Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRG F), Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana 
(RGSY), Panchayat Empowerment & Accountability Incentives Scheme (PEAIS), 
Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan (PMEYSA), e -Panchayat, etc. Being a 
relatively new Ministry, MoPR faced certain difficulties in the initial  years. However, over 
the recent years, following sustained interactions with the States at various levels, MoPR 
has been able to attain higher level of success in attainment of its objectives." 
1.17 In reply to a question about monitoring the Panchayats f unctioning at ground level the Secret ary 
(MoPR) stated during evidence: 
“In the Ministry of Panchayati Raj it has to be that the policy inputs are drawn from 
whatever experience is on the field.  We are aware of that n ot only myself but also my 
officers, who regularly have  undertaken visits to the panchayats. In fact, my Additional 
Secretary is just back from visit to O disha where he visited panchayats. Yesterday, I was 
in Haryana in a district called Mewat, interacting with sarpanchs of Mewat. My Addition al 
Secretary has gone to Jammu and Kashmir, and has also had the experience of visiting 
panchayats there." 
 
1.18 The Secretary (MoPR) further added: 
"Next week, visits are lined up for my Additional Secretary in Jaipur to visit a few 
panchayats. We are well aware of this. We have to interact at the panchayat level. You are 
also right in saying regarding the training that unless we get the feedback on ex actly what 
is the effect on the actual representatives who are receiving the training , then, that itself 
will put us on course as to how to give further inputs for improving the situation. I must say 
that, there are many States, many panchayats, which are bringing in  a lot of innovative 
ideas for training. The fact that many of them are coming into public life for the first time, 
and the fact that  they have to be educated on various programmes of the Government 
where more and more roles and responsibiliti es are sought to be devolved on  the 
panchayats, which is making the capacity building and the training of the panchayat level 
people more important." 
 
1.19 To empower women and making Panchayats more inclusive institutions the Government had 
sought to enhanc e the reservation of women in the Panchayats in the total number of seats, offices of 

8 
 
Chairpersons and in the seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes across three tiers from 
„not less than one -third‟ to „not less than one -half‟ and also sought to enhance similar reservation for 
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes categories in offices of Chairpersons in 
the Panchayats of each level upt o „not less than one -half‟ by introducing the Constitution (One Hundred 
and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 2009. The Standing Committee on Rural Development (2009 -10) had 
concurred with the proposed amendments with some modifications in their Fourteenth Report pre sented to 
Lok Sabha on 28th July, 2010. 
1.20 Asked Whether the Ministry has thought of seeking Government 's priority for passage of this 
legislation, the MoPR in a written note informed : 
"After considering the Report of Standing Committee to examine the p roposed Bill, the 
Ministry had proposed certain Official Amendments to the Original Amendment Bill and 
obtained the approval of the Cabinet for the same on 21.7.2011. Thereafter, notices have 
been sent to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha from Hon‟ble Minis ter for moving a motion 
for Amendment to the original Bill (last Notice sent being 25.07.2013)." * 
 
 
 
 
 
1.21  Emphasizing the need for capacity building of Panchayats the Planning Commission stated as 
under: 
“In order to fulfill their Constitutional obligations the capacities of Panchayati Raj Institutions need 
to be increased so that they can function effectively as the third tier of Government”  
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
*Note: At the time of factual verification, the Ministry informed on 26.07.2013 that they have again issued a 
notice on 25.07.2013. 
 
 

9 
 
 
1.22 According to MoPR training of elected representatives of Panchayats have  not received adequate 
focus and attention at the State level and hence these activities did not have desired impact on the 
empowerment of PRIs. 
 
1.23 On the issue of Panchayati Raj as a State subject, during the course of evidence, Member 
Secretary, Planning Commission clarified: 
“…according to a judgment of the Supreme Court, which is still in force, it is stated that Union 
Government, that is the Government of India, has a primary responsibility because the 
Constitutional Amendment actually is the respon sibility of the Government of India and we cannot 
shirk our responsibility by saying that it is a State subject”  
 
  

10 
 
II.  Schemes for Capacity Building of Panchayats 
     A.  Schemes under MOPR 
(i) Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) 
1.24 As a new approach to address the issue of regional imbalances in developmental process, a new 
programme called Backward Region Grand Fund (BRGF) was launched in 2007 after subsuming earlier 
programme of Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY). The BRGF covers 27 2 districts in 27 States of which 
251 districts have Panchayats and Municipalities. The remaining districts are covered by other local 
government structures such as Autonomous Districts Councils under Sixth Schedule of the Constitution 
and State specific arrangements as in the case of Nagaland and the hills areas of Manipur. A list of BRGF 
districts is at Appendix –I. 
(a) District Planning Committees (DPCs) 
1.25 The BRGF entrusts the central role to Panchayats in rural areas and Mu nicipalities in urban areas 
in p lanning and implementation of programme .  District Planning Committees at District level  are 
constituted in accordance with Article 243 ZD of the Constitution to consolidate plans of the Panchayats 
and Municipalities into draft District Plan.   Special provisions have been made for BRGF districts in J&K, 
Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura which do not have Panchayats under Part IX 
of the Constitution but where villa ge level bodies and institutions have been mandated under other legal or 
executive provisions. 
1.26 The Committee wanted to know about the success achieved in rega rd to effective district planning 
by the District Planning Committees and State/UT-wise difficulties encountered  and h ow it proposed to 
overcome these obstacles and within a time-frame, the MoPR in a written note clarified: 
"Under the BRGF Programme, relea se of funds is contingent upon preparation of the 
District Plans, duly consolidated by the District Planning Committees (DPCs) from the local 
plans prepared by the Panchayats, the Municipalities and the other local bodies.    The 
BRGF grants have encourage d the States to constitute the DPCs in the Districts.  At the 

11 
 
time of inception of the BRGF Programme in 200 7, only 13 States had constituted the 
DPCs.  All the other remaning States have constituted the DPCs since then. In Jharkhand, 
DPCs were constituted in December, 2011 after continuous urging by MoPR.  
The main difficulty encountered in implementation of the integrated and decentralized 
planning is that the State line departments, despite constant insistence by the Ministry, are 
not communicating the resource envelop to the Planning Units for effective convergence of 
resources before the plan preparation stage. Secondly, the PRIs/ ULBs are unable to play 
leading role in integrated planning as their discretionary budget, which comes only from 
the untied Development Grants of BRGF, is dwarfed by resources of other schemes. 
Capacity of local bodies to prepare Plan and of the DPC to direct and consolidate local 
plans need to be built and strengthened.  The Ministry proposes to devote attention in this 
matter now during the Twelfth Plan." 
 
(b) Allocation of resources and main features 
 1.27 Allocation of resources across a sample State reveals the following:- 
 
Sl. No.  Sector %age spending 
1. Angawadi Buildings 25.0 
2. Schools, Class Rooms, compounds etc. 16.3 
3. Drinking water 13.6 
4. Gram Panchayat Buildings 9.6 
5. Electrification 4.4 
6. Health 2.0 
7. Hostel Buildings 1.9 
8. Animal Husbandry  1.5 
9. Others 25.6 
                     Total 100.0 
 
1.28 The three main features of BRGF are : 
(i) Centrality of Panchayats and the Municipalities in planning and implementation. 
(ii) Grant is 'united' and can be used for any work preferred by the Panchayats/ 
Municipalities so long as it fills a development gap. 
(iii) Nearly 11% of total allocation is spent for capacity building. 
 
1.29 Under BRGF Capacity Building component, each State is required to identify nodal agencies, 
usually State Institutes of Rural Development(SIRDs) for a six years Perspective Capacity Building Plans, 
Funds are allocated to States, calculated at the rate of Rs. 1 crore for each BRGF district in the States per 

12 
 
annum.   Based on utilization of previous year releases, the expenditure  may vary from district to district.   
These funds are used for Capacity Building of Panchayats. 
(c) Allocation releases and Utilisation of Capacity Building Component under BRGF 
1.30 The MoPR has given the following year-wise details details about entitlements, releases and 
utilization of Capacity Building Component under BRGF durin g 2009 -10 2010 -11 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 
showing as under:      Rs. in crore 
Year Entitlement Grant Released Utilisation 
Reported 
2009-10 250.00 190.64 162.82 
2010-11 250.00 197.17 114.11 
2011-12 250.00 106.58 40.78 
2012-13 272.00 89.56 0.53 
    
1.31 The State-wise details are in Appendix II    
1.32 The Committee during the course of examination pointed out that against the entitlement  of Rs. 
250 crore for Capacity building under BRGF each year during 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 the releases 
have been as low as Rs. 190.64 crore, Rs. 197.17 crore and Rs. 106.58 crore respectively. Whereas during 
2012-13 against the entitlement of Rs. 272 crore for 272 BRGF Districts  the releases were as low as Rs. 
57.49 crore and utilization was only Rs. 0.53 crore .   The MoPR attributed inadequate submission of the 
utilization of the grants release d earlier as a reason for less than 100% release against the BE of Rs. 250 
crore during these years. 
1.33  Asked about the reasons behind non-submission of utilization of Grants during these years by 
different States, the MoPR in a written note stated as under: 

13 
 
"Under BRGF Capacity Building (C.B) Component, MoPR releases funds to the State 
Governments against their Perspective/Annual Action Plan duly approved by High Powere d 
Committee (HPC). Further, State Governments are responsible to execute the Annual Action Plan 
for Capacity Building and furnish the corresponding utilisation certificates (UC), physical and 
financial progress report and audit report in order to avail the  next release from MoPR under 
BRGF-C.B Component. " 
 
1.34  Explaining further the MoPR in a note stated as under: 
 (i)The funds sanctioned by Ministry of Panchayati Raj under the Programme are 
 transferred to the Consolidated Funds of the State Government concerned. These funds 
 are required to be transferred to the SIRD/Implementing Agency by the State 
 Governments within 15 days.  However, in most of the States, there is delay in releasing 
 funds to the implementation authorities well beyond 15 days. This  results in slow pace of 
 utilization of the BRGF funds and consequent accumulation of unspent balance.   
  (ii) Progress reporting only after reaching a certain percentage of expenditure. 
  As the States submit utilization certificates at the time of claiming their next 
 installments only, these reports are generally furnished to MoPR only after reaching 60% 
 utilization of previous releases. The utilization below these levels is normally not  
 reported by the  States. This gives the impression of low utilization and high unspent 
 balances even  though the actual utilization may be as much as 59%. 
 (iii) Expenditure level fixed for the State as a whole. 
  The actual expenditure measurement is d one for the State as a whole when 
 they report their progress on reaching a minimum of 60 per cent of their expenditure.  As 
 a result, even if 30 per cent of the Districts have attained 100 per cent expenditure, they 
 have to wait for the other Districts in the State to show good expenditure to make the 
 total expenditure upto a minimum of 60 per cent for the State as a whole. 
  
1.35 During the course evidence of the Secretary (MoPR) also stated: 
 "Under the BRGF there is still a slight problem. The funds are available.  But 
because the States are sitting on a lot of previously released funds, Utilisation Certificates 
are not coming and therefore fresh funds cannot be released to them. So, we are cha sing 
that also.  We have two and half months left before the financial year comes to a close.  
We are pursuing with the State Governments very closely so that we could get from them 
the Utilisation Certificates and as many proposals as can be approved and the BRGF 
funds for training could also be released."  
 
(d) Mid Term Review of BRGF  
 
1.36 The MoPR has outlined the following major weaknesses of BRGF in the Mid Term Review of 
BRGF Schemes during Eleventh Plan (2007-12): 

14 
 
 Even though the Programme is expected to address the issue of backwardness, the 
formula adopted for distribution of the national allocation among the 250 backward districts 
does not have any weight for any indicator of backwardness. Most States too are distributing 
te district allocat ions among the PRIs and ULBs based on population and area criteria, 
without attention to the indicators of backwardness. 
 Even though the Constitution had mandated setting up of the DPCs by the States as early 
as in 1993, DPCs, most States did not have the DPCs when the BRGF was launched, in later 
part of the FY2006-07. This did not let the programme take off in several major States such as 
Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Gujarat, Uttarakhand etc. On the persuasion of the 
MoPR, such States started con stituting the DPCs. However, two States, namely, Jharkhand 
and Uttarakhand, are yet to constitute the DPCs. 
 Even though the DPCs have by now been constituted in most States, they largely remain a 
body with political shell only, without any substantive tech nical support staff. This has made 
the DPC incapable of providing guidance to the PRIs and the ULBs in preparing good 
perspective and annual plans. 
 The quantum of grant per Panchayat, which averages to Rs. 2 to 3 lakh per year, is too 
small to have any significant impact. 
 PRIs/ ULBs are unable to play a leading role in integrated planning when its discretionary 
budget, which comes only from the BRGF, is dwarfed by other players. 
 Securing convergence of the large number of Central/ State schemes operational at the 
District/ sub-district levels is proving to be a huge challenge, especially when the DPCs are 
functionally weak.  
 Absence of a clear policy at Central / State level to ha ve Panchayat -wise resource 
envelope under different schemes has diluted the effectiveness of the planning process 
envisaged under the Programme for the Panchayats, Municipalities and the DPCs. 
 Lack of a clear policy at Central and State levels in regard to  the decentralised planning 
mechanism has made the BRGF as perhaps the only GOI programme which is mandated to 
be placed before the DPC. This has seriously eroded the achievement of integrated 
decentralised planning, that is one of the core objectives of the BRGF. 
 Inadequate availability of infrastructure, man -power and basic information required for 
integrated planning with the Panchayats has made it difficult to secure a methodical 
perspective plan to come from the local bodies. 
 Even though most States ha ve enacted laws to indicate subjects with regard to which 
functions would be devolved to Panchayats.  However, effective devolution is still to be 
accomplished. This has contributed to diminishing the role of the Local Bodies in preparation 
of realistic and visionary plans. 
 Transfer of funds from State Governments to implementing authorities is time consuming, 
delays the implementation of approved projects and also reduces the faith in the system. 
 The procedure adopted for release of instalments after the f irst one, is cumbersome and 
not based on sound logic. While each PRI/ ULB is an independent unit for planning and 
implementation, fund releases are based on the district taken as the unit. As a result, even if 
30% of the Panchayats in a district achieve 10 0% expenditure, they will have to wait for other 
PRIs/ ULBs in the district to show similar achievement for the district to become eligible for 
subsequent instalments. 
 ULBs are neglected in the capacity building program. 
 PRIs/ ULBs do not have much control over capacity building content or intensity. 
 Insufficient staffing for program management at MoPR, State, District and Local Body 
levels, particularly in the areas of financial management, planning, M&E, capacity building, 
and communications. 

15 
 
 The Programme has not given adequate logical proof for identifying only 250 districts as 
backward, nor has it attempted to identify pockets of backwardness in the non -Backward 
districts. 
 
1.37 The MoPR has indicated the following Mid-course correction: 
 
 The criteria for backwardness should be made transparent and measurable.  
Apportionment of funds from the Centre to the Districts and from the District to the various 
PRIs and ULBs should be based on objective and transparent criteria of backwardness. 
This would enable application of the BRGF resources for bringing in equalisation. 
 The BRGF has three main objectives: (a) to mitigate backwardness, (b) to  strengthening 
the local bodies and (c) to strengthen integrated decentralised planning. Of these, (b) & (c) 
are common to all districts and PRIs, irrespective of their being in a backward region or 
not. Therefore, the scheme coverage need be expanded to all the Districts for items (b) & 
(c), but with enhanced allocation for the identified backward areas to address item (a). 
 In consonance with the recommendations of the 2nd ARC and the Core Group  on 
Administrative Reforms headed by the Cabinet Secretary, Blocks could be used for 
identifying the backwardness of the area and for enhanced support under the scheme. 
 The Programme is operational through large number of rural and urban local  bodies.  
There is no dedicated mechanism at State and District level for managing this multi -
sectoral Programme.  There is need to set up Project Management Unit at the State le vel 
with dedicated coordination mechanism at the District level. 
 Similar to the reforms pursued through JNNURM, following the MoU mode  between the 
States and MoPR could be considered for implementing the Programme. 
The Programme should provide funds for s etting up of Project Management  Units at the 
National, State and District levels.  
 Each State should have a State Training Coordinator for the PRIs, who should  be able to 
envision the training needs for the PRIs holistically and identify the resources available to 
meet the objective under various Central and State Schemes, Non -Government and even 
open market resources and the resources of the Local Bodies themselves. 
 District Planning Committees need to be strengthened with adequate technical support. 
 Database for special and local planning needs to be made available to the  DPCs, PRIs 
and the ULBs, to enable them make effective local plans. 
 All Central Schemes, CSSs as well ACAs, should make it mandatory to adopt  the concept 
of integrated decentralised  planning, preparation of the plans through Gram/ Ward/ Area 
Sabhas and approved by the respective PRIs & ULBs; consolidation into Draft District Plan 
by the DPC and integration into the State Plan via an exclusive “District Window” in the 
State‟s plan and Budget documents. 
 
1.38 On the aspect of training and Capacity Building (TCB) the MoPR stated that Mid Term Appraisal of 
Eleventh Plan has pointed out as under :- 
The aspects of Training and Capacity Building (TCB) are common to both  BRGF and non-
BRGF districts.  Therefore, TCB component of both BRGF and RGSY should be the same. 
 
The BRGF, RGSY, e -PRI and PEAIS could be merged and restructured with the following 
components: 
 

16 
 
  (i)   Strengthening PRIs particularly Gram Panchayats in all districts which would  include- 
 (a) Capacity building of all Panchayati Raj functionaries and frontline functionaries at 
Panchayat level of flagship programmes; 
 (b) Strengthening infrastructure and s ervices of Panchayati Raj Institutions and e -enabling 
them for effective management of functions assigned to Panchayati Raj, improving 
delivery of public services and building accountability to the citizens and the Gram 
Sabha; and 
 (c) Preparation and Publ ic dissemination of annual Panchayati Raj Development Reports 
on Panchayat Diwas (24th April) in all Gram Panchayats. 
(ii)         Institutionalizing Decentralized Planning in all districts. 
(iii)    Untied Development Fund for the 250 already identified backward districts and left out 
Left Wing Extremism (LWE )districts,  based on integrated & decentralized district plans.  
(iv)      Establishment of Project Management Units at Central, State and PRI levels. 
(v)   Incentivising States to devolve 3Fs upon PRIs and incentivising Panchayats to raise own 
resources and enhance transparency.   Such reward money could be used for innovative 
projects such as essential rural skill building (viz. barefoot engine ers, accountants, 
computer operators) and community action. 
  Infrastructure, manpower, accounting system, e -governance should be the first charge on   
the Scheme. This should have the following components. 
(i) Panchayat buildings, wherever these do not exist or need major renovation, like CD Block 
buildings, would not only symbolize the rise of PRIs, but also provide physical space for the 
people to interact with representatives & functionaries for transacting expanded business 
of PRIs.  Labour component of the building construction could be met out of NREGS. 
 (ii)  Robust but simple accounting & financial management system would enhance the 
credibility of PRIs. A sound accounting culture should be inculcated through good 
accounting package, manpower and training. 
(iii)  e-PRI has the potential to revolutionise the PRIs as the symbol of modernity, efficiency & 
accountability and induce mass ICT culture.    
(iv)   Presently the biggest deficiency of Panchayats in general is the acute shortage of 
manpower. Often j ust a Panchayat Secretary is posted for several small Panchayats. 
Existing BRGF guidelines provide for trained community level workers for Gram 
Panchayats.  However, States have not used this facility, reportedly since coverage of only 
250 districts under BRGF would create imbalance within the State i.e. between BRGF and 
Non-BRGF districts and also the uncertainty about the life of BRGF which may create a 
permanent liability for the States anytime. There is, therefore, a need to assure the States 
about the continuation of BRGF (even after restructuring) in the 12th Plan also and if 
possible, build staff component into Finance Commission grants on a continuing basis. 
  

17 
 
(ii) Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY) 
1.39 Following are the objectives of RGSY:   
  (a) Actual training of PRI member 
(b) Setting up of infrastructure for Satellite based training. 
        (c) Training Infrastructure at District / Block level in the North  Eastern and Hilly States only.  
  (d) Orientation of key officials associated with functions devolved to Panchayats. 
(e) Promoting sensitization of Gram Sabha. 
        (f) Sensitization of media, elected representatives in  legislatures, CSOs etc. 
1.40 Following is the funding pattern of RGSY: 
(a) The scheme is demand driven in nature and the funding pattern of the scheme  
has been 75 % by the Central Government and 25 % by the State Governments.   
(b) The assistance to Non -Governmental Organizations is 100 %. Such NGO  
proposals should have the recommendations of the State Government concerned.   
(c) Ordinarily, Central assistance for capital expenditure would not be considered  
under the scheme.  States under the North Eastern region or hilly regions are 
given relaxation. 
(d) Proposals for setting up infrastructure for satellite based training are also eligible  
for funding to the States on 75 % cost fund basis.  
 
 (a)     Allocation releases and utilisation  
1.41 Component-wise allocation and releases under RGSY during the last three years is given below:                                                                                              
         (Rs. In Crore) 
Year Training & Capacity Building Infrastructure Development     Total Release 
 Allocation Release Allocation Release  
2009-10 39.28 39.28 4.95 4.95 44.23 
2010-11 60.20 60.20 12.50 12.50 72.70 
2011-12 35.80 35.80 49.00 49.00 84.80 
2012-13 (upto 
31.03.2013) 
75 (BE) 
53.78 (RE) 
53.78 40 (BE) 
36.22 (RE) 
36.22 90.00 
 

18 
 
1.42 The Committee while finding that amount given under RGSY was thoroughly inadequate keeping in 
view huge demand for training and infrastructure related expenditure in non BRGF districts asked about 
whether MoPR ever considered revising the funding pattern from 75:25 to 100% for RGSY,  the MoPR in a 
written note informed: 
"From 2013-14, RGSY will be subsumed in RGPSA. The Finance Ministry is not in favour of less 
than 30% sharing of funds from States, and 20% in case of special category States." 
 
(b) Mid Term Review of RGSY 
1.43 The MoPR explaining the over-all assessment of the progress of RGSY in Mid -Term Appraisal has 
stated as under: 
"Although the scheme has been allocated small amounts in the annual plans for 2007 -08 and 
2008-09, the release and utilisation of funds has progressed well. The programme of trai ning and 
capacity building of elected representatives and functionaries of PRIs has received the thrust it 
required.     
 
Strength and weakness of programme: 
1.44 The programme has a very important objective which needs to be prioritized.  It provides the 
required flexibility to the States to design their training and capacity building programmes for elected 
representatives and functionaries of PRIs.  However, the following weaknesses have put limits on the 
benefits from this scheme: 
- Prohibition on release of RGSY grants for training infrastructure (except for SATCOM and for 
States in NE Region and Hilly States); and 
- Some States are not able to contribute 25% share, which affects the implementation of the 
scheme. 
1.45 For BRGF a review by World Bank was unde rtaken in July, 2009 whereas for RGSY, MoPR 
sponsored evaluation through CTRAN Agency was done in 2011.  Asked about remedial steps taken after 
these evaluation the MoPR in a written note informed: 

19 
 
"As per the  World Bank Mission evaluation report, BRGF stim ulated capacity building (esp. top -
down orientation and training) activities targeted at PRIs officials and functionaries.  
While undertaking the review, some States like Andhra P radesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh and 
Maharashtra were selected in view of the diversity these States represent in terms of CB&T.   
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has examined the recommendations. These recommendations 
have been shared with the State Governments with the advice to adapt these as per the local 
specific conditions in order to improve the Capacity Building & Training processes." 
 
1.46 The Committee pointed out that t he MoPR in s tatement showing implementation of status of 
recommendation made by the Committee in their 22 nd Report had informed that Evaluation Report in 
respect of RGSY has been incorporated in RGPSA .  Asked about the salient feature of Evaluation Report 
and the extent to which it has been incorporated in RGPSA, the MoPR in a written note stated as under: 
"A mid -course evaluation of RGSY was commissioned in 2010 in 6 States viz. Assam, Andhra 
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan and West Bengal.  
The key findings and recommendations of the Evaluation Report are: 
 A pool of trainers / resource persons s hould be developed at the States, Districts and 
Block levels 
 The SIRDs and ETCs need to be strengthened in terms of Human Resources 
 Training Needs Assessment of ERs and Functionaries should be carried out at regular 
intervals 
 Exposure visits to beacon Panchayats should be made mandatory 
 Monitoring and supervision mechanism needs to be set up at MoPR, State and District 
level.  
  These have been broadly included in the Guidelines of RGPSA."  RGSY has been 
subsumed in RGPSA since 2013-14 
  

20 
 
(c) Restructuring of BRGF/RGSY Schemes 
1.47  During the course of examination of the subject the MoPR in 2010 had stated as under: 
The MoPR under restructuring of its various schemes has proposed (a) restructuring of the 
BRGF and the RGSY and (b) merger of the e -Panchayat, Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva 
Shakti Abhiyan (PMEYSA) and the Capacity Building Component of BRGF into RGSY and 
(c) renaming the restructured RGSY as the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran 
Abhiyan (RGPSA). Thus the MoPR will have two schemes viz,  
a) BRGF: To provide enhanced Development Grant for the districts/ regions identified 
as backward; and 
b) RGPSA: For enhancing the capacities of the PRIs, in terms of office building, ICT, 
training, manpower and accounting support, in all the districts to enable them discharge 
their roles and responsibilities efficiently and effectively. 
1.48 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj had given (October, 2010) the following abstract of costs of RGPSA:  
Sl. 
No. 
Components of 
RGPSA 
Proposed allocation 
(Rs. in Crore) 
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
1 Panchayat Staff  500 1000 1600 
2 Panchayat Ghars  500 1000 1400 
3 Accounting  200 400 600 
4 e-Panchayat  500 1000 1400 
5 Training + Infrastructure  600 600 600 
 
6 
Institutionalising 
Decentralized Planning  
400 600 600 
7 Total – RGPSA 2,700 4,600 6,200 
  
EFC approved the Scheme on 29.11.2012.  The EFC have advised to secure the concurrence of 
the Planning Commission." 
1.49 The Committee enquired about the basis of the above proposal, the MoPR in a written note stated: 
"MoPR has identified the availability of Panchayat Staff, Office Buildings, Accounting 
arrangements, ICT infrastructure and training as the core issues for capacity building of the 
Panchayats, subject, however, to adequate devolution of functi ons and concomitant funds 
by the State Governments. Though funds under the BRGF and other Schemes can be 
availed to provide for these facilities, States have often displayed inability in making 
integrated use of the available diverse resources. Therefore, to give a push to attainment 
of this objective, MoPR has proposed the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan 
(RGPSA). "  

21 
 
1.50 In this connection the Planning Commission also stated: 
"Ministry of Panchayati Raj has submitted a proposal to restructure BRGF into Rajiv 
Gandhi Panchayat Empowerment and Backward a Region Development Mission 
(Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) with an enhancement in provision from Rs. 
4800 crore to Rs. 10,000 crore per year for the development grant component of BRGF, 
additionality of Rs. 600 crore per annum for capacity building grant for the National 
Capability Framework and Rs. 500 crore, Rs. 1,000 crore and Rs. 1,600 crore for the next 
three years for staff and Rs. 200, Rs. 400 and Rs. 600 crore for supporting accoun t ting 
functions.   In addition an amount of Rs. 9464 crore is assessed as the cost for panchayat 
building @ Rs. 12 lakh per building.   Further for e -enabling Panchayats an amount of Rs. 
4250 crore has been proposed for the three year period.   In additio n, sums have been 
proposed for the project management units at the Central, State and PRI levels and also 
for incentive scheme for performance of implementing entities.   The capacity building 
allocation also proposed to be increased from Rs. 250 crore to Rs. 400 crore for 2010 -11, 
Rs. 600 crore for 2011-12 and Rs. 600 crore for 2012-13." 
1.51 Planning Commission has a lso given the provisions proposed under the restructured BRGF and 
RGPSA which are as follows:  
             (Rs. in Crore) 
Scheme  2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 Total 
BRGF 10000 10000 10000 30000 
RGPSA  2700  4600  6200 13500 
Total 12700 14600 16200 43500 
 
1.52 Expressing their views the Planning Commission stated as under: 
(i) "Planning Commission supports the restructuring of the programme into two components 
namely the BRGF and the RGPSA.   However, it would be more appropriate if the RGPSA 
is treated as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme with some contribution from the State 
Governments. 
(ii) Keeping in view the need to converge all resources, there is ne ed to converge funds from 
MGNREGA and also to utilize the common service centres being established by the 
Department of Information Technology. 
(iii) The availability of funds for BRGF and RGPSA can only be decided depending upon the 
availability of GBS for 2011-12." 
 
1.53 During the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of MoPR, the Ministry informed 
that during the Twelfth Five Year Plan , they propose to launch a new scheme namely RGPSA by merging 
the existing schemes viz. RGSY e- Panchayat, PEAIS, PMEYSA and Capacity Building part of BRGF with 
a total outlay of Rs. 33000 crore. 

22 
 
1.54 Asked as to whether necessary funds for this ambitious programme have been arranged, the 
MoPR in a written note stated:  
"That the Planning Commission have given their in principle approval to the Scheme and also 
provided GBS of Rs. 6437/ - crore for 12 th Five Year Plan Period for MoPR."  Subsequently it was 
revised to Rs. 11,547/-. 
 
 (iii)      Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) 
 
1.55 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their Outcome Budget (2012 -13) have highlighted that though 
there has been a dramatic rise in expenditure on programmes of social inclusion in recent years especially 
during the Eleventh Plan, it has been accompanied by growing problem  of implementation as schemes are 
developed along jurisdictional lines of the Ministries, based on vertical management decision systems 
instead of bottom-up participatory planning.   As such it is difficult to ensure that context -specific measures 
which address the issues in hand in a holistic manner.   In this context, MoPR has also highlighted that a 
vibrant and empowered Panchayati Raj system is vital.  Through Panchayats it is possible to move away 
from a top down centralized approach that can be insens itive to people's actual needs, to one based on 
people's participation and grass root planning.  Implementation can be improved by accountability to the 
Gram Sabhas.  Especially important is self governance through Gram Sabhas in Schedule V areas as 
envisioned in the Panchayat Extension on to the Schedule Area Act (1996).  PESA which can ensure 
community control over resources. 
1.56 The MoPR has informed that Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) with the 
following objectives will strengthen the Panchayati Raj System across the country and address the  critical 
deficiencies that constraints the functions of Panchayats: 
(i) Enhance the capacities and effectiveness of Panchayats and the Gram Sabhas; 
(ii) Enable democratic institutions decision making and accountability in Panchayats; 
(iii) Strengthen the institutional structure for knowledge creation and capacity building of 
Panchayats; 

23 
 
(iv) Promote devolution of powers and responsibility to Panchayats as per the spirit of the 
Constitutions; 
(v) Specially strengthen Gram  Sabhas in Schedule V areas to discharge their responsibilities as 
envisaged in PESA.    
 
1.57 According to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, RGPSA w ill be extended to all States under Part IX of 
the Constitution and also to elected bodies in the non-Part IX areas. The MoPR has stated that RGPSA will 
extend to all States and Union Territories of the country. For the purpose of these guidelines, wherever 
„State‟ is mentioned, it will include Union Territory also, and whenever „Panchayats‟ are mentioned, these 
will include elected local governments in areas where Panchayats do not exist in the North East. Approval 
of RGPSA was obtained on 7th March 2013 from CCEA. 
 (iv) The Panchayat Empowerment & Accountability Incentive Scheme (PEAIS) 
1.58 The Panchayat Empowerment & Accountability Incentive Scheme  (PEAIS) is a Central Sector 
Scheme being implemented by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj that aims at encouraging the States to 
adequately empower Panchayats and put in place  systems for bringing about accountability of Panchayats 
based on two stage evaluat ion of Devolution Index , one is Framework criteria that is based on following 
four fundamental Constitutional requirements: 
(i) Establishment of State Election Commission. 
(ii) Holding of election to Panchayats 
(iii) Setting up State Finance Commission 
(iv) Constitution of District Planning Committee (DPCs) 
1.59 The second stage involves assessment of States at devolution through detailed questionnaire and 
field visits.  Thereafter top ranked States are awarded based on Devolution Index (DI). 
1.60 The Scheme also provides for incentivization of best performing Panchayats,  PEIAIS and will be 
merged in RGPSA.  
 

24 
 
(B)   Capacity Building under the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) 
 (i) MGNREGA  
1.61 Construction of Bharat Nirman Rajiv Gandhi Sewa Kendras as Village Knowledge Resource 
Centre and Gram Panchayat Bhawans at Gram Panchayat Level  has been allowed under MGNREGA.  To 
strengthen administrative support systems, the Ministry of Rural Development  has permitted use of upto 
6% of the expenditure incurred in implementation of schemes, in a year, as administrative expenses.   The 
Ministry has recommended for the recruitment of one Rozgar Sewak Sahayak in every Panchayat, one 
technical assistant for ev ery five Gram Panchayat s, at least one computer assistant per Block and one full 
time dedicated programme Officer in every Block.   A scheme for dedicated manpower for Gram 
Panchayats in Integrated Action Plan (IAP) Districts is also in force. 
 (ii) National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM)  
1.62 In view of the eminent roles of Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs) that include governance, 
commercial and political, it is necessary to consciously structure and facilitate a mutually beneficial working 
relationship between Panchayats and institutions of the poor, particularly at the level of Village Panchayats. 
Formal platforms would be established for regular consultations between such institutions and PRIs for 
exchange of mutual advice, support and sharing of reso urces. However, care would be taken to protect 
their autonomy. Where there are no PRIs, the linkages would be with traditional local village institutions.  
 
  

25 
 
(C)  Role in capacity building of Panchayats under the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation  
1.63 The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in their programme captioned 'Nirman Bharat 
Abhiyan' has given the following role to Panchayats: 
"As per the Constitution 73rd Amendment Act, 1992, Sanitation is included in the 11th Schedule.   
Accordingly, Gram Panchayats have a pivotal role in the implementation of NBA.   The programme 
will be implemented by the Panchayati Raj institutions at all levels.   They will carry out the social 
mobilization for the construction of toilets and also maintain the clean environment by way of safe 
disposal of wastes.  PRIs may engage suitable NGOs for inter -personal IEC and training.  
Community Complexes constructed under the NBA will be maintained by the Panchayats/Voluntary 
Organisations/Charitable Trusts.   Pancha yats can also contribute from their own resources for 
School Sanitation over and above the prescribed amount.  They will act as the custodian of the 
assets such as the Community Complexes, environmental components, drainage etc. constructed 
under NBA.  GPs can also open and operate the Production Centers/Rural Sanitary Marts. 
  
GPs can play a key role in promoting regular use, maintenance and up gradation of toilets and 
inter-personal communication for hygiene education.   Panchayats and NGOs who are in the 
frontline of implementation have a key role in ensuring that safety -standards are being met with all 
components of NBA e.g. the distance between water source and a latrine – adhering to the 
minimum distance for IHHL, school and Anganwadi toilets and community sanitary complexes; 
regulating pit-depth, pit lining to prevent pollu tion, collapse of pit etc.   The same will apply to key 
hygiene behaviour such as keeping the environment around hand pumps/water sources clear and 
tidy and free of human and animal excreta.  GPs must also play a role in the mon itoring of the NBA 
programme.  Both Block level and District level PRIs must regularly monitor the implementation 
along with the concerned officials." 
 
  

26 
 
III. Ensuring Capacity Building & Training (CB&T) of Panchayats 
1.64 The MoPR has informed that with o ver 28 lakh Elected Representatives (ERs) and 10 Lakh 
Panchayat Functionaries in the form of Gram Sevaks, Panchayat Secretaries who work with Panchayats 
across the country, with varied devolution of subjects to Panchayats in different States coupled with w ide 
variation of educational and professional experience of ERs and equipping the Panchayat functionaries 
with increased responsibilities in various fields like planning, management, livelihood, agriculture, health 
etc., the challenge of Capacity Building and training is quite huge.   
1.65 Asked about the strategy chalked out by  the MoPR to address the issue of Capacity Building and 
training of ERs and Panchayat Functionaries across the  country in a time bound manner, the MoPR in a 
written note stated: 
"During the 12 th Five Year plan, the MoPR will implement the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat 
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) with focus on creating the required human resources, physical 
infrastructure and building the administrative and technical capacities of Panchay ats. Budgetary 
allocations to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj during the Twelfth Plan period are also proposed to be 
increased substantially to take care of these requirements."  
 
1.66 The Committee also wanted to know whether there is a need for separate Institute for Capacity 
Building and Training for ERs and Panchayat Functionaries on the pattern of Civil and Defence Services for 
real empowerment of Panchayats, the MoPR in a written note stated: 
"Capacity Building & Training for ERs/functionaries of Panchayats is required on third -tier 
governance issues and awareness about government Schemes particularly those in which PRI‟s 
have been given a clear role and responsibilities.  The trainees should have enough knowledge so 
that they can exercise the func tions assigned to them. The MoPR is of the view that for reasons of 
economy of scale the training infrastructure. HRD resources in the NIRD/SIRD and District 
Resource Centres would be strengthened to cater to the Capacity Building needs of Elected 
Representatives functionaries of PRIs."   
 
1.67 MoPR has stated that for Panchayats to effectively perform the responsibilities entrusted to them  
Capacity building of Panchayats needs to be ensured through: 
 (a) Devolution of 3 Fs 
 (b) Availability of Staff 

27 
 
 (c) Availability of Infrastructures and ICT facilities 
 (d) Training of Elected Representatives (ERs) 
 
1.68 In this connection, the Planning Commission  has informed that in order to fulfill the Constitutional 
obligations as provided under Article 243G endowing Panchayats powers to enable them to function as 
institution of Self Government.  The capacities of Panchayati Raj Institutions need to be increase d so that 
they can function effectively as the third tier of Government.  The capacity building of Panchayats may be 
viewed as a three pronged effort: 
(i) Provision of adequate human resources. 
(ii) Provision of Infrastructure. 
(iii) Training and Sensitisation of  
(i) Elected Members of PRIs 
(ii) Functionaries  of PRIs and 
(iii) Government functionaries working at District, Block and Gram Panchayat 
levels. 
1.69 The Twelfth Plan  (2012-2017) document Captioned 'Faster Sustainable and More Inclusive 
Growth' brought out by the Planning Commission inter-alia observed as under. 
"Rural Local self -governance is critical to rural transformation.  The 73rd Amendment to the 
Constitution seeks to endow the Panchayats with such power and authority as may be required to 
enable them to function as genu ine institutions of self -governance.  Inherent in this devolution is 
the expectation that it would lead to social justice with economic development and effective local 
governance with emphasis on: 
 Social and political empowerment of village communities, pa rticularly of the hitherto 
marginalized segments. 
 Accountability of local government functionaries to be elected as local representatives.  
 Greater control of village communities over natural resources.”  
 
 
 

28 
 
A.  Devolution of 3Fs 
1.70 One of the functions of the MoPR is implementation of Article 243 G read with Eleventh Schedule 
that provide for devolution of funds, functionaries and finances from State Governments to Panchayats. 
The Thirteenth Finance Commission while dealing with the issue of devoluation of three Fs in their Report 
observed: 
"The transfer of funds, functions and functions and functionaries to local bodies consistent with the 
XI and XII Schedules of the Constitution has met  with limited success so far.  T he traditional 
theology that funds and fu nctionaries will follow functions does not appear to have worked.   A 
number of States have notified transfer of functions, but this has not been followed by transfer of 
funds and functionaries.   Only some States have significan tly empowered local bodies by 
transferring expenditure obligations, taxation power and staff resources to them.  It has been 
contended that decentralization is not fiscally neutral as it will generate increased demands in the 
scope, scale and quality of se rvices provided by the local bodies.  Thus, more funds devolve to 
local bodies would encourage State Governments to accelerate their decentralization efforts.   
Transfer of functions and functionaries may then follow transfer of funds." 
 
1.71 The Commission also observed: 
"We have also noted that in recent times the local bodies have been entrusted with funds, often 
directly through Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) such as the National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) and Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) 
which have stretched their already limited planning implementation and accounting capacities.   
There is a felt need and demand for untied funds to augment local capacitites, which was 
communicated to us almost universally across States during ours visits." 
  
1.72  The Commission had further observed: 
"While the issue of providing addition funding support to  local bodies is significant, the building 
blocks of the third tier structure deserve attention.   These include  (i) entrusting local bodies with 
implementation and expenditure responsibilities consistent with their mandate (ii) enhancing their 
capacity to meet these obligations through assigning necessary event raising powers as well as 
providing adequate transfers ;(iii) making them accountable for the performance, including delivery 
of services as per previously notified standards; (iv) strengthening the functioning of the State 
Finance Commission and (v) providing focused support to the scheduled and excluded area s.   
The Eleventh and Twelfth Finance Commissions made a number of recommendations in this 
regard.   Some of the recommendations, though important, have not been implemented so far.   
More needs to be done to promote decentralization.   We also need to put  in place a stronger 
incentive mechanism aimed at persuading State Governments to decentralized further……” 

29 
 
1.73 Status of devolution of F unctions, Functionaries and Finances from State Governments to 
Panchayats in different States/UTs is as shown in Annexure III. 
1.74 On the progress made towards devolution over the years  has been Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a 
written note stated: 
"This Ministry has consistently been exhorting the States towards meaningful and effective 
devolution of functions, fund s and functionaries (3Fs) to the PRIs and for preparation and 
notification of detailed Activity Mapping , opening of Panchayat Windows in State budgets and 
assignment of functionaries in accordance with the devolution of functions and funds. The 
devolution of the 3Fs needs to be backed by grass -roots planning and the concept of grass -roots 
planning through the District Planning Committees (DPCs) was almost non -existent in most of the 
States." 
 
1.75 During the course of examination, the Committee enquired about the steps taken for ensuring that 
every State/UTs devolves the 3Fs to Panchayats, the MoPR in a written note had stated:  
"Devolution upon the Panchayats is discretionary for the States. However, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has issued three advisories to States: (i) Guidelines dated 01.12.2009 on 
the Activity Mapping (ii) Guidelines dated 09.04. 2009 on Panchayat Finances and (iii) Guidelines 
dated 23.10.2009 on manpower to the PRIs to facilitate the  process. These are available on 
www.panchayat.nic.in. SIRDs have also been entrusted to conduct research o n the status of 
activity mapping in some States. The DI study under PEAIS also includes activity mapping 
undertaken by State." 
1.76 Elaborating State -wise progress, the MoPR further informed that the Govt. of Rajasthan has 
transferred 3Fs in respect of fiv e departments to the Panchayats namely; Agriculture, Primary Education, 
Health, Women & Child Development and Social Justice Department.  MoPR has requested other States 
which have not devolved even these, to follow suit. In addition, the following new dev elopments have been 
noted in the incremental Devolution Index Study of 2011-2012: 
(i) In Maharashtra, the Joint Forest Management Committee (JFMC) has been set up as a sub -
Committee of Gram Panchayat (GP), responsible to Gram Sabha.  The State has undertaken a  
„Saksham Gram‟ as a Gram Sabha Strengthening campaign which includes awareness 
campaigns. 
 
(ii) The Government of Haryana has decided to provide funds directly to GPs in Schemes of the 
Panchayat Department, especially special development works, Mukhya Mantri Anusuchit Jati 
Nirmal Basti Yojana, pavement of roads.  The GP will have to discretion to exe cute works upto Rs. 

30 
 
10 lakhs itself or through contractors. The State has taken a decision to provide an untied grant of 
Rs. 50 lakhs annually to Panchayat Samitis, which so far had hardly any funds. 
 
(iii) Rajasthan has carried forward the process, started last year, of devolution for five departments, i.e. 
School Education, Health, Women and Child Development, Agriculture and Social Justice and 
Empowerment by creating sub-heads for Panchayats in their budget and has made an allotment of 
untied funds of Rs. 802.54 crores to PRIs. 
 
(iv) Karnataka has increased accountability and transparency of Panchayats by enacting the 
Karnataka Guarantee of Services to Citizens Bill, 2001 and including 10 services of Rural 
Development & Panchayati Raj Department.  Panchayat election s have been held through 
Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) for the first time in the State. 
 
1.77 Asked about the findings of devolution studies and comments of MoPR thereon, the MoPR i n a 
written note replied: 
"The DI study shows that devolution of functi ons is inadequate without parallel devolution of funds 
and functionaries. There is a tendency among States to devolve functions through activity mapping 
but not follow these up through devolution of funds and functionaries and detailed executive 
instructions. In 2010 -11, the DI study ranked States along an incremental DI along with a 
cumulative DI, which showed that States high on the cumulative DI also undertake further 
devolution. However, States that have not strengthened Panchayati Raj historically do n ot take 
adequate measures to catch up. There is need therefore to mandate devolution, link Central 
scheme funding with devolution, and vastly upscale PEAIS outlay." 
1.78 During the course of evidence of the representatives of the Planning Commission, the Committee 
wanted to know whether for real empowerment of Panchayats their over -all capacity  building is also 
required like authorizing Sarpanchs to appoint technical persons , the Member,  Planning Commission 
stated: 
"I want to tell you that from 1996 to 2001, I was looking after the work of Panchayati Raj 
and thereafter when I returned to Kerala in may own cadre, I was Secretary, Finance 
Department.  In Kerala one -third grants are given to Panchayats for that we const ituted 
Public Account Committees because nobody can say that there is a corruption in 
Panchayats.  Thereafter, their accounting audit was arranged. It is true that in Kerala the 
Panchayats have been given staff. In rest of States we do not see it." 
  
1.79 The witness further informed: 
"It has been clearly spelt out that as per Article 243 G they are supposed to be institutions 
of self -Government and in fact State Governments are asked to ensure that they are 
institution of self Government.  For that one thing is clear where States have en couraged 
this and given staff to Panchayats in that Sarpanch have not been given separate role.  

31 
 
From 2004 to December 2005 I was brought here again in this Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
at the time the Ministry was formed.  In every village or the Gram Panch ayat area, the 
Constitution of Committees of Education, Health in the Eleventh Schedule as you know, 
that are 29 subjects which are intended for Gram Panchayats, Block Panchayats and 
District Panchayats.  But, it appears about State Governments, there are good State 
Governments like Sikkim, Tripura, Kerala and to some extent Karnataka, rest of the State 
Governments have not given powers to Panchayats.  They are not giving powers under 
Article 243G". 
 
1.80 The Secretary, MoPR also informed: 
"I do not know why even after these efforts there is a p sychology working against 
decentralization at the grass roots level." 
 
1.81 She added:- 
"In the capacity building we are not just looking at training the panchayati raj functionaries 
but also strengthening of the ca pacity of the panchayats in administrative and technical 
matters at gram panchayat levels so that they are able to discharge their functions. The 
other aspects are the improving infrastructure facilities that are there; improving the 
institutional arrangements for giving the training, etc.  So, all these are under the RGPSA. 
Another major advantage of this Scheme is that it lays out a menu of activities.  States are 
at varying levels of developing their panchayati raj institutions. Some States like Kerala, 
Maharashtra, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Sikkim, and Tripura  are 
improving very rapidly.  There are some States which are still lagging behind for lack of 
resources or whatever.  For them, a menu of activities will be there in the RGPSA Scheme 
which will enable them to say, “I am lagging in this area. So, I would l ike Budgetary 
assistance from the Central Government in this area, for which I give you my plan.  In the 
next five years, this is  on yearly basis these will be my performance criteria.”  Against 
those performance criteria  we will examine the annual State p lan and sanction the 
budgetary resources. Another thing under the RGPSA is that we are linking the State 
performance on various activities to release of 20 per cent of the funds under the RGPSA.  
These activities include responsibilities about devolution of the funds, functionaries and the 
functions to the panchayats.  It includes the actions taken for training, for capacity building, 
actions under various infrastructure strengthening, etc. So, the inadequacies for 
strengthening panchayats are sought to be taken care of under this new Scheme in this 
fashion.  The funds, as I have explained, have increased manifold because of the RGPSA 
approval.  The formal approvals are in process of being obtained." RGPSA has since been 
approved on 7th March 2013.  
 
 
 
 

32 
 
B.  Availability of Staff 
1.82 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has informed that manpower has been one of the four dimensions 
of Capacity Building of Panchayats that has to be enhanced for discharging the Constitutional mandate 
given to them under Article 243G read with Eleventh Schedule. During the course of examination it came 
out that as per MoPR there are 582 District Panchayats, 6351 Intermediate Panchayats and 2.43 lakh 
Gram Panchayats across the country.  The MoPR has given the following State -wise detail s of staff at 
Gram Panchayat levels as on October, 2010 is detailed below: 
Sl.  
No. State No. of GPs  GPs Secretary 
Sanctioned  Filled 
1 Andhra Pradesh 21825 12395 10670 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1646 N.R N.R 
3 Assam 2196 1955 1897 
4 Bihar 8463 8463 5754 
5 Chhattisgarh 9820 9734 9734 
6 Goa 183 200 167 
7 Gujarat 13735 11802 9224 
8 Haryana 6155 2237 1370 
9 Himachal Pradesh 3243 3243 3243 
10 Jammu & Kashmir 4146 - - 
11 Jharkhand 4562 4423 2933 
12 Karnataka 5628 5627 4847 
13 Kerala 999 978 978 
14 Madhya Pradesh 23012 23040 N.R 
15 Maharashtra 27920 17326 16655 
16 Manipur 165 409 37 
17 Mizoram 818 N.R N.R 
18 Meghalaya 1179 N.R N.R 
19 Nagaland 1110 N.R N.R 
20 Orissa 6234 6234 6234 
21 Punjab 12800 2319 1919 
22 Rajasthan 9166 9188 8522 
23 Sikkim 166 165 165 
24 Tamil Nadu 12618 12618 12618 
25 Tripura 1038 N.R N.R 

33 
 
26 Uttar Pradesh 51914 16432 12003 
27 Uttrakhand 7227 670 412 
28 West Bengal 3351 3351 3351 
TOTAL 241319 152809 112733 
N.R. = Not Reported. 
 
1.83 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a written note informed 
"Manpower in the PRIs, in general is grossly insufficient.  In many States the Panchayats 
do not have full time core staff.  Even, MoPR manages the process intensive progress of 
BRGF with meager manpower." 
 
1.84 Dealing with the manpower requirements of Panchayats, the Secretary MoPR stated during 
evidence:- 
"The second important thing is that in State of Uttar Pradesh alone in 52,000 Panchayats 
there are 8000 Panchayat Secretaries in multiple charge . Where this multiple charge is 
imposed everybody has a responsibility, but nobody is responsive . For that we have 
proposed a Panchayat Staffing and the size of Panchayat spread from 100 to  60,000.  In 
Gram Panchayats what would be staffing pattern, source of fun ding, etc.  We have 
prepared a blueprint, which would be finalized with concurrence of Planning Commission." 
  
1.85 The Secretary MoPR further stated: 
"I am in agreement with the Members of this august Committee that in Panchayats there is 
a great need of infrastructure and technical manpower." 
 In regard to augmenting manpower of Panchayats, the MoPR informed that Secretary, MoPR has 
issued guidelines to the Secretaries of all the States/UTs on 23 October, 2009  which inter-alia stated as 
under:  
"The 73rd Amendment to the Constitution in 1993 has ushered in an important chapter in 
the process of democratic decentralization in the country.  The PRIs have consequently 
become a permanent tier of self government at the local level with, inter alia, sp ecific role 
in planning and implementation of programmes for economic development, service 
delivery and social justice, particularly in relation to 29 matters listed in the 11th Schedule.  
The 11 the Plan stipulates substantial empowerment and use of the P RIs as the primary 
means of delivery.  
. However, even after 15 years of the Amendment, the PRIs are generally yet to come up as 
the effective units of self -governance due to several reasons, a key reason being 
inadequate capacity of the PRIs, which has tw o facets, namely, their organizational 
capacity and capability of the officials and elected representatives.  All the same, their 

34 
 
responsibilities are  increasing progressively due to the role in the planning and 
implementation of NREGA, BRGF, MDM, SSA, NRHM, TFC and so on.  
Resources for deploying core staff of the Panchayats could be found out of the State 
resources, BRGF, NREGA, Finance Commission Awards etc. as per a well considered 
phasing.  Other staff could be financed under the existing Plan/non-Plan arrangements." 
1.86 This was later re iterated by MoPR on 12th November, 2010  on 7th June, 2011 by MoRD and and 
6th July, 2011. 
1.87 The Committee also  wanted to know as to how many States/UTs have sufficient number of  staff, 
the MoPR in a written note clarified: 
"Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has advised all the States to  provide the basis core 
functionaries to the Panchayats, which includes the Secretary, an Accountant, a Data 
Entry Operator and a Social Mobiliser. 
Most States have provided core t ask staff to the Panchayats, with the major exception 
being Uttar Pradesh. The Ministry has proposed to provide enhanced financial support to 
the States in respect of these components through the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat 
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA)." 
 
C. Availability of Infrastructural and ICT facilities 
1.88 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj  outlined infrastructure – Panchayat Ghars as one of the four 
Components of capacity building of Panchayats in the Country.   The MoPR has given the State/UT -wise 
details of Gram Panchayat (GP) Ghars as shown in Annexure IV.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has 
given the following details about the number of Panchayats in major States having no Panchayat Ghars 
and requiring major renovation is reported to be as under:- 
Sl. No. State No. of Gram 
Panchayats 
Panchayat having 
no  Panchayat 
Ghars 
1. Andhra Pradesh  21807 5639 
2. Assam 2196  622 
3. Bihar 8463 3135 
4. Gujarat 13693  53 
5. Karnataka 5628 372 
6. Maharashtra 27893 5183 

35 
 
7. Orissa  6234 401 
8. Punjab 12447 7182 
9. Rajasthan  9188 125 
10. Tamil Nadu 12618 Not reported 
11. Uttar Pradesh 51914 22930 
12. West Bengal  3354  15 
 
1.89 The Committee pointed out that in States like Uttar Pradesh 22930 Gram Panchayats do not have 
their Panchayat Ghars  out of 52, 000 GPs.    Further, in Bihar 3135 Gram Panchayats has no Panchayat 
Ghars.  Similarly, in Maharashtra out of 27, 920  Gram Panchayats as many as 5 183 have no Panchayat 
Ghars.  The Committee enquired as to why the efforts of MoRP have not yielded desired results, the MoPR 
in a written note had stated: 
"MoPR has advised the States to undertake construction of Panchayat Ghars by combining the 
funds available under the MGNREGS with BRGF and RGSY.  While there is a significant progress 
in respect of BRGF Districts, for non -BRGF Districts further efforts are required, for which the 
Ministry has advised the States suitably.  In respect of Panchayat Ghars, the Ministry has advised 
to the States to provide an appropriate office building to each Panchayat.    In consultation with the 
Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD), the Ministry has proposed a model of Panchayat Ghars 
which are also called the Bharat Nirman Rajiv Gandhi Sewa Kendras (BNRGSKs), to be 
constructed at a cost of Rs. 10 lakh for the GPs and Rs. 20 lakh for the inter-mediate Panchayats." 
1.90 The Committee also wanted to know the progress made towards ensuring Panchayat Ghars for 
each Gram Panchayat in the country, as well as for ensuring adequate staff at the Gram Panchayat level, 
the MoPR in a written note had stated as under: 
"The Ministry has advised all the States to ensure Panchayat Ghars for all GPs in a time bound 
manner, availing funding under MGNREGS/BRGF /RGSY, besides States‟ own resources for this 
purpose. Further, the Central Gover nment has decided to assist State Governments / UTs in 
providing a Panchayat Development Officer and a Junior Engineer in priority Gram Panchayats 
using Administrative Expenditure Head of MGNREGS. The support proposed on 90:10 sharing 
between Central and the State is to be gradually reduced by 10% every year for 5 years and would 
continue at 50:50 for another 5 years. Moreover, comprehensive guidelines dated 23.10.2009 has 
been given to the States on Manpower for the Panchayats. The Ministry proposes to fur ther 
address these issues under the Rajeev Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikarn Abhiyan (RGPSA)." 
1..91 The MoPR has given the following details about Panchayat Ghars/other infrastructure sanctioned 
under RGSY as on 30.09.2011 in different States on their website:- 

36 
 
A. Panchayat Ghars / Resource Centres sanctioned 
Sl. 
No. State  Infrastructure 
sanctioned No. of Units  Year of 
sanction 
1 Bihar Gram Panchayat Ghars 95 2006-07 
2 Gujarat Gram Panchayat Ghars 240 2006-07 
3 Himachal Pradesh Gram Panchayat Ghars 120 2006-07 
4 Rajasthan Gram Panchayat Ghars 180 2006-07 
5 West Bengal Gram Panchayat Ghars 5 2006-07 
6 Assam Gram Panchayat Ghars 770 2007-08 
7 Himachal Pradesh Gram Panchayat Ghars 120 2007-08 
8 Orissa Gram Panchayat Ghars 350 2007-08 
9 Manipur Gram Panchayat Ghars 82 2007-08 
10 Himachal Pradesh GP Resource Centre  150 2008-09 
11 Himachal Pradesh GP Resource Centre  150 2009-10 
12 Manipur Gram Panchayat Ghars 82 2009-10 
13 Rajasthan Gram Panchayat Ghars 180 2009-10 
14 Karnataka  Gram Panchayat Ghars 40 2009-10 
15 Chhattisgarh Gram Panchayat Ghars 290 2010-11 
16 Karnataka  Gram Panchayat Ghars 360 2010-11 
17 Chhattisgarh Gram Panchayat Ghars 290 2011-12 
18 Punjab Gram Panchayat Ghars 103 2011-12 
19 Uttar Pradesh Gram Panchayat Ghars 81 2011-12 
  Total   3688   
 
B. Training Infrastructure Sanctioned   
 
Sl. 
No. State  Infrastructure 
sanctioned No. of Units  Year of 
sanction 
1 Arunachal Pradesh Panchayat Resource 
Centre at Block level 150 2008-09 
2 Assam 
Panchayat Resource 
Centre in the Kahikuchi 
campus of State Institute 
of Rural Development at 
Guwahati. 
1 2008-09 

37 
 
3 Himachal Pradesh Administrative Block at 
PRTI Mashobra 1 2008-09 
4 Tripura 
Training Institutes at 
Udaipur in South District 
and Kumarghat in North 
Tripura 
2 2008-09 
5 Arunachal Pradesh Panchayat Resource 
Centre at Block level 150 2010-11 
  Total 304   
 
1.92 Asked about the assessment of the Ministry about the requirement of funds needed for full capacity 
building and training of elected representatives and functionaries of Panchayats and the target year by 
when the task could be accomplished fully, the MoPR in a written note stated:                  
"Under the BRGF, the component of Capacity Building for 2010 -11 is Rs. 250 crore as in the 
previous years.   In addition, Rs. 50 crore is available under the scheme of RGSY.  Hence, Rs. 300 
crore is available for C apacity Building & Training.  However, bulk of the 250 crore of BRGF (CB 
component) is required to utilised in the 250 BRGF districts.   It has been estimated that Rs. 300 
crore would be required to provide 3 day training to all the ERs at the present cost  norms of RGSY 
programme for the non -BRGF districts.   further, training and capacity building being a continuous 
task with Refresher trainings once a year, the requirement of funds increases to Rs. 1500 crore for 
a period of 5 years.   At present the trai ning infrastructure is also not very robust and presence of 
training institutions below District level is very small.   this is required to be augmented.   In the 
meanwhile, MoPR has advised States to proceed with association of private partners in PPP Mod e 
to augment the arrangements for effective and efficient management of training programmes."                                  
  
1.93 Explaining the requirement of funds for Panchayat Ghars the MoPR in a written note stated as 
under: 
"Wherever Gram Panchayat (GP) buildings do not exist or are insufficient, these would 
need to be financed.  The labour component of the building construction would be met out 
of MGNREGS. Necessary orders have been issued by the Ministry of Rural Development. 
Accordingly, though the overall cost is assessed as Rs. 9,464 crore, the amounts sought in 
this proposal is Rs. 500 crore for 2010-11, Rs. 1,000 crore for 2011-12 and Rs. 1,400 crore 
for 2012 -13, assuming that the project would be implemented in phases and that the 
remaining amounts would become available to the States from their own/ other resources 
including the MGNREGS. The unit cost is assumed as Rs. 12 lakh." 
1.94 In this connection the Secretary, (MOPR) also stated during evidence: 

38 
 
"Side by side with this huge gap, that has to be given the capacity building we have on the other 
side, as Madam Chairman has very rightly pointed out, inadequate institutional resources.  
Information Communication and Technology Systems (ICT) 
The MoPR in a note informed that between July and December 2004, Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
(MoPR) had organized Seven Round Tables of State Ministers of Panchayati Raj in order to arrive at a set 
of action points through consensus to operationalize the implementation of Part IX of the Constituti on and 
PESA in letter and spirit.  The Seventh Round Table at Jaipur discussed the issue of Information 
Technology for Panchayats and in its conclusions, positioned IT as: 
a. a decision making support system for Panchayats, 
b. a tool for transparency, disclosure of information to citizens and social audit, 
c. a means for better and convergent delivery of services to citizens, 
d. a means for improving internal management and efficiency of Panchayats, 
e. a means for capacity building of representatives and officials of the Panchayats  an e -
Procurement medium. 
 
 
Objectives of e-Panchayats 
  
1.95 The MoPR stated that objectives of e -Panchayat is to promote ICT driven (Software governance) 
to enable them to perform various tasks that inter-alia includes: 
(i) Better participation of stakeholders in District Planning Process and bring in an element of full 
need of planning. 
(ii) Enabling capacity building of the office bearers of the Gram Panchayat, including Computer 
Based self-learning tools. 
 
1.96 The MoPR also informed: 
(i) Keeping in view  the strategic importance of computerization at the Panchayat level, MoPR 
constituted an Expert Group in June 2007 under the Chairmanship of Director General, 
National Informatics Centre (NIC) to assess the current and future Information Technology (IT) 
programmes of the Ministry, to recommend on the most cost -effective technologies for 
reaching IT to the Gram Panchayats, the use of IT for effectively building capacities of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions through distance learning; and the cost implications of the 
recommendations.  
(ii) MoPR formulated a new Centrally Sponsored Scheme for e -governance in Panchayats 
incorporating comments of different Ministries and based on the recommendations of the 
meeting of National Programme Committee (NPC) held on 25th September 2008.  
(iii) Under e-Panchayats scheme, under a National Project Report  Village and Block Panchayats 
are to be provided with Desktop computer, laser printer, scanner, web camera, pen drive and 
UPS etc. Latest hardware was to be provided keeping in mind the present and future needs of 
the Panchayats. It was proposed that States/UTs would implement the e -Panchayats project 
on a service procurement model.   

39 
 
(iv) Ministry has been working closely with NIC to build generic software sol utions that could be 
used by PRIs across States. 
 
1.97 The Twelfth Plan has also outlined the need Information Technology for the purpose of tracking of 
Central and State Releases.  In this context, it has observed as under: 
  
 "The present accounting system does not permit effective monitoring of the flow of 
resources from Central Ministries to state governments and ultimately to the implementing 
agencies. The lack of uniform coding for plan schemes between the Centre and the States makes 
it difficult to trace releases under a particular scheme from the Centre to the ultimate user as it 
flows through the state budget system. As a result, the Central Government has direct information 
on releases made but no online capability of tracking flow of funds thr ough the State implementing 
agencies. Actual expenditure incurred in the field cannot be tracked online and is only known on 
the basis of „utilisation certificates‟ which take a great deal of time before they are submitted. 
 
 A new multi -dimensional budget  and accounting classification being prepared by a 
Committee set up by the Ministry of Finance aims at correcting these weaknesses. The Central 
Plan Scheme Monitoring System (CPSMS) has been initiated by the Controller General of 
Accounts, in collaboration  with the Planning Commission, to serve as a comprehensive 
management information and decision support system. CPSMS seeks to have interface with state 
treasuries and State AGs to obtain real time expenditure information for schemes for which funds 
are tra nsferred from the Central Ministries to the consolidated fund of the states. Thousands of 
implementing agencies are proposed to be integrated through Core Banking Solution (CBS) of the 
individual banks so that fund movement is tracked at each successive st age starting with the initial 
release from the Centre till the money actually reaches the ultimate beneficiaries. 
 
 When fully implemented, the CPSMS will provide online information of fund deployment 
and utilization vertically under each scheme down to th e implementing agencies in the field and 
also horizontally across schemes in one geographic area. Inputs provided by the system would be 
vital for programme management and policy planning. The information on fund utilization could 
also be placed in the pub lic domain for greater public awareness, public participation in the policy 
making and execution and towards enhanced transparency in Government operations. 
 
 As mentioned above, many schemes involve transfer of funds to societies which are the 
implementing agencies. These societies must be brought under the discipline of CPSMS. They 
must also be made subject to CAG audit, which can be done if it is built into the guidelines of the 
scheme." 
 
 
1.98 The MoPR also stated that out of total 12 'Common Applications' identified for PRIs – One core 
Common Application is for capacity building and Training where under a portal could be available giving 
details of training.  Besides, the officials who want training would also register their demand. 
 
 
 

40 
 
1.99 The MoPR further stated :  
(i) With the limited funds available with the Ministry under the head “Mission Project on e -
Panchayats”, undertook some preliminary studies such as Information and Service needs  
Assessment (ISNA), Business Process Re -engineering (BPR ) and preparation of Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) (State wise), which were completed in Jan 2010. 
 
(ii) The Information and Service Needs Assessment has helped in identifying and prioritizing 
the information and service needs and expected service levels of cit izens, State Govts, Central 
Ministries and other stakeholders from PRIs. Business Process (re)engineering study was 
undertaken in order to improve the delivery of services. DPRs provide the cost estimates for 
the project. ISNA, BPR and DPR reports have bee n prepared and are available on the website 
of MoPR. State wise DPRs have been prepared and feedbacks of States/UTs have also been 
incorporated. 
 
1.100 The MoPR submitted the following  Information and Social Need Assessment (ISNA) and Business 
Re-Engineering (BPR) on e-panchayats: 
State Name 
ZP BP GP 
Remarks 
(if any) 
No. of 
Offices 
No. of ZP 
having 
computers 
No. of 
Offices 
No. of BP 
having 
computers 
No. of 
Offices 
No. of GP 
having 
computers 
Andhra 
Pradesh 22 22 1097 1097 21809 475   
Arunanchal 
Pradesh 16 0 150 0 1751 0   
Assam 21 21 185 185 2202 0   
Bihar 38 0 531 0 8463 0 
* 4569 
CSCs 
Chattisgarh 16 16 146 146 9820 0   
Daman & Diu 2 2     14 14   
Goa 2 2     189 189   
Gujarat 26 26 224 224 13693 13693   
Haryana 19 19 119 119 6155 0   
Himachal 
12 12 75 75 3243 1185   

41 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.101 The Committee pointed out that there has been no progress in computerization in Bihar. In other 
States, at Zilla Panchayat and Block Panchayat levels, the computerization has been completed.  However, 
at Gram Panchayat level, there has been no computerization in most of the States excep t in the case of 
Gujarat, Karnataka, Rajasthan and West Bengal. Asked about the specific steps taken to ensure that the 
Pradesh 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 22 0 143 0 4139 0   
Jharkhand 24 0 212 0 4559 0   
Karnataka 29 29 176 176 5628 5628   
Kerala 14 14 152 152 999 999   
Madhya 
Pradesh 48 48 313 313 23040 0   
Maharashtra 33 33 351 351 27896 409   
Manipur 4 4     165 165   
Orissa 30 30 314 314 6234 150   
Puducherry     10 10 98 98   
Punjab 20 20 141 141 12809 0   
Rajasthan 32 32 239 239 9148 1100   
Sikkim  4 4     163 163  
Tamil Nadu 30 30 385 385 12618 12618   
Tripura 4 4 40 40 1040 0   
Uttar 
Pradesh 
71 
71 
820 
820 
52126 
0   
Uttarakhand 13 13 95 95 7541 0   
West Bengal 18 18 341 205 3354 2750   

42 
 
task of computerization is given priority in the States where there is no progress in this regard, the MoPR in 
a note stated that MoPR h as prepared Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for provision of computers to 
Panchayats in each State. These DPRs have been prepared after detailed analysis of the Information and 
Service Need Assessment (ISNA) and Business Process Re -engineering (BPR).  The ISNA, BPR and 
DPRs are State specific and have been prepared by MoPR in collaboration with the respective State. 
MoPR is now interacting with the States to implement these DPRs by availing of the financial resources 
available under various schemes such as BRGF, MGNREGS, etc.  
1.102 Asked about the progress made towards ensuring e -governance at the gram panchayat level and 
other levels of the panchayat system in the light of the recommendations of the Gairola Committee, 
The MoPR in a written note stated: 
"The Ministry is implementing e-Panchayat Mission Mode Project under the National e-Governance 
Programme (NeGP), which has been formulated keeping in view the recommendations of the 
Gairola Committee also. The project is aimed at effective use of IT in the  process of governance, 
bringing out transparency and accountability in the working of the PRIs. In order to lay a strong 
foundation for e -Panchayat MMP and to ensure that project evolved through an elaborate 
consultative process, in 2009 -10, MoPR commissioned a comprehensive study covering all States 
and UTs to identify the Information and Service Needs of the stakeholders viz. Central Ministries, 
State Departments, Panchayats and Citizens (all these reports are available at 
www.panchayat.gov.in). This detailed exercise led  to the identification of 12 Core Common 
Applications that address all aspects of Panchayats‟ functioning viz. from internal core functions 
such as Planning, Monitoring, Implementation, Budgeting , Accounting, Social Audit, etc to citizen 
service delivery like issue of certificates, licenses etc. The erstwhile proposed application namely 
Grievance Redressal has now been merged with the configurable service delivery application 
(ServicePlus) thereby  reducing 12 applications to 11 now. Together these 11 applications  
constitute the Panchayat Enterprise Suite (PES) as they talk to each other and thus seek to reduce 
duplication of efforts for the end user.  Four PES applications, namely PRIASoft, PlanPl us, 
AreaProfiler and Local Governance Directory (LGD) have already been rolled out while the 
remaining (except GIS module) will be rolled out on 24 April, 2012 on the occasion of National 
Panchayat Day." 
1.103 MoPR has given the following year -wise and hea d-wise cost estimates (In crore s) for the e -
panchayats projects: 
 
 
 

43 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
No Items Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Total 
1. State Site ICT + National ICT 62.32 27.83 30.10 17.68 137.94 
2. Payout (PRIs ICT + Manpower) 459.88 1757.21 1840.23 1400.49 5457.82 
3. Training 93.03 177.97 177.97 88.98 537.95 
4. Block Support Group 27.14 98.77 106.67 81.01 313.60 
5. PMU (CPMU and SPMUs) 65.89 72.48 79.73 0.00 218.10 
6. IEC 49.98 0.00 0.00 0.00 49.98 
 Total ePRI Project Cost 758.25 2,134.26 2,234.70 1,588.17 6,715.38 
 
1.104 The MoPR also stated that as against the requirement of Rs.6896.18 crore worked out as per the 
State-wise DPRs, the Planning Commission allocated Rs. 46.28 crore only. The activities have therefore 
been restricted to the conduct of studies, development and deployment of 11 Core Common Application 
softwares, essential training and limited project management support. Meanwhile, the States have regularly 
been advised (vide letters dated 30th September, 2010 & 13th May 2011, etc) to funds the ICT infrastructure 
under MGNREGS, 13 th Finance Commission Grants, BRGF grants and also through their own resources.  
During the Twelfth Five Year Plan, e-Panchayat has been dovetailed into the RGPSA.   
1.105 The entire allocation of Rs.40.00 crore for 2011-12 (including Rs.4 cores for North East) has been 
disbursed to States. While,  Rs. 1.5 crore were released as incentive grants for adoption of PRIASoft,  
Rs.38.5 cores have been released for setting up of Programme Management Units (PMUs) at the S tate 
and District levels for roll  out of e-Panchayat MMP. 
1.106 During the evidence the Secretary of (MoPR) also stated: 
"I fully agree with the sentiments of the Members of this august Committee that there is a shortage 
of infrastructure and towards manp ower in Panchayats … we also fully agree that there is no 
shortage of potential capacity of Panchayats.   The problem is how to utilize it.   How far we can 
do it is a challenge before the Ministry.   We are giving funds.  These are being utilized.   But there 
is a wide spread impression that there is a lot of corruption in Panchayats.   We have decided 
three things for that.   We will be starting at ground level shortly.   First, we have developed a 
software for Panchayats, wherein accounting system is act ivated.   This work will be begin from 
1.4.2011.  Second is social audit.  Every scheme is to be discussed in Gram Sabha.   But it is not 
done.  One suggestion has come wherever Social audit has taken place it should be video 
graphed when Broad Band will reach in Panchayats there will be live telecast of all Gram Sabhas.   
Third is accountability, the day e -goverance will implemented, everything of Panchayats like 
planning, budget, etc. will be so on line." 
 

44 
 
1.107 On the issue of Broadband connectivity, the Secretary (MOPR) stated: 
"On broad band connectivity, Department of IT is now implementing the NOFN –  National Optic 
Fibre Network by which they aim to connect all the 2.4 lakh panchayats across the country by 
December 2013 or early 2014. By that time, b road band connectivity will be given to the 
panchayats." 
 
D. Training of elected representatives and functionaries of Panchayats 
1.108 The MOPR have in their note on 'Making' available adequate funds for Capacity Building of 
Panchayats has outlined 'Training' as one of four dimensions which require enhanced level of capacities for 
discharging the responsibilities mandated Article 243G read with Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. 
(i) National Capacity Building Framework (NCBF) 
1.109 The MoPR infor med that National Capacity Building Framework has been designed to meet the 
training requirements of ERs which inter -alia pertain to equipping the ERs to perform their responsibilities 
better, training key Panchayat officials, improving the functioning of Gram Panchayat officials, improving 
the functioning of Gram Sabha etc. through Basic Foundational course, Basic Functional course etc. 
1.110    The National Capacity Building Framework (NCBF) for Elected Representatives and Functionaries' 
of PRIs brought out by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj indicates the following as stakeholders: 
(a)    Elected Panchayat representatives 
(b) Officials working with Panchayats 
(c) Pressure group within Gram Sabha such as SHGs and CBOs 
(d) Elected representatives and officials of higher levels of Government. 
 
1.111 The different categories of elected Panchayat representatives officials under the aforesaid 
stakeholders are as under: 
 
Sl. 
no. 
Stakeholders Comprises of 
a)  Elected Panchayat 
Representatives 
Ward Member and Territorial Constituency members, 
Presidents (Sarpanches, Mukhiya, Adhyakshas), Vice -

45 
 
President (Up -Sarpanch, Up -Mukhiya, Up -Adhyakshas 
and Chairperson of Standing Committees. 
b)  Officials working with 
Panchayats 
Panchayats Secretaries, Junior Engineer, Anga nwadis 
workers, Primary Health Workers, Panchayat own 
employees such as bill Collectors and clerks Agricultural 
Extension officials, Teacheares and Education 
Administration Workers. 
c)  Pressure groups within the 
Gram Sabha such as SHGs 
and CBOs 
SHGs/CBOs 
d)  Elected representatives and 
officials of higher level of 
Government 
 
  
1.112 MOPR has given the following date about requirements of Resource Persons for implementation of 
NCBF: 
(a) Number of elected representatives to be trained 22,00,000 
(b) Number of person per batch 20 
(c) Number of training batches  
                                    (a/b) 
1,10,000 
 
(d) Number of weeks in which each round of training is to be 
completed 
20 
(e) Number of training batches per week 
                                                   (c/d)  
5,500 
(f) Number of field resource persons per batch 5 
(g) Total number of field resource persons required 
                                                                     (exf) 
27,500 
(h) Number of field resource persons per State Master trainer  15 
(i) Number of State Master trainers required  
                                                           (g/h) 
1833 
(j) Number of national trainer per State Master Trainer 15 
(k) Number of National Master trainers required 122   
1.113 The MOPR in NCBF documents have also outlined the duration and contents of training 
programme as shown below: 
Theme Description of 
Course 
Area Category  Duration Time Line 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Building 
mindset for 
Foundational Overview of 
Panchayati Raj 
Elected 
Representatives 
4 days Within 20 days 
of elections 

46 
 
Panchayati Raj and Officials of 
PRIs 
         -do- Basic Functional 
Course 
Understanding, 
accounts, 
Panchayats 
revenues etc. 
Chairperson of 
Standing 
Committees and 
Officials 
-do- -do- (Including 
foundation 
course) 
          -do- Functional Literacy 
Course 
Those who are 
needy 
illiterate/semi 
illiterate 
One 
month 
6 month 
Skills for  
Planning and 
Implementation  
(i) Sectoral training  
programme 
 
 
(ii) Complete 
training 
 
 
(iii) Gram Sabha 
level 
Core functions of 
Panchayats 
 
 
Basic Computer 
training  
 
 
Awareness 
Creation 
Elected 
representatives 
and officials of 
PRIs 
At least two 
persons per 
Panchayats 
 
People at large 
Six days 
 
 
 
Six days  
 
 
 
At least 3 
days a 
week 
Within 40 
days/weeks of 
election 
 
Within 52 
weeks 
 
 
All India 
coverage 
Consolidation 
through 
interaction and 
networking  
(i)Formation of 
networks of PRIs 
 
 
(ii)Visits to beacon 
Panchayats 
 
 
 
(iii)Intermediate 
Panchayat level 
Resource Centres 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Certificate 
Courses 
Experience 
sharing  
 
 
On the site of 
training 
 
 
 
Daily assistance 
to support 
Panchayat 
Planning 
and 
implementation 
 
Interactive   
Elected 
representatives 
and PRIs 
 
At least 10 lakh 
elected leaders of 
Panchayats 
 
 
Elected 
Panchayat 
representatives 
 
 
 
 
Interested 
Stakeholders 
 
 
 
 
At least 
one full 
day 
 
 
Every 
working 
day 
 
 
 
 
6 months 
 
Within the first 
year after 
election 
 
At least two 
exposure 
visits to every 
year 
 
To examine by 
20 weeks 
when 
members 
have furnished 
basic training 
For about 100 
persons per 
State 
 
1.114 The cost norms for Training and Capacity Building of Elected representative and functionaries of 
under capacity building component  under BRGF as per MoPR 29th August, 2010 O.M. has been as 
unedr:- 
1. For elected representatives of PRIs 
Sl. No.  Category Cost per participant per day (In Rs.) 
1. ZP Members 1250 
2. Block Samiti Members 680 

47 
 
3. GP Members 350 
4. CP Secretaries 350 
Note: The Word "Members" includes "Chairpersons" and "Vice-Chairpersons" also. 
2. For functionaries of Panchayats and Line Departments. 
Sl. No.  Category Cost per participant per day (In Rs.) 
1. Central 1580 
2. State 1580 
3. District 1250 
4. Block 680 
 Village 350 
 ToT/Spl. Cources 1250 
 
Note-1:  The cost would be applicable as per level of participants and includes expenditure on: 
(a) Boarding and lodging, 
(b) Training materials stationery etc. 
(c) Transport including field visits. 
(d) Miscellaneous, telephone, group photo, banner etc. 
Note-2: Travel expnses may be reimbursed to the elected representative's only (Rail/Bus fare on actual basis) 
Note-3: Sitting fee/daily allowance @ Rs. 100 per day per head may be considered by the State Government for the 
training programmes for functionaries of PRIs, SHGs, NGOs, CBOs etc. (Karnatak a Model).  This is recommended 
as most of these participants lose daily income to attend the programme. 
Note-4: Each course must have a minimum number of thirty participants. 
 Under NCBF each State is required to identify nodal authorities for preparation and implementation 
of a six years perspective capacity building plan against which funds are released to States, calculated at 
the rate of Rs. 1 crore for each BRGF districts for capacity building activities of Elected Panchayat 
representatives, officials etc.  The MoPR has informed that as on 29.02.2012, Rs. 51.92 crore has been 
released for Capacity Building of Panchayats during 2011-12. 
1.115 During the course of examination the Committee asked MOPR to summarise the present position 
with regard to the implementation of the National Framework for Training and Capacity Building initially 
submitted to the United Nations Development Fund in 2006, the MOPR in a written note stated as under: 
"The National Capability Building Framework (NCBF) for Training & Capacity Building of the 
elected representatives (ERs) and the functionaries working for the PRIs is being implemented by 
all the States.   Panchayati Raj being a State subject, States are expected to provide the resources 

48 
 
for implementing the NCBF.  However, MoPR supplements and States' efforts by providing grants 
under the Capacity Building components of BRGF and RGSY.   The Ministry extends financ ial 
assistance to the States of the order of Rs. 250 crore under the BRGF and 50 to 85 crore under the 
RGSY, whereas the UNDP assisted Project provides 4 to 5 crore per year." 
1.116 The Committee further asked as to whether district and sub -district offici als of line departments 
were being educated to conduct training programmes for elected PRI representatives for the schemes of 
their respective departments, the MoPR in a note stated as under:  
"District and Sub -district officials of Line Departments are be ing drafted by most of the States as 
Resource Persons in the Training programmes for Elected PRIs representatives as they have good 
knowledge about the scheme of their respective departments." 
1.117 When asked about the progress made towards the implementation of NCBF, the MoPR in a written 
note clarified: 
"Networking of HIRD and SIRDs , selection of good master training establishment of District -cum-
Training Centres that have emerged out of the "Implementation of NCBF are still at a nascent 
stage and it would be too early to assess their impact on the implementation of NCBF." 
 
1.118 The Committee wanted to know whether the NCBF has not reached the Panchayats for which it 
was evolved and implemented, the MoPR in a written note stated: 
"The National Capacity Building Framework provides a framework for organizing the training of 
elected representatives, officials and other stakeholders in the Panchayati Raj, to enable them to 
perform their functions effectively. This framework is being implemented by the States." 
 
1.119 Asked whether that important Training  of NCBF Programme for Capacity Building of Pancha yats 
has not received the required level of attention, MoPR in a written note stated: 
"Given the available resources, the CB&T of Panchayats have been receiving the attention of the 
State Governments and the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is continuing its efforts to focus attention on 
this important area through its various schemes."  
 
 
 
 

49 
 
(ii) Number of Elected Representatives trained 
 
1.120 MoPR has stated that besides BRGF and RGSY Schemes financial assistance under a number of 
other Central/States Scheme is being utilized by States for providing training and capacity building of 
elected representatives of PRIs. 
1.121 MoPR has given the following details o f number of elected representatives and functionaries 
trained under BRGF/RGSY and other schemes during 2007-08 to 2011-12 at all India level.   
          (In lakhs) 
Total 
numbers 
of ERs 
Total number of 
ERs from 2007 -
08 to  
2011-12 trained 
Under BRGF Under RGSY Under Other Schemes 
1 2 3 4 5 
  No. of 
ERs 
trained  
No. of 
functionaries 
trained   
No. of 
ERs 
trained  
No. of 
functionaries 
trained   
No. of 
ERs 
trained  
No. of 
functionaries 
trained   
29.79 27.63 27.83 3.64 23.71 2.72 12.97 13.07 
 
 
 
1.122 MoPR has stated that there are 29.79 lakh ERs in the country.  The following are major States with 
large number of ERs: 
                  
       (In Lakhs) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the State No. of ERs  
1. Uttar Pradesh 7.71 
2. Madhya Pradesh 3.94 
3. Andhra Pradesh 2.61 
4. Maharashtra  2.33 
5. Chhatisgarh 1.60 
6. Rajasthan 1.30 
7. Bihar 1.30 
8, Gujarat 1.30 
9. Orissa 1.00 

50 
 
10. Karnataka 0.96 
11. Punjab 0.84 
12. Haryana 0.68 
13. Uttarakhand 0.61 
14. Jharkhand 0.53 
15. West Bengal 0.51 
 
1.123 The Committee wanted to know whether the ERs u ndergo any test  for assessing that they are 
eligible for training by implementing agencies and also about the  sort of evaluation which the ERs undergo 
in this regard, the MOPR in a written note clarified: 
"As per information available, presently, there are no tests etc. prescribed for accessing as 
to whether the Elected Representatives and Panchayat Functionaries have actually been 
trained by the Implementing Agencies.  
However, it has been ascertained from the State Governments that pre training and post 
training test of trainee are conducted by the SIRD/Implementing Agencies, Quiz sessions 
are organized on the last day of training and thematic film screening followed by group 
discussions etc. take place in order to evaluate the quality of training the ERs undergo.  
Moreover, SIRDs undertake periodic review of the quality of training programmes through 
independent agencies."  
 
1.124 The Committee further wanted to know whether a great deal of effort is desir able on this issue in 
big States like Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Chhatisgarh etc. with huge 
number of ERs, the MoPR in a written note stated: 
"Right now the institutions that we rely on are the State Institutes of Rural Development. Of course, 
the network is fairly good all across the country. But they are State Institutes of Rural Development; 
there are not State Institutes of Panchayat Raj Administration, or anything specific like that. We are 
also not asking for that b ecause in a huge country we have to make use of economies of scale.  
Madam had raised a point that we need to take the resource Centres down to district level, down to 
block level. Have more block level resource centres; have more district level resource centres." 
 
1.125 The Seceratary (MoPR) during evidence also stated:  
"Over the years as a result of sustained interactions with the States at various levels, Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj has been able to expand the outreach of Capacity Building &  Training of Elected 
Representatives and functionaries of Panchayats. This has helped the Panchayats to improve their 
performance for planning, implementation and monitoring of development schemes and 
programmes. However, the results across the States have  not been uniform. The Ministry intends 
to put in more effort not only in respect of these States but for all the States for effective Capacity 
Building and Training of ERs and Functionaries. As already submitted the proposed new Scheme 

51 
 
RGPSA will strength en the institutional structure for capacity building.  “It is agreed that training 
component particularly the quality aspect needs continuous improvement." 
  
1.126 Enquired whether training to Elected Representatives and Functionaries have being given in local 
language for their real capacity building, the Secretary (MoPR) stated: 
"A point was made about training in local language. It is a very well taken point. Most of the training 
capsules are in the regional languages. I myself  know that very  innovative training capsules are 
there for the elected women representatives.  Maharashtra has the Kranti Jyoti Programme.  It is 
conducted in the regional language for women and conducted at the district level. There is no 
paper  as such that the women ha ve to read because their functional literacy skill may be very low.  
How to teach them is the question. They teach through the interacti ve process, through games etc. 
they teach them things like DO‟s and Don‟ts of being an elected member of the Panchayat w hich 
includes what are their roles and responsibilities. So, they have devised a very unique scheme of 
Snake and Ladder. If you do a particular thing that is wrong, then you come down the snake. The 
Board Game of Snake and Ladder is used as a teaching stra tegy.  If you do a particular thing that 
is right, prepare a village plan, put it up for discussion, have the gram sabha meetings regularly, 
then, you go up the ladder. So, in similar ways, the elected women representatives are absorbing 
what are their rol es, responsibilities and rights. So, there are many innovative examples like this. 
Under RGPSA, we have a separate component for such innovations which strengthen the 
capacities of the panchayati raj in addition to the normal training programmes are being held. 
The subsidiarity principle was mentioned. It is a principle that we also support but it is dependent 
on the devolution that the States make to the panchayats of the various functions that they can 
handle on their own." 
1.127 During the course of evidence of the representatives of the Planning Commission, the Committee 
pointed out that although it is told that enough funds are available to Panchayats, Sarpanch and women 
elected representatives do not know how to do Panchayat work or Panchayat Secre tary does not know the 
paperwork and Panchayats do not have engineers for doing civil work, the Member Secretary, Planning 
Commission informed: 
 "There is no doubt about that the training we are giving village level is of no use. it is not related 
with exp enditure.  Even, if expenditure is incurred the quality is poor.  I had just returned from 
Ranchi.  There I spent some time.  I opened their books.  There situation is miserable.  All are very 
much concerned with it.  I fully understand your concern.  I wa nt to tell that many States where as 
compared to other States good work has been done.  But by and large we have failed the 
Panchayats." 
1.128 In reply to a query about evaluation done on training to Elected representatives , the MoPR in a 
written note stated as under: 

52 
 
"CB&T of ERs and Panchayat functionaries is a complex task given the different levels of 
education & skills of the trainees. It is necessary to address basic concept, skills of ERs and 
Panchayat functionaries, including literacy, as well as do main knowledge of subject handled by 
Panchayats, such as  drinking water, rural development, education, health, women‟s issue, social 
forestry, livelihoods etc. To address all these issues, a sound institutional structure and partnership 
with resource institutions are required. Under RGPSA, each State will be expected to strengthen its 
own institutional structure for CB&T while collaborating with other resource institutions to ensure a 
high quality of CB&T and an extended outreach. To overcome the inadequac ies in the field of 
CB&T of Elected Representatives and Panchayat Functionaries, drawing upon the experience of 
the achievement of different Schemes, it has been felt that there is a need to create sufficient 
number of Institutions at different levels for achieving a better and effect outreach on this front. As 
already submitted, the RGPSA has been conceived for plugging the loopholes in this matter. With 
regard to invigorating and strengthening the infrastructure facilities for CB&T, it has been proposed 
under RGPSA that all out efforts will be made to establish State Panchayat Resource Centres, 
District Panchayat Resource Centres and Block level Satellite Resource Centres at respective 
levels. " 
 
Monitoring 
1.129 MoPR has informed that it has empallened 37  National level Monitors (NLMs) for regular 
monitoring of BRGF, RGSY etc. schemes and for preliminary enquiries on complaints of serious natures 
from Elected Representatives regarding irregularities.  NLMs have been allotted specific States/Districts for 
peiordic visits and NLMs have completed first round of visits in September -November and submitted their 
reports which has being forwarded to State Governments for action on shortcomings.  These are also been 
examined by the MoPR for notification of scheme guidelines whenever required.  . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
(iii) Training Infrastructure 
1.130 MoPR has stated that in most States, the SIRDs are the nodal institution for training.   Apart from 
SIRDs States have Extension Training Centre (ETCs) and District Training Centres  (DTCs), several States 
appear to have a skeletal structure and have difficulty in performing even core managerial functions.  
Human Resources available in SIRDs and ETCs are far below the requirement Institutional faculty with 
knowledge about Panchayati i s scarce.   In some SIRDs there is only one facu lty dealing with Panchayati 
Raj. The total number of Districts, number of ERs, number of SIRDs etc. as furnished by the MOPR is  as 
below: 
No. of 
districts 
Total no. of 
ERs 
Average no. 
of ER per 
district 
No. of SIRD DTCs/PICs/P
RTCs 
No. of ETCs 
641 29. 26 lakhs 4565 29 169 78 
   
1.131 The Committee further wanted to know whether that with average number of ERs 4565 per district, 
the existing level of training institutions of 29 SIRDs, 169 DTCs and 78 ETCs are hardly sufficient and need 
to be augmented manifold, the MoPR in a written note stated: 
"Yes, we agree. This is proposed to be addressed through RGPSA." 
1.132 The State-wise number of districts, number of ERs, No. of SIRDs etc. given by MoPR the following 
is the situation prevailing in major States:  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State No.  
of Dis-
tricts 
Total no. 
of ERs 
 
Average 
no. of ERs 
per District 
No. of 
SIRD 
DTCs/PTCs/ 
PRTCs 
No. of 
ETCs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
   (In 
Lakhs) 
    
1. Uttar Pradesh 75 7.71 10,289 1 33  DIRD 
17  RIRD 
25  DTCs 
0 
2. Madhya Pradesh 50 3.96  7,930 1 07  PTCs 6 
3. Bihar 38 1.30  3,423 1 - 3 
4. Maharashtra 33 2.29  6,962 1 29 DTCs 
11 DRTCs 
8 
5. Rajasthan 33 1.20 3,644 1 - 6 

54 
 
6. Karnataka 30 0.96 3,203 1 - 5 
7. Tamil Nadu 31 1.16 3,758 1 - 5 
8. Orissa 30 0.92 3,082 1 - 0 
9. Chhatisgarh 27 1.60 5,946 1 04 PTCs 1 
10. Assam 27 0.25 9,42 1 12 DTCs 12 
11. Gujarat 26 1.14 4,392 1 05 
(04 PRTCs 
+01 RTC) 
0 
12. Jharkhand 24 0.53 2,217 1 12 DTCs 4 
13. Punjab 22 0.83 3,710 1 - 0 
14. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
22 0.28 1,308 1 - 2 
15. Andhra Pradesh 22 2.24 10,182 1 22 DTCs 5 
16. Haryana 21 0.69  3,324 1 - 1 
17. West Bengal 18 0.58  3,268 1 25 DTCs 5 
18. Arunachal  17 0.08     486 1 - 1 
19. Uttarakhand 13 0.57  4,423 1 - 5 
 
1.133 The Committee enquired whether aforesaid weaknesses and inadequacy of infrastructure at 
ground level, has dented the notion that Panchayats are power to people to a mere slogan, the MoPR in a 
written note stated: 
"Empowerment of Panchayat Members and Panchayat is taking place . However the sheer 
numbers involved and varying emphasis given by States, and availability of resources, makes the 
process take longer." 
1.134 The Committee also asked as to w hy the above weaknesses and inadequacies  have not been 
addressed even after funds are allocated for these purposes on yearly basis.  The MoPR in a written note 
stated: 
"Under RGSY funds are provided for construction of Panchayat Ghars in the Panchayats having 
no buildings. Funds for developing training infrastructure are provided only to NE and hilly States.  
Under BRGF there is a provision of construction of Intermediate Panchayat Resource Center. 
District and Block Resource and Training Centres can address the problem of training gaps and 
inadequacies. MoPR releases funds to the State Gover nments against their Perspective/Annual 
Action Plan duly approved by High Powered Committee.  However, State Governments are 
responsible to include the training infrastructure component in their Perspective/Annual Action Plan 
for Capacity Building. " 
  
1.135 Asked about the norm of e stablishment of SIRD/DTCs/ETCs and views of MoPR about need for 
greater number of DTCs/ETCs for big States with large number of districts, MoPR in a written note stated:  

55 
 
"SIRDs come under the administrative control of Ministry of Rural Development. MoPR supports 
the establishment of more District/Block level Resource and Training Centres to facilitate training of 
ER‟s especially EWR‟s, closer to their homes. As already subm itted above, while formulating the 
scheme of RGPSA and the detailed guidelines under the Scheme, intensive and extensive 
consultation were held with all the stakeholders including the Central Ministries, Planning 
Commission and representative of State Gove rnments. The density of training institutions will 
depend on economies of scale. There must also be sufficient devolution of powers. Mere increase 
of training centres will not build up capacity." 
  
  

56 
 
IV. Thirteenth Finance Commission Grants to PRIs 
1.136 With reference to Grants to PRIs , one of the Term of Reference s of Thirteenth Finance 
Commission is to make recommendations as to the measures needed to augument the Consolidated Fund 
of a State to supplement the resources of the Panchayats on the basis of  recommendations made by the 
Finance Commission of the State.  The Committee enquire whether they had approached the Thirteenth 
Finance Commission for their Capacity Building requirement, the MoPR in a written note clarified: 
"That in its memorandum submitt ed before the Thirteenth Finance Commission the Ministry had 
specifically proposed an allocation of 4% of the divisible pool for PRIs for the activities related to 
Construction  of Panchayati Ghars, Skelton staff ro each panchayat and sitting and  honorari a fee 
for elected representatives, office expenses and e -governance, as per detailed break -up of 
requirements as follows:-   
           (Rs. in crore) 
S.No. Item Amount 
1. Construction of Panchayat Ghar 23,587 
2. Providing skelton staff for each Panchayat 43,200 
3. Honoraria and sitting fee for elected representatives 34,530 
4. Office expenses and e-goverance 11,650 
 Total 1,12,987 
 
1.137 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj also proposed another 1% of the divisible pool was proposed as 
'specific purpose grant' for preparation of data base, Incentive for State Governments to empower PRIs, 
grants for area is planning and capacity building. 
1.138 The Thirteenth Finance Commission has recommended a Basic Grant of 1.5 per cent of the 
previous years' divisible pool and Performance Grant of 0.50 per cent of the divisible pool in the first year 
and 1 per cent in the next three years.   The Ministry of P anchayati Raj stated that the total estimated grant 
payable to PRIs works out to Rs. 63,050 crore comprising Rs. 41,225 crore as Basic Grant and Rs.21,825 
as Performance Grant." 

57 
 
1.139 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in a note furnished to the Committee brou ght out that total grants, 
recommended by the 13th FC for local bodies are as follows:                                     (Rs. in crore) 
SI. 
No 
Particulars 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 Total 
2010-15 
1 Divisible Pool  
(estimated) 
545463 636183 746179 880156 1038188 1224595 3846170 
2 General Basic Grant 
[(1)x1.5%-(7)} 
 8022 9303 10873 12883 15253     56334 
3 General Performance 
Grant 
 0 3181 7462 8802 10382     29827 
4 Total general Grant 
{(2)+(3)} 
 8022 12484 18335 21685 25635    86161 
5 Special area basic 
grant {Rs.20 per capita} 
 160 160 160 160 160        798 
6 Special Area 
Performance Grant 
 0 80 160 160 160        560 
7 Total specific area 
grant {(5)+(6)} 
 160 240 319 319 319      1358 
8 Total Grants to Local 
Bodies{(4)+(7)} 
 8182 12724 18654 22004 25955    87519 
 
1.140 The above amounts are estimated based on the projected figures of the divisible pool and will be 
subject to adjustments as per actuals of the divisible pool in a year.   26.82% of the general area basic 
grant and general area performance grant is to be allocated to urban areas and 73.18% to the rural areas 
based on the share of urban and rural population in 2001 census. 
1.141 Based on the distribution criteria between the rural local bodies and urban local bodies, the total 
estimated grant payable to PRIs works out to Rs. 63,050 crore, comprising Rs.41,225 crore as Basic Grant 
and Rs.21,825 as Performance Grant.   In addition, there is a combined Special area  Basic and 
Performance Grant of Rs. 1358 crore for PRIs and ULBs for areas covered by V and VI schedules and the 
areas exempted from the purview of Part IX and IX A of the Constitution.  The allocation by the 13 th 
Finance Commission is thus substantially higher than the allocation of Rs.20,000 crore by the 12 th Finance 
Commission. 
1.142 During the course of evidence of the representative of Thirteenth Finance Commission, the 
Committee wanted to know the reasons for not making  clear cut allocations for Capacity Building of 

58 
 
Panchayats particularly when th ere is a likelihood that with the enactment of Constitution 110 Amendment 
Bill around four l akh woman elected representatives of Panchayats would be adde d by reservation of 50% 
seats for women in Panchayats .  The Member, Thirteenth Finance Commission replying to these queries 
stated: 
"I will also explain how we approached the whole issue of capacity building which, I might 
add, we did not ignore.   We were very conscious of the fact that this needs to be done. 
Let me begin with an approach that has been taken by all previous Finance Commissions 
starting with the 10th Commission which was the first one after the Panchayati and local 
bodies came into existence.   The 10th, the 11th, and the 12th Finance Commissions, all 
three of them, have taken the stand that Finance Commission funding must not go towards 
establishment and salary costs.   This has been stated very explicitly in the reports of all 
three Commission s and we endorsed that.  So, why is it that Finance Commissions say 
that establishment costs which means structure, salary, honorarium and other such things 
– must not be covered by Finance Commission funding?  Why do they say that? 
 The reasons we say that these costs of establishment, salary and honoraria, these 
belong property in the province of State Governments.  The reason the Finance 
Commissions say very explicity that their funding must not go towards this basic funding is 
because if they were not t o say that, it is exactly where it will go.  It will go towards 
salaries, Panchayats Ghars, and so on.   The net result will be Panchayats will be no 
better than before and it will be State Governments who will be saving the money that they 
would previously have spent on setting up some basic structures, towards salaries, so on. 
The key work here the Finance Commission uses is additionality…." 
1.143 She further added; 
 
 "You wanted to know why it was that we had no special provision for capacity 
building, particularly in view of the fact that female gender component is to be raised to 50 
per cent.  There are going to be new people inducted in the task of governance, do they 
not need to have some capacity building provision?  This is an important issue.  We h ave 
to state why it is that did not have explicit provision for capacity building. 
 In the experience of past Finance Commissions, they have variously earmarked, 
the keyword here is earmarking, the Finance Commission funding for a number of specific 
purposes. 
 What was the net result of that?   The net result of that was that these usage 
conditionality acted as an obstruction to smooth fund flow.  Why is that?  It is so because 
when a Finance Commission flow is meant for a specific purpose, then, the Central 
Government which sends those funds has to be sure that the funding met that purpose.  
So there have to be detailed utilization certifications, certification that the fund flow was 
spent on the purpose for which it was earmarked.   Now, there was so many proce dural 
delays that entered into the fund flow as a result of earmarking that Madam, you would be 
astonished to know that in the 10th Finance Commission the under utilization by which I 

59 
 
mean that the funds were not even sent to Panchayats was as much as one -third of the 
total provision." 
1.144 She further stated:- 
 
 "In the Ministry of Panchayat Raj submission they had four categories viz. 
Panchayat Ghar and capacity training and honorarium and so on.   These are very rigid 
boundaries within which to specify fund flow to the States because States differ in terms of 
the provision that they had already made.  Let me give you an example.  In Kerala there is 
an institution called the Kerala Institute of Local Administration, Trichur.   It is set up at the 
State Government's expense, with some assistance from the Finance Commission funding 
in the past for maintenance of accounts, data base, etc.  But Kerala is a State, not so 
much in need of funding for capacity building etc.   They may need it for other things." 
1.145 The Committee wanted to know whether Thirteenth Finance Commission are aware about any 
advisory issued by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for use of TFC Grants for specific purpose and whether 
Rs. 3.3 lakh grant for Panchayats is too less for actual cap acity building requirements of Panchayats the 
witness clarified: 
 "The cardinal principle on which capacity is based is freedom to decide and that 
can only exist if the funds are untied.   So, we are totally opposed to any advisories and we 
do think that it vitiates the basis on which we allotted the funds." 
1.146 On this during the course of evidence of the representatives of MoPR, Secretary (MoPR) stated: 
"Unfortunately or fortunately the use of the word u ntied is very subjective.   Now the issue 
is how i t is to be interpreted?   It has various interpretations and a loss whatever the 
Committee will decide that will be guidance and there will be some suggestions thereafter 
the final decision will be of Ministry of Finance."          
                                             
1.147 On this the Committee heard the representatives of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance and enquired whether any categorisation of funds given by Thirteenth Finance Commission Grant 
is permissible, the Secretary, Department of Expenditure clarified: 
"Finance Commission is an Expert Body.  Their recommendation s by convention are 
accepted by the Government.  Finance Commission in their report had held  discussions 
with stake -holders on the issue.   They came to the concl usion that it should be un tied.  
Panchayats should be allowed to use their discretion for use of their funds.   The funds that 
are being given to local bodies and Panchayats that being linked with Divisible Pool 
because if buoyancy come s on taxes, then Sta tes as well as local bodies should be 
benefitted.   Therefore, they have fixed the percentage.  That in the first year would be 
1.5%, 2% and 2.5%.   If economy will be good then these would get benefit." 

60 
 
1.148 The witness further stated; 
"In Central Governments schemes mainly related with rural development there for State 
Administration some percentage is earmarked for administration expenses.   In that 
Department of Rural Development also provides money for Capacity Building so that they 
can utilise that.   For example under MGNREGA is some capacity building or technical 
people are needed, they can use that money.  Therefore, it has been made flexible.   
Where there is a need, they can utilise that. 
 Besides, there are State Finance Commissions under the Constitution to 
determine that how much funds of State's resources are to be transferred to local bodies.  
These can also allocate some funds for capacity building.   If Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
feels that capacity building Panchayats is so important ,  they can go before the Planning 
Commission for Twelfth Plan and Planning Commission can consider that because after 
one and half years time Twelfth Plan will commence." 
 
1.149 The Committee enquired whether under MGNREGA half of the allowable 6% as administrative cost 
can be earmarked for Capacity Building for Panchayats particularly when after 50% reservation of women 
there would be addition of around 4 lakh women elected representatives in Panchayats, the Secretary 
(MoPR) stated: 
"We people have consid ered the issue because Minister is common.  Limitation in this 
area is that under MGNERGA whatever funding you are going to give to Panchayats that 
are to be under the nomenclature of MGNERGA.   Right now, I am not telling anything final 
because it is bein g discussed between the two Ministries.  It is in the stage of discussion.   
The apprehension we have is that the amount is very limited. Secondly under the 
nomenclature of MGNERGA under Capacity Building it says that administrative cost under 
MGNERGA.   S econd thing I will again say that in States where Panchayat system is 
strong,  the largely the delivery of programme is good and expectancy of Panchayats is 
also high.  But in States where Panchayats are weak where there is a need for making the 
delivery g ood, there only there is a necessity of capacity building.   There we do not 
visualize any way." 
 
1.150 The Committee further enquired whether there is a need for undertaking a study for identifying 
weak Panchayats where there is no Panchayat building, the Secretary (MoPR) stated: 
"We had estimated and submitted a memorandum before the T hirteenth Finance 
Commission, it is based on precise calculation.   We have told how much money is 
needed, for which purpose it is needed.   It was told in detailed manner.  We had hoped 
that there would be some hope from 13th Finance Commission.   The main purpose of 
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY) was to give facilities to Panchayats.  We told 
before the Planning Commission to enhance funds however it was not done.  We issued 
circulars to States to build Panchayat Ghars by making use of labour component of 
MGNREGA with BRGF component.  In th at also the cost limit is Rs. 1 0 lakh.  It is a 

61 
 
beginning.   As you said about manpower, we had great expectation from Thirteen th 
Finance Commission.   However, we are disappointed.  The only hope is MGNREGA in 
that it is only 2%.  We will also see how it can be adjusted……… Under BRGF for 
manpower there is taken amount.  On this point we in our Ministry are unable to see 
anything.  We are only expecting that Planning Commission would give sufficient funds to 
RGSY so that deficient States are given funds so that we can do something for building 
and manpower….." 
1.151 The Committee enquired about  the progress on Planning Commission sugge stion that a 
percentage of CSS (Centrally Sponsored Schemes) funds should be placed at the disposal of the Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj to organize training and capacity -building programmes for elected PRI representatives 
and officials servicing PRIs, the MoPR in a written note stated as under: 
"In a recent meeting held with Member, Planning Commission in Yojana Bhavan attended 
by Secretary, Panchayati Raj and other senior officers in which points related to allocation 
of funds for capacity building under Cen trally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) for PRIs was 
also discussed. Matter relating to earmarking of 1% allocation for capacity building is 
actively under consideration with the Planning Commission."  
1.152 Responding to the issue , the Secretary (Department of Ex penditure) Ministry of Finance  stated 
during evidence: 
"It would not be possible to take all the Central Schemes and take out one per cent and give it in a 
fund to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to administer.   Sir, as you know, we are in deficit financi ng.   
So, it does not make sense for us to draw money from the GBS and put it aside in a fund, even in a 
public account.  As and when required, it can be given from the GBS." 
1.153 In this connection the Committee enquired whether one percent of that amoun t can be set aside 
and given to Ministry of Panchayati Raj for the purpose of funding the requirement of training under NCBF, 
the Secretary, (Department of Expenditure) Ministry of Finance clarified: 
"Sir, when you take different schemes run by different M inistries, with regard to the amount 
available to them, including for capacity building, a flexibility is given to the States what they want 
to use it for example, some States might require more for capacity building at the P anchayati raj, at 
that tier III  level, while some other States may not want it for that and they might need it for 
something else.  So, it is better to have a separate scheme for capacity building.   That is my view." 
1.154 The  Committee further enquired whether the Planning Commission  in the foreseeable future give 
them Rs. 13,500 crore per year for capacity building, the Secretary (Expenditure) replied: 
"Sir, they will not be able to absorb so much at one go." 

62 
 
1.155 In this connection, Secretary (MoPR) also informed : 
"We are quite an xious about the capacity of Panchayats.  We have the dilemma of capacity 
building.  I feel personally very disboundened that with all those responsibilities and all those funds, 
where is the Panchayat?   In fact, every time I have a dialogue with the Minis try, and I think that in 
your time all the initiatives were taken, but w here have we landed?  Nowhere!  Where is the 
capacity of the Panchayats?  Where are the of office building?   Where is the manpower?  Where 
is e-Governance?   What is the system of fund  transfer and management?  Then, we put a sorry 
figure.   Therefore, I said that we are living in perpetual shortage of funds in the midst of plentiful 
funds. If we look at MGNREGA itself, it is a big amount and many schemes that could have been 
devolved to Panchayats but for Ministry's fear that Panchayats do not have the capacity.   So, the 
situation is very complex and it is for the Committee to suggest the way out." 
  
1.156 The Secretary (MoPR) further added: 
“We did make efforts with the Planning Commission to have more funds for all purposes and we 
have been chasing them incessantly, but they have their own priorities.   We cannot say that the 
Planning Commission made wrong judgement or they have not been kind to us.   They have their 
own prioriti es, but the fact of the matter is that presently Panchayats – in most of the States, 
especially, in States, which need far more attention – the capacity is very very limited, and what to 
talk of 29 items." 
1.157 The Committee during the course of evidence of representatives of Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance further enquired whether Schemes of the order of Rs. 13,500 crore for Capacity 
Building of Panchayats being run by different Ministries like Health Ministry, Education Ministry, Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation can be integrated instead of training being determined by individual 
Ministries, the Secretary (Expenditure) stated that if such a scheme comes up they will support it: 
1.158 In this Connection the 'Twelfth Plan ' Document has also outlined the necessity of developing 
effective mechanism for convergence of Central Ministries on its various flagship programmes (para 15.14).  
In this context it has been observed:- 
"Many of the areas where we need substantial improvement in outc omes such as health, water 
management, development of manufacturing etc., require action in several fields.  Solutions require 
collaboration amongst several ministries and department.  Unfortunately, Ministries/Departments 
typically act as silos.  Plans an d schemes are developed along the jurisdictional lines of the 
ministries and departments, based on vertical management and decision, system which often 
makes coordination with other concerned Ministries very difficult.  It is necessary in the Twelfth 
Plan to undertake collaborative strategizing amongst the concerned ministries to clarify the roles of 
the departments in delivering holistic outcomes from the perspective of citizens.  

63 
 
PART-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
Role of Panchayats 
2.1 The Committee note with dismay that dream of 'Gram Swaraj' of Mahatma Gandhi and 
objective of 'Power to People' are yet to be achieved fully even after over six decades of 
independence and over two decades of enactment of Constitution (Seventy -Third) Amendment Act 
in 1992 that envisioned empowerment of Panchayats as embodiment of Local Self Government 
across the country largely on account of absence of adequate capacity building of Panchayats over 
the years.   Admittedly with as many as 589 District Panchayats, 6323 Block Panchayats and over 
2.41 lakh Gram Panchayats with over 28 lakh elected representatives and functionaries of which 10 
lakh are women, the task of their Capacity Building is quite gigantic particularly with respect to the 
provisions of Arti cle 243G of the Constitution that seeks to bestow powers and authority to 
Panchayats  in relation to 29 subjects specified in Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution.  These 
subjects inter -alia are agriculture , land improvement, implementation of land reform s, minor 
irrigation, water management and watershed developm ent, animal husbandry, dairying and poultry 
fisheries, social forestry and farm forestry, small scale industries including food processing 
industries, Khadi, Village and Cottage Industries ,  rural housing, drinking water, roads, 
culverts/bridges, rural electrification including distribution of electricity, education, health and 
sanitation, public distribution system, etc.   The Committee  find that prior to having the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj as independent one in 2004, the issue of Capacity Building of Panchayats was not 
suitably addressed  to by the Ministry of Rural Development under which the Department of the 
Panchayati Raj functioned. The Committee's examination has revealed that even after formation of 
the separate Ministry viz. the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 2004 that was primarily formed for 
focusing decentralization of power and empowerment of Panchayats, main objectives have not 

64 
 
been achieved fully.  The Committee are unhappy to note MoPR's candid admission before the 
Committee that although the efforts for providing training to Elected Representatives of Panchayats 
have been going on for past several years yet the training activities have not received adequate 
focus and attentio n at State level and as such desired impact on empowerment of Panchayat has 
not been forthcoming.  Also that the Constitutional obligations as mandated under the 73rd 
amendment to the Constitution cannot be realized without increasing the capacities of the  
Panchayats.   The Committee feel that ways and means are to be found out by MoPR as well as 
State Governments for making up the deficiencies in Capacity Building of Panchayats for their 
desired empowerment for discharging the Constitutional mandate in the light of broad parameters 
of new programme of Rajeev Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) launched by the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj  w.e.f March, 2013.  Needless to emphasise that with the more and more 
items of work out of the list of 29 subjects under Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution proposed to 
be assigned to Panchayats by the State Governments, the capacity of Panchayats needs to be 
raised manifold.  
                (Recommendation Serial No.1) 
Need for Capacity Building of Panchayats 
2.2 A glance at various schemes for Capacity Building of Panchayats shows that the work for 
Capacity Building has been done by various Ministries like MoPR mainly under Backward Region 
Grant Fund (BRGF) and Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY), Ministry of Rural Development 
under MGNERGA and NLRM and also by newly created Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
under Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA).   Besides, some other Central Ministries like Health, Education, 
etc. are also involved in Capacity Building work of Panchayats in a small measure in tune with their 
schemes/programmes.    The Committee feel that in the process, funds are spent under various 
schemes without any composite and cohesive planning and in the process capability of Panchayats 

65 
 
at ground lev el largely remain unchanged.  The Committee have been informed that within MoPR, 
process of merging of schemes for the purpose of Capacity Building of Panchayats in cohesive 
manner has started taking shape after launch of a new scheme named 'Rajiv Gandhi P anchayat 
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan(RGPSA)'. The Committee find that RGPSA provides for constitution of two 
bodies for overall policy direction, i.e. Empowered Central Steering Committee  (ECSC) and the 
Empowered Central Executive Committee (ECEC). ECSC is chair ed by the Minister of Panchayati 
Raj as Chairperson and  has  Ministers/State Ministers of Rural Development, Drinking Water and 
Sanitation, Education, Health, Agriculture, Social Justice and Welfare, Tribal Welfare, North East, 
Planning Commission, State M inister for Finance (Department of Expenditure), Ministers from well 
performing States as per devolution index, and five Elected Women Panchayats representatives 
form among best performing Panchayats as Members. ECEC is chaired by the Secretary MoPR as 
Chairperson, representative of Planning Commission , Secretary Expenditure (Ministry of Finance ), 
Secretaries of  Agriculture, Rural Development, Drinking Water and Sanitation, Education, Health, 
Social Justice Welfare, Tribal Affairs, DONER, Additional Secretaries, Financial Adviser and Joint 
Secretaries of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Director –General National Institute of Rural 
Development (NIRD) Hyderabad and Secretaries responsible for Panchayati Raj of well performing 
States as per the devolution index as Members.   The Committee  strongly recommend that a 
certain percentage  of funds for the schemes run by the Ministries of Rural Development, Drinking 
Water & Sanitation, Health etc.  in rural areas  should be made available to MoPR so that capacity 
building of Panchayats is built in a systematic/planned manner.   This will bring all the funds related 
with Panc hayats under different Ministries for capacity building of PRIs under one umbrella.   
Thereafter, similar process should be initiated at State level.  The Committee would await specific 
action taken in this regard. 
                (Recommendation Serial No.2) 

66 
 
2.3 The Committee find that empowerment of Panchayats through greater devolution of powers 
and responsibilities on Panchayats in planning and monitoring of development schemes in line 
with Constitutional intent was emphasized in Eleventh Plan (2007 -2012) Document . Government 
pronouncements made from time to time including the recent one in Twelfth Plan (2012 -2017) 
document brought out by the Planning Commission,  wherein role of rural local self Government 
has been considered critical for rural transf ormation. According to the Twelfth Plan Document 
although States have taken up activity mapping, pattern of assignment of subjects and coverage of 
subjects widely differed among the States, barring those development programmes/schemes which 
expressly require the involvement of Panchayats, most others are implemented by the functionaries 
of line department concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommend that issue of the devolution of 
powers and responsibilities in the areas spelt out in Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution should 
be taken up by the MoPR with all the States at highest level in the Government. Similarly there 
should be national level Conferences/Seminars to emphasize empowerment of Panchayats.  
(Recommendation Serial No.3) 
 
2.4 The Committee’s examination has revealed that a number of challenges and constraints like 
non-devolution of powers to Panchayats from State Legislatures on account of discretionary 
Constitutional provisions, non -empowerment of women in Panchayat on account of illiteracy ,   
absence of physical verification of Panchayat works and delay in releases of funds under Backward 
Region Grant Fund (BRGF) , slow pace of decentralized planning, etc. are coming in the way of 
desired level of capacity building of Panchayats in the countr y. The Committee are apprehensive 
that in the light of these challenges and constraints , the goal of inclusive growth accompanied by 
demonstrative difference to the lives of poorest and most vulnerable citizens may not be achieved  
fully.  

67 
 
2.5 For converting discretionary powers of State Legislatures to mandatory one for the purpose 
of necessary devolution of powers to Panchayats under XIth Schedule to the Constitution the 
MOPR has informed that it would require Constitutional amendment in respe ct of Article 246 
(subject matter of laws made by Parliament and by State Legislatures) Seventh Schedule 
(containing three Lists viz Union List, State List and Concurrent List) and Article243 (Definitions 
relating to Panchayats) of the Constitution and the  same would not be in line with the spirit of 
federalism underlined in the Constitution. The Committee find that in view the above legal position, 
the status quo on the issue of devolution of Powers to Panchayats may continue indefinitely unless 
States are  incentivised for devolution of powers.  From the information made available to the 
Committee by MoPR it is observed that  Andaman & Nicobar, Arunachal Pradesh, Haryana, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Sikkim, Tamilnadu  have transferred  some subjects to PRIs . However, th e 
Committee have not been apprised  about the actual empowerment of PRIs i.e. concomittent 
transfer of functionaries and finances.  In this context the Committee also find that Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj seeks to make some headway under new programme of Raj eev Gandhi Panchayat 
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) being implemented during the Current Plan(2012 -2017) by 
allocating 20% of resources based on performance conditions that include devolution requiring  the 
States to draw a road map for the purpose of avail ing Grants and giving incentives and 
responsibility to States to devolve powers and responsibility to Panchayats.   The Committee also 
find that though Panchayati Raj is a State subject, yet it is the primary responsibility of the 
Government of India, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to continue a purposeful dialogue with 
Ministries of Panchayati Raj in States and Union Territories for devolution of more power to 
Panchayats across the country. 
                      (Recommendation Serial No.4) 
  

68 
 
2.6 Another major impediment coming in the way of empowerment of Panchayats  is low 
competency to handle Panchayat work.  In this connection, during the course of evidence the 
Secretary (Panchayati Raj) stated before the Committee that the Ministry is looking for varyi ng 
requirements as out of 28 lakh Panchayat representatives, about 36 percent are elected women 
representatives, 19 percent are Scheduled Castes and 11 percent are Scheduled Tribes.  Admittedly 
many of these elected representatives are first timers and are  largely unlettered and as such their 
functional literacy needs to be satisfied. The Committee, therefore, recommend that for real 
capacity building of Panchayats a massive literacy campaign should be a part of training of elected 
representatives of Pancha yats in the country.   For future, the Committee feel that there is need to 
examine whether some minimum qualifications could be set for holding positions in PRIs. 
                 (Recommendation Serial No.5) 
2.7 The Committee also note that 'the Constitut ion (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment) Bill, 
2009 that seeks to amend Article 243D of the Constitution by seeking reservation of women in the 
Panchayats in the total number of seats, offices of Chairpersons and in the seats reserved for the 
Scheduled Casted and Scheduled Tribes across three tiers should be raised from existing 
provisions  of  ‘not less than one -third’ to  ‘not less than one -half’ and  also seeking similar 
reservation for women belonging to the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe categories in the 
offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayts at each level upto ‘not less than one -half’ was examined 
by the Committee (2009-10) and is pending b efore the Parliament for consideration and passing.  
The Committee feel that the proposed legislation be enacted at the earliest so that objectives of the 
legislation are achieved at the earliest. 
                                                                                                     (Recommendation Serial No.6)  
 
 

69 
 
 District Planning 
2.8 Another issue that has attracted the attention of the Committee is slow pace of district 
planning.  The Committee find that under Article 243ZD of the Cons titution, it is obligatory for   
every State to constitute the District Planning Committees (DPCs) and every such Committee shall 
prepare Draft Development Plan in matters of common interest between Panchayats and 
Municipalities for integrated planning.   The Committee find that although MoPR has been able to 
constitute DPCs in every State, it has not been able to make any headway on the issue of  integrated 
and decentralized planning .    This has been mainly to the fact that on-line Departments are not 
communicating the resource  envelop to Planning Units for effective convergence of resources 
before the plan preparation .  For this MoPR has suggested that capacity of Panchayats/ULRs is to 
be strengthened to prepare local plans and consolidate these at District level. 
 
Schemes for Capacity Building of Panchayats. 
2.9 The Committee have been informed that in order to have clarity in district planning 
Ramachandran Committee's recommendations containing elaborate guidelines were sent to 
Planning Commission in 2005 by MoPR and they also issued  the Guidelines on 25th June,  2009 to 
the State Governments  in this regard.   As a result Central Ministries have begun to introduce the 
role for PRIs, integrated planning etc. that has to be pursued during Twelfth Plan.    In this 
connection, the Committee find that Twelfth Plan  Document also underlines the need of 
strengthening local institutions through various programmes like National Rural Livelihood 
Missions(NRLM), Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) ,   MGNREGA etc. It has 
also highlighted that ‘Government  Institutions'  charged with the responsibility of capacity building 
of Panchayats like NIRD, SIRDs, etc.  have not succeeded in their designed role and thus need 
reform. From the perusal of the RGPSA programme the Committee find that twenty per cent of the 

70 
 
RGPSA funds would be disbursed to the States on the basis of their performance in twelve areas 
including preparing and operationalising a frame work for bottom up grassroots planning and 
convergence through District Planning Committees (DPCs). In the light of the experience in the 
previous years , the Committee apprehend that many States may lag behind on the issue of 
convergence. The Committee,  therefore, desire that role of Panchayats be suitably defined in all 
Centrally Sponsored Programmes(CSPs) including thos e related to 29 subjects enumerated in 
Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution. Needless to emphasize that  reform process in Government 
Institutions like NIRD, SIRDs , etc. should begin with right earnest for capacity building of 
Panchayats. 
                                                                                                       (Recommendation Serial No.7) 
BRGF  
2.10 The Committee’s  examination has revealed that two prominent schemes viz Backward 
Region Grant Fund (BRGF) and Ras htriya Gram Swaraj Yojna (RGSY) for Capacity Building and 
training of elected representatives and functionaries of Panchayats was reviewed during Mid Term 
Appraisal of Eleventh Plan out of which  certain valuable suggestions came up for improving the   
both schemes.  In the case of BRGF, the Committee find that inadequate Grant to Panchayats 
ranging between Rs. 2 lakhs to 3 lakhs, inability of PRIs to play a leading role in integrated planning 
on discretionary  Budget,  issue of convergence of Central/State S chemes of Districts/ Sub -district 
level etc., absence of Panchayat wise resource envelop under different schemes, faulty procedure 
for release of installment  to Panchayats at District level etc. are some issues which need to be 
considered and sorted out by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Planning Commission.  
                   (Recommendation Serial No.8) 
 
 

71 
 
RGSY 
2.11 The Committee also find that Mid Term Appraisal of Eleventh Plan relating to RGSY Scheme 
has also pointed out certain important suggestions.   These inter -alia relate to inclusion of 
important components of National Capability Building Framework (NCBF) components like courses 
for Master Resource Persons, functional literacy, enhan ced allocation for capacity building, 
permitting capital expenditure for construction of Training Institutes, etc,.  The Committee have 
been informed by MoPR that issues of Master Resource Persons, infrastructure etc. have broadly 
been taken care of under the new comprehensive scheme viz. RGPSA.  The Committee wou ld like 
the Government to have constant monitoring of RGPSA to ensure that its objectives are achieved in 
a time bound manner.  
                         (Recommendation Serial No.9) 
 
Allocation vis-à-vis releases and Utilization under BRGF 
2.12 While reviewing the allocation releases and utilization of funds for Capacity Building of 
Panchayats, the Committee find with dismay that there is gross under -utilisation of funds under 
BRGF  during the last three -four years. For instance, during 2009 -10, 2010-11 and 2011 -12 against 
the annual entitlement of Rs. 250.00 crore for 250 BRGF Districts in different States the releases 
were as low as Rs. 190.64 crore, Rs. 197.17 crore and  Rs. 106.58 crore  respectively. Further the 
utilization of these funds in these years has been Rs. 158.43 crore, Rs. 139.08 crore and Rs. 60.97 
crore respectively.  Similarly during 2012 -13 against the annual entitlement of Rs. 272.00 crore for 
272 BRGF Districts, the rele ases were as low as Rs. 89.56 crore against which the utilization was 
merely Rs. 0.83 crores.  

72 
 
2.13 The Committee find from the Demands for Grants (201 3-2014) of the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj that Rs. 272 crore have been allocated for capacity building an d training component of BRGF 
for the year 2012-2013 for 272 BRGF districts in different States.   The Committee feel that  increase 
in allocation will not result in actual Capacity Building of Panchayats unless these are released and 
utilized for the purpo se.  The Government has outlined reasons  for low utilization of funds  viz. 
delay in release of funds to implementing agencies well beyond 15 days, utilization of releases are 
reported only when next installment is claimed i.e. when 60% utilization is achi eved.  The 
Committee feel that these reasons should be sorted out by the MoPR through regular interactions 
with State Government implementing agencies with a view to enhance effective utilization of funds. 
               (Recommendation Serial No.10) 
2.14 The State -wise analysis of utilization of BRGF funds for Capacity Building Component of 
Panchayats, has revealed that in big State s like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh there are 
large amount of BRGF funds that have remained unutilized during the l ast 3-4 years.  For instance 
in Uttar Pradesh with as many as 34 BRGF districts during 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 against the 
entitlement of Rs. 34.00 crore the releases were Rs. 28.07 crore, Rs. 12.21 crore and Rs 00.00 crore 
respectively. Against this the utilization was as low as Rs 9.69 crore, Rs. 0.0 crore and Rs. 0.0 crore 
respectively. Similarly in the case of Bihar wi th as many as 3 6 BRGF districts, the release against 
the entitlement of Rs. 36.00 crore during the same period were Rs. 31.34 crore,  Rs. 0.00 crore and 
Rs. 0.0 crore respectively.  Also in the case of Madhya Pradesh with 24 BRGF districts the release s 
during the same period were Rs. 24.00 crore, Rs. 12.41 crore and Rs. 20.74 crore respectively.  
Whereas the utilization was Rs. 24.00 crore, Rs. 12.41 crore and Rs. 0.00 crore respectively.  The 
Committee, therefore, are unable to comprehend how these States would able to handle the 
additional  funds that would be made available for Capacity Building of Panchayats during  2013 -
2014 keeping in view their low rate of utilization so far.   The Committees; therefore, would like the 

73 
 
MoPR to examine this vital aspect of non -utilisation of funds and take remedial measures to 
gainfully utilize the allocated funds.  
(Recommendation Serial No.11) 
 
Demand vis-à-vis availability  of funds for RGPSA 
2.15 The Committee find that MOPR has been consistently  seeking substantial  increases in 
funds for capacity building requirements of Panchayats before the Planning Commission during the 
years  2010-2011, 20 11-2012 and 2012 -2013 broadly for six areas viz Panchayat Staff, Panchayat 
Ghars, Accounting, e Panchayats, Training & infrastructure and Institutionalising Decentralised 
Planning. Planning Commission admitted before the Committee about  the receipt of enha nced 
demand from MOPR. During the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2012 -2013) of MOPR 
the Committee were informed  that the total requirement of funds for RGPSA has been pooled 
together at Rs. 33,000 crore  for Twelfth Plan .  Against this huge re quirement, the Planning 
Commission while according in princip le approval to RGPSA has provided GBS of Rs. 11,547 crore 
only  for Twelfth Five Year Plan for MOPR. Considering the objectives of the Scheme, t he 
Committee, strongly recommend  that the Planning Commission should reconsider the 
requirements of funds for MOPR with an open mind for current Plan. 
(Recommendation Serial No.12) 

74 
 
Devolution of 3Fs 
2.16 While reviewing the progress on 'Devolution of Functions, Functionaries and Finances' from 
States to Panchayats under Article 243G read with subjects enumerated in Eleventh Schedule of the 
Constitution, the Committee are constrained to note that only few States  of have done some work  
on this issue whereas in other  States it has not progressed much.  In t his connection, the MoPR 
have candidly admitted before the Committee that Devolution of 3 Fs needs to be backed by grass 
root planning which is almost absent in all the States.  The MoPR has also pointed out that 
Devolution of powers to the Panchayats is  the discretion of the State Governments.   Further the 
Committee find that Thirteenth Finance Commission has also observed that traditional theology 
that funds and functionaries would follow functions did not appear to have worked as number of 
States that h ave notified transfer of functions,  it has not been followed by transfer of funds and 
functionaries.   The Committee also find that three advisories were issued by MoPR viz. on 9th 
April, 2009 on Panchayat Finances, on 23rd October, 2009 on manpower to Pa nchayats and on 1st 
December, 2009 on Activity Mapping but the position has not changed much . The Committee find 
that the RGPSA propose for  disbursement of twenty percent of RGPSA funds for five years to 
States based on their performance on twelve paramete rs. Since there has not been much progress 
on the issue of 'Devolution' of 3 Fs to Panchayats by reason of discretion available to the State 
Governments,  Committee would await impact of implementation of RGPSA which provides 
incentives for devolution of powers/functions to Panchayats. 
(Recommendation Serial No. 13)  
  

75 
 
Availability of Staff 
2.17 The Committee find that MoPR have projected four areas of Capacity Building of 
Panchayats viz. Devolution of 3 Fs, Availability of Staff, Availability of Infrastructure and ICT 
facilities and Training of elected representatives of Panchayats,  whereas the Planning Commission 
has viewed three pronged effort for bringing about desired Capacity Building of Panchayats viz. 
Provision of adequate human Resources, Infrastructure and Training and Sensitisation of Elected 
Members,  Functionaries of Panchayats and  G overnment Functionaries working at District Block 
and Gram Panchayat level.  The Committee find that broadly the identified areas of MoPR and 
Planning commission broadly are common.   The Committee also find that issue of Capacity 
Building of Panchayats ha s received the attention of the Planning Commission which has been 
reflected in Eleventh and Twelfth Plan Documents.  In this connection, the Committee also note that 
MoPR has already brought out a 'Roadmap for Panchayats for 2011 -2017.   The Committee 
recommend that Government should hold Annual reviews of implementation of 'Roadmap for 
Panchayats for 2011 -2017' so that corrective measures wherever necessary are taken while the 
implementing of the plan instead of waiting till 2017 to know the impact of the scheme.   
               (Recommendation Serial No.14) 
2.18 While reviewing the State-wise details of sanctioned vis-à-vis filled posts of Secretary, Gram 
Panchayats, the Committee find that against 1.52  lakh sanctioned post, 1.12 lakh have been filled in 
a total of 2.41 lakh Gram Panchayats and 40,000 posts are yet to be filled. The Committee are 
however, glad to note that some States like Kerala ( 978/978), Chattisgarh (9734/9734),  Himachal 
Pradesh (3243/3243), Orissa (6234/6234), Tamil Nadu ( 12618/12618), Sikkim (16 5/165), Rajasthan 
(9188/8522), Assam (1958/189 7), have done brilliantly in equipping Gram Panchayats with 
manpower.  However, the States which have  substantial vacancies are Uttar Pradesh (16432/12003), 
Andhra Pradesh (12395/10670) , Maharashtra (1 7326/16655), Bihar (8463/5 754),  Karnataka 

76 
 
(5628/372),   Uttarakhand  (670/412)  Manipur (409/37) etc. Information in respect of certain States 
has not been made or is not available. The Committee are convinced that with huge State -wise 
vacancies the functioning of Panchayats would be adversely affected .  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend the MoPR to take up the matter with concerned States  at the highest level for 
filling up sanctioned posts and also update the 'Not Repor ted’ information from concerned States 
urgently. 
                (Recommendation Serial No.15) 
2.19 On perusal of the composition of stakeholders of Panchayati Raj as reflected in the 
'National Capability Building Framework (NCBF),  the Committee find that  besides Elected 
Panchayat Representatives and officials of the  Panchayats, a large number of officials like Junior 
Engineers, Anganwadis Workers,  Primary Health Workers, Self Help Groups etc. have been shown 
as Pressure Groups with Gram Sabhas.  In this  connection, the Committee find that MoPR has 
advised State Governments to provide the basic core functionaries to the Panchayats which 
includes the Secretary,  an Accountant, a Data Entry Operator and a Social Mobiliser.   Keeping in 
view, the fact that 589 District Panchayats, 6323 Block Panchayats and 2.41 lakh Gram Panchayats  
are there across the country,  the Committee feel that MoPR should list out  a model composition of 
manpower for each PRI and steps should be taken to provide the same. 
                           (Recommendation Serial No.16) 
2.20 In regard to equipping Panchayats with requisite manpower, the Committee find that it is 
only on 23rd October, 2009  the MoPR issued Guidelines on Manpower for Panchayats to the Chief 
Secretaries of all States/UTs inter-alia highlighting that even after 17 years of the Amendment to the 
Constitution in 1992, the PRIs are yet to come up as effective institutions of Self -Government 
largely due to inadequate capacity of Panchayats and calling upon mobalisation  of resources for 
deployment of core staff of Panchayats through State resources, BRGF, MGNREGA, Finance 

77 
 
Commission Awards etc.  This was subsequently reiterated on 12th November, 2010 and also on 
6th July, 2011. In this connection , the Committee find that  new scheme viz, RGPSA also seeks to 
ensure that each Gram Panchayat (GP) has an appropriate building for holding meetings and office 
work and is expected to obtain funds from various sources, especially through schemes of Ministry 
of Rural Development. However, where funds are unavailable from other schemes GP buildings will 
be funded from RGPSA.    Considering the importance of the subject , the Committee recommend 
that more initiatives like holding regular meetings/conferences of the Minister of Panchay ati Raj 
with State Ministers should be held more often so that empowerment of panchayats takes at a 
faster pace as also State Governments share their concerns/problems as also the initiatives. This 
will also help State Governments to learn from each other’s experiences.  
               (Recommendation Serial No.17) 
Availability of infrastructure and ICT facilities   
2.21 The Committee find with dismay that Panchayats are facing major constraints in terms of 
construction of Panchayat Ghars in various States and this has been major hurdle in necessary 
capacity build up of Panchayats.   The Committee find that several States are yet to provide 
Panchayat Ghars to Gram Panchayats. Major deficit States are  Andhra Pradesh (21807/5639), Bihar 
(8463/3135), Haryana ( 6155/3155), Madhya  Pradesh ( 23012/3634),  Maharashtra (27920/ 5183),  
Punjab ( 12800/7182) and Uttar Pradesh  (51914/22930). The Committee attribute  the prevailing 
inadequacy of infrastructure largely due to non-utilisation of funds by State Governments under  
BRGF.  They also find that for arranging Panchayat Ghars in deficient States Government has taken 
a number of steps. MoPR has advised the  State Governments for construction of Panchayat Ghars 
in a time bou nd manner by combining the fund  available under MGNREGA , BRGF and RGPSA 
Schemes besides States own resources.   Further, the Central Government has decided to assist 
State Governments/UTs in providing a Panchayat Development Officer and Junior Engineer in 

78 
 
priority Gram Panchayats using Administrative Expenditure Head of MGNREGA and have proposed 
90:10 funding ratio between Centre and States to bring to the level of 50:50 in five years time for 
which comprehensive Guidelines have been issued.  Viewing the work done subsequent to 2009, 
the Committee find from the website of MoPR that as on 30.03.2011 only 3688  'Panchayat Ghars' 
have been sanctioned in 19 States from 2006 -07 to 2011 -12 and    only 304 'Resources Centres'  
were sanctioned in four States Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himachal Pr adesh and Tripura  during 
the same period. The Committee fail to understand as to how this small number of Panchayat 
Ghars/'Resource Centres' is going to reduce the huge deficiency of infrastructure of Panchayats 
across the States. The Committee, accordingly, would like the MoPR to pursue the matter with State 
Governments so as to ensure that all Panchayats have Panchayat Ghars by end of Twelfth Plan. 
             
               (Recommendation Serial No.18) 
 
2.22 The Committee are unhappy to find that the resolve of the MoPR of making available the 
Information Technology to the doorstep of Panchayats made in December, 2004 with the object of 
providing transparency, better delivery of service, capacity building requirement etc. of Panchayats 
largely remains unfulfilled for want of allocation of funds by the Planning Commission.   The 
Committee are also annoyed with the apathy of Planning Commission on this issue as MoPR has 
already quantified Rs. 6896.18 crore for this work that includes Rs. 5457.82 crore for  Payout and 
Manpower requirements alone.   As against this the actual allocation was as low as Rs. 46.28 crore 
in 2010-11 and Rs. 40.00 crore  in 2011 -12 and it has forced the MoPR to restrict their e -Panchayat 
activities to conduct studies, development and deployment of 12 'Common Applications'. 
(Recommendation Serial No.19) 

79 
 
2.23 The Committee are also unhappy to find that computerization has not reached the 
doorsteps of Gram Panchayats in most of the  States. From the data made available to the 
Committee about the progress of computerization , the Committee find that the offices of Zila 
Parishads and Block Panchayats have been given computers however these have not been given to 
Panchayat offices . During the course of evidence the Secretary MoPR had expected  that by 
December, 2013 or early 2014 broadband connectivity will be given to Panchayats. The Committee 
apprehend that with scant coverage of computers in village Panchayats the goal of giving broad 
band connectivity may not be realized. The Committee would like the Ministry to adhere to their 
stated schedule for providing broadband connection for Panchyats. The Committee would await 
conclusive action taken in this regard.    
(Recommendation Serial No.20) 
Training of elected representatives of Panchayats: 
2.24 The Committee find with dismay that training requirements of as many as 29 lakhs elected 
representatives of Panchayats of which 10 lakhs are elected women representatives are inadequate. 
The MOPR  admitted before the Committee that existing  training infrastructure viz. 29 State  
Institute of Rural Development and 78 ETCs needs to be augmented manifold and hoped that it 
would be addresse d through RGPSA. From the State -wise details of number of elect ed 
representatives, the Committee are constrained to find that in States like Uttar Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh and Bihar with as many as 7 lakhs,  3.94 lakhs and 1.30 lakhs elected Panchayat 
representatives  respectively , the training infrastructure  availab le is thoroughly inadequate. For 
instance in Madhya Pradesh for 50 districts and 3.9 6 lakh elected representatives there is only one 
SIRD, 7 PTCs and 6 ETCs in the State. Likewise in Bihar with 1.30 lakh elected representatives, 
there is 1 SIRD and only 3 ETCs are available. The Committee, therefore, feel that the MOPR should 
undertake a comprehensive study to expand the network for training of elected representatives of 

80 
 
Panchayats by an Expert Committee so that in States where training infrastructure is inadequate, 
the same may be upgraded to the required level.  
 (Recommendation Serial No.21) 
2.25 The Committee are constrained to find that as per MOPR there is no system of evaluation of 
training imparted to large number of elected representatives of Pancha yats in the country . The 
Committee were also informed by the MOPR that quality aspect needs continuous improvement. 
The Committee were also informed by the Member-Secretary, Planning Commission that there is no 
inter-relation between expenditure and qualit y of training imparted. In this connection , during the 
course of evidence the Secretary MoPR agreed with the Committee to impart training to elected 
representatives in local language. The Committee are also constrained  to note that most important 
training programme called National Capability Building Framework (NCBF) as brought out by MOPR 
and adopted for BRGF districts containing important features like stakeholders, requirement of 
resource persons to be trained for training the elected representatives of  Panchayats, duration  and 
course of training, remunerations, etc,. has not been implemented in letter and spirit during the last 
3-4 years. The Committee have been informed by the MOPR that RGPSA scheme broadly addresse s 
these issues. The Committee, would  like the Ministry   to ensure that RGPSA takes care of these 
vital aspects. 
(Recommendation Serial No.22)    
Thirteenth Finance Commission Grants to PRIs 
2.26  In the context of adequacy of Thirteenth  Finance Commission Grants to PRIs, the MoPR  
contended before the Committee that Ministry had requested the Thirteenth Finance Commission to 
provide 4% of Divisible Pool to Panchayats for Capacity Building require ments like construction of 
Panchayat Ghars, providing skelton staff etc. and 1% of Divisible Pool for Specific Grants for 

81 
 
preparation data base, area planning etc.   As against this, Thirteenth Finance Commission has 
recommended a Basic Grant of 1.5% perce nt of previous years' Divisible Pool and  a Performance 
Grant of 0.50% of Divisible Pool in first year and 1 percent in next three years.   The Committee find 
that MoPR has quantified the over -all capacity building requirement of Rs. 1.12 lakh  crore  out o f 
which Thirteenth Finance Commission has recommended Rs.6 3,050 crore for   five years to PRIs 
comprising of Rs.41,225 crore as Basic Grant and Rs. 21,825  crore as Performance Grant as untied 
Grants.   In this connection,  the Committee feel that an amount  of Rs. 3 lakh per Panchayat per 
annum recommended by Thirteenth Finance Commission is not sufficient enough takin g into 
consideration the devaluation of rupee and inflation for overall Capacity Building requirements of 
Panchayats.        
                   (Recommendation Serial No.23) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  
12  August, 2013        Chairperson, 
 21 Shravana, 1935 (Saka)       Standing Committee  
          on Rural Development 
        

82 
 
Appendix-1 
  
 
List of 272 BRGF districts 
S. 
No. 
State Sl. 
No. 
District  S. 
No. 
State Sl. 
No. 
District 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
1 Adilabad  Bihar contd. 34 Bhojpur 
2 Anantpur 35 Buxar 
3 Chitoor 36 Darbhanga 
4 Cuddapah 37 Gaya 
5 Karimanagar 38 Gopalganj 
6 Khammam 39 Jamui 
7 Mahboobnagar 40 Jehanabad  
8 Medak 41 Kaimur  
9 Nalgonda 42 Katihar 
10 Nizamabad 43 Khagaria 
11 Rangareddy 44 Kishanganj 
12 Vizianagaram 45 Lakhisarai 
13 Warrangal 46 Madhepura 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
14 Upper Subansari 47 Madhubani 
3 Assam 15 Baksa 48 Munger 
16 Barpeta 49 Muzaffarpur 
17 Bongaigaon 50 Nalanda 
18 Cachar 51 Nawada 
19 Chirang 52 Paschim 
Champaran 
20 Dhemaji 53 Patna 
21 Goalpara 54 Purbi 
Champaran 
22 Hailakandi 55 Purnia 
23 Karbi Anglong 56 Rohtas 
24 Kokarajhar 57 Saharsa 
25 Moregaon 58 Samastipur 
26 North Cachar 
Hills 
59 Saran 
27 North Lakhimpur 60 Sheikhpura 
4 Bihar 28 Araria 61 Sheohar 
29 Arwal 62 Sitamarhi 
30 Aurangabad 63 Siwan 
31 Banka 64 Supaul 
32 Begusarai 65 Vaishali 
33 Bhagalpur   

83 
 
S. 
No. 
State Sl. 
No. 
District  S. 
No. 
State Sl. 
No. 
District 
5 Chhattisgarh 66 Bastar  Jharkhand 
contd. 
105 Hazaribagh 
67 Bijapur 106 Jamtara 
68 Bilaspur 107 Koderma 
69 Dantewada 108 Khunti 
70 Dhamtari 109 Latehar 
71 Jashpur 110 Lohardagga 
72 Kabirdham 111 Pakaur  
73 Kanker 112 Palamu 
74 Korba 113 Ramgarh 
75 Koriya 114 Ranchi 
76 Mahasammund 115 Sahebganj 
77 Narayanpur 116 Saraikela 
Kharswan 
78 Raigarh 117 Simdega 
79 Rajnandgaon 118 West 
Singhbhum 
80 Sarguja 11 Karnataka 119 Bidar 
6 Gujarat 81 Banas Khantha 120 Chitradurga 
82 Dahod 121 Davangere 
83 Dang 122 Gulbarga  
84 Narmada 123 Raichur 
85 Panchmahal 124 Yadgir 
86 Sabar Kantha 12 Kerala 125 Palakkad 
7 Haryana 87 Mahendragarh 126 Wayanad 
88 Sirsa 13 Madhya Pradesh 127 Alirajpur 
8 Himachal 
Pradesh 
89 Chamba 128 Anuppur 
90 Sirmaur 129 Ashoknagar 
9 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
91 Doda 130 Balaghat 
92 Kishtwar 131 Barwani 
93 Kupwara 132 Betul 
94 Poonch 133 Burhanpur 
95 Ramban 134 Chhattarpur 
10 Jharkhand 96 Bokaro 135 Chhindwara 
97 Chatra 136 Damoh 
98 Deoghar 137 Dhar 
99 Dhanbad 138 Dindori 
100 Dumka 139 Guna 
101 Garhwa 140 Jhabua 
102 Giridih 141 Katni 
103 Godda 142 Khandwa 
104 Gumla 143 Khargone 
  

84 
 
S. 
No. 
State Sl. 
No. 
District  S. 
No. 
State Sl. 
No. 
District 
 Madhya 
Pradesh contd. 
144 Mandla 19 Orissa 182 Bargarh 
145 Panna 183 Bolangir  
146 Rajgarh 184 Boudh 
147 Rewa 185 Deogarh 
148 Satna 186 Dhenkanal 
149 Seoni 187 Gajapati 
150 Shahdol 188 Ganjam 
151 Sheopur 189 Jharsuguda 
152 Shivpuri 190 Kalahandi 
153 Sidhi 191 Kandhamal  
154 Singrauli 192 Keonjhar 
155 Tikamgarh 193 Koraput 
156 Umaria 194 Malkangiri 
14 Maharashtra 157 Ahmednagar 195 Mayurbhanj 
158 Amravati 196 Nabarangpur 
159 Aurangabad 197 Nuapada 
160 Bhandara 198 Rayagada 
161 Chandrapur 199 Sambalpur 
162 Dhule 200 Sonepur 
(Subarnapur) 
163 Gadchiroli 201 Sundargarh 
164 Gondia 20 Punjab 202 Hoshiarpur 
165 Hingoli 21 Rajasthan 203 Banswara 
166 Nanded 204 Barmer 
167 Nandurbar 205 Chittaurgarh 
168 Yavatmal 206 Dungarpur 
15 Manipur 169 Chandel 207 Jaisalmer 
170 Churchandrapur  208 Jalore 
171 Tamenglong 209 Jhalawar 
16 Meghalaya 172 Ri-bhoi 210 Karauli  
173 South Garo Hills 211 Pratapgarh 
174 West Garo Hills 212 Sawai 
Madhopur 
17 Mizoram 175 Lawngtlai 213 Sirohi 
176 Saiha  214 Tonk 
18 Nagaland 177 Kiphrie 215 Udaipur  
178 Longleng 22 Sikkim 216 North District 
179 Mon 23 Tamil Nadu 217 Cuddalore 
180 Tuensang 218 Dindigul 
181 Wokha 219 Nagapattinam 
  

85 
 
S. 
No. 
State Sl. 
No. 
District  S. 
No. 
State Sl. 
No. 
District 
 Tamil Nadu 
contd. 
220 Sivaganga 26 Uttarakhand 259 Chamoli 
221 Tiruvannamalai 260 Champawat 
222 Villupuram  261 Tehri Garhwal 
24 Tripura 223 Dhalai 27 West Bengal 262 24 South 
Paraganas 
25 Uttar Pradesh 224 Ambedkar Nagar 263 Bankura 
225 Azamgarh 264 Birbhum 
226 Badaun 265 Dinajpur 
Dakshin 
227 Bahraich  266 Dinajpur Uttar 
228 Balrampur 267 Jalpaiguri 
229 Banda  268 Maldah 
230 Barabanki 269 Medinipur East  
231 Basti 270 Medinipur West  
232 Chandauli 271 Murshidabad 
233 Chitrakoot  272 Purulia 
234 Etah   
235 Farukkhabad   
236 Fatehpur   
237 Gonda   
238 Gorakhpur   
239 Hamirpur   
240 Hardoi   
241 Jalaun    
242 Jaunpur   
243 Kanshiram Nagar   
244 Kaushambi   
245 Kushinagar   
246 Lakhimpurkhiri   
247 Lalitpur   
248 Maharajganj   
249 Mahoba   
250 Mirzapur    
251 Pratapgarh   
252 Raibareilly   
253 Sant Kabir Nagar   
254 Shrawasti   
255 Siddhartha Nagar   
256 Sitapur   
257 Sonbhadra   
258 Unnao   
 

2009-10 to 
2011-12
20112-13 
onwards
Funds 
Released
Utilisation 
Reported
Funds 
Released
Utilisation 
Reported
Funds 
Released
Utilisation 
Reported
Funds 
Released
Utilisation 
Reported
Funds 
Released
Utilisation 
Reported
1 Andhra Pradesh 13.00 13.00 22.11 22.11 13.00 10.37 6.07 0.00 3.00 0.00 44.18 32.48
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1.00 1.00 2.90 2.90 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.79 0.00 3.69 2.90
3 Assam 11.00 13.00 0.00 0.00 13.08 12.34 9.76 0.00 1.24 0.00 24.08 12.34
4 Bihar 36.00 38.00 25.78 0.00 31.34 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 57.12 0.00
5 Chhattisgarh 13.00 15.00 8.46 8.46 17.54 17.54 13.00 13.00 0.00 0.00 39.00 39.00
6 Gujarat 6.00 6.00 5.47 1.88 1.85 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.32 1.88
7 Haryana 2.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 2.00 1.04 0.73 1.49 0.00 4.53 2.73
8 Himachal Pradesh 2.00 2.00 1.76 1.76 2.00 2.00 2.00 0.03 0.00 0.00 5.76 3.79
9 Jammu & Kashmir 3.00 5.00 9.00 6.34 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.84 0.00 10.84 6.34
10 Jharkhand 21.00 23.00 0.00 0.00 8.46 7.84 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.46 7.84
11 Karnataka 5.00 6.00 8.39 8.39 5.00 5.00 2.69 0.79 3.50 0.00 19.58 14.18
12 Kerala 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.82 1.28 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.67 0.00 3.95 1.82
13 Madhya Pradesh 24.00 30.00 5.66 5.66 24.00 24.00 12.41 12.41 20.74 0.00 62.81 42.07
14 Maharashtra 12.00 12.00 0.00 0.00 12.00 12.00 5.06 0.80 6.94 0.00 24.00 12.80
15 Manipur 3.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 2.02 0.99 0.67 0.00 1.00 0.00 3.69 0.99
16 Meghalaya 3.00 3.00 2.36 2.36 3.00 3.00 2.04 0.38 1.04 0.00 8.44 5.74
17 Mizoram 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.78 1.32 0.00 0.26 0.00 5.58 3.78
18 Nagaland 3.00 5.00 6.00 6.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 2.70 4.20 0.00 16.20 11.70
19 Odisha 19.00 20.00 23.27 23.27 0.00 0.00 4.99 3.35 16.36 0.00 44.62 26.62
20 Punjab 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.99 0.89 0.00 3.89 2.99
21 Rajasthan 12.00 13.00 32.08 32.08 8.45 8.45 8.70 5.68 8.68 0.00 57.91 46.21
22 Sikkim 1.00 1.00 0.73 0.73 0.84 0.84 0.63 0.63 1.43 0.53 3.63 2.73
23 Tamil Nadu 6.00 6.00 0.00 0.00 5.24 5.24 6.00 6.00 4.65 0.00 15.89 11.24
24 Tripura 1.00 1.00 0.89 0.89 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.30 3.89 3.19
25 Uttar Pradesh 34.00 35.00 20.26 20.26 28.07 9.69 12.21 0.00 0.00 0.00 60.54 29.95
26 Uttarakhand 3.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.99 1.48 0.00 0.00 1.99 1.48
27 West Bengal 11.00 11.00 10.52 10.52 11.00 11.00 11.00 11.00 9.84 0.00 42.36 32.52
250.00 272.00 190.64 158.43 197.17 139.08 106.58 60.97 89.56 0.83 583.95 359.31
Funds Released & Utilisation Reported under Capacity Building Grant component of BRGF w.e.f. 2009-10 to 2012-13
Amount in Rs. crore
Total2009-10 2012-13Total Entitlement
Appendix-II
StateS.No. 2011-12
Total
2010-11
86

87 
 
Appendix-III 
         
Status of devolution of departments/subjects with funds, functions and functionaries to the 
Panchayati Raj Institutions for Major States/UTs. 
 
SI. 
No. 
State/UT No. and names of the Departments/subjects Transferred to Panchayats with 
respect to 
Funds Functions Functionaries 
1. Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
Grant-in-aid is released to 
PRI’s to discharge their 
functions 
All the functions (29 
subjects) have been 
transferred to the PRIs 
639 functionaries of various 
departments have been 
transferred to the PRIs. 
2. Andhra Pradesh Only Gram Panchayats (GPs) 
are empowered to collect 
taxes. Governments Orders 
(GOs) issued for devolving 
funds of 10 departments.  
22 GOs issued during 
1997-2002. Further, 10 
line departments have 
devolved certain 
powers to PRIs. 
Functionaries are under the 
administrative control of 
their respective line 
departments but they are 
partially accountable to 
PRIs.  
3. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
PRIs do not collect taxes. 
Transfer of funds by 
departments has not taken 
place.  
29 s ubjects have been 
devolved. GOs 
covering 20 
departments have been 
issued, but not yet 
implemented.   
Functionaries have not been 
transferred.  
4. Assam PRIs are empowered to 
collect taxes but cannot 
enforce. Main source of 
revenue is lease rent from 
markets, river banks and 
ponds. 
Activity-mapping done 
for 23 subjects. But 
GOs have been issued 
only for 7 subjects by 6 
departments.  
There has been very 
minimal devolution of 
functionaries. Officials 
continue to report to 
departments.  
5. Bihar No taxes are collected by 
PRIs but a proposal regarding 
the same is under 
consideration of State 
Government. 
 
Activity mapping has 
been conducted. 20 
line deptts. have issued 
GOs.  
Departmental staff are 
answerable to departments. 
Angandwadi workers, 
teachers and healt h workers 
are appointed by PRIs.   
6. Chhattisgarh GP is authorized to collect 
various types of taxes. Funds 
for 12 departments have been 
devolved.  
Activity Mapping of 
27 matters has been 
undertaken. GOs not 
issued. 
Panchayat make 
recruitments for 9 
departments.  
7. Goa Panchayats levy 11 types of 
taxes. Untied funds are given 
to Panchayats.  
 18 matters are 
devolved to GPs, while 
6 are devolved to ZPs.  
PRIs have their own core 
staff for the execution of 
works.  
8. Gujarat 8 major taxes are collected by 
PRIs. In 2008 -09, 13 
departments allocated funds 
to PRIs.  
14 functions have been 
completely devolved 
and 5 are partially 
devolved.  
GOs have been issued for 
devolution of functionaries 
for 14 functions.  
9. Haryana GPs generate revenue from 
lease of Pa nchayat land, 
liquor cess and rental of 
Panchayati Raj Act 
devolves 29 functions. 
GOs have been issued 
There is no significant 
devolution of functionaries.   

88 
 
Panchayat premises.   for 10 deptts.  
10. Himachal 
Pradesh 
Only GP is empowered to 
levy taxes. Fu nds have not 
been transferred.  
27 out of 29 subjects 
have been devolved to 
PRIs.  
Functionaries have not been 
transferred to PRIs. 
11. J&K State Govt. has issued GO notifying activity mapping. Funds have been devolved in a 
limited sense. Functionaries ha ve been identified in the Activity Mapping document 
who will assist Panchayats in carrying out assigned functions but have not been 
transferred. 
12. Jharkhand Elections to PRIs were held in November - December 2010 for the first time since 73 rd 
CAA came in to force. Three departments, namely, Agriculture, Social Welfare and 
Primary Education have recently devolved functions to PRIs by Departmental 
Notification. Activity Mapping has not been done so far.  
13. Karnataka PRIs collect 7 types of 
taxes.  Panchay ati Raj Act 
provides the mandatory 
transfer for untied funds to 
PRIs.  
Karnataka has 
delegated all 29 
subjects to PRI by 
notifying Activity 
Mapping.  
All Panchayat employees 
function under dual control of 
the Deptts. concerned and the 
PRIs.  
14. Kerala GPs have tax domain of 9 
types of taxes. 
Untied funds and funds for 
specific purposes by deptts 
are given to PRIs.  
Activity mapping for 
all 29 functions done 
and activities 
devolved to 
Panchayats.  
PRIs have full managerial and 
part disciplinary control ove r 
transferred functionaries.    
15. Madhya Pradesh GPs are empowered to 
collect taxes.  Funds for 13 
departments covering 19 
matters are released to PRIs. 
 
GOs containing the 
Activity Mapping in 
respect of 25 matters 
pertaining to 22 
deptts. have been 
issued.  
Functionaries for 13 
departments have been 
transferred to the PRIs.  
There is a State Panchayat 
Service.  
16. Maharashtra ZP and GP collect taxes. 
Grants for 11 departments 
are transferred to PRIs. 
11 subjects have been 
fully devolved. For 18 
subjects, schemes are 
implemented by PRIs.  
Class III and Class IV 
employees at all levels are 
Zilla Parishad employees.  
17. Manipur Five Departments have 
issued GOs transferring 
funds to PRIs. 
GOs have been issued 
devolving functions 
related to 22 
departments.  
5 Departments have issued 
GOs transferring functionaries 
to PRIs. 
18. Orissa PRIs collect 6 types of 
taxes. There is no clear 
devolution of untied funds.  
11 departments have 
devolved 21 subjects.  
Officials of 11 departments 
are accountable to PRIs.  
19. Punjab Main source of income of 
GP is from auction of 
Panchayat land. There is no 
clear devolution of funds.  
The devolution of 7 
key departments 
relating to 13 subjects 
approved.  
No functionaries have been 
transferred to PRI by line 
departments.  
20. Rajasthan 5 departments have issued 
GOs transferring funds to 
PRIs up to district level. 
10% untied fund to PRIs. 
Five Departments 
have transferred all 
functions up to district 
level to PRIs. Fresh 
Activity Mapping of 
above 5 Departments 
has been done. 
5 departments have transferred 
all functionaries upto district 
level to PRIs.  
21. Sikkim PRIs do not collect taxes. All 29 subjects are Employees are under the 

89 
 
Funds are being transferred 
by 17 departments.  10% of 
total fund of each 
department is given to 
Panchayats. Untied funds 
are given to PRIs. 
devolved as per 
legislation. Activity 
Mapping has been 
conducted for 20 
subjects covering 16 
departments.  
control of PRIs, but 
Panchayats exercise limited 
control over them.  
22. Tamil Nadu  Only village Pan chayats 
have the power to levy 
taxes. 9% of the States own 
tax revenue devolved to 
Local Bodies, of which rural 
local bodies will receive 
58% share.  
Government of Tamil 
Nadu has delegated 
supervision and 
monitoring powers of 
29 subject to PRIs 
There is no  significant 
devolution of functionaries.  
23. Tripura Part funds related to PWD 
Department, primary 
schools and Social Welfare 
and social education 
department and pension 
funds have been transferred 
to the Panchayats. Untied 
funds are also transferred to  
PRIs.  
So far GOs have been 
issued devolving 
irrigation schemes, 
primary schools and 
activities related to 
adult and non -formal 
education, women and 
child development and 
social welfare.   
 
Functionaries of 5 subjects for 
which functions have 
devolved, ha ve been 
transferred to Panchayats.  
24. Uttar Pradesh All 3 tiers have the power to 
collect taxes.  
16 subjects relating to 
12 departments have 
been devolved to 
PRIs. 
PRIs do not have control over 
functionaries.  
25. Uttarakhand Only ZPs collect taxes. 
Funds are made available to 
PRIs for activities for only 3 
functions.  
Master GO on 
transferring financial 
and administrative 
powers on 14 subjects 
has been issued in 
2003.  
Supervisory role over 
functionaries related to 14 
subjects.  
26. West Bengal GPs can impose and realize 
taxes.  Untied funds are 
allocated under the TFC 
grant as well as SFC grant. 5 
departments have opened 
Panchayat Window in their 
budgets.  
State Govt. agrees 
with transfer of these 
28 subjects. 14 
departments have so 
far issued matchi ng 
GOs transferring 27 
subjects.  
The Panchayat employees 
have been made into different 
district cadres. Other than the 
posts created in the Panchayat 
bodies, 7 departments of the 
State Govt. have devolved 
functionaries  
27. Daman & Diu Not available  12 subjects are fully 
devolved and 10 
subjects are partially 
devolved.  
Functionaries for 13 
departments have been 
transferred to PRIs. 
28. Puducherry  Panchayats collect taxes and 
receive funds from the state 
budget under the community 
development sector. 
22 functions have 
been devolved to the 
PRI.  
Devolution of functionaries 
has not been done yet. 

90 
 
29. Lakshadweep Entire Plan and Non Plan 
budget required for Schemes 
and Programs being 
implemented by 5 
departments viz Education, 
Medical & Health Services, 
Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry, and Agriculture 
is transferred to the District 
Panchayat and Village 
(Dweep) Panchayats. 
All Schemes and 
programmes being 
implemented by five 
major departments, 
viz Education, 
Medical & Health 
Services, Fisheries, 
Animal Husband ry, 
and Agriculture have 
been transferred to the 
PRIs w.e.f 1 st April 
2010.  
Entire establishments of  five 
major departments, viz 
Education, Medical & Health 
Services, Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry, and Agriculture 
except Director and few staff 
have been tr ansferred to 
District Panchayat and Village 
(Dweep) Panchayats.  
30. Chandigarh  A committee 
constituted by the 
Chandigarh 
Administration 
recommended transfer 
of some functions of 
12 Departments. 
However, the State 
Govt. felt that such an 
exercise of devo lving 
the functions to PRIs 
would only be an 
interim measure 
because fast 
urbanization would 
result in villages 
becoming part of 
Municipal 
Corporation in near 
future. 
 
Note: Mizoram, Meghalaya and Nagaland are exempt. 
 Delhi has no Panchayats. 
 Information is not available for UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli.  
 
 

91 
 
Appendix-IV 
 
State/UT wise details of Gram Panchayat (GP) Ghars 
 
Sl. 
No. State/UT Number of Gram 
Panchayats(GP)  
Number of GP 
having building 
Number of GP 
having                                             
no building 
1 Andhra Pradesh 21825 16186 55639 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1646 1646 0 
3 Assam 2196 1574 622 
4 Bihar  8463 5328 3135 
5 Chhattisgarh  9820 9654 166 
6 Goa    183 177 6 
7 Gujarat  13735 13682 53 
8 Haryana  6155 2200 3955 
9 Himachal Pradesh 3243 1142 2101 
10 Jammu & Kashmir 4146 * * 
11 Jharkhand 4562 2007 2555 
11 Karnataka 5628 5256 372 
12 Kerala 999 979 20 
13 Madhya Pradesh  23012 19378 3634 
14 Maharashtra 27920 22737 5183 
15 Manipur 165 165 0 
 Mizoram 818 * * 
 Meghalaya 1179 * * 
 Nagaland 1110 * * 
16 Orissa 6234 5833 401 
17 Punjab 12800 5618 7182 
18 Rajasthan 9166 9041 125 
19 Sikkim 166 166 0 
20 Tamil Nadu 12618 * * 
21 Tripura 1038 999 39 
22 Uttar Pradesh 51914 28984 22930 
23 Uttarakhand 7227 * * 
24 West Bengal 3351 3336 15 
25 A & N Islands 67 * * 
26 Chandigarh 17 * * 
27 Daman & Diu  14 * * 
28 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 11 * * 
29 Lakshadweep 10 * * 
30 Puducherry 98 * * 
TOTAL 241536 156088 58133 
N.R. = Not Reported. 

92 
 
APPENDIX V 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 10 AUGUST, 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1 500 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room  No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
             Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
 
2. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
3. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
4. Shri Sidhant Mohanpatra 
5. Shri P.L. Punia 
6. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
7. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
8. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
9. Shrimati Usha Verma 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
10. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
11. Shri Ganga Charan 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shiv Singh   - Director 
3. Smt. A.K. Shah   - Additional Director 
 
 
Witness  
 
 Dr. Indira Rajaraman - Former Member, Thirteenth Finance 
Commission 
    
    
    
    

93 
 
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee convened to take 
oral evidence of Dr. Indira Rajaraman, Former Member, Thirteenth Finance Commission and the r epresentatives 
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and the Ministry of Panchayati Raj on the subject ‘Capacity 
Building of Panchayati Raj Institutions’. 
 
[The witness Dr. Indira Rajaraman was called in]. 
 
 
3. The Hon’ble Chairperson welc omed Dr. Indira Rajaraman to the sitting of the Committee and direction 
55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ was read out. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of Dr. Indira 
Rajaraman, Former Member, Thirteenth Finance Commission. The main issues discussed during the sitting 
broadly include requirement of funds for various components of capacity building of Panchayati Raj Institutions 
(PRIs) like training of elected representatives and functionaries of PRIs, their other requirements relating to 
infrastructure, manpower, e -governance etc, vis -à-vis untied funds recommended by Thirteenth Finance 
Commission (TFC) for the period 2010 -2015, need for arranging funds for Panchayats for incurring non -plan 
expenditure such as salaries of staff, various facil ities being run by Panchayats like schools, dispensaries etc., 
issue arising out of advisory issued by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to States/UTs for use of Thirteenth Finance 
Commission grant to PRIs in contravention of Thirteenth Finance Commission rec ommendations giving complete 
freedom to Panchayats to use the funds as per their requirement etc. Various queries were raised by members 
which were responded to by the witness. The Chairperson thereafter thanked the witness for her appearance 
before the Committee. 
 
 
[The witness then withdrew]. 
 
 
[Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj were called in] 
 

94 
 
The following were present:- 
  
 Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
1. Shri A.N.P Sinha - Secretary 
2.  Dr. Sudhir Krishna  - Additional Secretary 
3.  Dr. Hrushikesh Panda - Additional Secretary  
4.  Shri D.K. Jain  - Joint Secretary 
 
 Representatives of the Ministry of Finance 
  (Department of Expenditure) 
 1.  Smt. Sushama Nath - Secretary (Expenditure) 
 2. Smt. Anjuly Chib Duggal - Joint Secretary 
 
4. The Committee held discussion with the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) and Ministry of Panchayati Ra on the subject ‘Capacity Building of Panchayati Raj Institutions’. 
 
5. The main issues that came up for discussion include the need to utilize the available funds under different 
rural development schemes of State Governments and other schemes like MGNREGA for capacity Building  of 
PRIs; need to approach the Planning Commission for making available adequate funds for capacity building of 
PRIs covering 29 subjects listed in Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution exclusively for the Panchayats that is to 
be funded by 0.5% of total a llocation of centrally sponsored schemes for the purpose of funding the ‘National 
Capacity Building Framework’ (NCBF). The Committee also decided to call the representatives of Planning 
Commission on the issue of capacity building at one of their subsequent sittings. 
 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

95 
 
APPENDIX VI 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2010-2011) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, THE 27 OCTOBER, 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1 500 hrs. to 1745 hrs. in Committee Room  ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
             Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
 
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
3. Shri Kunvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia 
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
6. Shri P.L. Punia 
7. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu 
8. Shri Jagdanand Singh 
9. Shrimati Usha Verma 
10. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Ganga Charan 
12. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
13. Shrimati Maya Singh 
14. Shri Mohan Singh 
15. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shiv Singh   - Director 
3. Smt. A.K. Shah   - Additional Director 
 
 
 

96 
 
 
 At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee convened for 
informal discussion on the subject ‘Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Gurantee  A ct 
(MGNREGA), 2005’ and for taking the oral evidence of the representatives of Planning Commission and Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj on the subject ‘Capacity building of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the coutry’. 
 
 
 
 
 
2. *  *  * 
 
 
 
 
3. *  *  * 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
***Note: Not related with subject matter of the Report

97 
 
 *  *  * 
 
[Representatives of Planning Commission and Ministry of Panchayati Raj were then called in] 
  
 Representatives of Planning Commission 
 
1. Smt. Sudha Pillai, Member Secretary 
2.  Shri Nagesh Singh, Adviser (PAMD)  
3. Shri S.P. Chauhan, Adviser (MLP) 
4. Smt. Indu Pathak, Deputy Adviser (MLP) 
 
 Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
 1.  Shri. A.N.P Singh, Secretary 
 2.  Dr. Sudhir Krishna, Additional Secretary 
 3.  Shri Avtar Singh Sahota, Joint Secretary 
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the Officers to the meeting. The representatives of Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Panchayati Raj made their presentation on the subject ‘Capacity Building of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)’. The main issues that came up for discussions include, need for transparency 
in functioning of Panchayats in terms of work done and utilization of funds under the supervision of Planning 
Commission, need for adequate funds for differen t components of capacity building of PRIs like infrastructure, e -
governance, training etc., need for greater devolution of powers to Panchayats for making for capacity building of 
PRIs. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
***Note: Not related with subject matter of the Report 

98 
 
APPENDIX VII 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, THE 9 JANUARY, 2013 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1710 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘C’, Ground Floor,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
             Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
 
2. Shri Thango Baite 
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
5. Shri Premchand Guddu 
6. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
7. Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
8. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
9. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
10. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
11. Smt. Annu Tandon 
12. Smt Usha Verma 
13. Shri P. Viswanathan 
 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
16. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
17. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
18. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Veena Sharma   - Director 
3. Smt. A.K. Shah   - Additional Director 
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
1. Smt. L.M. Vas - Secretary 
2. Shri Hrusikesh Panda - Addl. Secretary 
3. Shri A.K. Angurana - Addl. Secretary 
4. Shri Sushil Kumar - Joint Secretary 
5. Smt. Rashmi Shukla - Joint Secretary 
6. Smt. Neerja Sekhar - Joint Secretary 
7. Shri Mahabir Pershad - Director 
8. Shri Dilip Kumar - Director (Finance) 

99 
 
 
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the members and wished them a happy and prosperous New 
Year. Thereafter, the Chairperson apprised them that the sitting has been convened to take the evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in connection with examination of the subject ‘Capacity Building 
of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the country’. 
 
[witnesses were then called in] 
 
 
3. The Chairperson welcomed  the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to the sitting of the 
Committee and read out Direction 55(1) of the ‘Direction by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality  of the 
proceedings. The major issues that came up for discussions include constraints of infrastructure, manpower, 
training etc. coming in the way of the capacity building of over twenty -nine lakh elected representatives across the 
country on account of d iscretionary nature of Constitutional provisions assigned to States, ‘Panchayat’ being a 
State subject, low utilization of funds for Capacity Building Component under Backward Region Grant Fund 
(BRGF), need for verification of work done by regular visits o f officials of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj with 
respect to funds utilized under different Schemes of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for capacity building of the 
Panchayati, need for appropriate training of elected representatives and functionaries of the Panchayats in view of 
low level of literacy in rural areas, need for timely transfer of funds from the  Centre to States for onward 
transmission to the Panchayats etc. The Committee also sought clarifications which were responded to by the 
witnesses. The Committee also desired that written replies to the points for which the information was not readily 
available be sent to the Committee expeditiously.  
 
 
[The representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj then withdrew] 
 
 
4. A Verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

100 
 
APPENDIX VIII 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013) 
 
THE MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD  
ON WEDNESDAY, THE 24 JULY, 2013 
 
 The Committee sat from 11 00 hrs. to 1235 hrs. in Committee Room '074', Parliament Library Building, 
New Delhi. 
             Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Shri Premchand Guddu 
4. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
5. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
6. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
7. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
8. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy 
9. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
10. Smt. Annu Tandon 
11. Smt. Usha Verma 
12. Shri P. Viswanathan 
13. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
16. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
17. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
18. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
19. Shri Mohan Singh 
20. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah   - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj  
 
1. Smt. L.M. Vas -  Secretary 
2. Dr. Avtar Singh Sahota -  Senior Economic Adviser 
3. Shri Sushil Kumar -  Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Maha Bir Pershad -  Director 
    

101 
 
 
2. *  *  * 
 
3.  *  *  * 
4. *  *  * 
5.  Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft Reports:  
 
*  *  * 
 
(i) Draft Report on 'Capacity Building of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
 
6. After discussing the Draft Reports the Committee adopted both the Draft Reports.  
7. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Draft Report s after taking into account 
consideration consequential changes arising out of factual verification, if any, by the concerned Ministries and to 
present the same to both Houses of Parliament in ensuing session. 
 
  *  *  * 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** Note: Matters not related with the subject matter of the Draft Report. 