STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                         (2011-2012) 
      
 
        FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
   
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources) 
for the year 2011-12] 
 
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
25
7 


TWENTY-FIFTH  REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2011-2012) 
 (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources) 
for the year 2011-12] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.03.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.03.2012 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 
CRD No.  27 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in  Lok Sabha ( Thirteenth 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-2012)   ......................................   (ii)   
 
INTRODUCTION      …....................................   (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report   ..........................................................................  1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................................... 14    
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s 
replies………….............................................................................   26 
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee ............................................................................   27 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ......................................   29   
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
 
I. Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Strengthening of Revenue Administration 
and Updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR)……………………………………………………………30 
 
II. Financial Progress (Release of Funds & Utilization reported) under the NLRMP 
2008-09, 2009-10 and 2011-12 (31.12.2011)……………………………………………………………31 
 
III. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 22 February, 2012……………………..32   
 
  IV.  Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
       Twenty-first Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development................. 33  
  

(ii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012) 
 
        Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
4. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
5. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
6. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
7. Shri P. Kumar 
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
10. Shri Rakesh Pandey 
11. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
12. Shri P.L. Punia 
13. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
14. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
15. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray*** 
16. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
17. Smt. Supriya Sule 
18. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar 
20. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
21. Smt.  Vijaya Shanthi M** 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
23. Shri Ganga Charan 
24. Shri Hussain Dalwai 
25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
26. Dr. Ram Prakash 
27. Shri P. Rajeeve* 
28. Shri Mohan Singh 
29. Smt. Maya Singh 
30. Miss Anusuiya Uikey 
31. Vacant**** 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Raju Srivastava  - Deputy Secretary 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 02.11.2011 vice Shri P.R. Rajan. 
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 25.11.2011. 
*** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 03.01.2012 vice Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu. 
****   Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan retired on 15.02. 2012. 
 
 
 

(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (20 11-2012) having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the 25th Report on the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 21st  Report of the Standing Committee 
on Rural Development ( 15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (20 11-12) of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Land Resources).  
2.  The 21st Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabhya on 26 August, 2011. Replies of 
the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 17 January, 2012. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 22 February, 
2012. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 21st 
Report of the Committee is given in Appendix-IV. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
21 March, 2012                                                    Chairperson, 
1   Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
  

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
  
 
This Report of the  Standing Committee on Rural Development (2011 -12) deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty-
First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Land Resources) for the year 2011-2012. 
 
2. The Twenty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 26 August, 2011 and was laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 17 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of  all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report 
have been received from the Government. These have been examined and categorised as follows: - 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 
Total:14 
Chapter-II 
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the Government: 
Nil  
Total:00 
 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Serial Nos. 6 and 17 
Total:02 
Chapter-IV  
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial No. 16 
Total:01 
Chapter-V 

4. The Committee desire that final reply in respect of Recommendation at Serial No. 16 for which only 
interim reply has been submitted by the Government and Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report may be furnished to the Committee 
within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of the ir 
Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. INTEGRATED WASTELANDS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (IWDP)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4) 
 
6.  The Committee noted that IWDP had  been under implementation since 198 9-90 and was 
transferred to the Department of Land Resources alongwith National Wasteland Development Board in July 
1992. From 1 April 1995, the Scheme was  being implemented on a watershed basis in accordance with the 
guidelines for watershed development. The Committee were informed that  the projects under the 
programme were  sanctioned in the Blocks not covered by Desert Development Programme (DDP) and 
Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP). During the period from 1995 -96 to 2006-07, 1877 projects were 
sanctioned under the Scheme. The Committee were also informed by the Department that during the period 
from 2007 to 2010, no new projects were sanctioned. Of the 1877 sanctioned projects, only 748 have been 
completed so far and 85 projects have been closed.  
 
The Committee found  that upto 31.12.2010 Rs. 4141.14 crore were released by the 
Government for the programme. Prior to 31.03.2000, projects under the programme were 
sanctioned at the cost norm of Rs 4000 per hectare funded entirely by the Central Government. 
The cost norm for the projects sanctioned after 1.4.2000 had been revised to Rs. 6000 per hectare. 
The funding of the projects was  shared between the Centre and the States in the ratio of Rs. 5500 
and Rs. 500 per hectare respectively. However, the projects sanctioned prio r to 1.4.2000 continue 
to be funded entirely by the Central Government at the cos t norm of Rs. 4000 per hectare. The 
Committee desired to know  as to why the cost of the projects which were sanctioned prior to 
1.4.2000 and not completed till date had  not been revised. The Committee were  of the view that 
not increasing the cost of the earlier projects will make them unviable . The Committee accordingly 
recommended the Government to revise the cost of the earlier projects (san ctioned prior to 
1.04.2000).   
 
 

   7. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“As per the policy decision taken by the Department, no central assistance is being released in any 
pre-Hariyali project (sanctioned from 1995 -96 to 2002 -03) after 31.03.2011 (except  for those 
projects in snow covered areas where a grace period of three years beyond the cut -off date has 
been allowed). 
Since there is no ongoing project sanctioned prior to 01.04.2000 in the snow covered 
areas of Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu & Kashmir, the requirement of increasing the 
rates does not arise.” 
8. While appreciating the fact that there is no ongoing project (sanctioned prior to 01.04.2000) 
under the Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP) in snow covered areas of 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu & Kashmir, the Committee feel that the Department 
have not paid much heed to their recommendation of revising the per hectare cost norm of earlier 
projects (sanctioned prior to 01.04.2000) in other parts of the country so that the remaining 1044 
ongoing projects sanctioned from 1995-96 to 2006-07 do not become unviable and eventually closed 
as ‘non -performing projects’. The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to accord utmost 
importance to the issue of completion of  remaining 1044 ongoing projects by adopting stringent 
monitoring mechanism in coordination with the States in every possible manner and persuade them 
to accomplish the task in a fixed timeframe. 
B. DROUGHT PRONE AREAS PROGRAMME (DPAP) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6) 
 
9. In order to address the specific problems  of drought prone areas, DPAP was  being implemented 
on wat ershed basis from 1995 onwards. The Committee found  from the information provided by the 
Department that out of 74.5913 million hectare that had  been identified under the DPAP programme, the 
project area was limited only to 13.7195 million hectare which comprised of 27439 projects. The Committee 
were astonished t o find that no new projects had  been sanctioned under this pro gramme from 2007 -08 
onwards. Out of 27439 sancti oned projects, 6859 projects were  still ongoing and the Department propose d 
to complete these projects by 2012. The Committee were further concerned to find that there were as many 
1008 projects sanctioned during 2003-04 which were still ongoing i.e. even after seven years of sanction.  
The Drought prone areas were  amongst the most backward areas of the country and of 
the total identified area as drought prone in 16 States, the project are a was only 13.7195 mi llion 
hectare i.e. 18.39 percent of the total droug ht prone area. The Committee were  perturbed to note 
that after 16 long years of operation, the proposed coverage of the projects was only 18.39 percent 

of the total drought prone area. The Department had informed that under the revised programme of 
IWMP, priority will be given to identified areas. Though it was too early to comment on the progress 
of the new programme, the Committee recommend ed the Department to complete the ongoing 
projects of the existi ng programme on priority basis. The Committee also desire d that the concept 
of accountability and fixing responsibility should be in built in project planning and implementation 
process.”  
 
10. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“So far 16,323 DPAP projects covering an area of 8.16 m.ha. have been completed. The 
recommendation of Hon‟ble Standing Committee regarding close monitoring including regular visits 
by the project implementing authorities at the project  sites is being followed through State 
Governments. The Department is also closely monitoring the implementation of the programme 
through Hon‟ble Minister for Rural Development‟s progress review with States, Steering Committee 
meetings, Regional Review meetings, SLNA meetings held at State level and Department officials 
visit to States. The States have been advised to complete all on -going DPAP projects as per the 
timelines set by the Department i.e. December, 2012. 
Unlike pre-IWMP projects, under IWMP Guidelines, there is an inbuilt mechanism of evaluating the 
projects by independent agencies after completion of each phase of activities of the projects i.e. 
preparatory phase, works phase and consolidation phase.  The next installment of central fund is 
released on receipt of evaluation report and action taken on the recommendations of the evaluating 
agency.”  
 
11. During the course of examination by the C ommittee, it came out that out of 74.59 million 
hectare of identified area, the project area was limited only to 13.71 million hectare which comprised 
of 27,439 projects. The Committee also noticed that out of 27,439 projects, 6859 projects were still 
ongoing out of which 1008 projects were as old as seven years. Keeping in view the tardy progress 
in completion of DPAP projects, the Committee had recommended that close monitoring including 
regular visits by the project implementing authorities at the project sites should be adopted by the 
Department. From the Government’s reply, it is observed that so far 16,3 23 projects covering an 
area of 8.16 million hectare have been completed. Besides, close monitoring including regular visits 
by the project implementing authorities at the project sites, the States have been advised to 
complete all on-going DPAP projects as per the timelines set by the Department i.e. December, 2012. 
The Committee are not at all satisfied with the progress as out of 27,439 sanctioned projects 
covering an area of 13.71 million hectare, so far 16,323 projects covering an area of 8.16 million 
hectare, which in percentage terms come to around 59 %, have been completed. The coverage 

scenario becomes all the more gloomy, when the completed project area of 13.71 million hectare is 
compared with the total identified drought prone area of 74.59 milli on hectare which is a meagre 
18% of the total drought prone area of the country. Keeping in view the half -hearted and regressive 
progress made by the Department, the Committee are apprehensive that the Department would be 
able to complete all on -going DPAP projects by December, 2012. The Committee, therefore, desire 
the Department to accord utmost importance to the issue by initiating a sincere, innovative and time 
bound delivery mechanism involving all stake holders. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
C. NATIONAL LAND RECORDS MODERNISATION PROGRAMME (NLRMP) 
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 10,11,12 and 13, Para Nos. 2.10, 2.11,2.12 and 2.13) 
 
12. The Committee noted that with the objective of removing inherent flaws in the existing land 
records system and bringing efficiency, transparency and easy accessibility to the system of Land 
Records, the centrally sponsored scheme on Computerization of Land Records (CLR) was 
launched in 1988-89. Initially, the pilot-projects were initiated in 8 Districts of 8 States. The Scheme 
was subsequently extended to rest of the country. Upto 2007 -08, 583 Districts in the country were 
covered under the programme.  
The Committee had  been informed that since inception  of the scheme, the Ministry had  
released Rs. 586.60 crore till 31.3.2008 for the programme out of this, utilization of funds by the 
States is Rs. 431.35 crore which is approximately 74 percent of the total funds released . Funds 
were also provided for setting up Data Centers. So  far, Computer Data Centres had been set up in 
4434 Tehsils/Talukas, 1045 sub -Division and 392 Districts of  the country. The Committee found 
that the performance of th e programme had been abysmally low. The Committee were  of the view 
that although land is a State subject and switch over from manual system to a c omputerized 
environment required different kinds of activities involving establishment of hardware, creation of 
appropriate software, digitiz ation of maps, data entry/re -entry, capacity building, etc. twenty years 
is too long a time to achieve the d esired goals. The Committee had  been informed that the 
programme had  been merged with NLRMP from 2008 -09 onwards. The  Committee felt  that 
merging/renaming/ reframing the programme would not s erve the purpose unless there was  a 
strong will from the Govern ment, which, in this area, seemed  lacking. Regular monitoring, audit 
and capacity building exercise should be done with more vigour and renewed approa ch to achieve 
full computerization of land records across the country. Besides, corrective action with regard to 

the implementation of the programme should be taken urgently so as to achieve the objective of 
computerization of land records in all the States/UTs within the stipulated time frame.  
 
13. With the objective of helping the States in updating and maintenance of land records, 
strengthening and modernizing revenue machinery, carrying out survey and settlement operations 
and strengthening training infrastructure, SRA & ULR was initiated in 1987 -88. Funding under the 
scheme was shared between Centre and State in the ratio of 50:50. The Union Territories were 
provided full central assistance under the programme. Upto 31.3.2008, funds to tune of Rs. 47 5.36 
crore were released to th e States/UTs. The Committee found  that with the expendit ure of Rs. 
349.30 crore which was  about 73 percent of the to tal releases, the Department had  been able to 
construct 1366 record rooms, 4311 office -cum-residence of Patwar i/Talathi, 412 Tehsil Kacharies 
and 64 Training Ins titutes. The Committee also found that there were  19 State s/UTs where no 
record rooms had  been constructed. Similarly, in 20 States/UTs no office -cum-residence of 
Patwari/Talathi had been constructed, in 2 9 States/UTs no tehsil kacheries had been constructed 
and there were  14 States/UTs w here no training institutes had  been 
constructed/renovated/upgraded. It goes beyond saying that the performance of the programme 
had not been up to the mark. Infrastructure  development and capacity building were  very critical in 
the success of this  programme and these aspects were  lagging far behind. The Committee 
recommended the Government to take corrective action and strengthen the infrastructure in a time 
bound manner. 
  
 
14. The two schemes of computerization of Land records and updating of Land Records & 
Strengthening of revenue administration were merged into a single scheme of NLRMP in 2008 -09. 
The Committee were informed that in the previous run programmes of CLR and  SRA & ULR, the 
choice of activities were left to the States and UTs most of them opted for activities that 
strengthened revenue administration but not necessarily helped in updation of Land Records. The 
Committee were also informed that this 'hamper-of-activities' approach led to eddying, each activity 
was goal in itself rather than a step in systematic ladder like approach towards achieving updated 
Land Records. The Committee were also given to understand that the way the Schemes were 
framed, the exit mod es were not defined, nor were technology options for survey firmed up. The 
system of monitoring was not emphatically spelt out and both the schemes of CLR and SRA & ULR 
excluded inter -connectivity. The Committee fail to understand as to why it took the Dep artment 
nearly 20 years to reach to these conclusions in the aforesaid t wo programmes. The Committee 

were of the view that these problems should have been identified long back by the Department and 
corrective steps would have been taken.  
 
 
The Committee w ere informed that for Capacity Building the Department propose d to 
setup a National institute of Land A dministration (NILAM), but it was  still in the process of getting 
sanction from the Planning Com mission. The Committee also found  that upto 31.3.2011, th e 
Department had set up 15 NLRMP cells in different States of the country and according to their 
assessment, each State and UT needed  at least one such cell. The Committee were  of the view 
that Capacity Building was  an integral and vital part of NLRMP and therefore, urge d the 
Department to take the issue of training and capacity building more seriously and expedite the 
process of consultation with the Planning Commission to get the sanction for NILAM without further 
loss of time.  
 
15. The Committee were informed by the Department that under NLRMP from 2008-09 to 2010-11, Rs. 
538.18 crore had  been released for the programme but the utilizati on reported by the States/UTs was 
merely Rs. 22.34 crore which was  just 4.1 percent of the total amount released.  The Committee urged the 
Government to work in coordination with States so as to achieve the ultimate goal of NLRMP.    
 
16. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“All the States and UTs except A&N Islands have implemented the CLR s cheme, which 
has yielded good results, but not consistently across the country.  The CLR has been merged with 
another scheme of this Department, i.e., Strengthening Revenue Administration and Updation of 
Land Records (SRA &ULR) and a new and enhanced schem e in the form of the National Land 
Records Modernization Programme (NLRMP) was launched in the year 2008 -09. It includes the 
new components of Computerization of Registration and interconnectivity between revenue offices 
and between registration and revenu e offices, so that we can have real time, up -to-date records. 
So far 243 districts have been covered under the NLRMP. All the districts are proposed to be 
covered by the end of the 12 th Plan. The capacity building is an important component of the 
NLRMP. NLRMP Cells are being established at Administrative Training Institutes/ Survey Training 
Institutes/ Patwar Training Schools in the States/UTs where comprehensive training on various 
components of the NLRMP will be given. NIC has prepared an MIS for online m onitoring of the 
NLRMP. States/UTs are being requested to keep this MIS up -to-date. Interim and final evaluation 
is also an integral part of the NLRMP. Further corrective action will be taken from time to time 

based on feedback. The Core Technical Advisory  Group (CTAG) has also made important 
recommendation improving the scheme including the following: 
 
(a) NLRMP should be implemented at State level by a State Level Society, also to be known 
as Project Management Unit (PMU). The PMU will further allocate funds to the District 
level on the basis of project prepared by the District Collectorate for activities t o be taken 
up under NLRMP in the District.  
(b) District-level projects will be prepared after a baseline survey of status of computerization 
and requirements to provide a stated level of service, so as to provide adequate flexibility 
to meet hardware connectivity and other resource requirements. 
(c) Training institution building and capacity enhancement at local level would be a key 
component.  
(d) The State PMU would be responsible for coordinating the preparation and implementation 
of the district-level projects.  
(e) The State PMU would also be funded additionally for training, institution building, software 
development, capacity enhancement at State-level.  
(f) The approach would be a demand -driven close ended project to incentivize States who 
show commitment to implement the project quickly and effectively. Concurrent and final 
evaluation would be embedded in the project.  
(g) The project funding would be linked to sector reform with respect to systems, processes, 
human resource commitment etc. A separate portal would track th e progress of key 
parameters and updating of the data would be a key prerequisite to continued funding. 
(h) The project should be treated as a Central Flagship project and linked to the ultimate 
objectives of Conclusive Titling. Processed spatial and non spati al data required for use by 
stakeholders at Central level (including Agriculture, Urban Development, Coal, Mines, 
Roads and Railway Ministries, Planning commission, etc.) needed to be specified as 
outputs to be made available by States as per a standard me ta data nomenclature, 
through appropriate Central portal architecture. 
(i) At Central level, an institution needs to be created under DoLR which can set standards for 
Land Administration including citizen services and data provision to stakeholder. This 
institution can also advise State PMUs on various issues relating to data management 
(including spatial data) survey technologies (including satellite data), training and HR 
development etc. The institution could also facilitate creation of roadmap for Conclusiv e 

Titling and for development of mechanism for coordinated land use planning keeping in 
view needs of industry, urbanization, infrastructure, agriculture, forestry, etc.” 
The matter is under consideration. 
 
The SRA & ULR scheme was a demand driven scheme. Funds under this were released as per 
the proposals of the States/UTs.  The SRA & ULR has been merged with another scheme of this 
Department, i.e., CLR and a new and enhanced scheme in the form of the National Land Records 
Modernization Programme (NLRMP) was launched in the year 2008 -09. It includes the new components of 
Computerization of Registration and interconnectivity between revenue offices and between registration and 
revenue offices, so that we can have real time, up -to-date records. The capacity bu ilding is an important 
component of the NLRMP. NLRMP Cells are being established at Administrative Training Institutes/ Survey 
Training Institutes/ Patwar Training Schools in the States/UTs where comprehensive training on various 
components of the NLRMP wi ll be given. However, the CTAG has recently made important 
recommendations.   
EFC for the NILAM has been prepared and circulated to the concerned Ministries/ Departments for 
suggestions/ comments. The suggestions/ comments have been received on this EFC. N ow a meeting of 
the EFC is proposed to consider this proposal. Capacity building is an integral part of the NLRMP and the 
Department is giving adequate focus on this aspect. So far funds have been sanctioned for the 
establishment of the 26 NLRMP Cells in 2 1 States/UTs. MIS has been made online for effective monitoring 
of the NLRMP. Exit mode has also been well defined in the Guidelines of the NLRMP. Change from the age 
old method of the manual system of land records management is an ambitious project and th e technology 
has also undergone a sea change in recent years. Accordingly the NLRMP was launched in the year 2008 -
09 incorporating the lessons  learnt   from  the   earlier   schemes of the CLR and SRA & ULR and the 
technology developments in the related f ields. Based on a review of progress of NLRMP, the CTAG has 
made a number of recommendations for improving the scheme, including the mandate for the proposed 
NILAM, and the matter is under consideration. 
So far funds to the tune of Rs. 48.54 crores have be en utilized under the NLRMP. The Department 
is actively engaged with the States/UTs to usher in this modern system of land records management. The 
vital issue of the capacity building is being addressed with the establishment of the NLRMP Cells. So far 
funds have been sanctioned for the establishment of the 26 NLRMP Cells in 21 States/UTs. Dedicated 
Project Management Units (PMUs) are also being established in the States/UTs so that the efforts of 
various Departments handling different components of the lan d records, e.g. Registration, Revenue, 
Consolidation, and Survey etc. could be coordinated effectively.” 

17. While observing sluggish pace of implementation of the centrally sponsored scheme on 
Computerization of Land Records (CLR) which was merged with another scheme i.e., Strengthening 
Revenue Administration and Updation of Land Records (SRA & ULR) and thereaft er again 
amalgamated with a new scheme in the form of National Land Records Modernization Programme 
(NLRMP), the Committee had recommended the Department to take up the issue of training and 
capacity building more seriously and strengthen the infrastructur e in a time bound manner by 
expeditious setting up of the National Institute of Land Administration (NILAM). Notwithstanding the 
fact that land is a State subject, the Committee also recommended the Government to work with the 
States with better coordinati on so as to achieve the objective of computerization of land records in 
all the States/ UTs in a specified time frame. The Department have, however, informed that so far, 
243 Districts have been covered under NLRMP. The Core Technical Advisory Group (CTAG) has also 
made important recommendation s for improving the scheme. Since capacity building is an 
important component of the scheme, NLRMP cells are being established at Administrative Training 
Institutes/ Survey Training Institutes/ Patwar Training School in the States/ UTs where 
comprehensive training on various components of NLRMP will be given. The Department have also 
informed that EFC for the NILAM has been prepared and circulated to the concerned Ministries/ 
Departments for suggestions/ comments. The Committee are dismayed to note that the scheme of 
Computerization of Land Records (CLR) was initially launched in 1988-89 and since then the scheme 
has been continuously merged/ renamed/ reframed and now rechristened as National Land Records 
Modernization Programme (NLRMP) in 2008 -09. Even after the introduction of composite NLRMP, 
the objective of achieving universal computerization of land records, strengthening of revenue 
administration and updation of land records is still a distant dream. The situation  becomes more 
precarious in view of the fact that the recommendations made by Core Technical Advisory Gro up 
(CTAG) on capacity building are  still under consideration of the Government. The Committee, 
therefore, would like to reiterate that the Department s hould take all necessary steps to ensure that 
the requisite wherewithal's for this ambitious programme, be it the implementation of the 
recommendations of CTAG, es tablishment of NILAM or Dedicated Project Management Units 
(PMUs), are readily available fo r achieving the desired results. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.    
  

D. CONVERGENCE OF WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT WITH MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.17) 
18. It emerged during the discussion with the representatives of the Department of Land 
Resources that Watershed development activities of the Department could  be merged with the 
MGNREGA activities of the Department of Rural Development. During the evidence, t he Secretary 
agreed with the views expressed by the Committee and i nformed that the Department had  made it 
compulsory for every State Government to converse watershed development works with the 
MGNREGA works and guidelines had  also been prepared for the co nvergence. The Committee 
were also given to understa nd that where good governance was  prevailing in th e implementation, 
convergence was  taking place on the field level. It also came out during the evidence that very 
often the structures for watershed devel opment in the field do not  conform to the contours and 
were made without any consideration of technical parameters. In several watersheds, such 
structures had been washed away or have broken down, as observance of tech nical & engineering 
aspects had not been up to the mark . In some cases, structures had  been washed away after just 
a few inches of rainfall.  
 
The Committee were  of the view that merely formulating the guidelines does not relieve 
the Department of its responsibility. It was also the bounden duty of the Department to see that the 
guidelines were implemented in letter and spirit at the ground level so that  the convergence on the 
field was achieved. The Committee were  also of the view that water conservation should be the 
focal point of attention under the watershed development programmes. Water conservation should 
be done at all places. If wate r conservation and management was  not done even in high rainfall 
areas, there was likelihood of water scarcity for agriculture as well as for drinking purpo ses in lean 
seasons. The Committee recommend ed the Government to look into the above issues seriously 
and initiate corrective steps.   
 
19. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“Water conservation is one of  the main activities under taken in the watershed programmes of the 
Department of Land Resources. As recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee, continuous focus on 
this vital aspect is being given in all watershed projects implemented by the Department. 
Regarding convergence, department is emphasizing the States for having convergence 
with related schemes right from planning stage itself and that Detailed Project Report (DPR) should 
clearly spell  out activities to be undertaken with IWMP fund & activities planne d for taking up with 
convergence.” 

20. The Committee note that water conservation is one of the main activities undertaken in the 
watershed programmes of the Department. Besides, the Department are emphasizing the States for 
having convergence with related  schemes right from the planning stage itself. The Committee are 
astonished at the fact that till date, nothing tangible has come out either in relation to water 
conservation or convergence of watershed development works with related schemes especially the  
MGNREGA. Moreover, the Committee have not been given any information on the ground work 
initiated or proposed to be undertaken for ensuring the construction of watershed structures on the 
basis of established technical parameters that can withstand the cl imatic conditions and/or 
unscheduled wear and tear. Keeping in view the urgent requirement of convergence and water 
conservation in the watershed development programmes, concrete and result -oriented efforts 
should be made by the Department under intimation to the Committee.     
*** 
 
 
  

Chapter II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1 & 2, Para No. 2.1 & 2.2) 
The Committee take note that the Rule 331 G of the Rules Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha relating to examination of Demands for Grants by the Departmentally Related Standing 
Committees (DRSCs) was suspended by the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha due to rescheduling of the 
Financial Business in Lok Sabha to pass the Demands for Grants for the year 2011 -12 during the Seventh 
Session of Fifteenth Lok Sabha without being referred to the DRSCs concerned. However, the Committee 
have examined the Demands  for Grants and made report thereon. Since the Budget for the year 2011 -12 
has already been passed by the Parliament, the Committee endorse the same. Nevertheless, the 
Committee feel that the suggestions and recommendations of the Committee would help the Department of 
Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development in analyzing their performance and implementation of 
various Schemes/Projects during the current year, which happens to be the terminal year of the 11th Plan 
period. The Observations/Recommendations of the Committee are given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  
The Department of Land Resources act as a nodal agency for Land Resource Management. The 
Demand for Grants (2011 -12) of the Department with a plan component of Rs. 2700 crore and non -plan 
component of Rs. 6.20 crore was laid on the table of Lok Sabha on 11.3.2011. The outlay for the year 
2011-12 is Rs. 40 crore higher than that of the previous year. The Committee find from the information 
provided by the Department that during the financial year 2010-2011, there was 28 percent increase in the 
allocation of funds under IWMP, whereas, during this year, the increase is only 3 percent. Inspite of the 
Committee's recommendations made in their Second and Seventh Reports (15th Lok Sabha) the need for 
higher allocation for National Land Records Modernisation Programme (NLRMP), the funds for NCLRMP 
have actually been reduced by 25 percent for the year 2011 -12. Similarly, funds for other Schemes 
including Rehabilitation & Resettlement Policy have been reduce d by 50 percent. The Committee take 
strong exception to reduction in funds allocation for these vital schemes inspite of their repeated 
recommendations for enhancing the allocation. The Committee recommend that the work programmes for 
these schemes should be revised vis -à-vis availability of funds and necessary funds may be sought 
wherever necessary.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In so far as NLRMP is concerned, up -to 31 st December, 2011, 39 districts have been covered 
against the target of 40 districts. More districts are proposed to be covered in the remaining period of the 
financial year. So, no extra funds are required for achieving the physical targets this year.  
 
 In case of Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy Rs. 0.50 lacs has been kept as the budget 
provision. As the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2011 is still being considered by 
the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural Development, no extra funds are required on this account. 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 

Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3) 
    The Committee's examination has revealed that the unspent funds under various schemes with 
the States were over Rs. 3000 crore at the end of December 2010. The Committee have been informed by 
the Department that under Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPA P), Desert Development Programme 
(DDP) and Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP), funds are released in the individual 
project accounts and the next installment is released when more than 50 percent of the funds have been 
utilized which is one  of the reasons for huge unspent balances under these programmes. The Committee 
are of the view that regular audit and monitoring of the projects through monthly progress reports instead of 
present system of quarterly progress reports and releasing the fun ds to the Panchayats for utilizing the 
same for watershed development will not only empower the people at the grass root level but will also help 
in minimizing the unspent balances. The Committee would also like the Department to review the project 
Planning/Monitoring system of various bodies and organizations under its administrative control and 
ensuring better co-ordination with State Governments with a view to improving the utilization of funds so as 
to ensure that funds are utilized evenly during the ye ar. This would ensure proper utilization of funds and 
also help in achieving the physical targets set for various Schemes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Based on the experience of implementation of DPAP, DDP &  IWDP fund release system has been 
changed under Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP). Accordingly, central funds are 
now released in lump sum  to SLNAs and SLNAs are releasing funds to projects for their effective 
implementation.  
Unlike pre -IWMP projects (DPAP,DDP & IWDP), under IWMP the central funds towards 2 nd 
installment comprising of 50% of the project cost are being released on 60% expenditure of 1 st installment 
funds and submission of utilization certificate etc., and 3 rd installment of 30% project cost will be released 
on 75% expenditure of the total funds released and submission of utilization certificate etc. 
Further 1% of project funds have been earmarked for Planning & Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
preparation and 1% of project cost for monitoring purpose under IWMP for effective planning and 
monitoring. An online MIS has been made operational and data entry is under progress. This will enable to 
get real-time data about physical & financial progress of projects at all levels. 
Under I WMP, funds are released to Watershed Committee‟s (WCs) which is either a sub -
Committee of Gram Panchayat or a Committee constituted by Gram Sabha including members from SHGs, 
UGs SC/ST, landless and Women. WCs are implementing project activities at field l evel with the technical 
support & supervision of Project Implementing Agency (PIA). 
The above measures are expected to help in real time monitoring of progress, flexibility to utilize 
funds by SLNA in more efficient manner by minimizing unspent balances wi th the projects at a given point 
of time.  
Further, the issue of unspent balances has been taken up with State Government‟s in various fora 
like Hon‟ble Minister for Rural Development‟s progress review with States, Steering Committee meetings, 
Regional Review meetings, SLNA meetings held at State level and Department officials visit to States. The 
States are advised to expedite implementation of projects and minimize unspent balances. 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 

Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4) 
IWDP has been under implementation since 1989 -90 and was transferred to the Department of 
Land Resources alongwith National Wasteland Development Board in July 1992. From  1 April 1995, the 
Scheme is being implemented on a watershed basis in accordance with the guidelines for watershed 
development. Presently, IWDP is being implemented in 470 Districts in 28 States. The projects under the 
programme are sanctioned in the Bloc ks not covered by Desert Development Programme (DDP) and 
Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP). During the period from 1995 -96 to 2006-07, 1877 projects were 
sanctioned under the Scheme. The Committee were also informed by the Department that during the 
period from 2007 to 2010, no new projects were sanctioned. Of the 1877 sanctioned projects, only 748 
have been completed so far and 85 projects have been closed.  
The Committee have been informed that upto 31.12.2010 Rs. 4141.14 crore were released by the 
Government for the programme. Prior to 31.03.2000, projects under the programme were sanctioned at the 
cost norm of Rs 4000 per hectare funded entirely by the Cent ral Government. The cost norm for the 
projects sanctioned after 1.4.2000 has been revised to Rs. 6000 per hectare. The funding of the projects is 
shared between the Centre and the States in the ratio of Rs. 5500 and Rs. 500 per hectare respectively. 
However, the projects sanctioned prior to 1.4.2000 continue to be funded entirely by the Central 
Government at the cost norm of Rs. 4000 per hectare. The Committee appreciate the upward revision in 
the cost per hectare for IWDP. However, the Committee fail to understand as to why the cost of the projects 
which were sanctioned prior to 1.4.2000 and not completed till date has not been revised. The Committee 
are of the view that not increasing the cost of the earlier projects will make them unviable. The Committee,  
therefore, urge the Government to revise the cost of the earlier projects (sanctioned prior to 1.04.2000) also 
so that the objectives of the projects for which it was conceived are achieved in real sense.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the policy decision taken by the Department, no central assistance is being released in any 
pre-Hariyali project (sanctioned from 1995 -96 to 2002 -03) after 31.03.2011 (except for those projects in 
snow covered areas where a grace period of three years beyond the cut-off date has been allowed). 
Since there is no ongoing project sanctioned prior to 01.04.2000 in the snow covered areas of 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu & Kashmir, the requirement of increasing the rates does not 
arise. 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.5) 
   The Committee note that an impact ass essment study carried out by the National Institute of 
Rural Development (NIRD) in 12 ecologically and economically disadvantaged Districts of 9 States on 837 
watershed projects sanctioned during the period from 1.04.1998 to 31.03.2002 has rated 700 of the m as 
'average' and the remaining 137 as 'poor'. None of the projects had 'above average' performance. The 
study was based on 26 parameters inter-alia change in land use pattern, increase in cropping intensity, 
ground water increase, run off reduction, soil  erosion reduction, surface water increase, decrease in waste 
lands, improvement in vegetative cover, increase in man days, increase in crop yield, etc. The study also 
revealed that there was an enhancement in cropping intensity by 24 percent, range being 2 percent to 50 
percent due to implementation of IWDP and this resulted in enhancement of yields of cereals by 49 percent 
and cash crops by 28 percent. As regards to increase in income of rural households, the study observed 
that man days increased by 43 p er annum per head, ranging from 25 to 68 days, because of better 
production systems due to implementation of IWDP.  
In the context of NIRD study, the Department informed the Committee that the projects on which 
the study was carried out were old i.e. sanct ioned between 1.4.1998 to 31.3.2002 and according to the 
Parthasarthy Committee Report (2005), these projects were suffering from some bottlenecks which have 
been addressed while formulating the common guideline of IWMP. The Committee feel that the Department 
should not take solace in proclaiming that the projects were old and suffering from some bottlenecks. The 
Committee are of the strong opinion that the Department should have acted swiftly and have wedged the 
gaps in implementation/execution of the proj ects long before the constitution of the Parthasarthy 
Committee. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to be pro -active in 
formulation/planning/implementation of the projects. Considering the fact that the earlier study related to 
projects complete d prior to March, 2002, the Committee would like the Government to appoint another 
Expert Committee to assess the impact of implementation of projects during the last five years.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Standing Committee of Rural Development in its 2nd Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) 
of the Department of Land Resources has inter -alia recommended that the Department of Land Resources 
should undertake a comprehensive study to ascertain the impact of watershed development activities on 
areas like agriculture, employment, increase in ground water recharge etc.  Accordingly,   National Institute   
of   Rural   Development (NIRD),  Hyderabad  has  been requested in 2010 to undertake a Comprehensive 
Study of Impacts of Investments in 947 micro -Watershed Projects, sanctioned and completed between 
1.4.2002 to 31.03.2005, spread over 28 States.  The report of is awaited from NIRD. 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.7) 
      The Central funds released under DPAP programme from 1995 -96 to 2010-11 upto 31.12.2010 
is Rs. 3912.42 crore. The Committee observe that during 2010 -11, under the DPAP, Rs. 221.84 crore has 
been released to differ ent States. However, to the States of Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal, no funds 
were released during 2010 -2011. The Committee were informed that from 1.4.1999, the fund sharing 
pattern between the Centre and State has been changed from 50:50 to 75:25. Als o, with effect from 

1.4.2000 uniform cost norm at Rs. 6000 per hectare has been introduced, but the pre -revised norm in 
respect of projects sanctioned up to 1999-2000 is still continuing.  
 
Upto 31.3.2011, Rs. 340.45 crore was un -utilized funds with differ ent DPAP States. Explaining the 
reasons for unspent balances the Committee were informed by the Department that the next installment of 
funds for the project is released when the unspent balance is less then 50% of the funds and it does not 
lapse at the en d of the year but rolls over to the next year. The Department also informed the Committee 
that in order to check the unspent balances, the account of each project is audited every year and 
submission of audit report has been made mandatory for the release of next installment. The Committee 
would like the Department to utilize this mechanism for monitoring the progress of projects so as these are 
completed within approved cost and time frame.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee on auditing of accounts for each project is being 
followed and all efforts are being made to complete ongoing projects within approved cost & timelines fixed 
by the Department i.e. December 2012. 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 8) 
    The Desert Development Programme (DDP) was started in the year 1977 -78, both in the hot 
deserts in Rajasthan, Gujarat and Haryana and the cold d esert areas of Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal 
Pradesh. Later on, the coverage of the programme was extended to another six Districts of Karnataka and 
one District in Andhra Pradesh also. From 1995 -96 onwards, DDP is being implemented on a watershed 
basis in 235 Blocks of 40 Districts in 7 States of the country. The Committee find that out of the total 
indentified desert area of 45.7949 million hectare, the total project area is 7.873 million hectare only. The 
Department has informed that under the revised programme of IWMP, the 'identified DDP areas' have been 
given due priority while selecting the projects for implementation. Under the programme, 15746 watershed 
projects covering an area of 7.873 million hectare were sanctioned upto 2010 -11, out of these 8977  
projects have been completed/closed. The Committee are dismayed to note that out of the 8977 completed 
projects, only 2518 projects were completed in time and 6459 projects were completed beyond the 
scheduled time i.e. only 28 percent of the projects were  completed in time and a staggering 72 percent of 
the projects got delayed. The Committee expect the Department to give data relating to area covered under 
the completed projects for proper analysis. It appears that the Department did not pay any importanc e to 
the programme otherwise most of the projects would have been completed in time. The Committee also 
strongly recommend that Government should review and strengthen their monitoring mechanism so that 
projects are completed in time.  
 
The Committee have been informed that from 1.4.1999 onwards the total cost shared between the 
Centre and the State has been revised to 75:25 for all the projects. However, the projects sanctioned 
before 1.4.1999 continue to be funded on the old pattern i.e. 75:25 shared bet ween Centre and State for 
Hot Arid (Non Sandy) Areas and for hot Arid (Sandy) and cold areas, 100 percent Central assistance has 
been provided. The Committee have also been informed that the funds under the scheme are directly 
released to DRDAs/ZPs for implementation of the programme both by the Central and State Governments. 
The Committee also find it amazing that the funding pattern of projects which have been sanctioned prior to 

1.4.1999 have not been revised. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Depa rtment to revise the 
funding patterns of all sanctioned projects so that they do not suffer for want of funds.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
So far 11,489 DDP projects covering an area of 5.74 m.ha. have been completed. The Department 
is closely monitoring t he implementation of the programme through Hon‟ble Minister for Rural 
Development‟s progress review with States, Steering Committee meetings, Regional Review meetings, 
SLNA meetings held at State level and Department officials visit to States. The States a re advised to 
complete all on-going DDP projects as per the timelines set by the Department i.e. December, 2012 except 
the projects in snow bound areas of Himachal Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir, wherein a grace period of 3 
years beyond the cut of date has been allowed. 
 
In order to give emphasis on completion of ongoing projects under DDP, Department had not 
sanctioned any new projects w.e.f. 2007 -08 onwards. The department has reviewed the implementation of 
ongoing projects  and taken a conscious decision to  complete them by fixing time lines. As a result of the 
various initiatives of the department  on completion of the projects, a total of 8767 projects have been 
completed during 2007-08 to 2011-12 (as on 31.12.2011).   
 
 Regarding revision in the funding p attern, it is submitted that the projects sanctioned prior to 
1.4.1999 were at different stages of implementation; therefore, the revised funding pattern was not applied 
to these projects. However, at present, no DDP project sanctioned prior to 1.4.1999 is ongoing. 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.9) 
     IWMP was launched in 2009 -10 by merging the programmes of DPAP, DDP and IWDP. The se 
programmes were implemented on a watershed basis from the year 1995 -96 on the recommendations of 
Prof. Hanumantha Rao Committee (1994). In 2005, after careful appraisal of the programmes, Parthasarthy 
Committee found that the aforesaid programmes of DPA P, DDP & IWDP were implemented in a 
fragmented manner without well designed plans. The Department has also admitted that there were lack of 
dedicated institutions at various levels under the previously run programmes. In different States, various 
Departments of State Governments with multiple responsibilities were supervising the implementation of 
the programmes. The Parthasarthy Committee has pointed out various critical issues in the previously run 
programmes like low cost norms, lack of cluster approach,  lack of dedicated institution, too many 
installments, varying funding patterns, low emphasis on capacity building, monitoring, evaluation and 
Planning.  
 
The Department has assured the Committee that the bottlenecks of the earlier programmes have 
been done away with in the new programme guidelines of IWMP. The Committee are of the view that the 
physiographic and demographic dynamics of the country is constantly changing and any change in the 
guidelines which appear to be relevant today may not be relevant in future. The Committee, therefore, 

recommend the Department to be proactive to the needs of the people while formulating any 
programme/guidelines. The Committee are of the view that dedicated institutions, emphasis on capacity 
building and stringent moni toring and evaluation can help in achieving the desired objectives of this new 
programme of IWMP. The Committee urge the Government to take the desired steps and apprise the 
Committee accordingly.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee, the department has amended  the Common 
Guidelines for Watershed Development Projects, 2008 in the month of October, 2011 for smooth and 
effective implementation of the IWMP  and circulated to all the implementing agencies at state level.  
 
 For effective implementation of IWMP, dedicated institutions with multi -disciplinary professional 
support have been established at State and District levels. Further keeping the need of   stringent 
Monitoring &  Evaluation  (M&E)  and   adequate   capacity   building   of  various stakeholders in view, 1% 
of project cost each for M&E & 5% of project cost for capacity building activities have been earmarked in 
Guidelines of the programme. In addition, Department of Land Resources ha s given direction to all States 
to prepare a capacity building plan for conducting capacity building activities for various stakeholders 
starting from village level to State level under IWMP. The progress of these activities is reviewed in the 
Steering Com mittee meetings, Regional Review meetings, SLNA meetings held at State level and 
Department officials visit to States.   An online MIS has been made operational and data entry is under 
progress. This will enable to get real-time data about progress of projects at all levels. 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.10) 
The Committee note that with the objective of removing inherent flaws in t he existing land records 
system and bringing efficiency, transparency and easy accessibility to the system of Land Records, the 
centrally sponsored scheme on Computerization of Land Records (CLR) was launched in 1988 -89. Initially, 
the pilot-projects were initiated in 8 Districts of 8 States. The Scheme was subsequently extended to rest of 
the country. Upto 2007-08, 583 Districts in the country were covered under the programme.  
 
The Committee have been informed that since inception of the scheme, the Minis try has released 
Rs. 586.60 crore till 31.3.2008 for the programme out of this, utilization of funds by the States is Rs. 431.35 
crore which is approximately 74 percent of the total funds released. Funds were also provided for setting up 
Data Centers. So far, Computer Data Centres have been set up in 4434 Tehsils/Talukas, 1045 sub-Division 
and 392 Districts of the country. The Committee note from the aforesaid information that the performance 
of the programme has been abysmally low. The Committee are of the  view that although land is a State 
subject and switch over from manual system to a computerized environment requires different kinds of 
activities involving establishment of hardware, creation of appropriate software, digitization of maps, data 
entry/re-entry, capacity building, etc. twenty years is too long a time to achieve the desired goals. The 
Committee have been informed that the programme has been merged with NLRMP from 2008 -09 onwards. 
The Committee feel that merging/renaming/ reframing the program me would not serve the purpose unless 

there is a strong will from the Government, which, in this area, seems lacking. Regular monitoring, audit 
and capacity building exercise should be done with more vigour and renewed approach to achieve full 
computerization of land records across the country. Besides, corrective action with regard to the 
implementation of the programme should be taken urgently so as to achieve the objective of 
computerization of land records in all the States/UTs within the stipulated time frame.  
 
Reply of the Government 
All the States and UTs except A&N Islands have implemented the CLR scheme, which has yielded 
good results, but not consistently across the country.  The progress of different States/UTs in this regard is 
indicated at Appendix-I. The CLR has been merged with another scheme of this Department, i.e., 
Strengthening Revenue Administration and Updation of Land Records (SRA &ULR) and a new and 
enhanced scheme in the form of the National Land Records Modernization Programme (NLRMP) was 
launched in the year 2008 -09. It includes the new components of Computerization of Registration and 
interconnectivity between revenue offices and between registration and revenue offices, so that we can 
have real time, up -to-date records. So fa r 243 districts have been covered under the NLRMP. All the 
districts are proposed to be covered by the end of the 12 th Plan. The capacity building is an important 
component of the NLRMP. NLRMP Cells are being established at Administrative Training Institut es/ Survey 
Training Institutes/ Patwar Training Schools in the States/UTs where comprehensive training on various 
components of the NLRMP will be given. NIC has prepared an MIS for online monitoring of the NLRMP. 
States/UTs are being requested to keep this  MIS up-to-date. Interim and final evaluation is also an integral 
part of the NLRMP. Further corrective action will be taken from time to time based on feedback. The Core 
Technical Advisory Group (CTAG) has also made important recommendation improving the scheme 
including the following: 
 
(a) NLRMP should be implemented at State level by a State Level Society, also to be known as Project 
Management Unit (PMU). The PMU will further allocate funds to the District level on the basis of project 
prepared by the District Collectorate for activities to be taken up under NLRMP in the District.  
 
(b) District-level projects will be prepared after a baseline survey of status of computerization and 
requirements to provide a stated level of service, so as to provide adequate flexibility to meet hardware 
connectivity and other resource requirements. 
 
(c) Training institution building and capacity enhancement at local level would be a key component.  
 
(d) The State PMU would be responsible for coordinating the preparation and implementation of the 
district-level projects.  
 
(e) The State PMU would also be funded additionally for training, institution building, software 
development, capacity enhancement at State-level.  
 
(f) The approach would be a demand -driven close ended project to incentivize States who show 
commitment to implement the project quickly and effectively. Concurrent and final evaluation would be 
embedded in the project.  
 

(g) The project funding would be linked to sector reform with respect to systems, processes, human 
resource commitment etc. A separate portal would tr ack the progress of key parameters and updating 
of the data would be a key prerequisite to continued funding. 
 
(h) The project should be treated as a Central Flagship project and linked to the ultimate objectives of 
Conclusive Titling. Processed spatial and no n spatial data required for use by stakeholders at Central 
level (including Agriculture, Urban Development, Coal, Mines, Roads and Railway Ministries, Planning 
commission, etc.) needed to be specified as outputs to be made available by States as per a stan dard 
meta data nomenclature, through appropriate Central portal architecture. 
 
(i) At Central level, an institution needs to be created under DoLR which can set standards for Land 
Administration including citizen services and data provision to stakeholder. Thi s institution can also 
advise State PMUs on various issues relating to data management (including spatial data) survey 
technologies (including satellite data), training and HR development etc. The institution could also 
facilitate creation of roadmap for C onclusive Titling and for development of mechanism for coordinated 
land use planning keeping in view needs of industry, urbanization, infrastructure, agriculture, forestry, 
etc.” 
The matter is under consideration. 
 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.11) 
   With the objective of helping the States in updating and maintenance of land records, 
strengthening and modernizing revenue machinery, carrying out survey and settlement operations and 
strengthening training infrastructure, SRA & ULR was initiated in 1987 -88. Funding under the scheme was 
shared between Centre and State in the ratio of 50:50. The Union Territories were provided full central 
assistance under the programme. Upto 31.3.2008, funds to tune of Rs. 475.36 crore were released to the 
States/UTs. The Committee find that with the expenditure of Rs. 349.30 crore which is about 73 percent of 
the total releases, the Department has been able to construct 1366 record rooms, 4311 office -cum-
residence of Patwari/Talathi, 412 Tehsil Kacharies and 64 Training I nstitutes. The Committee also find that 
there are 19 States/UTs where no record rooms have been constructed. Similarly, in 20 States/UTs no 
office-cum-residence of Patwari/Talathi have been constructed, in 29 States/UTs no tehsil kacheries have 
been constr ucted and there are 14 States/UTs where no training institutes have been 
constructed/renovated/upgraded. It goes beyond saying that the performance of the programme has not 
been up to the mark. Infrastructure development and capacity building are very critical in the success of this 
programme and these aspects are lagging far behind. The Committee recommend the Government to take 
corrective action and strengthen the infrastructure in a time bound manner.  
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
The SRA & ULR scheme was a demand driven scheme. Funds under this were released as per 
the proposals of the States/UTs.  The progress so far under the programme is indicated at Appendix-I. The 
SRA & ULR has been merged with another scheme of this Department, i.e., CLR and a new an d enhanced 
scheme in the form of the National Land Records Modernization Programme (NLRMP) was launched in the 
year 2008 -09. It includes the new components of Computerization of Registration and interconnectivity 
between revenue offices and between registr ation and revenue offices, so that we can have real time, up -
to-date records. The capacity building is an important component of the NLRMP. NLRMP Cells are being 
established at Administrative Training Institutes/ Survey Training Institutes/ Patwar Training  Schools in the 
States/UTs where comprehensive training on various components of the NLRMP will be given. However, 
the CTAG has recently made important recommendations (as mentioned in the reply to recommendation at 
Sl. No. 10, Para 2.10) with regard to capacity building which is under consideration.  
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12) 
The two schemes of computerization of Land records and updating of Land Records & 
Strengthening of revenue administration were merged into a single scheme of NLRMP in 2008 -09. The 
Committee were informed that in the previ ous run programmes of CLR and SRA & ULR, the choice of 
activities were left to the States and UTs most of them opted for activities that strengthened revenue 
administration but not necessarily helped in updation of Land Records. The Committee were also inf ormed 
that this 'hamper-of-activities' approach led to eddying, each activity was goal in itself rather than a step in 
systematic ladder like approach towards achieving updated Land Records. The Committee were also given 
to understand that the way the Sche mes were framed, the exit modes were not defined, nor were 
technology options for survey firmed up. The system of monitoring was not emphatically spelt out and both 
the schemes of CLR and SRA & ULR excluded inter -connectivity. The Committee fail to underst and as to 
why it took the Department nearly 20 years to reach to these conclusions in the aforesaid two programmes. 
The Committee are of the view that these problems should have been identified long back by the 
Department and corrective steps would have been taken. 
  
The Committee were informed that for Capacity Building the Department propose to setup a 
National institute of Land Administration (NILAM), but it is still in the process of getting sanction from the 
Planning Commission. The Committee also find that upto 31.3.2011, the Department had set up 15 NLRMP 
cells in different States of the country and according to their assessment, each State and UT needs at least 
one such cell. The Committee are of the view that Capacity Building is an integral and vit al part of NLRMP 
and therefore, urge the Department to take the issue of training and capacity building more seriously and 
expedite the process of consultation with the Planning Commission to get the sanction for NILAM without 
further loss of time.  

Reply of the Government 
 
EFC for the NILAM has been prepared and circulated to the concerned Ministries/ Departments for 
suggestions/ comments. The suggestions/ comments have been received on this EFC. Now a meeting of 
the EFC is proposed to consider this proposal. Capacity buildi ng is an integral part of the NLRMP and the 
Department is giving adequate focus on this aspect. So far funds have been sanctioned for the 
establishment of the 26 NLRMP Cells in 21 States/UTs. MIS has been made online for effective monitoring 
of the NLRMP. Exit mode has also been well defined in the Guidelines of the NLRMP. Change from the 
age old method of the manual system of land records management is an ambitious project and the 
technology has also undergone a sea change in recent years. Accordingly the NLRMP was launched in the 
year 2008-09 incorporating the lessons learnt   from the   earlier   schemes of the CLR and SRA & ULR and 
the technology developments in the related fields. Based on a review of progress of NLRMP, the CTAG has 
made a number of rec ommendations for improving the scheme, including the mandate for the proposed 
NILAM, and the matter is under consideration. 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.13) 
   The Committee were informed by the Department that under NLRMP from 2008 -09 to 2010 -11,  
Rs. 538.18 crore have been released for the programme but the utilization reported by the States/UTs is 
merely Rs. 22.34 crore which is just 4.1 percent of the total amount released. The Committee also find from 
the information provided by the Department that while no funds were released to the States like Goa, Tamil 
Nadu and Delhi, funds were only utilized by the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Maharashtra, Nagaland, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar Island, Dadra & Nagar Hav eli. 
The Committee recommend the Department to look into the causes of low utilization or 'Nil' utilization of 
funds by the States/UTs and take corrective measures. As land is a State subject, the Committee would 
like the Government to work with the States  with better coordination so as to achieve the ultimate goal of 
NLRMP.  
Reply of the Government 
 
So far funds to the tune of Rs. 48.54 crores have been utilized under the NLRMP. The details are 
at Appendix II. The Department is actively engaged with the States/UTs to usher in this modern system of 
land records management. The vital issue of the capacity building is being addressed with the 
establishment of the NLRMP Cells. So far funds have been sanctioned for  the establishment of the 26 
NLRMP Cells in 21 States/UTs. Dedicated Project Management Units (PMUs) are also being established in 
the States/UTs so that the efforts of various Departments handling different components of the land 
records, e.g. Registration, Revenue, Consolidation, and Survey etc. could be coordinated effectively. 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 

Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.14) 
During the Study Tour to Mangalore in June, 2011, the Committee were apprised by the officials of 
Karnataka Government that they have fully computerized their Land Records and they do not nee d any 
financial assistance or the programme/project from the Central Government. The Committee recommend 
that the Government should study the model adopted by the Karnataka Government for computerization of 
Land Records. Such study would help the Departmen t to modify/expedite their computerization 
programme. Needless to emphasize that this process will go a long way in helping the farming community/ 
common man in a big way. This will also help in greater transparency and expedient service to the common 
man.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Karnataka State has done a lot of work under the modernization of the land records 
management system. The land records data base has been integrated with the registration process.  Land 
Acquisition   process   has   also been integrated with the land records data base. These good practices are 
being shared with other State Governments also.  Karnataka is also a member of the CTAG, alone with the 
States of Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat and practices are identifies in CTAG for adoption, and improvement 
in the scheme itself are also recommended from time to time. 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.15)  
The Department of Land Resources administers the Land Acquisition Act 1894 and is the nodal 
agency for National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation. The Committee were informed that in order 
to give statutory backing to the National Rehabilitation and Reset tlement Policy, 2007, 'the Rehabilitation 
and Resettlement Bill, 2007' and 'the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007', were introduced in the 
winter session of 2007 of the Parliament. The Bills were considered and passed by the Lok Sabha in its 
sitting held on 25 February, 2009 and referred to the Rajya Sabha for consideration. However, the Bills 
lapsed due to dissolution of the 14th Lok Sabha. Again, the 'Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2009' and 
the 'Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill 2009' were d rafted by the Department in consultation with the 
Ministry of Law and Justice. The Cabinet in its meeting held on 23.7.2009 approved the introduction of bills 
in Lok Sabha.  
 
The Committee are disappointed to note that even after the lapse of 2 years since  the approval of 
introduction of Bills in Parliament by the Cabinet, the Bills have not yet been introduced. The Committee 
feel that with the increasing number of litigations in Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation across the country 
and the discontentment in the farming community at large in the process of land acquisition, it is high time 
the Government should come up with a comprehensive Land Acquisition Act and Rehabilitation & 

Resettlement Act, taking into account the grievances of the affected persons and the recent Supreme Court 
observations/judgments in the cases of land acquisition. The Committee recommend the Government to 
come up with the Bills in the current session of Parliament itself.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has  decided to replace the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 with a single integrated 
Bill, namely the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2011 which incorporates the 
provisions of rehabilitation and resettlement also. The Cabi net in its meeting held on 05.09.2011 has 
approved the introduction of the aforesaid Bill. The Bill has been introduced in the Lok Sabha on 7.9.2011 
and has been referred by the Hon‟ble Speaker Lok Sabha to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Rural Development for examination and report to the Parliament. The Standing Committee has started the 
process of examination of the Bill.  
 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
  

Chapter III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
- N I L   - 
 
  

Chapter IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6) 
 
   In order to address the specific problems of drought prone areas, DPAP is being implemented on 
watershed basis from 1995 onwards. The programme is being implemented in 195 Districts of 16 States. 
The Committee find from the informa tion provided by the Department that out of 74.5913 million hectare 
that has been identified under the DPAP programme. The project area is limited only to 13.7195 million 
hectare which comprises of 27439 projects. The Committee are astonished to find that no new projects 
have been sanctioned under this programme from 2007 -08 onwards. Out of 27439 sanctioned projects, 
6859 projects are still ongoing and the Department propose to complete these projects by 2012. The 
Committee are further concerned to find tha t there are as many 1008 projects sanctioned during 2003 -04 
which are still ongoing i.e. even after seven years of sanction.  
 
The Drought prone areas are amongst the most backward areas of the country and of the total 
identified area as drought prone in 1 6 States, the project area is only 13.7195 million hectare i.e. 18.39 
percent of the total drought prone area. The Committee are perturbed to note that after 16 long years of 
operation, the proposed coverage of the projects is only 18.39 percent of the tot al drought prone area. The 
Department has informed that under the revised programme of IWMP, priority will be given to identified 
areas. Though it is too early to comment on the progress of the new programme, the Committee 
recommend the Department to compl ete the ongoing projects of the existing programme on priority basis. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the actual area covered vis -à-vis completed projects. Close 
monitoring including regular visits by the project implementing authorities at the project sites involving 
people in the planning and implementation process and stringent monitoring will help the Department to 
complete the projects in time. The Committee also desire that the concept of accountability and fixing 
responsibility should be in built in project planning and implementation process.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
So far 16,323 DPAP projects covering an area of 8.16 m.ha. have been completed. The recommendation of 
Hon‟ble Standing Committee regarding close monitoring including regular  visits by the project implementing 
authorities at the project sites is being followed through State Governments. The Department is also closely 
monitoring the implementation of the programme through Hon‟ble Minister for Rural Development‟s progress review  
with States, Steering Committee meetings, Regional Review meetings, SLNA meetings held at State level and 
Department officials visit to States. The States have been advised to complete all on -going DPAP projects as per the 
timelines set by the Department i.e. December, 2012. 
 
 Unlike pre-IWMP projects, under IWMP Guidelines, there is an inbuilt mechanism of evaluating the projects 
by independent agencies after completion of each phase of activities of the projects i.e. preparatory phase, works 
phase and consolidation phase.  The next installment of central fund is released on receipt of evaluation report and 
action taken on the recommendations of the evaluating agency.  
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 

Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.17) 
 
  It emerged during the discussion with the representatives of the Department of Land Resources 
that Watershed development activities of the Department can be merged with the MGNREGA activities of 
the Department of Rural Development. During the evidence, the  Secretary agreed with the views 
expressed by the Committee and informed that the Department have made it compulsory for every State 
Government to converse watershed development works with the MGNREGA works and guidelines have 
also been prepared for the co nvergence. The Committee were also given to understand that where good 
governance is prevailing in the implementation, convergence is taking place on the field level. It also came 
out during the evidence that very often the structures for watershed development in the field do not conform 
to the contours and are made without any consideration of technical parameters. In several watersheds, 
such structures have been washed away or have broken down, as observance of technical & engineering 
aspects have not been up to the mark. In some cases, structures have been washed away after just a few 
inches of rainfall.  
 
The Committee are of the view that merely formulating the guidelines does not relieve the 
Department of its responsibility. It is also the bounden duty of the Department to see that the guidelines are 
implemented in letter and spirit at the ground level so that the convergence on the field is achieved. The 
Committee are also of the view that water conservation should be the focal point of attention under  the 
watershed development programmes. Water conservation should be done at all places. If water 
conservation and management is not done even in high rainfall areas, there is likelihood of water scarcity 
for agriculture as well as for drinking purposes in lean seasons. The Committee recommend the 
Government to look into the above issues seriously and initiate corrective steps. They would also like to be 
apprised about the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Water conservation is one of the main activities under  taken in the watershed programmes of the 
Department of Land Resources. As recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee, continuous focus on this vital 
aspect is being given in all watershed projects implemented by the Department. 
Regarding convergence, department  is emphasizing the States for having convergence with 
related schemes right from planning stage itself and that Detailed Project Report (DPR) should clearly spell  
out activities to be undertaken with IWMP fund & activities planned for taking up with convergence. 
 
[O.M. No. Z-18013/9/2011-GC dated 27 January, 2012, Department of Land Resources 
 (Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

Chapter V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.16) 
[[[[ 
As the basis of all economic activity, land can serve as an essential asset for a country to achieve 
economic growth and social equity. India at independence inherited a semi -feudal agrarian system. The 
ownership and control of land was highly concentrated  in the small group of landlords and intermediaries 
whose main intention was to extract maximum rent from tenants. Land related problems such as tenancy 
rights and access to land for subsistence farming continue to challenge the country. The importance of land 
issue may be inferred from the fact that, notwithstanding the decline in the share of agriculture in the GDP, 
more than half of Indian population is dependent on agriculture for livelihood. From an economic 
perspective, the question of land is linked to critical issues of agricultural productivity, agrarian relations, 
industrial uses, infrastructure development, employment opportunities, housing and other related issues, 
each one of these aspects is crucial for enhancing economic growth, food security,  goods for export and so 
on. Apart from its economic functions, land ownership has a more profound social function. The Committee 
appreciate the return of land reforms to the Government list of priorities which is evident from the fact that 
the Government has formed two high level bodies; One, "Committee on State Agrarian Relations and the 
Unfinished Task in Land Reforms” under the Chairmanship of Minister of Rural Development, and the other 
"National Council for Land Reforms” under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister. The Committee were 
also informed that the composition, terms of reference etc. of the Committee and the Council were notified 
in the official Gazette on 9.1.2008 and the Committee has submitted its report for consideration to the 
National C ouncil. The Committee also note that the recommendations of the aforesaid Committee are 
being considered by the Committee of Secretaries (COS) and five meetings have been held so far. Since 
the process has already taken more than 3 years, the Committee str ongly recommend the Government to 
move expeditiously in the matter and come out with a comprehensive long term policy in this regard. The 
final decision taken in the matter may be intimated to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The “Committee on Sta te Agrarian Relations and the Unfinished Task in Land Reforms” has 
submitted its Report for consideration of the Hon‟ble Prime Minister. In the meantime, it has been decided 
that the recommendations of the committee may be examined by an appropriate Commit tee of Secretaries 
(CoS)   before   they   are placed  for   consideration  of  the  “National Council for Land Reforms”. The CoS 
has submitted its recommendations on the Report which are being placed before the Council. The 
decisions of the Council will be intimated to the Committee. 
 
 
     NEW DELHI;       SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
21  March, 2012                              Chairperson, 
1   Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)                                                                Standing Committee on Rural Development 
  

Appendix-I   
 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land Records 
(SRA&ULR)   
 (As on 10.01.2012) 
S.No. State/UT 
Record rooms 
constructed 
Office-cum-
residence of 
Patwari/Talathi/ 
RI constructed 
Tehsil 
Kacharies 
constructed 
Training Instituted 
renovated/ 
upgraded/ 
constructed 
1 Andhra Prd. 4   1 
2 Arunachal Prd.    1 
3 Assam    1 
4 Bihar  12   2 
5 Chhattisgarh 10 484   
6 Gujarat  61  1 
7 Goa     
8 Haryana 17 50  2 
9 Himachal Prd. 48 244  1 
10 J & K 2 288 5 2 
11 Jharkhand     
12 Karnataka    2 
13 Kerala 331 183  1 
14 M.P. 232 545 10 13 
15 Maharashtra 258 1025 252 7 
16 Manipur     
17 Meghalaya     
18 Mizoram     
19 Nagaland    2 
20 Orissa 3 2  2 
21 Punjab 4 165   
22 Rajasthan 6 73 10 8 
23 Sikkim     
24 Tamil Nadu    2 
25 Tripura 32 46 85 1 
26 Uttar Pradesh 74   11 
27 Uttaranchal  840  1 
28 West Bengal  331 267 50 3 
29 A & N Islands   38   
30 Chandigarh     
31 D & N Haveli     
32 Delhi     
33 Daman & Diu     
34 Lakshdweep 2    
35 Pondicherry     
  Total 1366 4311 412 64 
 
 

 
FINANCIAL PROGRESS (Release of Funds and Utilisation reported) under the NLRMP 2008 -09, 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 (31.122011) 
Appendix II 
Sl. No. States/UTs Year Total Utilisation 
Reported  
Unspent 
balance 2008-2009 2009-2010 2010-2011 2011-2012 Funds 
released 
Districts 
covered Funds 
released 
Districts 
covered  
Funds 
released 
Districts 
covered  
Funds 
released 
Districts 
covered  
Funds 
released 
Districts 
covered  
1.  Andhra Prd. 3356.60 5   117.64    3474.24 5 18.75 3455.49 
2.  Arunachal 
Prd. 
    48.6 1   48.60 1  48.60 
3.  Assam   1806.12 20 329.625 7   2135.75 27 1747.69 2135.745 
4.  Bihar  748.48 2 720.80 3 744.428 5 998.23 5 3211.94 15 156.625 1464.25 
5.  Chhattisgarh   553.86 2 414.705 3   968.57 5 1055.436 811.94 
6.  Gujarat 715.445 3   5527.24 12   6242.69 15  5187.249 
7.  Goa         0.00 0 1024.00 0.00 
8.  Haryana 285.06 2 1374.94 8 2101.48 11   3761.48 21  2737.48 
9.  Himachal 
Prd. 
488.95 3 326.82      815.77 3  815.77 
10.  J & K 65.625 2   235.28  589.05 7 889.96 9  889.96 
11.  Jharkhand     162.25 4 2227.66 16 2389.91 20  2389.91 
12.  Karnataka         0.00 0  0.00 
13.  Kerala   700.79 3     700.79 3  700.79 
14.  M.P. 1266.33 5 4168.04 15 3031.83  1276.10 7 9742.30 27  9742.30 
15.  Maharashtra 3693.01 6 788.78  117.64 10   4599.43 16 166.61 4432.82 
16.  Manipur 168.53 4       168.53 4  168.53 
17.  Meghalaya 431.43 3 192.32 2     623.75 5  623.75 
18.  Mizoram     323.72 1 39.2  362.92 1  362.92 
19.  Nagaland 58.97 2   181.625 2 574.54 2 815.14 6 58.97 756.165 
20.  
Orissa 
924.27225 4 1467.22 3 147.05    2538.54 7  2538.542
25 
21.  Punjab 814.17 2   585.613 3   1399.78 5  1399.783 
22.  Rajasthan   3901.94 4 235.27    4137.21 4  4137.21 
23.  Sikkim 9.36 3   65.70 1   75.05 4  75.06 
24.  Tamil Nadu       281.14 2 281.14 2  281.14 
25.  Tripura 271.68 4   385.653  117.63  774.96 4 87.96 687.00 
26.  Uttar Pradesh 1346.50 5 70.86  435.128 3   1852.49 8 25.99 1826.50 

27.  Uttarakhand     40.00  77.5  117.50 0  117.50 
28.  West Bengal  3991.55 10 3264.54 9   235.28  7491.37 19 436.36 7055.01 
29.  A & N Islands  25.71 1 28.39  12.15  6.00  72.25 1 51.40 20.85 
30.  Chandigarh         0.00 0  0.00 
31.  D & N Haveli 24.29 1 33.68  33.68    91.65 1 24.29 67.36 
32.  Delhi     40.00  77.5  117.50 0  117.50 
33.  Daman & Diu   103.72 2     103.72 2  103.72 
34.  Lakshdweep   4.21 1 162.20    166.41 1  166.41 
35.  Pondicherry 190.00 2 36.93    117.64  344.57 2  344.57 
Total All States/UTs 18875.96225 69 19543.96 72 15478.50
70 
63 6617.47 39 60515.89
925 
243 4854.08 55661.81
825 

  

 
APPENDIX- III 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012) 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY,  
THE  22  FEBRUARY, 2012 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room No. „E‟, Basement, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan       -  Chairperson 
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
32. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
33. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
34. Shri P. Kumar 
35. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
36. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
RAJYA SABHA 
37. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
38. Shri Hussain Dalwai 
39. Shri P. Rajeeve 
40. Shri Mohan Singh 
41. Smt. Maya Singh 
42. Miss Anusuiya Uikey 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah   - Additional Director 
3. Shri Raju Srivastava  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee to the sitting convened to discuss 
X X X X    consideration and adoption of draft Action Taken Reports on action taken by the 
Government on recommendations of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2011-12) in respect of   X X     X,    
X X X  and Department of Land Resources. 
 
      
3.  X X X X X X X X X X X X  
4.  Thereafter, the Committee considered draft Action Taken Reports on action taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in X   X   X,  X X   X, and 21st reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2011-
12) of the X   X X,  X X X and Department of Land Resources respectively. After 
detailed discussion, the Committee adopted draft Reports without any modifications. The Committee also authorized 
the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and present the same to Parliament. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned.  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
X Relevant portion of the Minutes not related with the subject have been kept separately

APPENDIX IV 
[Vide Introduction of Report] 
  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIRST  REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations:     17  
    
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted     
  by the Government :         
 Serial Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,  7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 
   
Total:         14 
Percentage:         82.35 %      
      
III. Recommendations which the Committee do    
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies :     
    
  Total:         0 
  Percentage:        0 % 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of   
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:    
 Serial Nos: 6 and 17 
   
Total:         02 
  Percentage:        11.77 % 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies   
of the Government are still awaited :      
  Serial No. 16         
   
  Total:         01 
  Percentage:        5.88 % 
 