THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 18.12.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 081
Price : Rs. 43.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-2013) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government ............................................................ 10
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .............................................................................. 27
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee ............................................................... 28
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ......... 30
A
PPENDICES
I. Extracts of Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee
held on 14 December, 2012................................................... 34
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth
Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development .................................................................. 36
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013)
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Thangso Baite
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
5. Shri Premchand Guddu
6. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique
7. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
8. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
9. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
12. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy
13. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
14. Dr. Sanjay Singh
15. Shri Uma Shankar Singh
16. Smt. Supriya Sule
17. Smt. Annu Tandon
18. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar
19. Smt. Usha Verma
20. Shri P . Viswanathan
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Munquad Ali
23. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay
(iii)

25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Shri C.P . Narayanan
30. Shri Mohan Singh
31. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma — Director
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Ravi Kant Prasad Sinha — Committee Assistant
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2012-2013) having been authorised by the Committee to
present the Report on their behalf, present the 35th Report on the
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the 28th Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Rural Development (Department of Land Resources).
2. The 28th Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 2 May, 2012. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 1 August, 2012.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 14 December, 2012.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 28th Report of the Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
14 December, 2012 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2012-13) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty-Eighth
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry
of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources) for the year
2012-2013.
2. The Twenty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
2 May, 2012 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same
date. The Report contained 14 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been examined and categorised as
follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13 and 14
Total: 10
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government:
Serial No. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Serial No. 9
Total:01
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 1, 4 and 12
Total: 03
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of
recommendations for which only interim replies have been given by
the Government included in Chapter-V of this Report and replies to
recommendations made in the Chapter-I of this Report may be
furnished to the Committee expeditiously.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that
require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Progress of implementation of IWMP projects
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
6. With regard to the implementation of IWMP projects, the
Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP) was started in the year 2009-10 after integrating
the Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP),
Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP) and Desert Development
Programme (DDP) into a single programme. Reportedly, IWMP is
a demand driven programme and the activities taken up under
the programme are spread over in three phases — the Preparatory
Phase of 1 to 2 years, the Watershed Works Phase of 2 to 3 years
and the Consolidation and Withdrawal Phase of 1-2 years. In other
words, there is a project duration of 4-7 years for IWMP . The
Committee are dismayed to note that the physical performance
under IWMP is not encouraging in view of the fact that during
the fiscal year 2011-12 (upto 15.02.2012), against the target for
sanction of new projects covering an area of 87.40 lakh hectare
and for ongoing projects covering an area of 16.78 lakh hectare,
the achievements were 70.01 lakh hectare (80%) and 4.95 lakh
hectare (29%) respectively. The financial performance has also
remained dismal during this period as against the target of
Rs. 2314.20 crore, the Department has been able to infuse only an
amount of Rs. 2055.35 (88%). The Department, for the year
2012-13, has fixed a target of 50 lakh hectare which is based on
minimum tentative allocation system. The Committee are
apprehensive that keeping in view the past performance,
achievement of this target by the Department would remain a
pipe dream. The Committee are also aware of the fact that, at this
juncture, the targets spelled out by the Department are only
confined to sanctioning of projects. The performance of the
Department would depend on actual completion of the projects,

3
the details of which would start emanating in the middle of Twelfth
Five Year Plan. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
a detailed and practicable strategy be put in place and proper
plan be prepared to ensure that the target for sanctioning of new
and ongoing projects are met with surgical precision and methodical
approach. The Committee would also like the Department to
approach the Ministry of Finance to allocate optimum funds, at
the time of revised estimates so that the implementation of projects
do not suffer for wants of funds.”
7. The DoLR in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“It is to submit that during 2011-12, against the target of
87.40 lakh ha, Department has sanctioned IWMP projects covering
an area of 90.79 lakh ha (103.87%). Against the financial target of
Rs. 2314.20 crore, Department has released Rs. 2312.09 crore (99.9%)
under IWMP during 2011-12. The Department will make all efforts
to achieve the target of 50 Lakh ha. set for 2012-13 under IWMP .
As indicated in reply to para 2.2, the Department will approach
the Ministry of Finance to allocate optimum funds.
To ensure timely completion of the on-going projects and sanction
of new projects, as indicated in reply to para 2.1, the Department
is closely monitoring the progress of implementation of IWMP
with States.
Para 2.1 states as under:—
“……The Department has been emphasizing on expediting the
implementation of watershed projects in the Steering Committee
meetings, Regional Review Meetings, field visits, visit of Hon’ble
Minister of Rural Development to States. Recently, one-day
conference with Chief Executive Officers of the State Level Nodal
Agencies (SLNAs) was organized on 21.5.2012 at New Delhi under
the chairmanship of Secretary (Land Resources). In addition, one-
day conference with State Ministers was organized in Vigyan
Bhawan, New Delhi on 08.6.2012 under the Chairmanship of
Hon’ble MRD to review the implementation of watershed
programmes. The issue of expediting implementation and
submitting proposals for new projects were discussed and States
have been directed to ensure necessary action for the same…..”
8. The Committee note from the action taken reply that the
Department while updating the status of sanction of IWMP projects
and the financial performance for the year 2011-12 has stated that

4
the physical achievements in terms of sanction of projects was to
the tune of 103.87 per cent whereas financial performance stood at
99.9 per cent. However, the Committee are surprised to note that the
Department has conveniently skipped the figures relating to physical
achievements of the ongoing projects covering an area of 16.78 lakh
hectare for the said duration.
The Committee are apprised that to ensure completion of the
on-going projects and sanction of new projects, the Department is
closely monitoring the progress of implementation of IWMP with
States by taking up the issue at the Steering Committee meetings,
Regional Review Meetings, field visits and during the visit of
Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development to States. The Committee
also find that the Department has also held one day conference each
with the Chief Executive Officers of the State Level Nodal Agencies
(SLNAs) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Land Resources) and
with the State Ministers under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister
of Rural Development for expediting the implementation of IWMP .
While appreciating the steps being taken by the Department, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the
implementation of the ongoing projects.
B. Progress of completion of IWDP projects
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
9. With regard to the progress of completion of IWDP projects, the
Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Integrated Wastelands Development
Programme (IWDP) is aimed at integrated development of
wastelands/degraded lands based on village/micro watershed
plans. The Department has stated that the projects under the
programme are sanctioned in the Blocks not covered by Drought
Prone Areas Programme (DPAP) and Desert Development
Programme (DDP). The Department has further stated that from
2007-08 onwards, no new projects are sanctioned under this scheme
and 609 projects are proposed to be completed during the fiscal
year, 2012-13. While the Committee appreciate the timeline given
by the Department to complete 609 projects, at the same time,
they express concern over the retarded rate of completion of
projects which are more than 6 years old, apparently, due to poor
coordination between the implementing agencies. Going by the
past record of the Department with regard to completion of
278 projects during the fiscal year 2010-11 and 142 projects during

5
the fiscal year 2012-13, the Committee have serious apprehension
regarding completion of 609 projects during the fiscal year 2012-13
that too at the rate of 50 projects per month. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Department should play a pro-active
role by strengthening their monitoring system so that all the 609
projects are completed within the end of this fiscal year. The
Committee would like to be kept informed about the progress
made in this regard.”
10. The DoLR in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Department is
closely monitoring the progress of Watershed Projects through
Regional Review Meetings, Steering Committee Meetings, Meetings
with CEOs/Chairman SLNA, Monthly & Quarterly Progress reports,
and through field visits by Department’s Officials and visits of
Hon’ble Minister for Rural Development. This issue of timely
completion of projects was also discussed in one-day conference
of CEOs of State Level Nodal Agencies of States held on 21.05.2012
and one-day conference of States Ministers looking after watershed
programmes held on 08.06.2012. States were directed to ensure
completion of ongoing IWDP projects within the timelines set by
the Department.
As on 30.6.12, 49 projects have been completed out of 609 ongoing
projects of IWDP .”
11. The Committee find that against a set target of completion
of 609 ongoing projects under IWDP during the fiscal year 2012-13,
the Department has been able to complete only 49 projects i.e. 8%
during the first quarter of the current fiscal ending 30.06.2012. With
this abysmally slow pace of progress which comes to around
completion of mere 16 projects per month, i.e. 2.6%, the Committee
are apprehensive of the completion of remaining 560 projects i.e.
92% in the remaining three quarters of the fiscal by the Department.
The Committee are of the view that the various measures taken by
the Department viz. closely monitoring the progress of watershed
projects and directions given to States to ensure completion of
ongoing projects within the timelines, have not been able to produce
the desired results. The Committee, therefore, desire that it is high
time the Department revisits its strategy and also pursue it
vigourously so that the target of completing 560 projects in the
remaining period of the year 2012-13 is achieved.

6
C. Coverage under Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP)
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
12. In the context of coverage under DPAP , the Committee had
recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that Drought Prone Areas Programme
aimed at minimizing the adverse impact of drought on the
production of crops, productivity of crops, productivity of land,
availability of water, livestock and human resources, thereby,
ultimately leading to drought proofing of the affected areas. With
these objectives in view, the programme was implemented on
watershed basis from 1995 onwards and 13.72 million hectare was
earmarked as project area. The Committee have been informed
that upto 2006-07, 27,439 watershed projects were sanctioned and
from 2007 onwards, no new projects had been sanctioned. It has
also come to the notice of the Committee that 16,323 projects
covering an area of 8.16 million hectare have been completed.
Physical performance of DPAP which presently stands at 59% is
far from satisfactory. On analyzing the entire gamut of activities
taken up by the Department under the programme, the Committee
are astonished to find that there are fundamental conceptual flaws
in the scheme as the total identified area in the country requiring
drought proofing is a mammoth 74.59 million hectare, whereas,
the project area taken up by the Department is only 13.71 million
hectare which comes to around 18 percent. Similarly, 6086 projects
have been closed mid-way for various reasons which also do not
augur well of the overall performance of the Department. Now
that DPAP alongwith DDP and IWDP have been integrated and
consolidated into a single programme called IWMP , the Committee
strongly recommend that under the integrated programme, the
conceptual flaws in the form of taking an indicative target of
coverage should be appropriately rectified by bringing the balance
rainfed/degraded areas of 125 million hectare under the activity
zone. The Committee also recommend that all the on-going 5030
projects should be completed by December, 2012 as committed by
the Department themselves and thereafter, the entire activity
mapping for drought proofing of the entire affected areas/identified
areas in the country should be taken by the Department at the
right earnest.”
13. The DoLR in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“Under IWMP while selecting project areas, due priority is being
given to DPAP , DDP and wasteland areas. During 11th Plan, an
area of 24.21 m.ha. has been covered under IWMP projects for
development. For 12th Plan, it is proposed to cover 25 m.ha. under
IWMP .

7
Out of 27,439 sanctioned DPAP projects, 24,895 projects have been
completed/closed as on 31.03.2012. As recommended by the
Hon’ble Committee, Department is closely monitoring with States
to complete ongoing DPAP projects by the end of December 2012.”
14. The Committee are unhappy to note that the reply of the
Government is silent on their recommendation for bringing the
balance rainfed/degraded areas of 125 million hectare under the
activity zone by rectifying the conceptual flaws in the form of taking
an indicative target of coverage and minimizing the adverse impact
of drought on the production of crops, productivity of crops and
land, availability of water, livestock and human resources thereby
ultimately leading to drought proofing of the affected areas. Although
the Committee expect that all ongoing 5030 projects should be
completed by December, 2012 as targeted, they strongly recommend
the Government to prepare a perspective plan to cover 125 million
hectare under the activity zone.
D. National Land Records Modernisation Programme (NLRMP)
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
15. In the context of the NLRMP the Committee had recommended
as under:—
“The Committee note that the schemes for Computerization of Land
Records (CLR) and Strengthening of Revenue Administration &
Updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR) were merged into a single
scheme in the shape of National Land Records Modernization
Programme (NLRMP) and launched in August, 2008. The modified
programme aimed at providing computerized copies of Records of
Rights (RoRs) with maps, other land-based certificates such as caste
certificates, income certificates, domicile certificates etc. The
Committee have also been informed that abolition of stamp papers
and payment of stamp duty and registration fees through banks,
e-linkages to credit facilities, automatic and automated mutations
and single window service can also be achieved under the
programme. However, the Committee observe that Budget Outlays
for the last two fiscals (2010-11 and 2011-12) were always
downward at Revised Estimates/Actual Expenditure/Releases stage.
This was attributed to procedural delays by various implementing
agencies, which lead to timelines being staggered for this scheme
till the end of the Twelfth Five Year Plan. Appalled by this shoddy
state of affairs, the Committee in their Twenty First Report
(2011-12) had recommended that corrective action with regard to

8
implementation of the programme be taken urgently so as to
achieve the objectives of the scheme within the shortest possible
time. The Committee, therefore, again reiterate their
recommendation and follow-up action should be urgently taken
thereon in the right earnest so that availability of funds should
not come in the way of attainment of objectives of the scheme.”
16. The DoLR in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“The ‘land and maintenance of land records’ is a State subject
under the Constitution. So, the Central Government has a limited
role to play for ushering in the system of modern land records
management system in the States/UTs. However, policy
interventions by the Central Government through schemes like
Computerization of Land Records (CLR), Strengthening of Revenue
Administration & Updating of Land Records (SRA&ULR) and
National Land Records Modernization Programme (NLRMP) have
yielded good results. The availability of the funds has not been a
constraint in the implementation of the NLRMP , so far. Funds for
267 districts have been released under the NLRMP upto 30th June,
2012. The Central Government has taken following initiatives to
help in smooth implementation of the programme:
(i) Detailed guidelines for implementation of the NLRMP have
been prepared and circulated to the States.
(ii) Management Information System (MIS) has been prepared
and put online to facilitate monitoring of the programme.
(iii) Guidelines for the establishment of the Project Management
Unit (PMU) have been prepared and circulated to the
States/UTs for better coordination between different
Departments and smoother fund flow.
(iv) Considering the special circumstances prevalent in the
North-Eastern States, the funding pattern (Central Share:
State Share) for them has been changed from 50:50 (survey/
resurvey and modern record rooms), and 25:75
(computerization of registration) to 90:10.
(v) Technical fair, symposium and workshops etc. are being
organized for experience sharing and guidance of the
States/UTs in implementation of the programme.
(vi) Regional review meetings are being organized to review
the implementation of the programme and chalk out the
future course of action for each State/UT.
(vii) Model Request for Proposal (RFP) and tender documents
for various components of the NLRMP have been prepared
and circulated to the States.”

9
17. While looking at the downward trend of Budget outlays at
Revised Estimates/Actual Expenditure/Release stage during the fiscals
(2010-11 and 2011-12) due to procedural delays by various
implementing agencies which led to the timelines being staggered
for the NLRMP till the end of 12th Five Year Plan, the Committee
in their 21st Report (2011-12), had recommended that corrective action
with regard to implementation of the programme be taken urgently
so as to achieve the objectives within shortest possible time. The
Committee also reiterated in their 28th Report that follow up action
be taken urgently in the right earnest so that availability of funds
should not come in the way of attainment of objectives of the
scheme.
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Department
that Central Government has a limited role to play for ushering in
the system of modern land records management system in the States/
UTs as ‘land and maintenance of land records’ is a State subject
under the Constitution. However, policy interventions by the way of
Centrally sponsored schemes like CLR and SRA & ULR and NLRMP
have yielded good results. The Committee feel that instead of stating
that the Central Government has a limited role to play, the
Government should work with the States with better coordination
and impress upon them by way of strict monitoring so as to achieve
the objectives of the scheme within stipulated time frame.
The Committee also note that in response to their
recommendation for taking corrective action for the procedural delays,
the Department has enumerated a number of initiatives taken for
smooth implementation of the programme. The Committee while
taking note of these initiatives taken by the Department feel that
still a lot more is desired to be done to remove the procedural
delays which is crucial for time bound success of the programme.
The Committee, therefore, expect the Department to take corrective
action in this regard in the right earnest and apprise the Committee
of the same.
The Committee further note from the reply of the Department
that availability of the funds has not been a constraint in the
implementation of NLRMP so far. Despite this, till 30.06.2012, the
funds for 267 Districts have been released. The Committee are
hopeful that with the corrective action taken for the procedural
delays, the target to cover the remaining Districts of the country
under the scheme would be achieved before the end of 12th Five
Year Plan.

10
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee observe that the projected outlay for various
schemes of the Department during the Twelfth Five Year Plan will be
approximately Rs. 36,460 crore at current rates. The outlay for the
fiscal year 2012-13 is Rs. 3201 crore, which is Rs. 501 crore higher than
that of the previous fiscal year.
The Committee endorse the Demands for Grants of the Department.
The Committee’s recommendations on availability of funds and related
matters are detailed in succeeding paragraphs. The Committee also
note that during this year, there is an increase of 19.65 percent in the
allocation of funds under Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP), whereas, for National Land Records Modernization
Programme (NLRMP), the increase in allocation is a meagre
0.33 percent. Notably, no funds have been allocated for bio-fuel during
the current financial year. The Committee’s examination has revealed
glaring mismatch between the yearly allocation of funds vis-à-vis total
projected outlay for the entire Twelfth Five Year Plan. For instance,
Rs. 7292 crore is required to be allocated to the Department, on yearly
basis, for meeting the total projected outlay of Rs. 36,460 crore for
various schemes of the Department during the Twelfth Five Year Plan,
whereas, fund to the tune of Rs. 3208.20 crore has been allocated for
the fiscal year 2012-13. The Committee strongly feel that at the current
pace of allocation of funds, the overall achievement of targets during
the Twelfth Five Year Plan are not likely to be fully achieved. In view
of the foregoing, the Committee would like the Department to approach
the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance to allocate more funds,
on evenly basis during all the 5 years of the Plan, so that the time
bound implementation and completion of projects can be ensured and
the work is not suffered for want of funds.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that an unspent balance of Rs. 3573 crore is available
with States as on 01.04.2012 under IWMP . The Department is
emphasizing on utilization of the unspent balance by States. To tackle

11
the issue of unspent balances, the department has revised mechanism
of release of Central assistance w.e.f. current financial year (2012-13).
As per the revised release mechanism, the unspent balance available
with the States is being taken into account while releasing Central
assistance. With the introduction of new system for release of Central
assistance under IWMP , during the current year, department will make
all the efforts to liquidate unspent balance and also utilize the current
financial year budget allocation i.e. Rs. 3050 crores. However, if States
require more funds, the department will approach the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance to allocate more funds during
2012-13.
Further, as desired by the Hon’ble Committee, the Department
will also take up the matter with the Planning Commission for
allocation of funds on evenly basis during all the years of 12th Plan.
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC dated 1 August, 2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee note that Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP) was started in the year 2009-10 after integrating
the Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP), Drought
Prone Areas Programme (DPAP) and Desert Development Programme
(DDP) into a single programme. Reportedly, IWMP is a demand driven
programme and the activities taken up under the programme are
spread over in three phases — the Preparatory Phase of 1 to 2 years,
the Watershed Works Phase of 2 to 3 years and the Consolidation and
Withdrawal Phase of 1-2 years. In other words, there is a project
duration of 4-7 years for IWMP . The Committee are dismayed to note
that the physical performance under IWMP is not encouraging in view
of the fact that during the fiscal year 2011-12 (upto 15.02.2012), against
the target for sanction of new projects covering an area of 87.40 lakh
hectare and for ongoing projects covering an area of 16.78 lakh hectare,
the achievements were 70.01 lakh hectare (80%) and 4.95 lakh hectare
(29%) respectively. The financial performance has also remained dismal
during this period as against the target of Rs. 2314.20 crore, the
Department has been able to infuse only an amount of Rs. 2055.35
(88%). The Department, for the year 2012-13, has fixed a target of
50 lakh hectare which is based on minimum tentative allocation system.
The Committee are apprehensive that keeping in view the past
performance, achievement of this target by the Department would
remain a pipe dream. The Committee are also aware of the fact that,
at this juncture, the targets spelled out by the Department are only

12
confined to sanctioning of projects. The performance of the Department
would depend on actual completion of the projects, the details of
which would start emanating in the middle of Twelfth Five Year Plan.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a detailed and
practicable strategy be put in place and proper plan be prepared to
ensure that the target for sanctioning of new and ongoing projects are
met with surgical precision and methodical approach. The Committee
would also like the Department to approach the Ministry of Finance
to allocate optimum funds, at the time of revised estimates so that the
implementation of projects do not suffer for wants of funds.
Reply of the Government
It is to submit that during 2011-12, against the target of 87.40 lakh
ha., Department has sanctioned IWMP projects covering an area of
90.79 lakh ha. (103.87%). Against the financial target of Rs. 2314.20
crore, Department has released Rs. 2312.09 crore (99.9%) under IWMP
during 2011-12. The Department will make all efforts to achieve the
target of 50 lakh ha. set for 2012-13 under IWMP . As indicated at
reply to para 2.2, the Department will approach the Ministry of Finance
to allocate optimum funds.
To ensure timely completion of the on-going projects and sanction
of new projects, as indicated in reply to para 2.1 above, the Department
is closely monitoring the progress of implementation of IWMP with
States
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC dated 1 August, 2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that Integrated Wastelands Development
Programme (IWDP) is aimed at integrated development of wastelands/
degraded lands based on village/micro watershed plans. The
Department has stated that the projects under the programme are
sanctioned in the Blocks not covered by Drought Prone Areas
Programme (DPAP) and Desert Development Programme (DDP). The
Department has further stated that from 2007-08 onwards, no new
projects are sanctioned under this scheme and 609 projects are proposed
to be completed during the fiscal year, 2012-13. While the Committee

13
appreciate the timeline given by the Department to complete
609 projects, at the same time, they express concern over the retarded
rate of completion of projects which are more than 6 years old,
apparently, due to poor coordination between the implementing
agencies. Going by the past record of the Department with regard to
completion of 278 projects during the fiscal year 2010-11 and
142 projects during the fiscal year 2012-13, the Committee have serious
apprehension regarding completion of 609 projects during the fiscal
year 2012-13 that too at the rate of 50 projects per month. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should play a
pro-active role by strengthening their monitoring system so that all
the 609 projects are completed within the end of this fiscal year. The
Committee would like to be kept informed about the progress made
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Department is
closely monitoring the progress of Watershed Projects through Regional
Review Meetings, Steering Committee Meetings, Meetings with CEOs/
Chairman SLNA, Monthly & Quarterly Progress reports, and through
field visits by Department’s Officials and visits of Hon’ble Minister for
Rural Development. This issue of timely completion of projects was
also discussed in one-day conference of CEOs of State Level Nodal
Agencies of States held on 21.05.2012 and one-day conference of States
Ministers looking after watershed programmes held on 08.06.2012. States
were directed to ensure completion of ongoing IWDP projects within
the timelines set by the Department.
As on 30.6.2012, 49 projects have been completed out of 609
ongoing projects of IWDP .
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC dated 1 August, 2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee observe that Drought Prone Areas Programme
aimed at minimizing the adverse impact of drought on the production
of crops, productivity of crops, productivity of land, availability of
water, livestock and human resources, thereby, ultimately leading to
drought proofing of the affected areas. With these objectives in view,

14
the programme was implemented on watershed basis from 1995
onwards and 13.72 million hectare was earmarked as project area. The
Committee have been informed that upto 2006-07, 27,439 watershed
projects were sanctioned and from 2007 onwards, no new projects had
been sanctioned. It has also come to the notice of the Committee that
16,323 projects covering an area of 8.16 million hectare have been
completed. Physical performance of DPAP which presently stands at
59% is far from satisfactory. On analyzing the entire gamut of activities
taken up by the Department under the programme, the Committee
are astonished to find that there are fundamental conceptual flaws in
the scheme as the total identified area in the country requiring drought
proofing is a mammoth 74.59 million hectare, whereas, the project
area taken up by the Department is only 13.71 million hectare which
comes to around 18 percent. Similarly, 6086 projects have been closed
mid-way for various reasons which also do not augur well of the
overall performance of the Department. Now that DPAP alongwith
DDP and IWDP have been integrated and consolidated into a single
programme called IWMP , the Committee strongly recommend that
under the integrated programme, the conceptual flaws in the form of
taking an indicative target of coverage should be appropriately rectified
by bringing the balance rainfed/degraded areas of 125 million hectare
under the activity zone. The Committee also recommend that all the
on-going 5030 projects should be completed by December, 2012 as
committed by the Department themselves and thereafter, the entire
activity mapping for drought proofing of the entire affected areas/
identified areas in the country should be taken by the Department at
the right earnest.
Reply of the Government
Under IWMP while selecting project areas, due priority is being
given to DPAP , DDP and wasteland areas. During 11th Plan, an area
of 24.21 m.ha. has been covered under IWMP projects for development.
For 12th Plan, it is proposed to cover 25 m.ha. under IWMP .
Out of 27,439 sanctioned DPAP projects, 24,895 projects have been
completed/closed as on 31.03.2012. As recommended by the Hon’ble
Committee, Department is closely monitoring with States to complete
ongoing DPAP projects by the end of December 2012 as given in reply
to para 2.5 above.
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC dated 1 August, 2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report)

15
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee note that Desert Development Programme was
started in the hot desert areas of Rajasthan, Gujarat and Haryana and
the cold deserts of Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh in
1977-78. For this purpose, the Department had earmarked 78.7 lakh
hectare as project area out of the total 457.9 lakh hectare of identified
area for which 15,746 watershed projects with a total cost of Rs. 4487.12
crore were sanctioned upto 2006-07. Against these targets, 11,489 projects
covering an area of 57.44 lakh hectare have been accomplished. Besides,
825 projects have been closed as non-performing. The Department, for
the year 2012-13 has fixed a target of completion of 3432 on-going
projects by December, 2012 except the projects sanctioned in snow
bound areas which would be completed by December, 2015. The
Committee hope that the Department would honour their commitment
for completing the on-going DDP projects. However, the Committee
are unable to understand the reasons for restricting the total project
area to 78.7 lakh hectare which is a meagre 17% of the total identified
area of 457.9 lakh hectare. The Committee also express their serious
concern on the slow pace of development of 57.44 lakh hectare desert
area over a period of 30 years which comes to around 2 lakh hectare
per year. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
Department should make all out efforts to complete all the on-going
projects, whether in plain areas or in snow bound areas, by the end
of current financial year. The Committee would also like to be apprised
of the reasons for taking a small percentage of project area vis-à-vis
total identified area alongwith a road map inter alia containing the
future plan of action for desert development in the new Integrated
Watershed Management Programme.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that a total of 15,746 projects covering an area of
78.73 lakh hectares were sanctioned under DDP by the end of
10th Plan (2002-03 to 2006-07). During 11th Plan (2007-08 to 2011-12),
no new projects were sanctioned under DDP . The DDP alongwith
Drought Prone Areas Programme and Integrated Wastelands
Development Programme has been consolidated into single modified
programme called Integrated Watershed Management Programme
(IWMP) with effective from 26.02.2009.
Under IWMP , while selecting project areas, due priority is being
given to DDP , DPAP and wasteland areas. Further, it is to submit that
desert areas have been considered as difficult areas and higher cost

16
norm of Rs. 15000/ha. is provided under IWMP . During 11th Plan, an
area of 24.21 m.ha. has been covered under IWMP projects for
development. For 12th Plan, it is proposed to cover 25 m.ha. under
IWMP .
Out of 15,746 sanctioned DDP projects, 13,940 projects have been
completed/closed as on 31.03.2012. As recommended by the Hon’ble
Committee, Department is closely monitoring with States to complete
ongoing DDP projects by the end of December 2012 except snow bound
areas as given in reply to para 2.5 above.
Regarding the DDP projects in snow bound areas of Lahul & Spiti
and Kinnaur districts in Himachal Pradesh and Kargil and Leh districts
in Jammu & Kashmir it is submitted that the projects in these districts
are being executed in difficult geographical terrain, where working
season is only for 3-4 months in a year. The area remains under snow
for the remaining period/months of the year. The execution of the
project work in areas under snow is extremely difficult during
7-8 months in the year. Considering the difficult geographical terrain
and limited working season in the snow bound area, the Ministry has
allowed a grace period of three years beyond the cut-off date for
completing the projects in snow bound areas. As recommended by the
Hon’ble Committee, the Department will make efforts to ensure that
all ongoing projects in snow bound areas are completed at the earliest
even before the grace period is over.
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC dated 1 August, 2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee note that in order to accelerate the pace of
development of wastelands/degraded lands, the Government had set
up the National Wastelands Development Board in 1985 under the
Ministry of Environment and Forests. Later, a separate Department of
Wastelands Development in the Ministry of Rural Development and
Poverty Alleviation was created in 1992 and the National Wastelands
Development Board was transferred to it. In April 1999, Department
of Wastelands Development was renamed as the Department of Land
Resources to act as a nodal agency for land resource management.
The Committee also note that the Department of Land Resources has
been implementing three area development programmes viz., Integrated
Wastelands Development Programme, Drought Prone Areas Programme
and Desert Development Programme. These programmes have now
been consolidated into a single modified programme namely

17
Integrated Watershed Management Programme. While formulating these
programmes, the Department has prescribed the objectives which
inter alia include increase in the productivity of rainfed/degraded areas,
increase in income of rural household and empowerment through
increased people’s participation in local decision making processes.
However, the Committee are flabbergasted to find that in all the
documents published by the Department  i.e., the Annual Report or the
Outcome Budget, only the reforms measures and policy initiatives,
past performance of the individual programmes/schemes, financial
review have been highlighted. As a matter of fact, there has been no
attempt of the Department to either mention the impact of watershed
projects on actual increase in the productivity of rainfed/degraded
land or actual increase in income of rural household or their
empowerment through increased people’s participation in local decision
making processes including the provisions contained under
Article 243(G) read with Schedule XI of the Constitution which are
stated objectives of the programme. The Committee are of the firm
opinion that the success of all the watershed programmes could be
measured not in terms of deliverables or achievements but on the
basis of these aforementioned attributes. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department should assess and provide a detailed
account of attainment of these objectives so that the viability of various
watershed programmes could be reviewed by them for betterment of
rural populace of the country.
The Committee are also dismayed to note that the various social
welfare schemes/programmes are initially formulated by the Ministry
and soon thereafter, without making any realistic assessment of
attainment of objectives in terms of overall benefits to the masses, the
schemes/programmes are merged/renamed/reframed on the pretext
of administrative convenience and judicious utilization of resources.
As a matter of fact, similar methodology has been adopted by the
Ministry while integrating the watershed programmes (IWDP , DPAP
and DDP) into a new programme, namely, IWMP . This sort of malady
becomes all the more serious when the projects under earlier
programmes are not completed as it has been noticed in the case
IWDP , DPAP and DDP projects. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that all the pending projects under IWDP , DPAP and DDP
are completed within the end of this fiscal year (2012-13) and thereafter,
the integrated IWMP programme may be functionalized and operated
as per modified guidelines.
Reply of the Government
The impact assessment studies of watershed programmes
(DPAP , DDP & IWDP) of the department conducted by engaging
institutions like The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI),

18
International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
(ICRISAT) & National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD), have
inter-alia reported the following:—
1. The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI)-2004:
• The Study was carried out in 16 States. Overall
improvement in land use was reported from all States
following the implementation of the Watershed
Development Programmes. Increase in the net sown area,
gross cropped area, and area sown more than once was
reported from Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, and
Uttar Pradesh.
• Several States reported changes in their cropping pattern
from one to two crops annually. This was directly attributed
to the availability of irrigation water in the dry season.
Some States reported the adoption of improved crop
varieties. Only a few states have recorded pre and post
project yield for dominant crops in the annual cropping
cycle. Where data has been available, an increase in yield
has been reported.
• Several States reported an increase in agriculture-related
employment opportunities among beneficiaries and in other
sectors for non-beneficiaries. These included trade, dairy,
poultry, masonry, etc. Physical works carried out under the
Watershed Development Programmes provided varying
numbers of man-days of work in nearly all States. Some
States witnessed no change in income levels whereas other
States showed changes to over 50% in the income levels.
2. International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
(ICRISAT)—2008:
•A  meta-analysis based upon 636 studies inter-alia reported
as below:
• The watershed projects are largely aimed to converse soil
and water to raise farm productivity. The available
evidences revealed that both these objectives were
accomplished in the watershed areas. Soil loss of about
1.1 ha
-1 y-1 was saved due to interventions in the watershed
framework. Conserving soil means raising farm productivity

19
and transferring good soils to the next generation. On water
conservation, it was noted that on an average about
38m ha. additional water storage capacity was created in a
500 ha watershed as a result of watershed program.
Augmenting water storage capacity contributed in
(i) reducing rate of run-off, and (ii) Increasing groundwater
recharge. These have direct impact in expanding the
irrigated area and increasing cropping intensity. On an
average, the irrigated area increased by about 52 per cent,
while the cropping intensity increased by 35.5 per cent.
• The average additional annual employment generation in
the watershed area on various activities and operations was
about 154 person days per ha.
• The results further show that the benefits vary depending
upon the location, size, type, rainfall, implementing agency
and peoples participation etc.
3. National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD)—2011:—
At the initiative of this Department, NIRD has completed the
impact assessment of watershed projects sanctioned under DPAP , DDP
and IWDP during the period of 1st April, 2002 to 31st March, 2005.
The study titled as “A Comprehensive Study of Impacts of Investments
in Watersheds Projects” was taken up in 947 completed watersheds
spread over 169 districts in 17 States. In all, 444 watersheds under
DPAP , 321 under DDP and 182 under IWDP were considered for the
study. Fifteen nodal agencies were identified to elicit the needed data
from the beneficiaries (@ 75 per watershed) and through FGDs besides
PIA and district level officials using six schedules. The components
included EPA, HRD activities, training and capacity building, NRM
(SMC works, WHSs, plantation) crop demonstration, production systems
and use of revolving fund.
As many as 66,680 primary beneficiaries were surveyed in the
study, which included 76% SMF and 24% LMF. The nodal agencies
provided district-wise summarized data sets under each of the schemes
using averages of the data from the SMF and LMF under each
watershed and also from the PIAs. NIRD prepared the final report
based on the data (scheme-wise and/or State-wise). So the data sets
were examined agro-climatologically in there classes viz. Hilly humid
region (IWDP), Semiarid (DPAP; IWDP) and the Arid (DDP).
Accordingly, the final report was prepared. All the data included in
the report are averages of a watershed of 500 ha. area. In general, it
was found that the performances under IWDP and DPAP were almost
similar.

20
Among the 169 districts, the net sown area was only 15% in hilly
humid areas while it was about 45% in other two areas (semiarid and
arid regions). Soil erosion was serious in arid region (51%), while it
was 21% in humid and 36% in semiarid areas. Groundwater depletion
was 100% in arid areas while it was 85% in semi-arid and 23% in
hilly humid areas. Low productivity was more in arid (86%) areas as
compared to 55% (hilly humid areas) and 68% (semiarid areas).
The increase in Natural Resource Management is as under:—
• On an average of watershed, 42 ha. of cultivable wastelands
was brought under plough (47 ha. humid, 50 ha. in semiarid
and 19ha in arid).
• An additional area of 26 ha. (35 ha. humid, 27 ha. semiarid
and 11 ha. in arid) under rainfed farming and 46 ha.
(14 ha humid, 64 ha. in semiarid and 49 ha. in arid) under
irrigation were recorded.
• Upto 65 ha. area (93 ha. humid, 45 ha. semiarid and 71 ha.
arid) was improved under vegetative cover. Only 50% of
the plants had survived. Fodder availability increased from
68% to 82%.
• Out of the 40 soil conservation and water harvesting
measures (60 humid, 28 semiarid and 38 arid), 22% were
of poor quality. However the soil erosion was reduced by
40%. With these measures, the water retention period in
the surface water bodies increased by 3 months.
•G roundwater table increased by 1.2m (1.7m humid, 2.4m
semiarid and 0.6m arid).
The increase in the ‘Production Systems’ has been as under:—
• The cropping intensity (CI) increased from 131 to 139.
Perceptible increase was with SMF (129 to 140) in semiarid
areas. Presently it was static at 125 in arid and 165 in
humid areas. However, with proper training the CI can be
increased to 195 in humid areas.
• SMF were more enthusiastic with horticulture by bringing
about 23 ha. under horticulture as compared to 7.6 ha. by
LMF. The thrust was more visible in humid areas where
the area increase was 53 ha.
• As far as crops are concerned, the farmers showed thrust
in enhancing the yield of oilseeds and pulses, more so in
semiarid regions, the increase being 41% and 33%
respectively.

21
• Even through cereal productivity increased only by 18% in
semiarid areas, the enhancement in rice yields in hilly
humid areas was 32%. The availability of cereals at HH
level increased by 10% with the Project Livestock
Enterprises.
• SMF had more livestock than LMF.
• Small ruminants were more in both arid and humid areas.
• There was a quantum jump in bovine population from 201
to 483 per watershed area with the implementation of the
project.
• Milk production increased from 742 to 970 liters/annum
with SMF while it was from 1122 to 1372 liters/annum
with LMF. Overall increase in milk production is by 25.64%.
Consequently the adequacy levels moved from 57.3% to
64.8% with SMF and 62.6% to 72.9% with LMF. Maximum
gains were observed in semiarid areas.
Human Resource Development has been recorded as under:—
• On an average 29 CBOs (9 SHGs, 14 UGs and 6 LGs) were
formed per watershed by the PIA.
• WCs were formed as per norms.
• Overall, 8 trainings were conducted with 38 participants
including 16 women and 17 SC/ST members.
• In 80% of the cases, DPR was prepared in participatory
mode.
• Up to 85% cases women participated in planning as well
as execution of works in the project.
Economic effectiveness:—
• There was an overall increase of 54% in the HH income
being Rs. 39,355 with SMF and Rs. 80,900 with LMF on an
average of watershed area.
• Similarly there was debt reduction to the extent of 38%
with SMF and 34% with LMF.
• The average BCR was 2.6 ranging from 1.2 to 4.2.
The draft final Report of NIRD is yet to be accepted by the
Department. However, the assessment has been outlined as above.

22
The above impact assessment studies suggest that the watershed
programmes have by and large met its objectives of increasing
productivity of rainfed/degraded areas, raising income, and generating
employment etc.
To expedite the implementation and completion of ongoing projects
under IWDP , DPAP & DDP programmes, no new projects were
sanctioned since 2007-08. Also, a policy decision has been taken to
complete these ongoing projects by 31.12.2012 except in snow bound
areas where a grace period of 3 years has been allowed after the cut-
off date. As recommended by the Committee, the department is closely
monitoring with the States as given in reply to Para 2.5 above.
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC dated 1 August, 2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee express their happiness over the fact that the
Planners have finally acted, though belatedly, upon their specific
recommendation for streamlining the process so as to attain the
objective of the scheme by its timely implementation. This fact is further
strengthened as 26 States/UTs have completed data entry of Record of
Rights (RoRs), 16 States have stopped manual issue of RoRs and
21 States have accorded legal sanctity to the computerized copies of
RoRs. Besides, 16 States/UTs have placed the RoR data on websites
and 18 States/UTs are effecting mutations using computers. The
Committee would like the Department to motivate the remaining States
to come forward and implement the programme so that its in-built
benefits could be reaped by all the citizens of the country.
Reply of the Government
As stated in reply to Para No. 2.9, the Department has taken a
number of initiatives to facilitate the implementation of the programme.
In this regard, the Department is laying special emphasis on the States/
UTs which are lagging behind in the computerization of the land
records management.
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC dated 1 August, 2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee have also been informed that for the fiscal
year 2012-13, Rs. 150 crore has been allocated for the programme.
While co-relating the target of covering 191 Districts during the fiscal
year 2012-13 with the availability of funds, the Committee once again
emphasise that shortage of funds should not stand in the way of
attainment of targets set for the fiscal year 2012-13. Apart from
operational and coverage aspects, the Committee would also like to
know the status of services viz., issuing of caste certificates, income
certificates, domicile certificates etc., being provided to the people in

23
those States where major portion of the programme has been
implemented and operationalised. The Committee would also like to
be apprised of actual usage of the programme in planning of various
land-based developmental, regulatory and disaster management
activities.
Reply of the Government
Various certificates like caste/income/domicile and Record of
Right (RoR) etc. are being issued in the States of Karnataka,
Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Maharashtra, Odisha,
Tripura, Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan etc. In fact Karnataka is issuing
32 certificates. This has helped the citizens a lot. Even in a small State
like Himachal Pradesh, approximately 50,000 certificates are issued per
month through the Lok Mitra Kendras established for the purpose.
The cadastral maps are being digitized in various States/UTs. On these
digitized maps, various GIS layers depicting soil type, water bodies,
cropping pattern, electrical lines, roads, elevation from the sea level
etc. will be laid. Such integrated information can be used for planning
various land based developmental, regulatory and disaster management
activities etc. by the States/UTs.
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC dated 1 August, 2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee are disappointed to note that even after persistent
recommendations of the Committee, there is an increasing trend of
outstanding Utilization Certificates (UCs) with the States. For instance,
627 UCs involving an amount of Rs. 766 were outstanding with the
States as on 31.12.2010 which further swelled to 640 UCs involving an
amount of Rs. 1076.58 crore as on 31.12.2011. The Committee have
been informed that the Department has been taking up the issue of
liquidation of these outstanding UCs with the State officials during
the Steering Committee meetings, Regional Review meetings and also
through written correspondence. The Committee express their
displeasure at the prevailing situation as it is abundantly clear that
the present mechanism for follow-up being practiced by the Department
for liquidation of outstanding UCs with the States has not served the
intended purpose. They strongly feel that there is urgent need to revisit
this mechanism and introduce necessary correctives at the earliest so
that the States are persuaded to follow financial discipline and take
cogent measures to liquidate the outstanding UCs in a time bound
manner and further release of funds from the Department continues
unhindered. The concept of incentives to the best performing States
could also be thought of on the lines of some of the rural development/
drinking water/sanitation schemes. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Department to initiate corrective measures in the matter at the
earliest and apprise them of the follow up action taken.

24
Reply of the Government
One-day conference with State Ministers looking after watershed
programmes was organized in Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi on 08.6.2012
under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble MRD inter alia to expedite
implementation of IWMP and liquidate the unspent balance. In
addition, one-day conference with Chief Executive Officers of the
State Level Nodal Agencies (SLNAs) was organized on 21.5.2012 at
New Delhi under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Land Resources) and
the issues of unspent balance and pending utilization certificates were
inter alia discussed and States have been directed to take necessary
steps.
To tackle the issue of unspent balance and pending utilisation
certificates, the central assistance release mechanism to States under
IWMP has been revised by the Department. The salient features of the
revised release mechanism are as below:—
(i) Central assistance will be released in lump-sum to SLNA
on the basis of annual plan of fund requirement furnished
by SLNA.
(ii) The funds will ordinarily be released in two instalments
every year. The first instalment will be equivalent to 60%
of the estimated annual fund requirement of SLNA
including the unspent balance available with the SLNA as
on 1st April of the financial year or fund requirement for
six months, whichever is less.
(iii) The next instalment in the year will be released after
utilisation of 60% of the funds of first instalment (including
unspent balance) and submission of corresponding physical
progress, utilisation certificate, Audited Statement of
Accounts for the preceding financial year by the SLNA.
(iv) For effective utilisation of funds already released for ongoing
IWMP projects, SLNA is permitted intra and inter transfer
of funds from one batch to another.
The issue of pending utilization certificates and unspent balances
with the States/UTs is being taken up on priority basis by the
Department. Due to the persistent efforts of the Department, the
unspent balance under the programme of Computerization of Land
Records (CLR) has come down to Rs. 141.63 crore. Similarly, the
unspent balance under the programme of Strengthening of Revenue
Administration & Updating of Land Records (SRA&ULR) has come
down to Rs. 119.49 crore. Further, the States/UTs are being asked
regularly to expedite the utilization of the unspent balances available
with them and send up-to-date utilization certificates to this
Department.
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC dated 1 August, 2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]

25
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee also regret to note that there have been huge
amounts lying unspent in all the programmes being implemented by
the Department. In this connection, the Committee note that Rs. 230.61
crore in IWDP , Rs. 220.72 crore in DPAP , Rs. 188.37 crore in DDP ,
Rs. 2480.99 crore in IWMP and Rs. 500.92 crore in NLRMP have been
lying as unspent as on 31.12.2011. The Committee have been informed
that central funds are released directly to State Level Nodal Agencies
and projects are eligible for claiming 2nd instalment on expenditure of
60% of the first instalment funds. Similarly, projects are eligible for
3rd instalment on expenditure of 75% of the funds released. As per
the Guidelines of the programmes, next instalment for the project is
released when the unspent balance is less than 50% of the previous
instalment released. In view of the acute problem of accumulation of
unspent balances, the Committee strongly recommend the Department
to devise a practical solution to this perennial problem and make every
possible efforts to ensure that the problem is tackled at the earliest
lest there could be a situation in the coming years, where the unspent
balances would surpass the total budgetary allocation of the
Department. The Committee wish to be apprised of the innovative
steps taken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
One-day conference with State Ministers looking after watershed
programmes was organized in Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi on 08.6.2012
under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble MRD inter alia to expedite
implementation of IWMP and liquidate the unspent balance. In
addition, one-day conference with Chief Executive Officers of the State
Level Nodal Agencies (SLNAs) was organized on 21.5.2012 at
New Delhi under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Land Resources) and
the issues of unspent balance and pending utilization certificates were
inter alia discussed and States have been directed to take necessary
steps.
To tackle the issue of unspent balance and pending utilisation
certificates, the central assistance release mechanism to States under
IWMP has been revised by the Department. The salient features of the
revised release mechanism are as below:—
(i) Central assistance will be released in lump-sum to SLNA
on the basis of annual plan of fund requirement furnished
by SLNA.
(ii) The funds will ordinarily be released in two instalments
every year. The first instalment will be equivalent to 60%
of the estimated annual fund requirement of SLNA
including the unspent balance available with the SLNA as
on 1st April of the financial year or fund requirement for
six months, whichever is less.

26
(iii) The next instalment in the year will be released after
utilisation of 60% of the funds of first instalment (including
unspent balance) and submission of corresponding physical
progress, utilisation certificate, Audited Statement of
Accounts for the preceding financial year by the SLNA.
(iv) For effective utilisation of funds already released for ongoing
IWMP projects, SLNA is permitted intra and inter transfer
of funds from one batch to another.
As per the guidelines of the NLRMP , the funds are being released
in two instalments to the States/UTs. In the first instalment, 60% of
the sanctioned funds are released. On the receipt of the utilization of
the 60% of these funds, the balance funds are released in second
instalment. All the activities under the programme are proposed to be
completed in two years in a district for which funds have been
sanctioned. So, a certain amount of unspent balances with the States/
UTs will always be reflected in the accounts. Further, the Department
has taken a number of initiatives to fast track the implementation of
programme and utilization of unspent balances. Some of these steps
are as follows:—
(i) In some States, there was delay in transfer of funds from
State to the implementing agency. The Department has
prepared guidelines for the establishments of the PMUs in
States/UTs. This will facilitate direct transfer of funds by
the Central Government to these PMUs.
(ii) Model Request for Proposal (RFP) and tender documents
for various components of the NLRMP have been prepared
and circulated to the States/UTs, as a lot of time was spent
by each State/UT in finalization of such documents.
(iii) Some States/UTs were facing difficulties in undertaking the
survey/re-survey component of the NLMRP. Major portion
of the funds sanctioned to the States/UTs (around 60%)
pertain to this component. The States have been given
permission to utilize these funds for other components of
the NLRMP in the remaining districts.
(iv) The rates for the survey/re-survey and digitization of the
cadastral maps have been revised upwardly as per the
suggestions received from various States/UTs.
(v) The States/UTs and the vendors, who are interested in
working with the States in various components of the
NLRMP , have been brought on one platform through
symposium/technical fair.
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC dated 1 August, 2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]

27
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
—NIL—

28
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee note that the schemes for Computerization of Land
Records (CLR) and Strengthening of Revenue Administration &
Updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR) were merged into a single
scheme in the shape of National Land Records Modernization
Programme (NLRMP) and launched in August, 2008. The modified
programme aimed at providing computerized copies of Records of
Rights (RoRs) with maps, other land-based certificates such as caste
certificates, income certificates, domicile certificates etc. The Committee
have also been informed that abolition of stamp papers and payment
of stamp duty and registration fees through banks, e-linkages to credit
facilities, automatic and automated mutations and single window
service can also be achieved under the programme. However, the
Committee observe that Budget Outlays for the last two fiscals (2010-
11 and 2011-12) were always downward at Revised Estimates/Actual
Expenditure/Releases stage. This was attributed to procedural delays
by various implementing agencies, which lead to timelines being
staggered for this scheme till the end of the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Appalled by this shoddy state of affairs, the Committee in their Twenty
First Report (2011-12) had recommended that corrective action with
regard to implementation of the programme be taken urgently so as
to achieve the objectives of the scheme within the shortest possible
time. The Committee, therefore, again reiterate their recommendation
and follow-up action should be urgently taken thereon in the right
earnest so that availability of funds should not come in the way of
attainment of objectives of the scheme.
Reply of the Government
The ‘land and maintenance of land records’ is a State subject under
the Constitution. So, the Central Government has a limited role to
play for ushering in the system of modern land records management
system in the States/UTs. However, policy interventions by the Central
Government through schemes like Computerization of Land Records
(CLR), Strengthening of Revenue Administration & Updating of Land

29
Records (SRA&ULR) and National Land Records Modernization
Programme (NLRMP) have yielded good results. The availability of
the funds has not been a constraint in the implementation of the
NLRMP , so far. Funds for 267 districts have been released under the
NLRMP up-to 30th June, 2012. The Central Government has taken
following initiatives to help in smooth implementation of the
programme:—
(i) Detailed guidelines for implementation of the NLRMP have
been prepared and circulated to the States.
(ii) Management Information System (MIS) has been prepared
and put online to facilitate monitoring of the programme.
(iii) Guidelines for the establishment of the Project Management
Unit (PMU) have been prepared and circulated to the
States/UTs for better coordination between different
Departments and smoother fund flow.
(iv) Considering the special circumstances prevalent in the
North-Eastern States, the funding pattern (Central Share:
State Share) for them has been changed from 50:50 (survey/
resurvey and modern record rooms), and 25:75
(computerization of registration) to 90:10.
(v) Technical fair, symposium and workshops etc. are being
organized for experience sharing and guidance of the
States/UTs in implementation of the programme.
(vi) Regional review meetings are being organized to review
the implementation of the programme and chalk out the
future course of action for each State/UT.
(vii) Model Request for Proposal (RFP) and tender documents
for various components of the NLRMP have been prepared
and circulated to the States.
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC Dated: 01.08.2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report)

30
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
The Committee note that during the Eleventh Plan period
(2007-12), against the Revised Estimates of Rs. 9194.50 crore received
by the Department, Rs. 8983.67 crore has been released under Integrated
Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) including ongoing
liabilities of Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP),
Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP) and Desert Development
Programme (as on 15.02.2012). Similarly, for National Land Records
Modernization Programme (NLRMP) which was launched during
2008-09, against the Revised Estimates of Rs. 716.40 crore, an
expenditure of Rs. 620.19 crore was incurred during the entire Plan.
Hence, the expenditure made by the Department for these two flagship
programmes during the Eleventh Plan period does not meet the
financial target even when the enormity of unspent balances are not
taken into account. Keeping in view the significance of these
programmes which are handled by the Department, the non-spending
of this sum during the entire Plan reflects the poor performance of the
Department especially when Rs. 18,074 crore for watershed programme
alone was sought by the Department from the Planning Commission
for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. Even though the Committee were
informed that physical and financial performance during the last couple
of years have been satisfactory as compared to earlier years, the
utilization of funds and achievement of targets in full measure could
have been beneficial for the country in general and rural populace in
particular. The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that there should be
higher allocation for the flagship programmes provided that the
Department is able to properly plan their priorities, strategize and
synchronize their work programmes. They, therefore, recommend that
the Department should work out a two-pronged strategy i.e., to increase
their financial-absorption capacity and thereafter again take up the
matter with the Planning Commission for a realistic higher allocation
for the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that during 11th Plan (2007-12), against the Revised
Estimates of Rs. 9194.50 crore received by the Department, a total of
Rs.9240.41 crore was released under Integrated Watershed Management

31
Programme (IWMP) including ongoing liabilities of Integrated
Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP), Drought Prone Areas
Programme (DPAP) and Desert Development Programme (as on
31.3.2012). Due to re-appropriation of funds from other schemes, the
released amount is more than Revised Estimates.
The absorption capacity of the funds under IWMP is dependent
on the performance of the States in implementation of IWMP .
Department has been emphasizing on expediting the implementation
of watershed projects in the Steering Committee meetings, Regional
Review Meetings, field visits, visit of Hon’ble Minister of Rural
Development to States. Recently, one-day conference with Chief
Executive Officers of the State Level Nodal Agencies (SLNAs) was
organized on 21.5.2012 at New Delhi under the Chairmanship of
Secretary (Land Resources). In addition, one-day conference with State
Ministers was organized in Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi on 08.6.2012
under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble MRD to review the implementation
of watershed programmes. The issue of expediting implementation and
submitting proposals for new projects were discussed and States have
been directed to ensure necessary action for the same.
As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the issue of higher
allocation will be taken up with the Planning Commission based on
the actual requirement of funds.
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC Dated: 01.08.2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee find that provisions in the Common Guidelines,
2008 for watershed programmes and the observations of the
Parthasarathy Committee have necessitated modifications in the
watershed schemes of the Department of Land Resources. Accordingly,
DPAP , DDP and IWDP have been integrated and consolidated into a
single modified programme called Integrated Watershed Management
Programme. The Department also submitted before the Committee that
IWMP is a Demand Driven Programme. However, the Committee have
experienced that by transforming the programme from ‘rights based’
to ‘demand driven’, the responsibilities of the executing/implementing
organisation could be conveniently shifted to the beneficiaries. In other
words, there would not be any pre-determined targets and, therefore,
whatever deliveries are attained by an organisation within a specified
time frame are regarded and brought under the category of
achievements. The accountability of optimum utilisation of scarce

32
resources also gets vitiated due to the fact that lower utilisation of
funds is often co-related with lower generation of demand. The
Committee are constrained to mention that in order to camouflage the
administrative inefficiency and/or fundamental conceptual flaw in the
schemes, almost every centrally sponsored scheme of the Government
are now being transformed to a demand driven approach. The
Committee are of considered view that the Integrated Watershed
Management Programme would not be able to deliver the desired
results if the scheme continue to be operated on demand driven mode.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that a quick study should be
initiated by the Department to pragmatically analyse the shortcomings
of the demand driven approach of IWMP so that timely action for
re-transforming the scheme to target-oriented approach may be taken.
The Committee urge the Government to take the desired steps and
apprise the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Department will
assign a study to analyse the advantages and shortcomings of the
demand driven approach and the target-oriented approach and to
recommend approach suitable for IWMP .
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC Dated: 01.08.2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee are perturbed to note that there is inordinate delay
in finalization of bio-fuels programme which was started way back in
April, 2003 followed by in-principle approval of demonstration phase
by taking up 3 lakh hectare plantations on bio-diesel producing
non-edible oilseeds species (Jatropha and Pongamia) on degraded forest
land and waste land. However, thereafter, the entire programme has
been engulfed in a prolonged debate on the issue of viability or
non-viability of the programme amongst the Department of Land
Resources, Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), Group of
Ministers (GoM) and The Energy Research Institute (TERI). The
outcome of this long debate has not only consumed a decade of
uncertainty on the issue, but also the entire programme is shrouded
in mystery. The Committee also note that for the fiscal year 2012-13,
no funds have been allocated for bio-fuels programme as the decision
on the future of the programme has been pending for long. The
Department has informed that the assessment report submitted by TERI
is so negative that there is no scope for going in for further

33
demonstration of Jatropha plantation in the country. It has further
been informed that it is now for the Union Cabinet to take a decision
in the matter. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department should place the matter before the Union Cabinet at the
earliest for taking a conscious decision on continuance or otherwise of
bio-fuels programme.
Reply of the Government
On the basis of the recommendations contained in the assessment
study report from TERI, experts views and experiences of other
organizations, the matter is being placed before the Cabinet seeking
its directions on continuance or otherwise of Bio-fuels Programme.
The decision of the Cabinet will be intimated to the Committee.
[O.M. No. H-11011/3/2012-GC Dated: 01.08.2012, Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)]
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
14 December, 2012 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

34
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF
THE COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 14TH DECEMBER, 2012
The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in Committee Room
No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
3. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy
4. Dr. Sanjay Singh
5. Smt. Supriya Sule
6. Smt. Annu Tandon
7. Smt. Usha Verma
8. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
10. Dr. Chandan Mitra
11. Shri C.P . Narayanan
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
4. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary

35
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee convened for consideration of Memoranda
containing draft Reports of the Committee on action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in four Reports on
Demands for Grants (2012-13).
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Action Taken Reports:-
(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report
on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Land Resources);
(iii) *** *** *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** *** *** ***
4. Draft Reports were taken up seriatum. After detailed discussions,
the Committee adopted the Reports with minor modifications. The
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid
Reports and present the same to the Parliament.
5. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.***Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

36
APPENDIX II
[Vide Introduction of Report]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-
EIGHTH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
I. Total number of recommendations: 14
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government:
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13 and 14
Total: 10
Percentage: 71.43%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Total: 00
Percentage: 00%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Serial No. 9
Total: 01
Percentage: 7.14%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 1, 4 and 12
Total: 03
Percentage: 21.43%