 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                         (2011-2012) 
    
 
                  FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
   
 
 
Council for Advancement of People's Action and Rural Technology 
 
 
THIRTY- SECOND REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
32 


 
THIRTY - SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2011-2012) 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
Council for Advancement of People's Action and Rural Technology 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.08.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28.08.2012 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2012/Bhardapada, 1934 (Saka) 


C.R.D. NO. 34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  

(i) 
CONTENTS 
Page Nos. 
Composition of the Committee       (ii) 
Introduction           (iii) 
 
REPORT 
Part-I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
I. Introductory          
II. Organisational Structure of CAPART        
III. Schemes being implemented by CAPART       
IV. Utilisation of funds         
V. Monitoring mechanism for funded NGOs/VOs     
VI. Restructuring of CAPART         
 
Part-II 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee                      
 
APPENDICES 
I. Number of Gram Shree Melas organized during 2001-02 to 2011-12 
II.  Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Committee     
III. Minutes of the Thirty-first sitting of the Committee     
  

(ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012) 
        Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
4. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
5. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
6. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
7. Shri P. Kumar 
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
10. Shri Rakesh Pandey 
11. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
12. Shri P.L. Punia 
13. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
14. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
15. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray* 
16. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
17. Smt. Supriya Sule 
18. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar 
20. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
21. Smt.  Vijaya Shanthi M** 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
23. Shri Munquad Ali# 
24. Shri Hussain Dalwai 
25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
26. Dr. Ram Prakash 
27. Shri C.P. Narayanan^ 
28. Shri Mohan Singh 
29. Smt. Maya Singh 
30. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan@ 
31. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay$ 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1.  Shri Brahm Dutt   -  Joint Secretary 
 2.  Smt. Veena Sharma   - Director 
 3.  Shri Ravi Kant Prasad Sinha  - Committee Assistant 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 03.01.2012 vice Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu. 
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 25.11.2011. 
# Nominated w.e.f. 04.05.2012 vice Shri Ganga Charan ceased to member of Committee on retirement from Rajya Sabha on 
02.04.2012. 
^ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 13.07.2012 vice Shri P. Rajeeve ceased to be members of the Committee w.e.f. 11.07.2012 
consequent in his resignation (Shri P. Rajeeve nominated w.e.f. 02.11.2011 vice Sh. P.R. Rajan ceased to be member of the 
Committee w.e.f. on 27.10.2011 consequent on his resignation) 
@ Nominated w.e.f. 04.05.2012 vice Ms. Anusuiya Uikey ceased to member of Committee on retirement from Rajya Sabha. 
$ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 18.04.2012 vice Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan ceased to member of Committee on retirement from 
Rajya Sabha. 
 
 

(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chair person, Standing Committee on Rural Development, having been  authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present  this Thirty Second Report on ‘ Council for 
Advancement of People's Action and Rural Technology ’ pertaining to  the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development). 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the  Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development) on 27th January, 2012 . The Committee wish to express their thanks to 
the representatives of the  Ministry for appearing before the Committee for evidence and furnishing  the 
information, desired by the Committee in connection with the issues relating to the subject. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at  their sitting held on 24th August, 
2012. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their deep sense of appreciation of the invaluable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and  recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;              SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
27 August, 2012                Chairperson, 
05 Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Rural Development. 
  

REPORT 
 
PART I 
 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
I. Introductory 
 The Council for Advancement of People‟s Action and Rural Technology 
(CAPART) was created in 1986 by merging two organisations namely People‟s Action in 
Development India (PADI) and Council for Advancement of Rural Technology (CART). 
It is registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and functioning as an 
autonomous body under the aegis of the Ministry of Rural Development.  It was setup 
with a vision to play a dynamic and catalytic role in the many-sided development of rural 
India through its work with the various Governmental agencies and Non- Governmental 
organizations (NGOs) . CAPART was setup to promote voluntary action in the 
implementation of projects for enhancement of rural prosperity and to act as a catalyst 
for development of technologies appropriate for the rural areas.  
1.2 The Ministry of Rural Development in their Ann ual Report have brought out the 
following objectives of the CAPART: 
 Aiding and organizing voluntary bodies for rural upliftment. 
 Supporting voluntary organizations in implementing projects for sustainable 
development in rural areas. 
 Facilitating community action for development. 
 Building and strengthening village level organisation. 
 Strengthening the capacities of voluntary organizations in rural areas. 
 Creating community assets and fulfilling basic needs. 
 Acting as a nodal point for development and promoti on of appropriate rural 
technologies. 
 Overseeing the application or appropriate technologies for the progress of 
rural areas. 
 Promoting and supporting voluntary action and people‟s participation for rural 
development through capacity building of voluntary organizations and rural 
communities. 
 Building awareness on critical development issues. 

 Creating employment opportunities and economic self reliance. 
 Enabling women, persons with disability and other disadvantaged groups to 
participate in development. 
1.3 In addition, CAPART has taken up following schemes to realign its activities with 
its vision, mission and objectives:- 
 Scouting, „Documentation/Validation‟ and „Patenting/Piloting and Up -scaling‟ 
of Rural Technologies and Innovations. 
 Grow up to lab achieved benchmark 
 Value addition for income generation through the assets/infrastructure 
created under NREGA & SGSY. 
 Institutional framework and norms for Gram Shree Melas supported by 
CAPART. 
 IT based comprehensive transformation of CAPART‟s interaction with 
stakeholders.  
 
  

II. Organizational Structure of the CAPART 
2.1 CAPART permits the membership of 100, out of which 40 are from Voluntary 
societies, 25 from other institutions, 25 ex -officio members and 10 per cent individuals. 
The General Body (GB) is the highest governing body of CAPART comprising all its 
members presided over by the Minister, Rural Development which gives overall policy 
guidance, approves the Annual Budget, Balance Sheet, the audited accounts and the 
Annual Reports, amends the Rules of the Society and the by -laws. The Executive 
Committee (EC) is chaired by the Hon‟ble Minister, Rural Development and is in -charge 
of the da y- to-day functioning. It is the duty of the Chairperson to ensure that the 
CAPART runs efficiently. The Secretary of the Department is the ex -officio Vice -
Chairman of the EC. The Director General(DG) is appointed by the EC and is 
responsible for proper ad ministration of the Society and its funds, supervision and 
control over its activities and coordination amongst others. There is also Standing 
Committee on Finance & Administration headed by the DG which scrutinizes accounts 
and budget estimates of the Soc iety, considers proposals for new expenditure and 
scrutinizes re-appropriation statements amongst others. 
2.2 CAPART has its Headquarters in New Delhi and  has nine Regional Offices 
spread all over the country viz. Ahmedabad, Bhuwaneshwar, Chandigarh, Dharw ad, 
Guwahati, Hyderabd, Jaipur, Lucknow and Patna.  The jurisdiction of the Regional 
Centers are as below:- 
(i) The Regional Centre at Ahmedabad covers the States of Gujarat and 
Maharashtra and the Union Territories of Dadar & Nagar Haveli and Daman 
& Diu. 
 
(ii) The jurisdiction of Regional Centre, Bhubaneswar extends t o the States of 
Chattisgarh, Odisha and West Bengal and the Union Territory of Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands. 
 
 

(iii) The Regional Centre  at Chandigarh covers States of Jammu &  Kashmir, 
Himachal Pradesh, Punjab and Haryana and the Union Territory of 
Chandigarh.  
 
(iv) The R egional Centre at Dharwad covers the States of Karnataka, Kerala 
and Goa and the Union Territory of Lakshadweep.  
 
(v) The North East Regional Centre at Guwahati is th e largest in area and 
covers maximum number of states under its jurisdiction. It covers the States 
of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Manipur, Sikkim, Tripura, Arunachal 
Pradesh and Nagaland. 
 
(vi) The Regional Centre at Hyderabad covers the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Tamilnadu and Puducherry. 
 
(vii) The Regional Centre at Jaipur covers t he States of Raja sthan, Madhya 
Pradesh and Delhi. 
 
(viii) The Regional Centre at Lucknow covers the States of Uttar Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand.  
 
(ix) The Regional Centre at Patna covers the States of Bihar and Jharkhand. 
 
2.3 CAPART has been mandated to work in close cooperation with the rural NGOs 
and to empower them by engaging them in dialogue, respecting their thoughts and 
ideas, listening to their voice, harnessing their resources, funding their activities, 
strengthening their hands, part icularly, the weaker sections of rural society and the 
disabled and the other privileged sections of the rural society and walking hand -in-hand 
with them on the road to rural prosperity.  
  

III. Schemes being implemented by CAPART 
3.1 Following 5 schemes are being implemented through CAPART:- 
A. Public Cooperation (PC); 
B. Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme (ARTS); 
C. Organization of Beneficiaries (OB); 
D. Disability Action Development (DAD); and 
E. Marketing 
These are discussed in succeeding paragraphs.  
 
A. Public Cooperation (PC) 
3.2 Public Cooperation Scheme is one of the popular and important programmes of 
CAPART by virtue of its multi -dimensional approach.  The thrust of the Scheme is to 
involve the community in designing, planning, implementation, monitoring an d 
maintenance of assets created under the projects. The activities under the Scheme 
focus on the disadvantaged sections of the rural community, with a view to promote and 
strengthen SHGs in need -based skill training, production and marketing of products. I n 
order to facilitate the exposure of the rural community to appropriate technologies, 
capacity building is considered as an in -built component of the Public Cooperation 
Scheme. CAPART has stated in its Annual Report that an intensive programme was 
taken up for conducting workshops by all the Regional Centres of CAPART. The scope 
of conducting the workshop at the premises of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) in 50 
identified districts was enhanced to 115 backward districts ( as  identified by the 
Planning Commission, Government of India) across the country. 22 such workshops 
were organized. 34 proposals have been generated as an outcome of the workshops 
and are at the desk appraisal stage. It is expected that the proposals of con vergence 
under MGNREGS and SGSY programme with the close association of expertise 
available at KVKs will provide immense benefit to the targeted beneficiaries. 
3.3 The SHGs are targeted through the projects sanctioned to the Voluntary 
Organisations (VOs) to provide need based training to them. The details of the number 

of beneficiaries of the scheme from 2001 -02 to 2011-12 as furnished by the Ministry of 
Rural Development are as under:-  
Year No of Beneficiaries 
2001-2002 2127 
2002-2003 4265 
2003-2004 659 
2004-2005 410 
2005-2006 265 
2006-2007 890 
2007-2008 6905 
2008-2009 9974 
2009-2010 860 
2010-2011 303 
Total 26658 
 
3.4 On being asked about the kind of activities organized by the CAPART under the 
PC scheme, the Ministry in their written reply stated: 
“CAPART, under its Public Cooperation (PC) scheme has sanctioned projects for 
income generation training in vocational and handicraft activities such as 
readymade garments, agarbatti  making, candle making, pickle making, brush 
manufacturing work, appliance works, brass trade, leaf cup plate making, 
computer training, repairing of diesel engine, tractor, mobile, TV, motor to 
generate livelihood through self employment/wage employment. “ 
 
3.5 Further, on being asked about the steps taken to encourage Self Help Groups , 
the Ministry stated: 
“Self Help Groups (SHGs) are targeted through the projects sanctioned to the 
VOs to provide need based skill training, production and marketing of products." 
 

3.6 As stated by the CAPART the major outcomes of the PC scheme are providing 
self employment/ wage employment opportunities, income generation, skill up -gradation 
and Women empowerment. 
3.7 On being asked about the constraint/bottlenecks in im plementing the Scheme, 
the Ministry stated: 
“One significant constraint which is faced commonly is the VOs seeking change 
of beneficiaries, due to migration of beneficiaries looking for employment, women 
migrating after marriages, and deaths. VOs can‟t cha nge beneficiaries without 
seeking prior permission from CAPART (so as to avoid any malpractices).”  
 
B. Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme (ARTS) 
 
3.8 Appropriate technologies for rural application are designed especially to solve the 
problems faced by deprived sections of the society, improve their income generating 
and livelihood capabilities, reduce drudgery and improve habitat and quality of life. 
These also focus on providing employment through self -sustaining and replicable 
income-based projects.  The thrust of ARTS is also to promote innovative technologies 
assimilated and introduced in the villages by rural innovators. Such technologies are 
considered innovative as they are locally designed and assembled to solve a local 
problem. These are lab-tested to ensure replicability. 
3.9 On being asked about the physical performance of various projects sanctioned 
by the Council under ARTS, the Ministry stated: 
“The major technologies supported under ARTS scheme include organic 
pesticides, soil management, low cost green house, water harvesting, brass 
vessel making, decorative pottery, medicinal plants nursery, agriculture tools 
making, food processing, f erro cement water storage tanks and sanitary latrines, 
cost effective housing, sisal fiber extraction, solar energy, mushroom cultivation 
benefiting approximately 1000 NGOs.” 
 
3.10 When asked as to how the Council co -ordinates the efforts towards ARTS to 
ensure that projects are implemented in a desired manner, the Ministry stated: 

“In order to ensure that projects are implemented and desired results are 
achieved, CAPART co -ordinates the efforts by providing funds to the VO s for 
implementing the project, su bmission of progress reports and Utilization 
Certificates etc. by the VO s, deputation of institutional monitors for conducting 
evaluations of the projects and providing feedback to the VOs.” 
 
3.11 During the year 2010 -11, no new projects were approved in A RTS. Sanction 
letters were issued in 4 projects however, for CAPART's assistance of Rs. 118.06 lakhs 
for projects which were approved in 2009 -10. Further an amount of Rs. 120 lakhs was 
released towards the new and ongoing projects under the scheme. 
 
3.12 The Department of Rural Development have informed the Committee that 
dissemination of appropriate technologies to the target groups in rural areas is one of 
the prime objectives of the CAPART, for which 20 Technology Resource Centre (TRCs) 
have been established across the country. The TRCs are designed to test technologies 
suitable for the specific geographical area, make modifications where necessary, and 
initiate the process of transfer of viable technologies through demonstration, training 
and manufacture. The unique feature about these Centres is that they are all managed 
by the voluntary organisations which have high degree of technical competence. Under 
this programme, voluntary agencies with proven track record of adaptive research and 
development (R & D) and technology transfer are supported with one -time grant for 
creation of necessary infrastructure and some recurring expenses. 
 
3.13 In reply to a query as to how the objective of TRCs can be achieved by 
establishing a meagre number in such a vast co untry, the Department stated that 
CAPART has taken a note of this vital observation of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development that 23 TRCs have been established in only 13 states of the country. In 
order to establish more Technology Resource Centers ( TRCs) by CAPART, an agenda 
on this subject was considered by the Executive Committee of CAPART in its 55 th 
meeting held on 29 th March, 2011.  The Executive Committee has approved that more 
TRCs should be setup by the Council with at least one TRC in each s tate, starting with 
big states going on to the smaller states. 

 
3.14 When the Committee enquired as to what kind of awareness programmes are 
being conducted by the NGOs on matters relating to Intellectual Property Right (IPR), 
the Ministry in their note stated: 
“Under the scheme of Scouting, Documentation/Validation and patenting/Piloting 
and Up -scaling of Rural Technologies and Innovations, a capacity building 
workshop on Dissemination and Incubation of Green Grass Root Innovations 
was conducted on 7th a nd 8th June 2010 at IIM, Ahmedabad. This workshop 
was organized through National Innovation Foundation (NIF), Ahmedabad and 
was attended by representatives of the voluntary organizations and Science & 
Technology (S&T) Institutions of the states.” 
 
 
C. Organization of Beneficiaries (OB) 
 
3.15 Under this scheme, CAPART supports activities for Organization of Beneficiaries 
to create awareness among the rural poor.  The objective of the Scheme is to provide 
support to poor communities/groups, through voluntary organizations, for just causes 
and to sustain the campaign for betterment of their economic status and social power.  
The Scheme also intends to empower people by increasing their awareness and 
bargaining power to get what is rightfully their benefits in term s of schemes, rights and 
legal entitlements. 
3.16 On being asked about the trajectory adopted by the CAPART to create 
awareness through OB, the Ministry in their written reply stated: 
“The trajectory adopted to create awareness through OB scheme includes 
training of organizers, organizing of mini camps/preparatory camps, organizing 
main camps, inviting resource persons from Govt. officers, Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs), social workers, development workers, experts on 
development issues, exposure visit s/field visits if required, exposure to media, 
i.e. films, slide show, demonstrations organized, supply of written material, role 
playing and socio-drama.”                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  

3.17 When asked as to how the CAPART ensures that the programmes u nder the 
scheme actually benefitted the targeted group they in their written note replied: 
“Through monitoring/evaluation by Institutional Monitors/CAPART‟s staff. The 
mechanism for effective monitoring of projects sanctioned by CAPART to VO is 
well defined and explained in the Policy Guidelines of CAPART” 
 
3.18 Further, they informed that from time to time, improvements in monitoring 
mechanism have been introduced. Earlier, individual monitors were evaluating the 
projects. This system was done away with in 2007, since then only Institutional monitors 
are monitoring the projects supported by CAPART. Since 2010, NABCONS (a 
subsidiary of NABARD) has been empanelled as Institutional Monitor. 
 
D. Disability Action Development (DAD) 
3.19 The Disability Action Division was set up in 1995 to facilitate equal job 
opportunities for people with disabilities while working for rural development. The thrust 
of the programme is to generate awareness through formation of Self Help Groups 
(SHGs) and to take up economic support activities so that the disabled people not only 
become self -supporting but also equal partners in the development process. The 
emphasis is on community based rehabilitation programmes through voluntary 
organizations, to enable p eople who have the capacity to work in this field and to focus 
on development of disabled people. 
3.20 The Committee have been informed that CAPART is the first national agency to 
act on the mandate of the "Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, P rotection of 
Rights and Full Participation)" Act, 1995 and to earmark three percent of its resources 
for people with disabilities. 
  

3.21 Goals and Focus areas of the scheme are: 
 Community Based Rehabilitation Projects (CBR) are based on local conditions 
and cultures which enable the expansion of CBR coverage as an important 
means of achieving equalization of opportunities for people with disabilities in 
rural areas. 
 CAPART has recognized seven established organizations in the field as 
Facilitation Centres for aiding the CBR programme. 
 
 Elimination of attitudinal, cultural and physical barriers, which limit the access of 
rural people with disabilities to facilities, services, information and development 
programme in the rural areas is one of the key objecti ves of the Disability Action 
Scheme Administered by CAPART. 
3.22 About the strategy adopted by the CAPART for upliftment/ rehabilitation of 
extremely vulnerable people with disability in rural areas, the Ministry stated: 
“CAPART is the first national agenc y to act on the mandate of the “Persons with 
Disability (equal opportunities, protection of rights and full participation)” Act., 
1995. The thrust of the programme is to generate awareness through formation 
of Self Help Groups (SHGs), Social mobilization, Awareness generation, 
Capacity building, Building of Village Level Organizations of vulnerable people, 
Activities for economic development, enhancement and income generation, 
Promotion and distribution of appropriate and low cost technology i.e. assistive 
devices, Initiating and supporting rural community network, Education and 
Community Health Action so that the disabled people not only become self 
supporting but also equal partners in the development process.” 
 
3.23 The Council also informed that approximately 10,000 disabled persons have 
been benefited under the programme. 
 
E. Marketing 
3.24 CAPART set up its marketing Division in 1989 with a view to providing 
opportunities, exposure and sustainable market linkages to rural producers covered 
under va rious income generation schemes of the Council and Ministry of Rural 
Development. The major activities of Marketing Division of CAPART are as under:- 

 
(i) Organise Gram Shree Melas 
(ii)  Participate in National/ International Melas 
(iii) Organizing and participating in n ational level Exhibitions by CII, FICCI   
and other International Organisations. 
(iv) Organize SARAS Melas at Dilli Haat, near INA Market and during India 
International Trade Fair (IITF) at Pragati Maidan. 
(v) Management of RD Pavilion at Pragati Maidan. 
(vi) Management of 44 SARAS stalls at Dilli Haat, Pitampura. 
 
Gram Shree Mela (GSM) 
3.25 The first step towards establishing an overall marketing development linkage was 
the organization of 'Gram Shree Melas' (GSM -BSM) which literally means 'wealth of 
villages'. GSM provide an opportunity to rural producers to sell their products directly in 
major markets, to interact with the buyers, to study and comprehend consumer tastes, 
preferences and choice.  Thus it helps them to upgrade and improve their products and 
marketing skills and provide a better service to the consumer while benefiting from a 
larger marketing opportunity. Gram Shree Mela has been decentralized and the 
Regional Committees (RC) are authorized to sanction and release funds after calling of 
Expressions of Interest from the VOs. Empowered Committees at state level sanction 
these melas. 
3.26 In reply to a query, the Ministry stated that d uring the Eleventh Five Year Plan , 
the Council has organized 96 Gram Shree Melas  and in these melas 5317 NGOs/ VOs 
have participated.  The details of the Gram Shree Melas organized during 2 001-02 to 
2011-12 are given at Appendix-I.  
 
3.27 When asked why Gram Shree Melas have never been organized in Arunachal 
Pradesh, Meghalaya, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Dadra &  Nagar Haveli, Daman & 
Diu, Delhi, Lakshadweep and Puducherry the Department stated that the event is 
demand driven and it is likely that no demand has been received from those states.  
However, CAPART has invited those states to participate in IITF SARAS,  Delhi but they 

did not participate in the mela. Meghalaya state now participated in SHISHIR SARAS 
Mela Delhi Haat Delhi. Despite of our repeated request and follow up, the union 
territories are not participating in these melas.  However, CAPART is orgnaising SARAS 
(IITF) and SHISHIR SARAS every year and inviting SHGs from all the states and union 
territories on behalf of the Ministry of Rural Development, Govt. of India.  Efforts are 
being made to organise mela in every state/UTs. 
3.28 The Department of Rural Development further stated that the Council adopts the 
following criteria for holding Gram Shree Melas:- 
 
a. The VO must be a registered organization under the Societies 
Registration Act 1860 or a state amendment thereof, the India Trust Act 
1882 or the Religious or Charitable Institution Registration Act 1920.  
b.  Should have completed 3 years with proven track record.  
c.  VOs organizing Melas should have undertaken projects/activities in 
income generation/production/marketing of rural crafts etc.  
d.  VO should be financially sound and should have had an average annual 
turnover (income and expe nditure) of at l east Rs.15 lakh  per year during 
the preceding three years for organizing State level Melas and Rs.7 lakh  
per year during the preceding three years for the Melas for organizing 
District level Melas. Thus for this purpose the total turnover (income and 
expenditure) of 3 preceding years shall be taken and then divided by 3 to 
get the average. Th is average should be Rs. 7 lakh  for District level mela 
and Rs. 15 lakh for a state level mela.  
 
e.  Should have organizational ability to handle events such as worksh ops, 
seminars, market promotion activities, publicity and public relations.  
f.  Should have adequate manpower and resources to undertake the 
responsibilities.  

g.  Have a cordial and effective working relationship with the local 
government, line departmen ts of the state/district and enjoy a good 
reputation with the local people and the groups.  
h.  The NGO should have some physical presence in the State/Union 
Territory where the Mela is proposed to be organized.  
i.  VO shall not be sanctioned more than tw o Melas in a block period of five 
years anywhere. However in places where good NGOs with requisite 
experience and turn over are not available, this may be relaxed to two 
melas in a block of 3 years with the approval of Director General, 
CAPART.  
 
j. The site of the GSM apart from the State Capitals can be organized in any 
major town/city of the state or any prime rural location also. Efforts should 
be made to synchronize dates of Melas with local festivals/major 
traditional Melas.  
 
k. The Gram Shree Mela can coincide with major religious occasions or 
social/ cultural events, adding a fillip to the objective of organizing the 
Mela.  
 
l.  Depending upon the appropriateness of timing of the event a place 
authorized for organizing a State level GSM can be  sanctioned a District 
level GSM if the respective Regional Committee deems fit. 
 
3.29  On being asked as to what additional measures have been initiated by the 
CAPART to ensure that talented artisans are not deprived of opportunities to participate 
in melas, the Ministry stated: 
 
"The voluntary agency is providing the following amenities to the participating 
 NGOs/DRDAs/SHGs in the Mela:  
 

I.  CAPART supported voluntary agencies will be provided expenses 
incurred by them on the freight of the material for onward journey. It would 
be limited to the actual amount paid not exceeding Rs. 3000, to the 
railways/road transport and would be payable only  on the production of 
the original/ photocopy receipt. The expenses on local transport will not be 
paid by CAPART.  
II.  Two persons from each voluntary agency/DRDA will be provided 
Dormitory style simply furnished accommodation free of cost. The 
participants would also be free to make alternative arrangements at their 
own cost.  
III.  In case of CAPART supported voluntary agencies, daily allowance of 
Rs.100/- (Rupees One Hundred Only) per day per person for the duration 
of the mela will be paid to a maximu m of two representatives of each 
participating agency.  
IV.  Each participating organization shall be provided with a stall measuring 
approximately 75 sq ft with two long tables for display of products and two 
chairs.  
V.  Proper security arrangements at the Mela site.  
VI.  Proper sanitation facilities and temporary toilets.  
VII.  Safe drinking water & Fire Safety  
VIII.  First aid facilities to meet with emergencies like minor  accidents/ mishaps/ 
ailments etc.  
IX.  Few stalls exclusively for local cuisine/ethnic food items."  
 
F. Young Professional Scheme (YP Scheme) 
3.33 In addition to the aforementioned schemes, t he Young Professionals 
Scheme was introduced in CAPART in 1988 for creating a training platform for 
youth drawn from diverse academic streams with the express objective of 
grooming them as potential rural managers for achieving the objective of 

introducing professionalism in the rural development sector. CAPART selects 
post graduates from various discipline related to rural development such as 
Social work, Rural management, Engineering and Marketing. The selection of the 
candidates is done through a process  of rigorous campus  level selection 
undertaken by CAPART in premier educational institutions across the country.  
The selected candidates are provided with 15 days' orientation training 
programme at selected resource institutes including an exposure visit t o a well 
established VO before their placement with CAPART Headquarters and RCs, 
Ministry of Rural Development, DRDAs and VOs across the country. The scheme 
endeavours to apportion the YP‟s tenure equally between CAPART/MoRD and 
DRDAs/VOs so as to expose t hem to the widest possible spectrum of working 
environments and challenges related to the rural development sector. CAPART 
imparts five days Refresher training to Young Professionals for experience 
sharing and updating their knowledge with the latest devel opments. Two one day 
exposure college visits are also  organized by CAPART with the basic aim to 
disseminate knowledge about various scheme of CAPART i.e., Public 
Cooperation, Rural Technology, Disability, YP Scheme etc.  
 
  

IV.  Utilisation of funds 
4.1 Under assistance to CAPART, the Government provides a Grant of Rs. 100 crore 
to CAPART for its various activities including administrative expenses. The details of 
grant received from MoRD and its utilization are as under: 
        (Rs. in crores) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Funds 
allocated 
 
Interest + 
refund 
from 
project          
Total  Financial 
Target 
(utilisiation)  
Unspent 
Balance  
2007-08 15.94 58.54 1.93 76.41 50.06 26.35 
2008-09 26.35 52.20 1.59 80.14 65.61 14.53 
2009-10 14.53 50.00 1.31 65.84 37.20 28.64 
2010-11 28.64 50.00 2.99 81.63 20.38 61.25 
2011-12 * 61.25 - - 61.25 11.22 50.03 
  
       *till 30.11.2011 
 
4.2 When asked as to what mechanism is being contemplated by the Department of 
Rural Development to ensure proper and full utilization of funds allocated to CAPART, 
the Department stated that efforts are being made by the Ministry for restructuring of 
CAPART. When the ban is lifted, it will ensure proper and full utilization of funds 
allocated to CAPART. 
  

V. Monitoring Mechanism for funded NGOs/VOs 
5.1 Monitoring is a systematic collection and analysis of information as a project 
progresses. It is aimed at improving efficiency and effectiveness of a project. CAPART 
has a unique in -built system of monitoring and evaluation of projects, throug h 
institutions of national and international repute. Monitoring of the CAPART -supported 
projects is a detailed exercise carried out in three stages: the pre -funding appraisal 
(PFA) of a project is carried out prior to sanction, mid -term appraisal is carrie d out 
before the release of the second installment of the sanctioned amount, and post -
completion evaluation is undertaken on completion of the project. The entire process is 
carried out through institutional monitors by the regional offices and the project  divisions 
at CAPART headquarters. During the financial year 2010-11, the CAPART had obtained 
51 PFAs, 471 mid -term evaluations and 74 post -completion evaluations of projects. A 
special drive was undertaken by CAPART to close the project files where sancti oned 
amount was released and the project was completed by the VO. As a result, during the 
financial year 2010-11, CAPART project divisions and regional offices have closed 808 
project files subject to technical formalities. 
 
5.2 CAPART's objective is to facilitate implementation of projects with timely conduct 
of the monitoring and evaluation exercise. A need has been felt to empanel an 
Institutional Monitor who has a presence all over the country. Accordingly in addition to 
the existing 210 Institutional M onitors, during the year 201 0-11, CAPART has 
empaneled NABARD Consultancy Services Pvt. Ltd. which has a pan -Indian presence. 
In the current year, 123 evaluation work assignments were given by various divisions at 
CAPART Headquarters against which Nabcons has already submitted 64 evaluation 
reports in 2010-11. 
 
5.3 As informed by the Ministry t he mechanism of effective monitoring of projects 
sanctioned by CAPART to a voluntary organisation (vo ) is defined in the Policy 
guidelines. CAPART has empanelled 211 Institutional Monitors to evaluate the projects 
off the VOs at three stages. The extract of relevant portion of Guidelines is given below: 
 
 

5.4 Stage – I Pre-Funding Appraisal 
  After the desk-appraisal of the proposal, CAPART will depute its empanelled FCEs for 
pre-funding appraisal to look into the following aspects:-  
●  Adherence to the statutory requirements – periodic filing of reports and 
returns with the registration authorities, fili ng of  income tax returns, if any, 
compliance with the FCRA requirements, etc.  
●  Verification of Account from Bank/Post Office and Registration Certificate 
from the office of  the Registrar, Societies.  
●  Maintenance of basic records – Executive Committ ee, General Body 
minutes books, books of accounts, etc.  
●  Consultation with the members of the society for assessment of 
transparency in managing the society.  
●  Capacity, expertise and infrastructure to implement the project.  
●  Rapport established by the VO with the people, Panchayats, the local 
administration, Bank etc.  
●  Consultations held by the VO with the proposed beneficiaries, villagers, 
panchayat functionaries, Block officials, Bankers while formulating the 
project proposal.  
●  Consultations by the VO with the line departments, banks, etc. for 
ensuring sustainability of  the project. 
5.5 Stage–II Mid -term appraisal by CAPART Monitors and release of second 
instalment.  
Decision to depute FCE for conducting mid -term evaluation will be based on the 
following:-  
●  Progress Report received from the VO.  

●  Utilisation of funds made available/local contributions mobilised in 
proportion to the release made. 
●  Failure on the part of the VO to submit the requisite documents in time. 
Based on the findings by the FCE, second and subsequent instalments will 
be released. A project may be subjected to one or more mid -
term/concurrent evaluations depending upon the nature, duration & 
seasonality involved in the implementation of the project.  
5.6 During the course of mid-term evaluation, the monitor is expected to look into the 
following:-  
●  Management of the affairs of the society, fulfilling the legal requirements, 
etc.  
●  The authenticity/correctness of the progress report made av ailable in 
comparison to the field work done.  
●  Assessment of the quality of physical work, beneficiaries involvement,  
reasonableness of  the amount spent, etc.  
●  Withdrawal of project fund from the bank and its utilisation.  
●  Checking of the vouchers and books of accounts.  
●  Assessment of beneficiaries satisfaction and their participation.  
●  Assessment of the benefits accruing from the progress made in the 
implementation of the project.  
5.7 Based on these factors, the monitor is expected to make  his recommendation for 
release of the next instalment.  
5.8 The evaluation report will be submitted by the FCE to CAPART within 45 days 
from the date of receipt of the assignment. The Evaluation re port will be examined by 
CAPART, keeping in view the progress reported by the project holder.  After 
examination of the progress report, Receipt & Payment Account, utilisation certificate 

and the mid -term evaluation report, decision will be taken in regard to the release of 
second/subsequent instalment within 15 days.  
5.9 The balance grant will be considered for release in six monthly instalments 
keeping in view the satisfactory performance and utilisation of grant released in 
previous installments and mid-term/concurrent evaluation reports. 
5.10 10% of  the total grant will be retained/withheld and will be reimbursed to the 
organization after receipt of satisfactory completion/final progress report/audited receipt 
& payment and income and expenditure statements of accounts and utilisation 
certificate. The project holder need not furnish separate utilisation certificate for this 
10% amount if utilisation Certificate for the same has been submitted in the final 
accounts.  
5.11 Stage – III Post Evaluation 
On receipt of the completion report an d other final documents, CAPART will 
appoint FC for  post evaluation within 15 days which will be carried out to obtain 
information on the following:-  
●  To verify whether all the stipulated work has been carried out as per the 
terms of the sanction order.  
●  To ascertain beneficiaries‟ satisfaction in the implementation/creation of the 
assets.  
●  To verify the books of accounts and other related documents to ensure 
proper utilisation of funds.  
●  To assess the impact of the project and arrangements mad e for 
sustainability of the project. 
 
5.12 As informed by the Department, c omprehensive evaluations of VOs are 
conducted by CAPART in addition to the periodic evaluations.  Such evaluations are 
normally conducted through professional institutions or teams of experts in the following 
cases:-  

●  VOs which have rece ived assistance over Rs.50 lakh  for a single project; 
or  
●  VOs which have received assistance over Rs.1 crore for different projects 
during a period of 4 years. 
 
Procedure for funding restrictions and blacklisting 
5.13 During the financial year 2010-11, CAPART placed 117 VOs under the "Financial 
Assistance Stopped"(FAS) category. If a VO is found to have indulged in financial 
misappropriation of the grant from CAPART or has exhibited recalcitrant behavior, it can 
be placed under black listing (BLA) as per the laid down g uidelines and procedures. 
During the financial year 2010 -11, CAPART has black -listed 4 VOs; however, 8 VOs 
have been placed under the BLA category on the recommendation of other 
Governmental funding organizations. 
5.14 VOs can be placed under funding restrictions on the following grounds:- 
i.  If  the project holder do not cooperate with the monitor for conducting 
evaluation of  the project.  
ii.  If the project holder does not submit progress report, audited statement of 
accounts and utilisation certificate.  
iii. If the project holder diverts the funds/change the beneficiaries/change the 
location of the project without approval of CAPART.  
5.15 The organisation  will be kept informed of the restrictions imposed in writing by 
CAPART.  It will also be given an opportunity to rectify the defect(s) within a period of 
three months failing which the prescribed procedure for blacklisting of the organisation 
will be init iated. VOs complying with the requirements will be removed from the 
restricted category.  
5.16 On the receipt of complaint, on the functioning of a organisation where there is 
prima-facie evidence of any of the points stated above, restrictions on the sanc tions and 

the release of funds will be imposed on the said organisation till the complaint is 
investigated/outcome decided.  
  
5.17 VOs can be blacklisted on the following grounds:-  
i.  If  the project holder has received or  receives funds from more than  one 
source or  applies for receiving any funds, either completely or partially 
from any other governmental/non -governmental, international or  any 
other agency, for the same project covering the same beneficiaries.  
ii.  Principal office bearers involved in criminal conduct/misappropriation of 
public funds.  
iii.  For submission of falsified accounts/documents.  
iv.  For not accomplishing the stipulated work even after giving sufficient 
opportunities.  
v.  Refusal to hand over the assets created/acquired u nder the project to the 
community/beneficiaries 
vi.  Failure to return the savings/unspent balance/refundable grant available/ 
extended under the project.  
vii.  Principal office bearers are serving government servants and the 
organisation conceals the fact.  
viii.  If more than two members of the Executive/Governing/Managing Body of 
the organisation  are  relatives/family  members  or  two  from  these  are  
cosignatory  in  bank  account operations and the VO conceals the facts.  
ix.  VOs blacklisted by other Governmental Organisations etc.  
5.18 After the organisation is blacklisted, it will be served with notice for recovery of 
the fund in question within a period of one month.  On the failure of the organisation to 
comply with the notice, suitable legal  action for recovery of the said amount will be 
initiated by CAPART.  The organisation will have an opportunity to appeal against the 

order of blacklisting within 3 months from the date of issue of the order.  This appeal will 
be considered by the Executiv e Committee of CAPART for decision.  The decision will 
be communicated to the organisation.  
 5.19 CAPART has blacklisted 634 organisations since 2001. The ground on which 
these have been blacklisted is given below:  
Particulars Number of VOs 
Non respon se/non submission of documents/ non 
cooperation to evaluators.   
380 
Fake and fabricated documents 54 
Blacklisted by other organisations 138 
Others  62 
Total 634 
 
5.20 Further, on being asked by the Committee about the occasion when the VO have 
been subsequently taken out of the blacklisted category and released funds, the 
Department in their note submitted:  
“6 voluntary organisations have been taken out from the blac klist category and 
Rs.8.05 lakh have been released under 14 projects to these 6 VOs.” 
 
5.21 On being asked about the action taken to recover the funds from the defaulter 
voluntary organizations/ NGOs, the Department in their note stated: 
“It  would  be  appropriate  to  mention  that  all  blacklisted  VOs  do  not  
necessarily  fall  under  the category  of  defaulter,  as  in  all  these  cases  there  
may  not  be  a  financial  angle  involved.  VOs have  been  blacklisted  for  non -
submission  of  documents,  non -response,  blacklisted  by  other Govt. funding 
agencies and even non -co-operation shown toward Monitors, etc. These are the 
various reasons, other than default, for blacklisting the VOs. As per records, out 
of the total of 634  VOs  blacklisted,  CAPART  ha s  not  released  funds/grants  
to  192  Blacklisted  Voluntary Organizations (including the 138 VOs blacklisted 
by other Govt. funding agencies), and hence no action is required in respect of 
those cases. Actions such as lodging of FIRs referring cases to  CBI and Police 
have been initiated in 62 cases for recovery.” 
 

5.22 Further, on being asked about the status of those 62 cases where the CAPART 
has lodged FIR cases to CBI and Police for recovery, the Department in their note 
stated: 
“(i) Legal action by lodging FIR by respective Regional Office is at various 
stages in 44 cases. 
(ii) CBI investigation against VOs was done and 10 cases are at various 
stages of prosecution in Patna. 
(iii) Legal action was taken by Special Haryana Police in 8 cases which are 
sub-judice in Court at different stages.” 
5.23 On being asked about the quantum of funds recovered from the blacklisted VOs 
the Department stated that the recovery from the blacklisted VOs stands to the tune of 
Rs. 25.22 lakh. 
  

VI. Restructuring of CAPART 
6.1 CAPART has had a troubled existence right from the beginning.  According to the 
Ministry the organization is suffering from: 
  
(i) Poor image;  
(ii) strong perception ineffectiveness, inefficiency and mission dissipation;  
(iii) rent seeking behavior/corruption;  
(iv) gross indiscipline and disregard of the objective;  
(v) failure to build up financial self sufficiency and a healthy corpus;  
(vi) no organisation focus; and  
(vii) no networking at any level except with clientele institutions.  
 
6.2  The working/organizational structure of CAPART has been reviewed by a 
number of  Committees from 1996 onwards which inter-alia includes TCS Study and 
Organisation review (1996), Short -term review of the structure (2000) , Secretary (RD) 
Committee (2002),  Vitthal Committee Report (2005),  Vinay Shankar Committee (2005-
06), Syeeda Hameed Report (2005 -06), Sevottam (2008 -09), Strategic Planning and 
Result Framework (2010).  
 
6.3  Also in the year 2009, 6 Sub-Committees of the Executive Committee (EC) were 
constituted to suggest reforms in CAPART and their Reports have since been 
submitted. 
 
6.4  The Executive Committee meeting convened on 30 April, 2010 decided to 
appoint Institute of Rural Management (IRMA) for a third party evaluation of the reports 
submitted by the Sub-Groups. The Report of IRMA has since been submitted.  
 
 
6.5  The Ministry ha d done an in -depth examination of the reports submitted by the 
Sub-Groups and report of the IRMA. Based on that, a restructuring proposal is under 
consideration of the Ministry. The measures suggested range from creating a new focus 
for CAPART on Capacity development, focus on Marketing, creating institutional 
networking of stakeholders organisations, structural reorganization including open 
selection of DG's post etc. 

6.6  The proposed measures for reforming CAPART based on IRMA Report under 
consideration are as below: 
 i.  Creating a New Focus  
 
a.  Capacity development of PRIs;  
b.  SHGs and their federations;  
c.  Sustainable development of natural resources;  
d.  Capacity development of voluntary organisations;  
e.  Learning from the people‟s models;  
 
ii.  CAPART should revert to its original role of development/dissemination of 
 appropriate rural technologies wherein a focus is required on the 
 following:-  
 
a.  Collect, audit, store and disseminate technologies;  
b.  To act as a platform for technolog y producing, users and marketing 
institutions;  
c.  To provide the technological input for NREGS, NRLM, IAY and other 
programmes of the Ministry;  
d.  Youth Employability Skill Development and Placement: the Kaarigar 
Scheme (Group3);  
e.  Engagement with A ppropriate Technologies and Knowledge Systems for 
enhancing nature based livelihoods (formerly ARTS) (Group 2);  
f.  Strengthening Institutional Base for enhancing Technical Competencies in 
CSOs (TRCs) (Group 2).  
 
 
iii.  Marketing of Rural Produce: - Holds the key to the success of the RD and 
 other initiatives.  
 
The rural produce do  not find adequate markets on account of distances, costs 
and access to electronic media. It is, therefore, necessary that the rural produce must 
be provided this access s o that the terms of trade are corrected. This focus could be 
brought in the following ways:-  

a.  Organise haats/melas at the national/all States capital on permanent 
basis;  
b.  Organise an e-marketing network for all rural produce;  
c.  Induct SHGs and other rural producers for this network;  
d.  Evolve a revenue model for the scheme;  
e.  Gradually spread the marketing network internationally.  
 
iv.  Grassroots Planning: -  
 
One of the major problems identified is regarding the lack of involvement of the 
people with the programmes. This is because the planning process does not involve the 
people and despite all protestations grassroots planning is not being practised. Here, 
grassroots planning becomes an imperative with focus on following subjects:  
a.  Capability building of the people in the tools of grassroots planning;  
b.  Capacity development of the PRIs and other people‟s institutions in 
grassroots planning;  
c.  Creating awareness of different models that have emerged in grassroots 
planning;  
d.  Helping people to evolve their own formats and appropriate models;  
e.  Creating linkages through local and regional networks;  
 
v.  Process Support:- 
 
  Apart from huge investments Government has much stake in the success of its 
programmes in the rural areas. The following focus needs to be created:  
 
a.  CAPART to be the principal institution to provide process support to the 
Government programme structure;  
b.  Process support to include grassroots planning, implementation, resource 
mobilisation and social-audit;  
c.  To provide legal literacy, mobilisational and other issue based support to 
the Panchayats;  

d.  Enable realization of Rights: Forest rights, RTI, MGNREGA, Right to Food 
etc (Sub-Group 1);  
e.  Fill up the missing link between institutions like DRDAs, RSETIs and the 
PRIs and the people;  
f.  Also to undertake process design, documentation and module 
development;  
 
vi.  Marketing Support:- 
 
With initiatives like SHGs marketing support to rural products is vital for any 
exercise in resuscitation. CAPART will fulfil this role with focus on the following:  
 
a.  To network with State -led endeavours like NRLM, SHGS and their 
Federations, PURA, Khadi Board and other enterprises in the rural areas;  
 
b.  To create a platform of the marketing institutions;  
 
c.  To expand the scope of the Gram Shree Melas to create an universal 
coverage;  
 
d.  To undertake and promote e-marketing for the constituent units;  
 
e.  Research including Action Research into the marketing needs of the 
constituent units;  
 
f.  Networking with the other initiatives of the Government and the voluntary 
sector;  
 
vii.  Networking:- 
  A major failure on part of the Voluntary Organisations is their incapacity to 
network together on major issues. CAPART is ideally placed to play this r ole with a 
clear focus on:  
 
a.  Create robust institutional network;  

 
b.  To act as platform of national and international funding agencies, 
Government, other institutions, PRIs and VOs;  
 
c.  Representation and advocacy on behalf of VOs;  
 
d.  Create partnership with Anchor Organisations in different regions;  
 
e.  Bring all such organizations into a network to support the Government and 
other endeavours in rural areas;  
 
viii.  Structural Reorganisation:- 
 Selection of DG/DDGs:  
a.  Organisation created for a different time and context. CAPART is 
structurally not able to cope with the requirements of workload. An 
antiquated organisational structure has become a constraint to the growth 
of CAPART;  
 
b.  The process of selection of the CEO and the top executive a key process. 
The upper management is monopolised by IAS cadre. Not every IAS 
officer is capable of handling the workload in CAPART. It is essential that 
the process of selection of the CEO and the top executive needs to be 
broadened.  
 
c.  The DG should be selected through a transparent broadbased selection 
process from the open market. A Search Committee headed by an 
eminent person like Deputy Chairman/Member Planning Commission 
needs to be constituted. The post of DG/DDGs should have a fixed term of 
5 years extendable by another term.  
 
d.  One DDG should be from the Voluntary Sector while the third could be 
from the open market.  
 
e.  The emolument of the DG should be fixed at Rs 1.5 L while the DDGs 
should get 1L fixed.  
 
f.  All other staff should be recruited from the open market for fixed terms;  

 
g.  Continuation should be on the basis of annual appraisal by independent 
machinery.  
 
ix.  Change in Funding Pattern:-  
 
a.  There can be no functional autonomy without financial autonomy. 
CAPART needs to delink from its dependence upon the Government for 
its day-to-day existence. [IRMA Report]  
 
b.  A Corpus of Funds of Rs. 1,000 C to be created at CAPART.  
 
c.  CAPART should service all Central/State Governemnt organisations 
international funding agencies, industrial houses and should seek project 
based support from them;  
 
d.  CAPART should access multiple sources of funding;  
 
e.  The Ministry would undertake p roject based funding to CAPART. This 
would help the organisation to get its acts together.  
 
f.  CAPART may develop into a Federation of funding organisations and 
could even become a clearing house for FCRA proposals;  
 
 
x.  Change in the Internal Processes:-  
 
a.  Any change in CAPART has to be preceded by change in its internal 
processes of invitation of application, appraisal, funding, monitoring and 
evaluation. These processes have to acquire objectivity, transparency and 
have to adhere to time lines.  
 

b.  The processes have to be made IT based and human interface have to be 
minimised to the extent possible. The movement of the project proposals 
have to be on-line through the web so that there is transparency.  
 
c.  There has to be a process of registra tion of organisations along with 
evaluation at the entry points.  
 
d.  The vigilance process to be reconsidered. The present system of 
vigilance has done least to check the behaviour in rent seeking.  
 
e.  We could think in terms of having a Standing Commi ttee on Vigilance in 
place of the Director   Vigilance.  
f.  The filing, storage and retrieval of information have to made totally 
electrophonic based.  
 
xi.  Changes in the Governing Structure:-  
 
The major stakeholders including the NGOs, the staff, the PRIs, other Ministries 
to acquire a real stake in the governance process. Internal autonomy is a sine qua non 
for the organisation but it is not to be equated with license to indulge in non -objective 
related behavior.  
a.  While the Minister (Rural Develop ment) may continue to be the President 
of the General Council of CAPART Member (RD) of Planning Commission 
or the Deputy Chairman himself be the Chairman of the Executive 
Committee.  
b.  Members of the alliance of funding institutions could be included in the 
governing process in the EC or the GC.  
c.  It is necessary the Regional Centres need to be developed, vested with 
greater autonomy and financial and other powers. They need to be made 
functional.  
d.  We need to put together a transparent process for nomination to the 
GC/EC of CAPART.  

e.  Some of the Regional Centres could also be managed in PPP mode with 
the help of the organizations.  
f.  There is urgent need to get away from the Government processes.  
 
xii.  Stages of Restructuring  
 
I.  In Stage I, the organisational changes would be made including the proposed 
pattern of the appointment of the DG/DDG and the rest of the top 
management.  
II. Conduct a series of workshops for firming up the Vision, Mission and the 
Strategies.  
III. In Stage II put the financial processes in place and start working it out.  
IV. Create Networking;  
V. Many of these actions will take place simultaneously.  
 
 
6.7 During the evidence the Committee pointed out that inspite of the fact that the 
working of CAPART has been reviewed by a number of Committees appointed on 
regular intervals since 1996 no action has been taken to revive or re-orient the CAPART 
particularly with reference to increased role of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) which 
was strengthened through 73rd & 74th Constitutional Amendments. The Secretary MoRD 
in response stated: 
“I will say there is a Government sector and there is a private sector.  There is 
also a non -Government sector which is away from these two.  There are N 
number of people at the grassroots level who are doing outstanding work on their 
own.  Nobody is suppo rting them.  All the hon. Members are aware that at the 
grassroots level there are many people who are doing outstanding work out of 
their own volition.  In fact, there is a theory that, „where there is a Government 
failure, there is an increase in people‟ s action and people‟s participation‟.  In 
these programmes, people take over.  This factor cannot be denied that there is 
a spirit of voluntarism.  We have come out with another programme of Bharat 
Nirman volunteers which is not even one year old, but is d oing outstanding work.  
It is totally voluntary and unpaid. In every village society, there are youths who 
are under employed or disguisedly employed..  We are harnessing  them for 
taking the rural development programmes down to the people and for supporti ng 
the panchayats.  I went to a village in Andhra Pradesh and found that there is 
electrifying experience. The Bharat Nirman volunteers and panchayats sat 
together. In a village of 999 people, there were four liquor shops and their daily 

sale was Rs. 10,00 0.  The Gram Sabha  decided that there will be no sale of 
liquor and the sale of liquor was stopped. The sarpanch said that previously the 
office would not open for five or six days together.  But now from morning to 
evening it is humming with activity. The refore, to have proper development 
people‟s initiatives, people‟s desires have to be harnessed for rural development 
purposes……." 
 
6.8 He further stated: 
 
" Article 243 (g) has designated the panchayats as institutions of self-governance 
at the local level.  Kutumbasri is a very good example. When we drafted our 
NRLM, we inducted Shri Vijay Anand from Kerala to draft our chapter for 
integration with the panchayats.  We seek integration with panchayats.  We do 
not deny the panchayats. We also admit that they are the Government at the 
local level. In our NGOs also, it has been rightly mentioned that in 1986 the 
panchayats were not in very good shape and they were moribund.  Since then a 
lot of activity has come. So, we are also looking ways by which they can be 
dovetailed to the Gram Sabha, how the Gram Sabhas can be supported and how 
the panchayats can be supported. Therefore, I assure this hon. Committee, our 
intention is not to bypass the panchayat, is no t to weaken the panchayat. Our 
intention is to strengthen the panchayats. The National Capacity Building 
Framework which was drafted by the Ministry of Panchayatiraj, I was also 
involved in that.  I had a minor contribution to that.  We are taking it forwa rd.  
Now, our premium institution, the National Institute of Rural Development has 
become the National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayatiraj and the 
Secretary, Ministry of Panchayatiraj has been inducted as a co -chair of all 
institutions. It is my firm opinion that you need some institution to harness the 
creative energies of the people.” 
 
 
6.9 On being pointed out by the Committee that the CAPART has failed on all fronts 
and enquired as to why it was necessary to continue, the Secretary, MoRD  stated that 
there was no compulsion to continue and if there were recommendations of the 
Parliamentary Committee to close it, the Government would consider the same. 
  

PART-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.  The Council for Advancement  of People’s Action and Rural 
Technology (CAPART) set up in 1986 by merging two organizations, viz., 
People’s Action and Development India (PADI) and Council for 
Advancement of Rural Technology (CART) has been functioning as an 
autonomous body under the ae gis of the Ministry of Rural Development. It 
was set up with the vision to play a dynamic and catalytic role in the many -
sided development of rural India through its network with the various 
Governmental agencies and Non -Governmental Organisations (NGOs). 
Even though the object ives of CAPART are laudable which, inter alia , 
include to encourage, promote and assist voluntary action for 
implementation of projects for rural prosperity, promote voluntary efforts in 
rural development and dissemination of technolo gies suitably modified for 
serving rural population, to promote, plan, undertake projects through Self 
Help Groups (SHGs) and to create awareness amongst rural people, etc., 
the Committee’s examination has revealed that CAPART has hardly 
achieved any of it s objectives. The Department of Rural Development 
themselves have conceded that  there have been problems in the 
organization since its beginning  and it is plagued by poor image, 
ineffectiveness and inefficiency. Further admittedly , it is suffering from  

corruption, gross indiscipline and disregard of the objectives. The 
Committee’s findings are detailed in succeeding paragraphs.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1) 
2. The organizational structure of CAPART is a broad spectrum 
consisting of 100 members out of which 40 are from voluntary societies, 20 
from other institutions, 25 ex -officio members and 10% individuals. The 
General Body is the highest governing body of CAPART comprising of its 
members presided over by the Hon'ble Minister of Rural Development 
which gives overall policy guidelines and approves the annual budget, 
balance sheet, etc. Besides it has Executive Committee Chaired by the 
Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development , Director General of CAPART being 
the Secretary to the Executive Committee, and the Secretary of the Ministry 
its ex-officio vice -Chairman.  Also there is a Standing Committee on 
Finance and Administration headed by Director General. The Committee 
are unhappy to find that an institution entrusted with r ural development 
under the overall control of the Minister  of Rural Development  and the 
Secretary of Rural Development , has been allowed to die a silent death.  It 
is high time that it is taken out of slumber to make this institution vibrant , 
so as to achieve its stated objectives. The Committee feel that there is also 
a need to re view the membership of Gener al Body to make this body slim 
and efficient to enable it to  take timely effective decisions.  The Committee 
also recommend  that the Chairman of CAPART should be a professional 

person with proven track record of rural development work. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the specific action taken by the Government in 
regard to reorganization of CAPART’s General Body/Exe cutive Committee, 
its Chairman and composition of other Committees.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2) 
3. CAPART’s headquarters are located at New Delhi and it has 9 
Regional Offices spread across the country, viz., Ahmedabad, 
Bhubaneshwar, Chandigarh , Dharwad, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Jaipur, 
Lucknow and Patna. The Committee regret to find that in spite of spread of 
the organization across the country, the various activities carried out by 
CAPART are declining year after year.  The Committee strongly recommend 
that these Regional offices should be strengthened so that they focus in 
their respective regions to have wider reach to the rural areas across the 
country. Besides, the re should be small advisory committees at Regional 
level having elected repre sentatives on board for wider and meaningful 
consultations.  
 The Committee would also like the Government to engage institutions 
of national importance like IIMs/ IRMA , etc. geographically located near  to 
the respective Regional Centres in evaluation of t he working of Regional 
Centres of CAPART so that timely remedial/corrective measures are taken 
on the shortcomings pointed out during such review/evaluation. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3, Para No.3) 

4. The Committee express their unhappiness  to find that there have 
been frequent changes in the post of D irector General, the Chief Executive 
of the organisation . During the last 7 years  there have been  as many as 
seven incumbents to this post. The non -continuity of the Chief Executive 
has affected the working of CAPART in a big way. The Committee expect 
that henceforth the post will carry a fixed tenure so as to carry out the 
plans and programmes of the CAPART in an organized and systematic 
manner. This would also ensure accountability of the Chief Executive of the 
organisation. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4) 
5. CAPART has been carrying out 6 Schemes, viz., Public Cooperation 
(help to Self Help Groups), Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme 
(ARTS), Organization of Beneficiaries, Help to Disabled, Marketing of Rural 
Products and Extending Help to Young Professionals. From the 
information furnished to the Committee by the Ministry it is seen that 
during the last 3 years , i.e., after 2008-09 activities of CAPART have almost 
been standstill. For instance, in the Scheme for Helping Self Help Groups, 
the number of beneficiaries during 2010 -11 has  come down to 303 from 
9974 in 2008 -09. Similarly, under Advancement of Rural Technology 
Scheme and Disability Action, Marketing, Gram S hree Melas, etc. , the 
activities have come down drastically.  The Committee are of the opinion 
that the Ministry should not take refuge of the impending restructuring of 

the CAPART which is under planning process for the years together.  The 
CAPART should have motivated the States to participate in the Gram Shree 
Melas which is a wonderful platform for the rural artisans to showcase their 
talent and products to the outer world. Similarly the CAPART should have 
assisted the VOs who are doing credible work in enhancing the skills and 
living conditions of the rural masses . Similarly, CAPART should have 
utilised the allocated funds fully. The Committee are anguished to find that 
the Ministry also failed in guiding the CAPART to carry out its given 
responsibilities efficiently. The Committee deplore such casual approach 
on the part of the Ministry. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5) 
6. The Committee note that CAPART has a number of guidelines for 
monitoring the  implementation of the projects  by the funded NGOs/VOs 
before sanction of the projects, during execution of the project s and post 
implementation of the projects. The Committee, however, find that CAPART 
has blacklisted as many as 634 organisations since 2001 on accou nt of 
non-furnishing of account documents, fake documents, etc. This shows the 
magnitude of misappropriation of funds by the funded NGOs/VOs whereby 
the impact of CAPART schemes has turned out to be invisible. The 
Committee feel that merely blacklisting of VOs/NGOs would not suffice . 
Strict action needs to be taken against them which may serve as a 
deterrent to others.  Moreover, the monitoring me chanism of CAPART also 

needs to be strengthened. The Committee therefore, would like the Ministry 
to ensure that CAPA RT takes action against  corrupt organization s/ 
individuals and also against its own Officers found guilty of malpractice / 
connivance with NGOs/VOs,  inefficiency etc.  Also the list of black -listed 
NGOs/VOs should be made available to other Central Ministries/State 
Governments so that these black-listed organizations do not get assistance 
from other Government sources.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6, Para No. 6) 
7.  The Government has been providing a grant of Rs.100 crore to 
CAPART to carry out its various activities including administrative 
expenses. However, in the recent years it has never utilized its funds  fully. 
For instance, against the target of Rs.50 crore in 2007-08 there was unspent 
balance of Rs.26 crore which increased to Rs. 61 crore and Rs. 50 crore in 
2010-11and 2011-12 respectively. It appears that during the last three years 
instead of giving any assistance for rural activities or to Self Help Groups, 
the CAPART has been incurring expenditure on the salary of its employees 
and other administrative expenditure only. The reason put forth by the 
Ministry that pending restructuring of CAPART, the funding of new projects 
has been kept in abeyance is not convincing to the Committee.  The 
Committee feel that this step has only hampered the development of the 
rural populace. The Committee therefore, desire that the ongoing projects 
should continue to be funded till the final decision of restructuring  of 

CAPART is taken, so that the developmental activities in rural areas are not 
stopped altogether.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7, Para No. 7) 
8. The Committee find that since 1996 onwards there ha ve been a number 
of reviews carried out by various Committees to improve the working of the 
CAPART and to bring efficiency and accountability in the working of 
CAPART. These Committees, inter- alia, include Strategy and Organisation 
Review (TCS) (1996), Shor t review of the Structure (2000), Review of 
Secretary RD (200 5), Vittal Committee Review (2005), Vinay Shankar 
Committee (2005 -06), Sayeed Hameed Repor t (2005 -06) and Sevottam 
(2008-09). The Committee are surprised to note that with so many reviews 
carried out by various Committees on the working of CAPART and visible 
non-functioning of the system coupled with corruption and black listing of 
several NGOs,  did not prompt  the Ministry of Rural Development to take 
any action or initiative to root out the ineff iciency in the institution. It was 
only in 2009 that 6 Sub -Committees of the Executive Committee (EC) were 
constituted to suggest reforms in CAPART and the reports submitted by 
these Sub -Committees have been evaluated by a third party viz. the 
Institute of Rural Management Anand (IRMA). The Committee have now 
been informed that based on IRMA Study Report, the Government is in the 
process of taking a  decision in regard to restructuring of the CAPART. The 
measures suggested in the Report ran ge from creating a new focus for 

CAPART on capacity building, focus on marketing, creating institution al 
networking of stakeholder organizations, structural reorganization 
including open selection of DG's post, etc. The Committee hope that the 
measures suggested in the Reports of Sub -Committees will help CAPART 
to come out of slumber and give it a new life.  The Committee , therefore, 
recommend the Government to  take a final decision in regard to future,  
restructuring of CAPART without further delay. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8, Para No. 8) 
9. The Committee are anguished to find that the CAPART though 
associated with the rural activities, does not have any coordination with the 
Panchayati Raj Institutions so far and it mainly has been dealing directly 
with the NGOs /VOs. Even though the Panchayati Raj Institutions were 
strengthened by the 73 rd and 74th Constitution Amendments as far back as 
1992, which made Panchayati Raj Institutions as institutions of Self 
Government, CAPART did not find it necessary t o associate PRIs with its 
activities. Under article 243G read with Schedule XI of the Constitution, the 
State Government, may, by law, endow the Panchayats  with powers to 
function as institutions of self government in  the  areas  of  agriculture,  
land  improvement,  minor irrigation, water management/watershed 
development, fisheries, minor forest produce, drinking water, roads, 
culverts, bridges, education, technical training, library, market and fairs, 
health and sanitation, womanand child development, PDS, social welfare 

including welfare of the handicapped and mentally retarded, etc.  While the 
CAPART has lost valuable time of over two decades in searching right 
module for helping the rural populace, the role of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs) has increased substantially during this period.  Similarly, 
from the information made available to the Committee, it is seen that 
CAPART has hardly any presence in backward regions/scheduled areas for 
carrying out welfare activities. The Committee are of the str ong view that 
while taking a final decision in regard to future of the CAPART, role of PRIs 
should be considered of prime importance so that CAPART assist the PRIs 
in terms of capacity building, training and providing necessary technology 
inputs in impleme ntation of various schemes. Since Panchayati Raj 
Institutions are getting direct funding from the Central Schemes as also the 
State’s share in some of the schemes , the pro-active role of CAPART can 
help the PRIs in a big way. The Committee therefore, desire that CAPART 
apart from assisting NGOs/VOs should also co -ordinate with PRIs in 
implementing its various schemes/ programmes.  The Committee would 
await the final decision of the Government in the matter within three 
months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9, Para No. 9) 
 
NEW DELHI;        SUMITRA MAHAJAN 
27 August, 2012             Chairperson, 
05 Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Rural Development 
  

Appendix - I 
Number of Gram Shree Melas organized during 2001-02 to 2011-12 
(vide Para 3.26) 
Year State No of Melas 
Organised 
2001-2002 Karnataka 1 
Sikkim 1 
Andhra Pradesh 1 
Jammu & Kashmir 1 
Maharashtra 1 
Assam 1 
Total 6 
2002-2003 Maharashtra 1 
Tamil Nadu 1 
Gujarat 1 
Orissa 1 
Assam 1 
Uttar Pradesh 1 
Jharkhand 1 
Chandigarh 1 
Himachal Pradesh 1 
Total 9 
2003-2004 Gujarat 1 
Maharashtra 3 
Rajasthan 1 
Uttar Pradesh 6 
Himachal Pradesh 1 
Haryana 1 
Andhra Pradesh 3 
Jammu & Kashmir 1 
Karnataka 1 
Assam 3 
Uttarakhand 2 
Bihar 6 
Goa 1 
Mizoram 1 
Manipur 1 
Nagaland 1 
Tamil Nadu 1 
Jharkhand 1 
Tripura 1 
Total 36 
  

2004-2005 Jammu & Kashmir 1 
Uttarakhand 1 
Kerala 1 
Uttar Pradesh 2 
Orissa 1 
Bihar 1 
Jharkhand 2 
Chhattisgarh 1 
Maharashtra 2 
Sikkim 1 
Tamil Nadu 2 
Assam 2 
Rajasthan 1 
Madhya Pradesh 1 
Manipur 1 
Karnataka 1 
Kerala 1 
Andhra Pradesh 3 
Total 25 
2005-2006 Jammu & Kashmir 2 
Himachal Pradesh 1 
Gujarat 1 
Andhra Pradesh 1 
Uttar Pradesh 3 
Madhya Pradesh 2 
Chandigarh 2 
Uttarakhand 1 
Orissa 1 
Rajasthan 1 
Bihar 1 
West Bengal  1 
Punjab 1 
Total 18 
2006-2007 Assam  1 
Nagaland 1 
Tripura 1 
Bihar 5 
Jharkhand 1 
Karnataka 1 
Kerala 2 
Tamil Nadu 2 
Andhra Pradesh 1 
Rajasthan 1 
Total 16 
  

2007-2008 Uttar Pradesh 9 
Rajasthan 1 
Assam 9 
Tripura 1 
Mizoram 1 
Manipur 1 
Bihar 7 
Jharkhand 8 
Karnataka 2 
Kerala 2 
Gujarat 2 
Maharashtra 4 
Andhra Pradesh 4 
Tamil Nadu 4 
Total 55 
2008-2009 Uttar Pradesh 1 
Uttarakhand 1 
Madhya Pradesh 2 
Rajasthan 3 
Bihar 10 
Jharkhand 5 
Karnataka 3 
Kerala 2 
Gujarat 4 
Maharashtra  5 
Total 36 
2009-2010 Bihar 1 
Kerala 1 
Andhra Pradesh 3 
Tamil Nadu 1 
Total 6 
2010-2011 Jharkhand 1 
Rajasthan 1 
Andhra Pradesh 1 
Karnataka 1 
Kerala 1 
Total 5 
2011-2012 NIL NIL 
TOTAL  212 
 
  

Appendix – II  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
FRIDAY, THE 27 JANUARY, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs. in Committee Room No. „D‟, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan -   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
3. Shri Maheshwar Hazari 
4. Shri P. Kumar 
5. Dr. (Smt.) Ratna De (Nag) 
6. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
8. Shri Ganga Charan 
9. Shri P. Rajeeve 
10. Smt. Maya Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.  Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Raju Srivastava - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
Representatives of Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development) 
 
1. Shri B.K. Sinha  - Secretary 
2. Shri S. Vijay Kumar  - OSD 
3. Shri Arvind Mayaram  - Additional Secretary & FA 
4. Shri A.K. Singh  - Director-General, CAPART 

  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee to the sitting 
convened to take evidence of the representatives of the Department of Rural Development 
(Ministry of Rural Development) in connection with examination of working of ' the Council for 
Advancement of People's Action and Rural Technology (CAPART)'. 
[Witnesses were then called in] 
 
3. After welcoming the witnesses, the Chairperson read out Direction 55 (1) regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings. The Chairperson then h ighlighted the various issues of 
schemes/programmes being implemented by the CAPART viz. poor image of CAPART, 
reorientation of the existing schemes in synchronization with emerging trends in rural sector, 
non-utilization of budget for the last five years,  stipulated time for finalization of the 
restructuring process, appointment of regular Director -General etc. Thereafter, the 
representative of the Department of Rural Development made a power point presentation on 
issues related to the implementation and r eview of restructuring of the Council for 
Advancement of People's Action and Rural Technology (CAPART). They also informed the 
Committee about the various difficulties being faced in the implementation of the 
schemes/programmes of the CAPART as well as mea sures taken by the Government for its 
effective implementation. The witnesses then responded to the clarifications sought by the 
Members of the Committee.   
 
4. On some of the queries raised by Members, on which the information was not readily 
available, they were requested to send the written replies to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
[The representatives of Department of Rural Development withdrew] 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.   
/-----------------/ 
  

Appendix – III  
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
FRIDAY, THE 24 AUGUST, 2012 
 
 The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1040 hrs. in Committee Room No. „D‟, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
           
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti 
3. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
5. Shri P.L. Punia 
6. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
7. Smt. Supriya Sule 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri Hussain Dalwai 
9. Dr. Ram Prakash 
10. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
11. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma   - Director 
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. 
The Committee then took up for consideration the Draft Reports on 'Council for Advancement 
off People's Action and Rural Technology', Department of Rural Development (Mini stry of Rural 

Development) and Computerization of Land Records', Department of Land Resources (Ministry 
of Rural Development). After discussing the Draft Reports in detail the Committee adopted the 
Draft Reports with slight modifications. 
 
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above mentioned Draft 
Reports taking into consideration consequential changes arising out of factual verification, if 
any, by the concerned Ministry/Department and to present the same to both the Houses of 
Parliament. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson apprised the members that term of present Committee 
comes to end on 31 August, 2012 and appreciated the members for their valuable contribution 
made in the working of the Committee and in finalisation of 11 Report s during the present 
tenure of the Comittee. 
 
5. The Committee also placed on record their deep sense of appreciation of the invaluable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.  
  
The Committee then adjourned.  
----- 
  
 