THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for the year 2012-13]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 18.12.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 82
Price : Rs. 34.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-2013) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government ............................................................ 9
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .............................................................................. 17
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee ............................................................... 18
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ......... 22
A
PPENDICES
I. Extracts of Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the
Committee held on 14 December, 2012 ............................. 25
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth
Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development .................................................................. 27
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013)
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Thangso Baite
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
5. Shri Premchand Guddu
6. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique
7. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
8. Shri Ramesh Vishwanath Katti
9. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
12. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy
13. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
14. Dr. Sanjay Singh
15. Shri Uma Shankar Singh
16. Smt. Supriya Sule
17. Smt. Annu Tandon
18. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar
19. Smt. Usha Verma
20. Shri P . Viswanathan
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Munquad Ali
23. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay
(iii)

25. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Shri C.P . Narayanan
30. Shri Mohan Singh
31. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
4. Miss Melody Vungthiansiam — Committee Assistant
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2012-2013) having been authorised by the Committee to
present the Report on their behalf, present the 36th Report on the
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the 29th Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj.
2. The 29th Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 3 May, 2012. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 31 August, 2012.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 14 December, 2012.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 29th Report of the Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
14 December, 2012 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2012-13) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in their Twenty-Ninth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj for the year 2012-2013.
2. The Twenty-Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
03 May, 2012 and was laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on the same
date. The Report contained 15 observations/recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been examined and categorised as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10, 14 and 15
Total: 08
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Sl. No. 11
Total: 01
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl. No. 4, 12 and 13
Total: 03
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. Nos. 2, 8 and 9
Total: 03
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of
recommendations for which only interim replies have been given by
the Government included in Chapter-V of this Report and replies to
recommendations made in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished
to the Committee expeditiously.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of the recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Allocation of funds for Twelfth Five Year Plan
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
6. With regard to allocation of funds, the Committee had
recommended as under:—
“In order to transform the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) into
an effective, efficient and transparent vehicle for local governance,
social change and public service delivery mechanism for meeting
the aspirations of the local population, the erstwhile Department
of Panchayati Raj was converted into a full-fledged Ministry with
effect from 27 May , 2004. The Committee’s examination has revealed
that for the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the Ministry had proposed
an allocation of Rs. 39899 crore (Rs. 24110 crore for BRGF and
Rs. 15789 crore for other schemes), whereas, the Planning
Commission had allocated Rs. 24986.37 crore i.e., a decrease of
around 37 percent. The Committee also note that as per the report
by the Working Group for the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the total
fund requirement for the Ministry would be approximately
Rs. 78000 crore i.e., an yearly allocation of around Rs. 15600 crore
during the entire period of Twelfth Five Year Plan. However, for
the first year of the Twelfth Plan i.e., for the fiscal year 2012-13, a
meagre amount of Rs. 5350 crore (including Rs. 5050 crore for
BRGF) has been provided. The Committee are disappointed to note
that the allocation of funds for the fiscal year 2012-13 is not
adequate for effectively enforcing various constitutional provisions
for strengthening the Panchayati Raj Institutions. Since allocation
to BRGF is of Rs. 5050 crore, left out amount of Rs. 300 crore for
other schemes for the entire country is hardly adequate. While
approving the allocations for 2012-13, which is on lower side, the
Committee strongly recommend that Planning Commission/
Ministry of Finance should consider higher and realistic allocation
for the Ministry so that the growth and empowerment of
Panchayats are visible in the country.”

3
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“The concern of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
was conveyed to the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance.
Planning Commission has informed that the concern of the
Committee has been noted by them. They have stated that the
Twelfth Five Year Plan is yet to be finalized. The allocation for the
schemes of any Ministry is based on the total GBS available during
any year. The allocation for the schemes of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj was enhanced from Rs. 200 crore in 2011-12 to
Rs. 300 crore in 2012-13. Further, a proposal to transfer 1% of the
allocation of the Ministry of Rural Development and the Ministry
of Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation to the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj for strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institutions
(PRIs) during the Twelfth Plan period is also under consideration.
These resources would be available through the Rajiv Gandhi
Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) to supplement the
action plan for strengthening of Panchayats which is expected to
have a substantive impact on the effectiveness of PRIs.”
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
8. The Committee had also recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that during the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the
Ministry propose to launch a new scheme, namely, Rajiv Gandhi
Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) by merging the existing
schemes viz., Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY), e-Panchayat,
Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive Scheme
(PEAIS), Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan (PMEYSA)
and capacity building part of Backward Regions Grant Fund
(BRGF). The Committee also note that the total funds required
under RGPSA for the Twelfth Pan period would be Rs. 33000 crore,
whereas, for the fiscal year 2012-13, only an indicative amount of
Rs. 50 crore has been allocated for the scheme. The Committee are
dismayed to note that various social welfare schemes/programmes
are initially formulated by the Ministry and soon thereafter, without
making any realistic assessment of attainment of objectives, the
schemes/programmes are merged/ renamed on the pretext of
taking a holistic view of the sector. The Committee are not very
sure whether any detailed analysis was done for mooting the
proposal for merging existing schemes into one umbrella scheme.
This sort of malady becomes all the more serious when the total
funds allocated for various schemes of the Ministry excluding BRGF
and RGPSA is a meagre Rs. 250 crore. Considering the lower
allocation to various schemes like Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana
(RGSY), Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive
Scheme (PEAIS) and Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan

4
(PMEYSA), where their impact could hardly reach to the ground
level, the Committee strongly recommend that after the launch of
RGPSA with proposed outlay of Rs. 33000 crore for the Ministry
in the Twelfth Plan, allocation to the existing schemes which would
become components of the RGPSA particularly in PEAIS should
be increased substantially to have a real impact at village panchayat
level. The Committee expect that after merging various schemes of
the Ministry under the umbrella of RGPSA, the aims and objectives
of these schemes would not only remain intact but would be
enlarged substantially to feel the positive impact of local self
governance through PRIs.”
9. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“The observations of the Committee have been noted for
compliance and necessary steps have been taken by the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj to ensure that adequate provisions would be
available under the individual components or activities included
under the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan for
funding the strengthening of Panchayats and improving their
accountability.”
10. The Committee note that the inadequacy of funds for the
Ministry in the initial year of the Twelfth Five Year Plan as pointed
out by them has been brought to the notice of the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance. From the statement made
by the Minister in Lok Sabha on 30.11.2012 on action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the 29th Report
of the Committee, it is observed that the Planning Commission has
approved an outlay of Rs.  35,743 crore for the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj for 12th Plan period. Considering the fact that the Ministry had
sought Rs. 33,000 crore for RGPSA alone, the Committee feel that
the total approved budget is on lower side. Accordingly, the
Committee would like the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to take up the
matter again with Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance
for seeking enhancement in plan allocations for the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj.
B. Implementation of the Panchayats (Extension of Scheduled Areas)
Act, 1996 (PESA)
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
11. In the context of implementation of the PESA 1996, the
Committee had inter-alia recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that the provisions of the Panchayats
(Extension of Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 came into force as a
sequel of the 73rd amendment of IX Schedule of the Constitution

5
which inter-alia provided constitutional sanction to the Panchayati
Raj as an institution of self-governance. The application of this
amendment excluded the areas covered by the Fifth and Sixth
Schedules to the Constitution. The areas of the Fifth Schedule,
according to the Article 244, cover the Scheduled and Tribal areas
other than the areas of the Sixth Schedule like in Assam,
Meghalaya, Tripura, Nagaland and Mizoram. The areas of the Fifth
Schedule are spread over nine States viz.,  Andhra Pradesh,
Jharkhand, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Rajasthan. The PESA Act, 1996
was aimed to extend the provisions of 73rd Constitution
amendment to the Scheduled and Tribal areas falling under the
Fifth Schedule.
The Committee also note that though the enactment of PESA in
1996 was a welcome step which conferred relatively greater
autonomy to Gram Sabhas, PESA’s sincere implementation has not
been seriously attempted by the Government as the data furnished
by the Ministry has brought out that several States are yet to
implement all provisions enumerated in PESA even after its
enactment as many as 16 years back. The Committee have also
been informed that the Government has identified the proposed
amendments in the PESA to make it more beneficial to the people.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the provisions
contained in the PESA Act should be reviewed and amended by
bringing out appropriate amendments in PESA expeditiously.”
12. The Ministry in their action taken reply have inter-alia stated
as under:—
“Ministry of Panchayati Raj is continuously pursuing the matter of
implementation of PESA with the nine States which cover areas of
the Fifth Schedule. Model Guidelines to vest Gram Sabha with
powers under PESA as well as Model Rules under PESA have
been prepared and circulated to those States for adoption with
necessary modifications. The concerned States as well as Central
Ministries have been urged to amend where necessary, the
provisions of subject laws relating to forests, excise, mining etc., to
make them PESA compliant. Special Training modules have also
been developed to equip Gram Sabhas and elected representatives
in areas covered under Fifth Schedule to effectively dispose their
responsibilities as per PESA provisions.”
13. In response to the Committee’s recommendation about non-
implementation of PESA during the last sixteen years and the need
for review of the provisions of PESA law while bringing out

6
amendments in the identified areas, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
has spelt out that preparation and circulation of Model Guidelines/
Rules vesting the Gram Sabha with powers under PESA to nine
States with ‘Scheduled Areas’ and also urging the Central Ministries
for amending their respective laws to make them PESA compliant.
The Committee are unhappy to find that the Ministry has not given
any reply to the specific recommendations about review of PESA
Act and bringing out appropriate amendments in PESA expeditiously.
The Committee expect that Government replies are specific and
complete. They, therefore, would like the Government to take action
on their recommendations and apprise the Committee.
C. Devolution of Functions, Finances and Functionaries (3Fs) to
Panchayats
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that about 200 districts in the country are
affected by the extremism, violence, etc. Various Government
Committees have brought out that one of the reasons for this has
been unequal distribution of resources and opportunities and means
of regular income. Even though Constitutional provisions were
made long back about involvement of Gram Sabhas and Councils
in the Scheduled areas. Real financial powers/planning have not
been given at the Panchayat/Gram Sabha level. The Committee
are of the strong view that out of Rs. 2 lakh crores funds which
are given by the Centre to the States for rural/social scheme a
substantial amount should be allocated to the Panchayats/Gram
Sabhas, particularly with reference to 29 items of work enumerated
in 11th Schedule to the Constitution. The Committee, therefore,
would like the Government to do model activity mapping to be
followed by the State Governments for empowering the
Panchayats/Gram Sabhas in the matter. The Committee also note
that Central Government can issue directions to the States under
the provisions of Schedule V for governance in Scheduled areas
and accordingly Government should make use of these provisions.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific action
taken in this regard.
The Committee find that 73rd Amendment to the Constitution seeks
to endow the Panchayats with authority to function as institutions
of self-governance. Inherent to this provision is the need for
devolution of Functions, Finances and Functionaries (3Fs) for States

7
to the Panchayats. The Committee are aware that Panchayati Raj
is a State subject and the States are responsible for devolution of
3Fs to the Panchayats. The Committee, however, find that the pace
of devolution of 3Fs to the Panchayats has not been encouraging
due to lack of manpower and infrastructure which impinges on
their capacity to fulfil their assigned roles and responsibilities. The
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take up the matter with
the State Governments to speed up the process of devolution of
3Fs to Panchayats by chalking out an activity map so as to ensure
that progress in this regard is monitored regularly and
scientifically.”
15. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“The Ministry of Panchayati Raj will continue its efforts through
a system of regular monitoring and incentivization to encourage/
facilitate State Governments to speed up the process of devolution
of 3Fs under RGPSA, funding would be linked to the performance
of State on critical parameters including devolution of 3Fs to
Panchayats.”
16. The Committee regret to note that the Government reply is
silent on the model activity mapping to be followed by the State
Governments for empowering the Panchayats/Gram Sabhas and issue
of directions to the State Governments under the provisions of
Schedule V for governance in the Scheduled Areas. The Committee
expect from the Government that their recommendations are
considered by the Government carefully and in letter and spirit.
They, accordingly, would await specific replies of the Government
to these vital aspects.
D. Review of working of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
17. The Committee in the context of empowerment of PRIs had
recommended as under:—
“Empowering process of Panchayati Raj Institutions in the country
is nearing two decades. The Committee recommend that
Government should institute a high-level Committee on the pattern
of Balwant Rai Mehta and Ashok Mehta Committees to review
working of Panchayati Raj Institutions to identify the shortcomings
in the present system and to suggest remedial measures for
strengthening the PRI institutions to meet the challenges of inclusive
growth and inclusive governance and devolution of powers at
Panchayat/Gram Sabha level as per Constitutional provisions.”

8
18. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:—
“The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has constituted an Expert
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar,
Member of Parliament (Rajya Sabha) with the following Terms of
Reference:—
(i) To review the existing policy and guidelines of relevant
Central Sector/Centrally Sponsored Schemes dealing with
social sector/anti poverty programmes and to give specific
recommendations on (a) an appropriate role and
responsibility of Panchayats at different levels based on the
principle of subsidiarity, (b) for strengthening their capacity
to deliver services and (c) for making them accountable to
respective Gram Sabhas.
(ii) To flag the constraints that may come up in operationalising
the delivery system through the PRIs and suggest ways
and means of dealing with the same.
(iii) To suggest ways to incentivize States to devolve 3 Fs i.e.
Funds, Functions and Functionaries to Panchayats.
Order constituting the Committee has been issued on 27 August,
2012.”
19. The Committee are happy to note that in pursuance of
Committee’s recommendation for constitution of high level
Committee, an Expert Committee has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, Member of Parliament
(Rajya Sabha), to inter-alia review the existing policy of relevant
Central Sector/Centrally Sponsored Schemes to give recommendations
on appropriate role and responsibilities of Panchayats and to suggest
ways to incentivize States to devolve three Fs to Panchayats. The
Committee while acknowledging the initiatives of the Ministry,
re-emphasise the significance of strengthening of PRIs which are
the basis of development of rural areas and preparing them to
effectively meet the challenges of inclusive governance. The
Committee would await the recommendations of the newly
constituted Committee.

9
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
In order to transform the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) into an
effective, efficient and transparent vehicle for local governance, social
change and public service delivery mechanism for meeting the
aspirations of the local population, the erstwhile Department of
Panchayati Raj was converted into a full-fledged Ministry with effect
from 27 May, 2004. The Committee’s examination has revealed that for
the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the Ministry had proposed an allocation
of Rs. 39899 crore (Rs. 24110 crore for BRGF and Rs. 15789 crore for
other schemes), whereas, the Planning Commission had allocated
Rs. 24986.37 crore i.e., a decrease of around 37 percent. The Committee
also note that as per the report by the Working Group for the Twelfth
Five Year Plan, the total fund requirement for the Ministry would be
approximately Rs. 78000 crore i.e., an yearly allocation of around
Rs. 15600 crore during the entire period of Twelfth Five Year Plan.
However, for the first year of the Twelfth Plan i.e., for the fiscal year
2012-13, a meagre amount of Rs. 5350 crore (including Rs. 5050 crore
for BRGF) has been provided. The Committee are disappointed to
note that the allocation of funds for the fiscal year 2012-13 is not
adequate for effectively enforcing various constitutional provisions for
strengthening the Panchayati Raj Institutions. Since allocation to BRGF
is of Rs. 5050 crore, left out amount of Rs. 300 crore for other schemes
for the entire country is hardly adequate. While approving the
allocations for 2012-13, which is on lower side, the Committee strongly
recommend that Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance should
consider higher and realistic allocation for the Ministry so that the
growth and empowerment of Panchayats are visible in the country.
Reply of the Government
The concern of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
was conveyed to the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance.
Planning Commission has informed that the concern of the Committee
has been noted by them. They have stated that the Twelfth Five Year
Plan is yet to be finalized. The allocation for the schemes of any
Ministry is based on the total GBS available during any year. The

10
allocation for the schemes of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj was
enhanced from Rs. 200 crore in 2011-12 to Rs. 300 crore in 2012-13.
Further, a proposal to transfer 1% of the allocation of the Ministry of
Rural Development and the Ministry of Drinking Water Supply and
Sanitation to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for strengthening of
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) during the Twelfth Plan period is
also under consideration. These resources would be available through
the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) to
supplement the action plan for strengthening of Panchayats which is
expected to have a substantive impact on the effectiveness of PRIs.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Statement made by the Minister of Panchayati Raj on 30.11.12
Planning Commission vide their D.O.No. 32/26/2011-FR dated
7.9.2012 informed to Ministry of Panchayati Raj that Planning
Commission has worked out the Gross Budget Support (GBS) for the
Twelfth Plan in consultation with the Ministry of Finance.
The GBS allocation at current prices for Twelfth Plan in respect of
Ministry of Panchayati Raj is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Central Plan 6,437
Additional Central Assistance to State Plan - 29,306
BRGF District Component
Total 35,743
This enhanced allocation would be placed in the Rajiv Gandhi
Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) for evolving a holistic action
plan for strengthening of Panchayats. The RGPSA scheme has been
approved in principle by the Planning Commission. Approval of
EFC,CCEA etc. is to be obtained.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
For the Eleventh Plan, Rs. 24750 crore was allocated to the Ministry
at BE stage which was reduced to Rs. 22283 crore at RE stage. The
Committee regret to note that funds allocated to the Ministry at BE

11
stage during the Eleventh Five Year Plan were reduced year after year
at the RE stage by the Ministry of Finance. Notwithstanding the fact
that during the Eleventh Plan, the fund utilization by the Ministry has
been found to be satisfactory, the Committee are of the firm opinion
that the importance of PRIs in the country is talked much but
constantly ignored by the Government by not only providing requisite
funds and further reducing the allocated funds subsequently.
Accordingly, the Committee recommend that practice of reduction of
funds at RE stage by the Ministry of Finance in respect of an important
Ministry like MOPR, which directly deals with the functioning and
strengthening the Panchayats, should be stopped forthwith so that the
objective of empowerment of people at the grass-root level through
the Panchayati Raj Institutions could be achieved fully.
Reply of the Government
The concern of the Committee regarding practice of reduction of
funds allocated to the Ministry at RE stage by Ministry of Finance has
been noted. On its part, Ministry of Panchayati Raj would make every
effort to ensure timely utilization of the allocated funds so that the
occasion for reduction of the budget estimates of the Ministry does
not arise at RE Stage.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
Even though the Ministry's main role and responsibilities are to
strengthen the role by Panchayati Raj Institutions at grass-root level,
the Committee find that for years, the Government has been
maintaining BRGF as the main scheme of the Ministry. For instance,
for the year 2012-13, out of Rs. 5350 crore, Rs. 5050 crore has been
earmarked for the BRGF leaving Rs. 300 crore for the other schemes
of the Ministry. The Committee are of the strong view that while
backward Districts require much assistance in terms of funds and
capacity building under BRGF scheme, the other Panchayats across
the country also need similar help, particularly in terms of capacity
building and training. The Constitutional provisions provide that the
State Governments can assign the implementation of as many as 29
subjects to the Panchayats. Accordingly, it becomes all the more
necessary to provide training not only to the Panchayat members but
also to the other functionaries of the Panchayat like the Secretaries,
the Junior Engineers and other functionaries in the three tier PRIs
who are required to conceptualize and implement the schemes like

12
supply of drinking water, laying of roads, construction of anganwadis,
health centres, etc. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
the Government should consider all these factors and prepare a
comprehensive/composite plan for strengthening the PRIs in a realistic
manner. Similarly, in this context, there is also need for setting up
regional training centres so that more and more Panchayat members
and related officials are trained.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry agrees with the recommendations of the Committee
regarding the need for a comprehensive/composite plan for
strengthening of the PRIs which is the main mission of the Ministry.
Keeping this in view, the scheme of Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) has been conceptualised to address
issues of infrastructure and manpower for strengthening Panchayats
and for the training & capacity building of elected representatives of
PRIs and official functionaries. In the scheme, special focus is envisaged
for strengthening of training infrastructure.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee’s examination of BRGF, the main scheme of the
Ministry so far, which is aimed at redressing regional imbalances in
development by providing financial resources for supplementing and
converging existing developmental inflows, has revealed that a World
Bank Mission evaluated the implementation of BRGF in eight States.
The Mission found that BRGF had stimulated a process of strengthening
PRIs and provided resources for local bodies to address investment
needs and over 1 lakh local investment projects had been executed.
However, while comparing the findings of World Bank Mission with
the ground realities which include continuous slashing of allocated
funds at RE stage, meagre funds allocated under the capacity building
component of BRGF, decreasing trend in the training of elected
representatives and functionaries, inordinate delay in establishing an
institutional infrastructure for training and the burgeoning problem of
unspent balances, the Committee are constrained to conclude that
rigorous efforts are still required to be made by the Ministry to attain
the underlined objectives of the Scheme. Since 94% of total allocation
of funds of the Ministry account for BRGF, the Committee urge the
Ministry to work out a specific plan of action to eliminate the loop-
holes of the scheme to ensure a better delivery mechanism for the
people at large. Since the capacity building component of BRGF would
be merged with RGPSA, the Committee strongly recommend that the
funds for this component should also be enhanced.

13
Reply of the Government
It is a fact that while the scheme has been found to be very useful
in terms of its untied nature, there is no doubt, much scope to improve
the implementation of the scheme with particular reference to ensuring
prompt and timely release of funds by the States to the Implementing
Agencies at various levels. Although the imposition of penal interest
for delayed releases of funds has had some effect, the problem still
persists in respect of some States. The Ministry holds regular review
meetings with the States to facilitate early disposal of all pending
issues so that States are in a position to access their entitlements under
the scheme early in the fiscal year. Planning Commission has been
requested to enhance the Plan allocation for the Ministry in Twelfth
Plan and a major component of this will be earmarked for capacity
building and training.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee find that RGSY scheme is implemented in
non-BRGF Districts of the country. Under the scheme, assistance is
provided to the States under two components, namely (i) Training and
Capacity Building, and (ii) Infrastructure Development. The Committee
also note that during the Eleventh Plan Period (2007-2012), Rs. 213.63
crore has been utilized for capacity building & training purposes and
Rs. 82.99 crore for infrastructure development. The Committee have
been informed that during 2009-10 to 2011-12, around 19 lakh elected
representatives and functionaries have been trained and a total of 3968
Panchayat Ghars have been constructed during the Eleventh Plan. The
Committee are dismayed to note that out of 28 lakh elected
representatives of Panchayats, the Ministry are able to provide training
to only 19 lakh people. The Committee are also unhappy with the
pace of construction of Panchayat Ghars in different States. It is an
acknowledged fact that in the absence of Panchayat Ghars, the growth
of Panchayats would always be a difficult proposition. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should pay more
attention towards training and capacity building and infrastructure
development of Panchayats which are the underlying objectives of
RGSY scheme. For attainment of the stated objectives, the Ministry
should review the scheme on monthly basis. The Committee also hope
that RGSY, on becoming a component of RGPSA, the scarcity of funds
would not stand on the way of attaining the objectives of the scheme.

14
Reply of the Government
The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the Committee
that training, capacity building and infrastructure development of
Panchayats should receive more allocation. Full achievement of the
targeted members for training of elected representatives/functionaries
and creation of Panchayat infrastructure has been inhibited by
budgetary constraints. However, under the new scheme of RGPSA,
higher budgetary allocations are envisaged for these components. In
addition, Panchayat Ghars are also allowed to be taken up under
other schemes like MGNREGS.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee’s examination has revealed that e-Panchayat has
been identified as one of the Mission Mode Projects (MMPs) under
National e-Governance Programme (NeGP) and the budget provisions
for the scheme for the fiscal year 2012-13 are Rs. 40 crore. The Project
is aimed at supporting State Governments to enable Panchayats to
make effective use of Information Technology in the process of planning
at grass root level, bring transparency in the working of all the PRIs
and help in increased accountability of these institutions. The
Committee find that 12 Core Common Applications have been
developed out of which 4 have been rolled out successfully and
6 Applications have been officially launched on the occasion of National
Panchayati Raj day. The Committee are, however, dismayed to note
that while some States have reported 100 percent computerization of
Gram Panchayats, States like Andhra Pradesh and Chhattisgarh have
reported 2 percent and 9 percent computerization respectively. Likewise,
around 1.45 lakh village panchayats have been provided with
broadband connectivity so far. The Committee feel that computerization
of the working of Gram Panchayats and provision of internet
connectivity are pre-requisites for attaining the objectives of the
e-Panchayat project. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to be
proactive in implementing the project on priority basis. The Committee
also recommend that after the merger of this scheme with RGPSA, the
Mission Project on e-Panchayat’ should continue to receive due attention
with regard to availability of funds for attaining the overall objectives
of the scheme.
Reply of the Government
In the 12th Plan, e-Panchayat Mission Mode Project (MMP) is
proposed to be integrated as a component of Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) of MoPR. Electronic enablement of

15
Panchayats through the implementation of the various software
applications created as part of the Project, along with the technical
support envisaged under the scheme, would help increase the
effectiveness of Panchayats for service delivery.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee are disappointed to note that even after persistent
recommendations of the Committee, there have been huge amounts
lying unspent in all the schemes of the Ministry, especially the BRGF,
which is the biggest Central Assistance to State Plan (CASP). In this
regard, the Committee note that as on 31.12.2011, Rs. 4880 crore was
lying unspent which includes Rs. 4724 crore [Rs. 4572 as on 31.03.2012]
under BRGF. The Committee do not approve such irresponsible parking
of precious funds, particularly when, there are cases of insufficiency of
funds highlighted before the Committee from time to time. In
Committee's view, this position is unjustifiable on the part of the
Ministry and concerned State Governments to allow the scarce resources
remain unutilized. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry
to devise a practical solution to this perennial problem and make every
possible efforts to ensure that the problem is tackled at the earliest
lest there could be a situation in the coming years, where the unspent
balances would surpass the total budgetary allocation of the
Department. The Committee would also like the Ministry to chalk out
incentive schemes for the best performing States. The Committee wish
to be apprised of the innovative steps taken by the Department in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
At the outset the Ministry would like to clarify that the term
“unspent balance” relates to the amount of grants released to States
and available with them till such time the UCs/Expenditure statement
is received by MoPR. As BRGF grants are released in two installments,
the UCs/Expenditure statements are also received twice a year. During
the intervening period, the released grants are treated as “unspent”
pending the receipt of UC’s/Expenditure Statements. The UCs, even
though actual utilization of the said grants may have been done by
the concerned implementing agencies become due after one year from
the date of release of grants. While the outstanding UCs as on 31.3.2011
amounted to Rs. 895.71 crore, as on 31.3.2012, the same have declined
to Rs. 319.19 crore due to sustained efforts of the Ministry in following
up the matter with the concerned State Governments and continuously
monitoring the progress of utilization of grants with the States. MoPR

16
also provides necessary guidance/clarification to the States from time
to time to ensure better programme implementation.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
Empowering process of Panchayati Raj Institutions in the country
is nearing two decades. The Committee recommend that Government
should institute a high-level committee on the pattern of Balwant Rai
Mehta and Ashok Mehta Committees to review working of Panchayati
Raj Institutions to identify the shortcomings in the present system and
to suggest remedial measures for strengthening the PRI institutions to
meet the challenges of inclusive growth and inclusive governance and
devolution of powers at Panchayat/Gram Sabha level as per
Constitutional provisions.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has constituted an Expert Committee
under the Chairmanship of Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, Member of
Parliament (Rajya Sabha) with the following Terms of Reference:—
(i) To review the existing policy and guidelines of relevant
Central Sector/Centrally Sponsored Schemes dealing with
social sector/anti-poverty programmes and to give specific
recommendations on (a) an appropriate role & responsibility
of Panchayats at different levels based on the principle of
subsidiarity, (b) for strengthening their capacity to deliver
services and (c) for making them accountable to respective
Gram Sabhas.
(ii) To flag the constraints that may come up in operationalising
the delivery system through the PRIs and suggest ways
and means of dealing with the same.
(iii) To suggest ways to incentivize States to devolve three Fs
i.e. Funds, Functions and Functionaries to Panchayats.
Order constituting the Committee has been issued on 27 August,
2012.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)

17
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee find that the scheme of Rural Business Hub
provides technical support and marketing linkages to rural products
and producers. The scheme was visualized as a pilot scheme for
promoting Public-Private Panchayat Partnership. They , however, find
that the financial allocation under the scheme has been minimal with
releases of less than Rs. 2 crore yearly during the Eleventh Plan period
and the allocation for the fiscal year 2012-13 has been brought down
to an insignificant amount of Rs. 25 lakh. The Committee are astonished
to find that the Ministry can run a national programme meant for all
States with a meagre budget of Rs. 25 lakh. Even though the Scheme
was conceptualized as a follow up of the Prime Minister's statement
made in as early as 2004 comparing with China pattern for encouraging
rural business hubs, the Committee find that the Scheme has remained
only on paper. They , accordingly, recommend that the Government
should re-visit this scheme with a view to either making a proper
scheme with adequate funds or dispense with totally so that national
resources are not frittered away in small schemes like the present one.
Reply of the Government
It is has been decided to discontinue the scheme during the 12th
Plan period. Accordingly, only a token allocation of Rs. 25 lakh has
been provided in the budget for the current year for meeting the
committed liabilities of the approved ongoing projects only.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]

18
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee note that during the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the
Ministry propose to launch a new scheme, namely, Rajiv Gandhi
Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) by merging the existing
schemes viz., Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY), e-Panchayat,
Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive Scheme (PEAIS),
Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan (PMEYSA) and capacity
building part of Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF). The Committee
also note that the total funds required under RGPSA for the Twelfth
Pan period would be Rs. 33000 crore, whereas, for the fiscal year
2012-13, only an indicative amount of Rs. 50 crore has been allocated
for the scheme. The Committee are dismayed to note that various
social welfare schemes/programmes are initially formulated by the
Ministry and soon thereafter, without making any realistic assessment
of attainment of objectives, the schemes/programmes are merged/
renamed on the pretext of taking a holistic view of the sector. The
Committee are not very sure whether any detailed analysis was done
for mooting the proposal for merging existing schemes into one
umbrella scheme. This sort of malady becomes all the more serious
when the total funds allocated for various schemes of the Ministry
excluding BRGF and RGPSA is a meagre Rs. 250 crore. Considering
the lower allocation to various schemes like Rashtriya Gram Swaraj
Yojana (RGSY), Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive
Scheme (PEAIS) and Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan
(PMEYSA), where their impact could hardly reach to the ground level,
the Committee strongly recommend that after the launch of RGPSA
with proposed outlay of Rs. 33000 crore for the Ministry in the Twelfth
Plan, allocation to the existing schemes which would become
components of the RGPSA particularly in PEAIS should be increased
substantially to have a real impact at village panchayat level. The
Committee expect that after merging various schemes of the Ministry
under the umbrella of RGPSA, the aims and objectives of these schemes
would not only remain intact but would be enlarged substantially to
feel the positive impact of local self governance through PRIs.

19
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance
and necessary steps have been taken by the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj to ensure that adequate provisions would be available under the
individual components or activities included under the Rajiv Gandhi
Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan for funding the strengthening of
Panchayats and improving their accountability.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
 The Committee find that the provisions of the Panchayats
(Extension of Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 came into force as a sequel
of the 73rd amendment of IX Schedule of the Constitution which
inter alia provided constitutional sanction to the Panchayat Raj as an
institution of self-governance. The application of this amendment
excluded the areas covered by the Fifth and Sixth Schedules to the
Constitution. The areas of the Fifth Schedule, according to the
Article 244, cover the Scheduled and Tribal areas other than the areas
of the Sixth Schedule like in Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Nagaland
and Mizoram. The areas of the Fifth Schedule are spread over nine
States viz., Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Rajasthan.
The PESA Act, 1996 was aimed to extend the provisions of
73rd Constitution amendment to the Scheduled and Tribal areas falling
under the Fifth Schedule.
The Committee also note that though the enactment of PESA in
1996 was a welcome step which conferred relatively greater autonomy
to Gram Sabhas, PESA’s sincere implementation has not been seriously
attempted by the Government as the data furnished by the Ministry
has brought out that several States are yet to implement all provisions
enumerated in PESA even after its enactment as many as 16 years
back. The Committee have also been informed that the Government
has identified the proposed amendments in the PESA to make it more
beneficial to the people. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that the provisions contained in the PESA Act should be reviewed and
amended by bringing out appropriate amendments in PESA
expeditiously.

20
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Panchayati Raj is continuously pursuing the matter of
implementation of PESA with the nine States which cover areas of the
Fifth Schedule. Model Guidelines to vest Gram Sabha with powers
under PESA as well as Model Rules under PESA have been prepared
and circulated to those States for adoption with necessary modifications.
The concerned States as well as Central Ministries have been urged to
amend where necessary, the provisions of subject laws relating to
forests, excise, mining etc., to make them PESA compliant. Special
Training modules have also been developed to equip Gram Sabhas
and elected representatives in areas covered under Fifth Schedule to
effectively dispose their responsibilities as per PESA provisions.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee find that about 200 districts in the country are
affected by the extremism, violence, etc. Various Government
Committees have brought out that one of the reasons for this has
been unequal distribution of resources and opportunities and means
of regular income. Even though Constitutional provisions were made
long back about involvement of Gram Sabhas and Councils in the
Scheduled areas. Real financial powers/planning have not been given
at the Panchayat/Gram Sabha level. The Committee are of the strong
view that out of Rs. 2 lakh crores funds which are given by the
Centre to the States for rural/social scheme a substantial amount should
be allocated to the Panchayats/Gram Sabhas, particularly with reference
to 29 items of work enumerated in 11th Schedule to the Constitution.
The Committee, therefore, would like the Government to do model
activity mapping to be followed by the State Governments for
empowering the Panchayats/Gram Sabhas in the matter. The Committee
also note that Central Government can issue directions to the States
under the provisions of Schedule V for governance in Scheduled areas
and accordingly Government should make use of these provisions.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific action taken
in this regard.
The Committee find that 73rd Amendment to the Constitution seeks
to endow the Panchayats with authority to function as institutions of
self-governance. Inherent to this provision is the need for devolution

21
of Functions, Finances and Functionaries (3Fs) for States to the
Panchayats. The Committee are aware that Panchayati Raj is a State
subject and the States are responsible for devolution of 3Fs to the
Panchayats. The Committee, however, find that the pace of devolution
of 3Fs to the Panchayats has not been encouraging due to lack of
manpower and infrastructure which impinges on their capacity to fulfil
their assigned roles and responsibilities. The Committee, therefore, urge
the Ministry to take up the matter with the State Governments to
speed up the process of devolution of 3Fs to Panchayats by chalking
out an activity map so as to ensure that progress in this regard is
monitored regularly and scientifically.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj will continue its efforts through a
system of regular monitoring and incentivization to encourage /facilitate
State Governments to speed up the process of devolution of 3Fs under
RGPSA, funding would be linked to the performance of State on critical
parameters including devolution of 3Fs to Panchayats.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)

22
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee note that in the Draft 12th Plan the Government
have highlighted achievement of GDP growth of 8% in the 11th Plan
whereas the rate of poverty alleviation has been only 0.8% during the
11th Plan. The Committee find this position unacceptable as one of
the prime objectives of 11th Plan was inclusive growth. From the rate
of poverty alleviation it is obvious that the objective of inclusive growth
has not been achieved at all. Considering this aspect and the fact that
12th Plan has just taken off, the Committee strongly recommend that
there should be serious efforts by the Government to ensure that there
is inclusive governance at Panchayat level under the provisions of the
Constitution wherein Panchayats are to be assigned 29 items of
governance including land, water supply, etc. The Committee would
await specific action taken by the Government in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj will continue to pursue with States
the matter of devolution of powers and responsibilities to Panchayats.
The Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA), which
will be implemented during the Twelfth Plan once approved, will link
a portion of the funding to the performance of States on various criteria
including devolution of 3F’s to Panchayats.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
The Government aims at incentivizing States to empower
Panchayats through devolution of Funds, Functions and Functionaries
(3Fs) and put in place accountability of PRIs. The Committee note that
the allocation of funds for the year 2011-12 was Rs. 31 crore which
has been enhanced to Rs. 40 crore for the fiscal year 2012-13. A study
of Devolution Index (DI) and ranking of States was undertaken by the
Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) which indicates that

23
Kerala has ranked first in the composite Panchayat Devolution Index.
The Committee’s examination has further revealed that Government
of Kerala provides 25 percent Plan funds to the Panchayats and has
devolved important revenue sources to Panchayats. The Committee
find that the present Scheme is just to give award/prizes or holding
only Panchayati Raj Divas Function, etc. In Committee’s view this
approach is not taking anywhere the Scheme which is called incentive
scheme for Panchayat empowerment and accountability. The present
allocation of Rs. 40 crore will not take the Scheme anywhere.
Considering the fact that over Rs. 2 lakh crore for social sector is
given by the Central Government to the State Governments, there is
urgent need for Panchayat empowerment and accountability incentives
and for this purpose the fund for the Scheme has to be raised
substantially. The Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to ask
the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for raising the fund
for this Scheme substantially.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry will continue to follow up on the recommendation
of the Committee and pursue with Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission for substantially reviewing the allocation for the PEAIS
scheme which aims at incentivizing States to empower Panchayats
through devolution of 3F’s and achieving a higher accountability of
PRI’s.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee note that Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti
Abhiyan aimed at encouraging Elected Women Representatives (EWRs)
and Elected Youth Representatives (EYRs) to form associations to
collectively work for the attainment of goals of decentralized
governance in Panchayati Raj. The Committee find that 23 States have
formed core Committees under the scheme and organized State level
Sammelans. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that inspite
of the importance of the scheme for increasing the knowledge,
capability, involvement and responsiveness of Elected Women
Representatives and Elected Youth Representatives, the allocation of
funds for the fiscal year 2012-13 has been placed at Rs. 1.75 crore
from the earlier Rs. 3 crore. The Committee are of the considered view
that any scheme with an outlay for Rs. 1.75 crore for the entire country
can hardly make any impact and such schemes remain as instrument

24
of publicity without any impact or reach to the intended beneficiaries.
Since the scheme is under consideration for a merger with RGPSA,
the Committee strongly recommend that allocation to the scheme
should be substantially increased so that elected youth representatives
are involved effectively in decentralized governance through PRIs.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is in dialogue with the Planning Commission for
substantive enhancement of allocation to support the capacity building/
training and involvement of Elected Women Representatives and Elected
Youth Representatives as envisaged under PMEYSA, under the overall
thrust of the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA),
under which PMEYSA is proposed to be subsumed during the Twelfth
Plan Period.
[No. G-20012/4/2012-B&F Dated: 31.8.2012,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj]
   N
EW D ELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN,
14 December, 2012 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

25
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2012-13)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF
THE COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 14 DECEMBER, 2012
The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in Committee Room
No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Maheshwar Hazari
3. Shri Anantha Venkatarami Reddy
4. Dr. Sanjay Singh
5. Smt. Supriya Sule
6. Smt. Annu Tandon
7. Smt. Usha Verma
8. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
10. Dr. Chandan Mitra
11. Shri C.P . Narayanan
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Additional Director
4. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary

26
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee convened for consideration of Memoranda
containing draft Reports of the Committee on action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in four Reports on
Demands for Grants (2012-13).
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Action Taken Reports:—
(i) **** **** **** **** ****
(ii) **** **** **** **** ****
(iii) Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj; and
(iv) **** **** **** **** ****
4. Draft Reports were taken up seriatum. After detailed discussions,
the Committee adopted the Reports with minor modifications. The
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid
Reports and present the same to the Parliament.
5. **** **** **** **** ****
The Committee then adjourned.
****Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

27
APPENDIX II
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-
NINTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (15TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations: 15
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the 8
Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10, 14 and 15
Percentage to total recommendations: 53.34%
III. Recommendation which the Committee do not 1
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Sl. No. 11
Percentage to total recommendations: 6.66%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of 3
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl. Nos. 4, 12 and 13
Percentage to total recommendations: 20%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies 3
of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. Nos. 2, 8 and 9
Percentage to total recommendations: 20%