 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                    (2014-2015) 
 
          
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Forty-Second 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005'] 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
14 

 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2014-2015) 
              (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
   
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Forty-second 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005'] 
  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   12 August, 2015 
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on   12 August, 2015 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August 2015/Shravana 1937 (Saka) 
 


CRD No. 111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2015 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha ( Fifteenth 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
 
 
  

CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-2015) .....................................   (ii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................   (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................   1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ..........................................................   18 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply .............................................................................   46 
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee .....................................................   47 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited .....    53 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Extracts of the Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee  
held on 10 August, 2015 …………………………..........        54    
54545554 of the sitting of the Committee held on           
 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report  
of the Committee (15th Lok Sabha)..................................... 56  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(2014-2015) 
 
          Dr. P. Venugopal  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri Kirti Azad 
4. Shri Harish Chandra Chavan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Manshankar Ninama 
8. Shrimati Mausam Noor 
9. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey 
10. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
11. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
12. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
13. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
14. Shrimati Butta Renuka  
15. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
16. Shri Naramalli Sivaprasad  
17. Shri Balka Suman 
18. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
19. Shri Ajay Misra Teni 
20. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
21. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Munquad Ali 
23. Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi 
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay@ 
25. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
26. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
27. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev** 
28. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho$ 
29. Shri A. K. Selvaraj 
30. Shrimati Kanak Lata Singh 
31. Shri Ashwani Kumar# 
 ____________________________________________________________________ 
  * Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 07.10.2014. 
  @  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 13.05.2015. 
  ** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 25.09.2014 vice Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya. 
 $ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.11.2014 vice Shri Jairam Ramesh 
 # Nominated w.e.f. 16. 07.2015 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R. C. Tiwari   - Director 
3. Smt. B. Visala   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Manish Mohan Kamble - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development  
(2014-2015) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present the Fourteenth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Forty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Implementation of 
'Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005'.  
2.  The Forty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 14  August, 2 013. The replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 11 March, 2015. 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered 
and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 10 August, 2015. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Forty Second Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
   NEW DELHI;      DR. P. VENUGOPAL 
10 August, 2015                    Chairperson 
19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 This Report of the Standing Comm ittee on Rural Development (2014 -15) deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Forty -Second Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ' Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employme nt Guarantee Act, 
2005'.  
 
2. The Forty- Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 14.08.2013 and was laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 27 observations/recommendations.: 
 
3. Action Ta ken Notes in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report 
have been received from the Government. These have been examined and categorized as follows: ---- 
(i)  Observations/recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20,  
24, 25, 26 and 27 
Total:22 
Chapter-II 
(ii)  Observations/recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
Serial Nos.: Nil 
Total: Nil 
Chapter-III 
(iii)  Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Serial Nos.: 11, 16, 21, 22, and 23  
       Total: 5 
       Chapter-IV 
(iv)  Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. : Nil                                                                      Total: Nil 
Chapter-V 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the observations/recommenda tions 
contained in Chapter-I of the Report may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
A. Issues related with Job Cards 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1 Para No. 2.2) 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
"Registration and issue of job cards to rural households is basic requirement to avail right of wor k 
under MGNREGA. The Committee note that during the last 7 years of the implementation of 
scheme, as many as 12.46 crore rural households out of 13.83 rural households (2001 census) 
have been registered and issued job cards in the country by State/UT Gover nments. However, the 
Committee note that many discrepancies such as issue of fake job cards, inclusion of fictitious 
names, missing entry or delay in making entries in job cards, illegal custody of job cards by 
influential people etc. have been noticed. Similarly, complaints regarding non-issue of dated receipt 
to job applicants have been widely reported. The Committee are of the strong view that there is 
need to bring reform in the process of issue of job cards. The Committee are of the opinion that 
offences such as missing entries in the job cards and unlawful possession of job cards with 
influential people including elected representatives of PRIs or MGNREGA functionaries should be 
made punishable offence under section 25 of the Act. The Committee, howeve r, welcome the 
proposal for registration of application for work through mobile phones and MGNREGA website. 
The Committee feel that such steps are progressive and need to be taken further. The Committee 
desire that job cards should have photograph of the h older and other details like voter ID/Adhaar 
No./voter list no. so as to ensure that the chances of fake duplicate/multiple job cards are reduced 
to minimum. The Committee also recommend the Department to conduct random inspections of 
job cards to weed out  the fake job cards. Apart from PRIs, job cards should also be subject to 
social audit or audit under directions of Comptroller & Auditor General of India." 
 
7. The Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) in their action taken repli es 
stated as under:- 
 "The MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013, has detailed the process of issue of job 
cards.  As per the provisions contained in the guidelines, the Gram Panchayat has to cause a door-
to-door survey to identify eligible households for registration under the Act. The Gram Panchayat is 
also required to verify the following:- 
(a)         Whether the household is really entitled as stated in the application. 
(b)         Whether the applicant household or legal resident in the Gram Panchayat is concerned. 
(c)         Whether applicants are adult members of the household. 

3 
 
 The Guidelines mandate that the job card should contain permanent information regarding 
the household as well as employment details of 5 years.   This inter-alia include job card members, 
information relating to job cardholder household, work demand and allocation, postal account 
number, bank account number, insurance policy number and EPIC number (voter ID), RSBY 
number, Aadhar number and BPL/socio-economic status. 
 All entries into the job cards of rural households should be duly authenticated by an officer 
authorised by the State. Entries pertaining to employment and wages should be up-dated from time 
to time.  Missing entries or delay in entries in the job cards is considere d as a violation and is now 
punishable under section 25 of the Act. 
 To ensure transparency and accountability, it is mandated in the guidelines that the  job 
cards should be in the custody of the household to whom it   is  issued.  If job cards were found i n 
the possession of any Panchayat or MGNREGA Officer without a valid reason, it would be 
considered as an offence and be punishable under Section 25 of the Act. 
 The guidelines also mandate that the details of individual in the registered households 
should be verified by Panchayat Secretary with the assistance of Gram Rozgar Sevak and Data 
Entry Operators.  After due verification, the corrections relating to job cards are to be made in the 
database. As per the revised Guidelines, 2013, the social audit proc ess requires inspection and 
verification of various registers and records including job card register detailing the cards issued to 
the adult members of rural households.  It is also decided to link the job cards with Aadhaar 
numbers so as to avoid duplication/fake cards." 
8. In the context of issues related with job cards under MGNREGA, the Committee while taking 
note of  many discrepancies like issue of fake job cards, inclusion of fictitious names, unlawful 
possession of job cards with influential people i ncluding elected representatives of PRIs or 
MGNREGA functionaries etc. had strongly emphasized the need for bringing reform in the process 
of issue of job cards by  making these offences punishable under Section 25 of MGNREGA, 
conducting random inspection of job cards, linking job cards with Voter ID/Aadhar cards for 
minimizing chances of fake /multiple  job cards  and bringing job cards within the ambit of Social 
Audit or audit under the directions of Comptroller  & Auditor General of India.  The DoRD in the ir 
action taken reply have merely stated th e various provisions mandated in the  MGNREGA 
Operational Guidelines, 2013 regarding  the  process of issue of job cards through door -to-door 
survey to identify eligible households for registration , subsequent verification by Gram Panchayat , 
authentication of job cards, ensuring of transparency and accountability, etc. are duly followed. The 
DoRD has further informed that  as per the  Revised Operational Guidelines, 2013 , the social audit 
process require verification of registers and records including  job card register  and it has also 
been decided to link the job cards with Aadha ar number so as to avoid duplication/false cards.  The 
Committee are constrained to note that the action t aken reply of the Department is si lent on the  
issue of making the job cards subject to audit under the directions of C&AG of India  and also 

4 
 
conducting of random inspection of job cards to weed out the fake job cards . The reply of the 
Department is also silent on the matter of the  reported complaints regarding non -issue of dated 
receipts to job applicants.  In view  of the various discrepancies  and complaints relating to  job 
cards, there is serious apprehension about the authenticity of the effective implementation of the 
provisions mandated in the MNGREGA Operational Guidelines.  The Committee are of the strong 
opinion that there should be proper process of actual physical verification  and also there is a need 
for random inspections at the ground level to keep a check on the various irregularities in the issue 
of job cards  as highlighted in the Report. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their 
recommendation, desire that the Department should conduct random inspections of job cards and  
the job cards should also be audit ed under the directions of Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
as this process will eliminate the fake job cards.   
B. Women participation under MGNREGA 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.4) 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
 "The Committee find th at implementation of MGNREGA has provided women in rural 
areas an opportunity to participate in remunerative activities thereby, empowering them financially. 
The Committee note that participation of women under MGNREGA works has been more than 40 
percent in each of last seven years and that is more than the statutory requirement of 1/3 of the 
total beneficiaries. However, examination of the scheme by the Committee has revealed that 
participation of women in some States such as Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Odish a, Uttar Pradesh 
and West Bengal has been less than national average. The Committee also note that Assam, 
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have failed to meet statutory requirement of providing 1/3rd 
employment to the women beneficiaries. The Committee  in their 1st Report (15th Lok Sabha), 
while showing concern over low women participation in these States, had recommended the 
Department to analy ze reasons for poor performance of these States and take corrective steps to 
enhance participation of women in MGNREGA. The Committee are of the firm view that success of 
MGNREGA will be more visible if the number of women workers is large as their income raise the 
standard of household more than the male workers. Apart from generation of employment, it will 
also help to widen the ambit of opportunities for employment to those sections of society which  
were so far denied equal opportunity. In this regard, it becomes imperative to enhance participation 
of more number of women in States which have lower Socio -economic Indicator as economic  
 empowerment of women has been seen to enhance human development index. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to take steps such as awareness among women, allowing 
works suitable for women as per local culture, formatio n of self help groups etc. to encourage 
women to demand employment in States which have lower participation of women under 
MGNREGA." 
 

5 
 
10. The Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) in their action taken reply 
stated as under:  
 "Provision to para 6 of Schedule- II of MGNREG Act provides that priority shall be given to 
women in such a way that at least one -third of the beneficiaries shall be women who have 
registered and demanded work under the Act. The overall participation of women  as reported by 
States/UTs is about 48% during the previous four years (2008 -09 to 2011 -12) in terms of 
persondays generated. Whereas during the year 2012 -13, the share of employment generation for 
women has increased to 51% and during the year  2013-14 has increased to 53% and further 
increased to 55% during the year 2014-15 (till 24/02/2015) as reported by the States. However, the 
coverage of women has been reported as less than one -third in the States of  Assam, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmi r, Mizoram, Nagaland, Lakshadweep and Uttar Pradesh 
during 2013-14. The reason for low participation of women in some states could be attributed to 
reasons like non-revision of Schedule of Rates, Socio-cultural constraints and low awareness. High 
demand & limited supply of work opportunities force women to compete against men which might 
also have resulted in lesser participation of women workers. Some of the provisions enunciated in 
the Act/Operational guidelines, 2013 which would enhance women participation are as under; 
 
(1) Payment of equal wages for men and women. 
(2) Participation/representation of women in Panchayati Raj institutions that would ensure 
greater participation of women both at the planning and execution levels under 
MGNREGA. 
(3) Identification of widowed women, deserted women and destitute women, who qualify as a 
household under the Act, to ensure that they are provided job cards and are given 100 
days of work. 
(4) Special works, which require less effort and those that are close to their house are to be 
given to pregnant women and lactating mothers. 
(5) Conduct time and motion studies to formulate gender, age, level of disability, terrain and 
climate sensitive Schedule of Rates (SoRs) and also accurate capturing of work done by 
women at worksites. 
(6) At least 50 % of the worksite supervisors (Mates) at all worksites to be women.  Priority is 
to be given to women workers who have put in maximum work in the last 3 years or their 
daughters. 
(7) Encourage participation of women groups, including Self Help Groups (SHGs) in  
awareness generation, capturing of demand, planning, implementation, monitoring and 
maintenance of works.  SHGs can also mentor women mates. 
(8) Individual bank/post office accounts should be opened in the name of all women 
MGNREGA workers and their wages dir ectly credited to their account for the number of 
days worked by them. 
(9) Worksite facilities such as crèches, drinking water, shade etc. are to be provided.  This 
may also be done through convergence with Women and Child Development Schemes 
like Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS). 
(10) By way of an amendment in Schedule -I of MGNREG Act, construction of Anganwadi 
centres have been included as one of the permissible works under the scheme. 
 A new approach to IEC action plan has been mooted which would be a  deviation from the 
conventional mass media driven approach in message dissemination.  The new action plan would 

6 
 
focus on mid media and interpersonal media initiatives to ensure that the messages reach the 
target group in a more effective and sustainable w ay. This would help the illiterate women to 
access and understand messages of MGNREGA and thereby motivate them to be involved in 
MGNREGA.  The states have also asked to prepare their State level IEC Annual action plans.   
The State-level IEC action plan w ould aim at facilitating dissemination of right based provisions of 
the Act and ensure that the workers know their right to demand wage employment an d exercise 
their right by applying for such employment as per their need."   
 
11. Taking note that the part icipation of women under MGNREGA has been less than the  
national average in some of the States such as Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh 
and West Bengal and also that Assam, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have failed to meet  
the statutory requirement of providing 1/3rd employment to the women beneficiaries,  the Committee 
had recommended the Department to take steps such as awareness among women, allowing works 
suitable for women as per local culture, formation of Self Help Groups (SHGs)  etc. to encourage 
women to demand employment in States which have lower participation of women under 
MGNREGA. The DoRD in their action taken reply inter-alia have informed the Committee that share 
of employment generation for women during 2012 -13 has incr eased to 51% and has increased to 
53%  during the year 2013 -14 and further increased to 55%  during 2014 -15 as reported by States . 
However, the coverage of women has been reported as less than 1/3 rd in the States of Assam, 
Arunachal Pradesh,  Jharkhand,  J ammu & Kashmir, Mizoram, Nagaland, Lakshadweep and Uttar 
Pradesh during 2013 -14 due to reasons like non -revision of Schedule of Rates, S ocio-cultural 
constraints and low awareness. The Committee have also been informed that high demand and 
limited supply o f work opportunities force women to compete against men which might also have 
resulted in lesser participation of women workers. In this context ,  DoRD has  elaborated various 
provisions enunciated in the Act/Operational Guidelines, 2013 for enhancing wome n participation 
and stat ed that DoRD has come up with a new  IEC  action plan to focus on mid media and 
interpersonal media initiatives to ensure that the  messages effectively reach  target g roups for 
helping illiterate women to access and understand mess ages of MGNREGA and have further 

7 
 
informed that States have been asked to prepare their State level IEC Annual Action Plan in this 
regard.  The Committee desire that the issue of non-revision of Schedule of Rates (SORs) should be 
taken up expeditiously with  the concerned State Governments to encourage women to demand 
employment in States which have lower participation of women under MGNREGA.    
C. Wage: Material ratio for MGNREGA works 
Recommendation (Serial No.11, Para No. 2.12) 
12. The Committee had recommended:- 
 
"The Committee note that water related works constitute majority of works (54.58 percent) 
undertaken in MGNREGA, while work on private lands of SC/ST/BPL/SML and IAY and Land 
reform beneficiaries, Land development, rural connectivity and others (B harat Nirman Kendra) 
constitute the 10.38%, 11.38%, 19.47% and 3.7% respectively. The Committee take note of the 
fact that MGNREGA works are being criticized for poor quality of assets created under it. The 
Committee's examination has revealed that expendi ture limit of 40 percent imposed on material 
component including skilled and semi -skilled workers is restricting implementing agencies to 
undertake works requiring material components or skilled workers. The Committee find some merit 
in argument of the Dep artment that works with higher material component will invariably bring in 
contractor system. However, the Committee are of the considered view that adopting a uniform 
yardstick for wage material ratio across the country causes problems in hilly States such as Jammu 
& Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh etc. and other difficult areas of the country such as Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands and flood prone areas where cost of raw material and transportation is higher than 
rest of the country. The Committee, therefore, recomme nd the Department to allow specific 
relaxation in wage -material ratio in case of aforementioned hilly and difficult areas/States. 
Needless to emphasise that there should be in-built flexibility to meet the specific situations." 
 
13. The Department of Rural Development in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
"The primary objective of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) is to enhance the livelihood security of the rural households by providing up to 100 
days of guaranteed wage employment in a year to every household on demand for doing unskilled 
manual work.  The focus of activities under MGNREGA is on wage employment as given in 
Schedule-I of MGNREG Act, which list out the activities in the order of their priority.  
 Vide the Notification dated 21.07.2014, amendments have been made by the Government 
in paragraph 4 and 20 of Schedule –I of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) providing for at least 60% of the works in a district in terms of cost for 
creation of productive assets directly linked to agriculture and allied activities through development 
of land, water and trees.  To ensure quality, productivity and durability of assets created under 
MGNREGA, cost of material component includi ng the wages of the skilled and semi -skilled works 
shall not exceed 40% at the Gram Panchayat level for all the works taken up by the Gram 
Panchayats.  For works taken up by the implementing agencies other than Gram Panchayats, the 
overall material component shall not exceed 40% at the district level." 

8 
 
14. Taking into account the specific problems being faced by the local populace  in difficult 
terrains in the country , the Committee had recommended the Department to allow specific 
relaxation in wage-material ratio in these areas.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Department   have 
not responded to this recommendation of the Committee.  The Co mmittee are  constrained to 
observe that the recommendation of the Committee for allowing specific relaxation in wage-material  
ratio in hilly and  difficult areas/States and also to have an in-built flexibility in the system  to meet 
the specific situations was based on the Committee’ s analysis of the peculiar conditions in these 
areas which normally tend to change the cast ing pattern of wage and materials.   Transportation of 
raw material in uneven topography also involves higher cost.   The Committee are of the  strong 
opinion that adopting a uniform yardstick for wage material ratio  will not be a rationale approach as 
it will put people living in difficult terrains in disadvantageous position.   The Committee therefore 
reiterate their recommendation to allow specific relaxation in wage - material ratio for  the hilly and 
difficult areas/States of the country and desire to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 
D. Delay in Payment of Wages 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.14) 
15.  The Committee had recommended as under:  
"The Committee note that section 3(3) of the Act provides for payment of wages to the wor kers 
within 15 days of date on which such work was done. However, most of the States have failed to 
disburse wages within time limit as laid down in the Act. At the same time, workers are also not 
being compensated for delay in payment of wages according t o provisions of Payment of Wages 
Act, 1936 as provided in MGNREGA, 2005. The examination of the issue by the Committee has 
revealed that main reason for delay in payment of wages under MGNREGA is less availability of 
required administrative and technical s taff in different States which leads to administrative delay 
such as delay in measurement of work, not adhering to strict schedule of closing of muster roll 
within fortnight etc. Since majority of population in rural areas are dependent on daily wages, 
failure of the Government to ensure timely payment of wages to workers may force people to 
distress migration in search of employment in other sectors or areas which could provide them 
daily payment. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take immediate steps for 
recruitment of necessary manpower and required infrastructures at every level to ensure 
adherence to time limit for payment of wages to workers. The Committee also desire, the 
Department to enforce the provisions of the MGNREGA regardin g payment of requisite 
compensation to the workers who are paid wages beyond the prescribed time frame. 
16. The Department of Rural Development in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
The Ministry has initiated various steps to address concern s expressed on delay in payment of 
wages.  Electronic Fund Management System (e -FMS) has been introduced and 23 states have 
since switched over to e -FMS for making payments. Roll out of e -FMS in the remaining states is 

9 
 
expected by March, 2014. The States h ave also been instructed to roll out Electronic Muster Roll 
(e-MR) and till last reported; e -MR has been implemented in 228950 Gram Panchayats. To 
enforce the payment of compensation for delay in payment of wages, the provisions in para 30 of 
Schedule II o f the Act has been amended (notification dated 24 th September, 2013).  The salient 
features of the amendments are as under: 
 
1. Quantum of compensation has been prescribed depending on the number of days of delay from 
the date of closure of the muster roll.  
2. Delay in payment of compensation beyond prescribed time limit to be treated at par with that of 
delay in payment of wages.  
3. For accountability, various processes determining the payment of wages have now been divided 
into various stages to facilitate fixing of responsibility.  
4. Provision to be included in NREGASoft to automatically calculate the compensation payable. 
5. The compensation shall be paid by the State Government and subsequently recovered from the 
delinquent functionaries/Agencies.  
6. District Program me Coordinator/Programme Officer to ensure payment of wages and 
compensation, if any, and put the system in operation for calculation of wages and compensation.  
7. Days of delay in payment of wages, compensation due and paid to be reflected in MIS and Labour 
Budget.  
17. The Committee while noting  that the main reason for  delay in payment o f wages under 
MGNREGA was  due to less availability of required administrative and technical staff in different 
States,   had recommended the Department to take immediate  steps for recruitment of necessary 
manpower and required infrastructure at every level to ensure adherence to time limit for payment 
of wages to workers and had also desired the department to enforce the provisions of MGNREGA 
regarding payment of requisit e compensation to the workers who are paid wages beyond the 
prescribed time frame.   The Committee observe that the action taken reply of the Department 
indicate that now the States have been instructed to roll out e -FMS and e-MR for making payments 
and th e provisions in para 30 of the Schedule II of the  Act have been amended to enforce the 
payment of compensation for  delay in payment of wages and the salient features of the 
amendments have been specified.   The Committee are however constrained to note th at the 
Department in their action taken reply has not elaborated about the action taken by them for 
recruitment of manpower and providing infrastructure to address the concerns  expressed by the 

10 
 
Committee.  The Committee, therefore, strongly desire that urg ent  action  need to be taken by the 
Department  for recruitment of necessary manpower and  providing required infrastructure at ev ery 
level to ensure  timely  payment of wages to workers and also  for payment of compensation for 
delay in payment of wages. 
 
E. Payment of Unemployment Allowance 
Recommendation (Serial No.16, Para No. 2.17) 
 
18. The Committee had recommended:- 
 
"The Committee note that provisions under MGNREGA for payment of unemployment allowances 
where demanded work is not given in stipulated t ime is not being adhered to almost all States/ 
UTs. The Committee are also astonished to note that so far only 4078 workers were paid 
unemployment allowances in 8 States during 2006 -09 and Rs. 1,23,589 has been paid to eligible 
beneficiaries in 2010-11 in six States. The Committee also note that non -issuance of dated receipt 
of demanded work as pointed out by audit report of C&AG of India, prevents workers to claim 
unemployment allowance. The Committee are of considered view that payment of unemployment 
allowance is the only provision which provides legitimacy to guarantee provided in the MGNREGA 
and differentiates it from earlier employment schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to impress upon the State Governments to take steps for is suance of dated receipt of 
demanded work so that the workers can claim unemployment allowance. The Committee would 
like the Government to ensure that State -wise details of payment of unemployment allowance form 
part of Annual Reports which are laid in Parl iament/State Legislatures on the functioning of 
MGNREGA. The Committee also recommended that since MGNREGA is a Centrally sponsored 
scheme, funds for unemployment allowance under section 7 of the Act should also be met by the 
Central Government. 
 
 
19. The Department of Rural Development in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
"Central Government meets the cost of (i) amount required for payment of wages for unskilled 
manual work under the Scheme (ii) Up to three-fourths of the material cost of the Scheme including 
payment of wages to skilled and semi-skilled workers subject to the provisions of Schedule II of the 
Act (iii) 6% of the total cost of the Scheme towards administrative expenses. The State 
Government meets the cost of (i) Unemployment allowance Payable under the Scheme (ii) One -
fourth of the material cost of the scheme including Payment of Wages to skilled and semi -skilled 
workers subject to the provisions of Schedule II of the Act and (iii) administrative expenses of the 
State Council.  MGNREG Act being a demand driven wage employment programme, the resource 
transfer from Centre to States is based on the demand for employment in each State. This 
provides an incentive for States to leverage the Act to meet the employment needs of the poo r. 
Whereas the provision enunciated in Section 7 of the Act serves as a disincentive for failing to 
provide work on time, as the States then bear the cost of unemployment allowance.  This provision 
which serves as a deterrent to the States for not providin g employment would therefore be, in the 
interest of job seekers under MGNREGA. The states are required to provide details of 
unemployment due and paid in MIS regularly."   

11 
 
 
20. The Committee had recommended  the DoRD to impress upon the State Governments t o 
take steps for issuance of dated receipt of demanded work so that workers can claim 
unemployment allowances and also that since MGNREGA is a Cen trally Sponsored Scheme, funds 
for unemployment allowances should be met by the Central Government under Secti on 7 of the 
MGNREGA Act.   The DoRD in their action taken reply  have inter-alia stated that MGNREG  Act 
being a demand driven wage employment programme, provides  an incentive for States to leverage 
the Act to meet the employment needs of the poor, whereas the provision enunciate d in Section 7 
of the Act serves  as a disincentive for failing to provide work on time .  It has been added that this 
provision  which serves as a deterrent to States for not providing employment would therefore be in  
the interest o f job seekers under MGNREGA.   The Committee  however  note that the department 
has not submitted any response to the recommendation of the Committee for  impressing upon the 
State Governments to take steps for issuance of dated receipt of demanded work so as  to enable 
the workers to claim unemployment allowance .  The Committee, therefore,  while reiterating their 
recommendation desire the DoRD to  comprehensively  examine the matter in  consultation with 
State Governments and apprise the Committee of the outcome thereof.  
 
F. District Perspective Planning 
Recommendation (Serial No.21 Para, No. 2.22) 
21. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee are astonished to note that despite constitution of District Planning Committees 
(DPCs) in most of the St ates, PRIs have not been able to formulate District Perspective Plan, a 
necessary condition of effective utilization of funds available under MGNREGA. The Committee 
note that most of the States are still following top down approach of planning for MGNREGA based 
upon labour budget. The Committee are of the considered view that formulation of District 
Perspective Planning (DPP) based upon active participation of Gram Sabhas is essential for 
effective utilization of resources. Aim of holistic development of ru ral India is not possible in the 
absence of well laid out plan. The Committee recommend that preparation of DPP should be 
starting point for MGNREGA so that there could be better utilization of huge funds available under 
MGNREGA. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to initiate consultation with 
States and Union Territories and chalk out strategy for preparation of DPP through active 
participation of Gram Sabhas within a specific time frame so that there could be better utilization of 
resources for all-round development of rural areas.” 
 

12 
 
22. The Department of Rural Development (MoRD) in their action taken reply have stated as under:  
"The Schemes made by the States are required to provide for the minimum features specified in 
Schedule I of the MGNREG Act which lists the category of works that any Scheme prepared by a State 
Government under Section 4 (1) of MGNREG Act shall focus upon.  Schedule I of MGNREGA has 
been suitably amended to include various new works which would give thrust to activit ies relating to 
Agriculture, watershed, Livestock, Fisheries, Rural Drinking Water and works in coastal areas which 
have scope for creation of durable assets and enhance the livelihood of the rural poor. MGNREGA 
Guidelines on decentralized planning envisag e preparation of a District Perspective Plan, which 
identifies the needs and gap in the Districts in all sectors. Labour Budget (LB) entails planning, 
approval and funding under MGNREGA.  Sub -section 6 of Section 14 of the MGNREG Act mandates 
that the Dist rict Programme Coordinator (DPC) shall prepare in the month of December every year, a 
labour budget for the next financial year containing the details of anticipated demand for unskilled 
manual work in the district and the plan for engagement of workers in  the works covered under the 
programme. It is also mandated that the LBs be prepared in accordance with the process prescribed in 
Sections 13 to 16 of MGNREG Act.  The DPCs has to ensure strict adherence to the principles of 
bottom-up approach from plannin g to approval of the selected shelf of projects by each of the Gram 
Sabhas (GSs) in the district.  As per section 16 of MGNREGA, Gram Panchayats in the meetings of 
Gram Sabha and ward Sabha are to determine the order of priority of the works to be taken up  under 
the MGNREGA. As per Section 13 of MGNREGA, the Panchayats at district, intermediate and village 
levels shall be the principal authorities for planning and implementation of the schemes made under 
this Act.  The Panchayats at the district level shall  finalize and approve block -wise shelf of projects to 
be taken up under the scheme.  Bottom -up approach is being adopted to allow the local community 
including the MGNREGA workers to express their views by participating in the process of selection of 
works which would help to define the development course for the area in line with their expectations 
and needs."  
 
23. While pointing out that PRIs have not been able to formulate District Perspective Plans (DPPs) 
which is a necessary condition for effective ut ilization of funds under MGNREGA, the Committee had 
recommended the DoRD to initiate consultation with States/UTs and chalk out strategy for preparation 
of necessary DPPs through active participation of Gram Sabhas in a specific time frame for better 
utilization of resources for all -round development of rural areas. The Committee find that in the action 
taken reply, DoRD have merely informed about provisions under MGNREGA which envisage preparation 
of DPPs which ident ifies the needs and gap in the Districts  in all sect ors and other mandatory 
provisions like section 13 to 16 of MGNREGA concerning role of local bodies under MGNREGA. The 
Committee are unhappy to note that  the action taken reply of the Government does not at all state 
anything about  initiating a process of consultation with States/UTs and chalk out strategy for 
preparation of DPPs  as recommended by the Committee for  the  intended purpose. The Committee 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation in this regard a nd desire to be apprised of the action taken in 
the matter.   

13 
 
F. MGNREGA works during Agriculture Season  
 
    Recommendation (Serial No.22 Para, No. 2.23) 
24. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that one of persistent complaints against MGNREGA scheme relates to le ss 
availability of labour during agriculture season. The Committee have been informed that only 47 
days of employment were provided in the period for the year 2010 -11 of which 12 days of 
employment were provided from July to November, 2010 which correspond s to the peak 
agriculture season. The remaining 35 days of employment were provided mostly in the lean 
agriculture season as supplementary employment. The Committee have also been informed that 
since MGNREGA Act provided for 100 days of guaranteed wage emp loyment in a financial year, 
so, the guaranteed employment may be availed of by the registered households any time during 
the year. Hence, restricting it to any particular season would be against the spirit of the Act. The 
Committee are of the view that ag riculture is the backbone of our rural economy and labour 
availability in our agricultural sector cannot be ignored as it may lead to shortfall in food production 
in the country. Further, aim of MGNREGA is not to substitute agriculture labour but to provid e 
additional income support to people/household in rural areas. The Committee, therefore, are of 
considered view that lack of proper planning of works under MGNREGA without keeping in view of 
local agriculture practice is causing the problem of labour avai lability in agriculture sector. The 
problem could only be solved if there is follow up of guidelines about preparation of District 
Perspective Planning by District Planning Committees and annual planning by Gram Sabha clearly 
indicating works availability in a year while taking care of local agricultural practices. It would 
enable workers in rural areas to avail employment opportunity under MGNREGA in non-agricultural 
season while simultaneously ensuring labour availability for agriculture. The Committee al so note 
that similar kind of initiatives have been taken by Gram Sabha and Gram Panchayat in Bikaner, 
Idukki, Trivandrum, West Sikkim District and Chitoor Districts in the Country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to take efforts for plan ning of MGNREGA works for each 
financial year as attempted in the aforesaid Districts." 
 
25.  The Department of Rural Development (MoRD) in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 "The provisions in Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarante e Act (MGNREGA) are 
effected through Schemes formulated by States under Section 4(1) of the Act. The Schemes made 
by the States are required to provide for the minimum features specified in Schedule I of the Act 
which lists the category of works that any S cheme prepared by a State Government under Section 
4 (1) of MGNREG Act shall focus upon.  As per section 16 of MGNREGA, Gram Panchayats in the 
meetings of Gram Sabha and ward Sabha are to determine the order of priority of the works to be 
taken up under th e MGNREGA. As per Section 13 of MGNREGA, the Panchayats at district, 
intermediate and village levels shall be the principal authorities for planning and implementation of 
the schemes made under this Act.  A month -wise analysis of the persondays of employme nt 
generated under MGNREGA reveals that the majority of the work has been provided during the 

14 
 
lean agriculture season.  For instance, during FY 2010 -11 to 2012 -13, around 60 -70% of the 
persondays were generated during the lean agricultural season (January-June). 
 MGNREGA works by their very nature place stress on increasing land productivity, 
recharging ground water and increasing water availability which all have positive impact on 
Agricultural productivity. Recent amendment of the Act to permit MGNREGA wo rks on individual 
land of small and marginal farmers who constitute a majority of the farming community, in addition 
to the individual land of SC/ST/BPL/IAY/ land reform beneficiaries, will augment the impact on 
agricultural productivity and household income. With the objective of expanding and deepening the 
positive synergy between MGNREGA and agriculture, especially in the context of small and 
marginal farmers, Ministry has permitted works under MGNREGA relating to NADEP composting, 
vermi-composting and l iquid bio -manures, livestock related works, irrigation command related 
works (rehabilitation of minors, sub-minors and field channels), etc." 
26. While finding less availability of labour for MGNREGA works during peak agriculture season 
which is due to lack of proper planning of works under MGNREGA without keeping in view the local 
agriculture practices,  the Committee desired  follow up  of Guidelines about preparation of D istrict 
Perspective Planning by DPCs and annual planning by Gram Sabha clearly indica ting works 
availability in a year taking into account local  agricultural practices and  recommended DoRD to 
make efforts for planning of MGNREGA works for each f inancial year as attempted in other 
Districts. The Committee are constrained to note  that inste ad of responding to their 
recommendation for follow up of  Guidelines for planning MGNREGA works during agricultural 
season based on local agricultural practices,   the DoRD has merely mentioned the provisions  for 
PRIs  under section 13 and 16  MGNREGA   regarding planning and implementati on of the Scheme 
and also mentioned  about latest amendment to the Act permitting MGNREGA works on individual 
land of small and marginal farmers who constitute a majority of farming community. The Committee 
find the action t aken reply of the Department  as evasive on such a vital issue and reiterate their 
recommendation already made in this regard.  

15 
 
G. Convergence under MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No.23 Para, No. 2.24) 
27. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that in order to optimize the desired outcome in an accelerated manner, the 
Department has taken steps for convergence of various schemes implemented by different 
Ministries and Departments as well as the programmes operated by the Department of  Rural 
Development. The Committee also note that most of the State Governments have started 
convergence at planning, management and work level. However, the Committee are dismayed to 
note that no information is maintained by the Department on number of pro jects taken up in each 
State/UTs under MGNREGA convergence guidelines. Similarly, the Department does not maintain 
information on constitution of District/Block resource Groups in State/UTs which are responsible for 
facilitating convergence at the ground l evel. The Committee are of the considered view that 
convergence between different schemes of Central and State Government is prerequisite for 
optimum utilization of resources and to avoid wasteful expenditure. Therefore, it becomes 
imperative to give more attention towards convergence of schemes. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to initiate measures for bringing more programmes such as literacy 
mission, mid-day meal scheme, National Rural Health Mission etc. under the ambit of convergence 
under MGNREGA. At the same time, the Department should also explore ways for convergence of 
National Rural Livelihood Mission with MGNREGA. It will help to promote spirit of entrepreneurship 
in rural India. The Committee also desire the Department to maint ain upto date information on 
number of convergence projects implemented in the country along with details of resource saved 
on these projects. The Committee also desire the Department to initiate consultation with State 
Governments for early constitution o f District/Block resources group as it will help to enhance 
coordination among different Government agencies and other stake holders which are necessary 
for promoting convergence at the ground level." 
28. The Department of Rural Development (MoRD) in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 Convergence is an evolving process and therefore, while broad principles can be laid down by the 
Central Government, the actual contours of convergence will be determined by (i) the objective of 
convergence and (i i) the nature and quantum of resources available for convergence.  Specific 
guidelines for convergence with different schemes were issued from time to time by the Ministry; 
 Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and MGNREGA convergence guidelines 
 issued on 23.12.2008 
 Ministry of Environment & Forests and MGNREGA convergence guidelines issued on 
 19.1.2009. 
 Ministry of Water Resources and MGNREGA convergence guidelines issued on 
 18.2.2009. 

16 
 
 Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) and MGNREG A convergence 
 guidelines issued on 29.5.2009. 
 Ministry of Agriculture and MGNREGA convergence guidelines issued on 30.10.2009. 
 Revised advisory for MGNREGA convergence with schemes of Ministry of Agriculture 
 issued  on 13.6.2013.  
 Advisory for Bharat Nir man Rajiv Gandhi Sewa Kendra (BNRGSK) convergence with 
 Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) issued on 30.12.2009. 
 Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA), Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation and  MGNREGA 
 convergence guidelines issued on 11.9.2012. 
 Ministry of Youth Affairs and MGNREGA convergence for construction of play fields issued 
 on 11.2.2013. 
 Rubber Board (Ministry of Commerce) and MGNREGA convergence guidelines issued on 
 2.8.2013.   
 
 Two schemes of Ministry of Rural Development – National Rural Livelihood  Mission 
(Ajeevika) and MGNREGA have similar mandates to reach out to the most marginalised sections 
of the society.  The major works undertaken through MGNREGA would enhance livelihood 
opportunities leading to increase in income and thereby alleviating po verty and combating distress 
migration. Whereas, Aajeevika aims at creating efficient and effective institutional platforms of the 
rural poor enabling them to increase household income through sustainable livelihood 
enhancements and improved access to fina ncial services. Aajeevika Skills aims to skill rural youth 
who are poor and provide them with jobs having regular monthly wages at or above the minimum 
wages. Ajeevika Skills allows convergence with MGNREGS in the following manner: 
 
(1) Youth who have worked as labourers in MGNREGA worksites for at least 35 days in each 
 of the previous three years will also be eligible even if they are not in the BPL list.  
(2) Under the new Aajeevika Skills Guidelines 2013, skilling projects are now possible for 
 training and placement for improved Public Service Delivery, wh ich could include 
 MGNREGA also. 
 So far, State Convergence Plan (SCP) has been formulated in 21 States." 
 
 
29. The Committee  during the process of examination of the subject, had observed that  
convergence between different schemes of Central and State Government  was pre -requisite for 
optimum utilization of resources and  also to  avoid  wasteful expenditure .  The Committee had , 
therefore, recommended the Department to initiate measures for  bringing more programmes like 
literacy mission, mid -day meal scheme, NRHM within the ambit of convergence under MGNREGA.  
The Committee  had also desired the Department to maintain uptodate information on number of 
convergence projects implemented in the country alongwi th details of resources saved on these 

17 
 
projects.  In addition, the Department was also advised to initiate  consultation with State 
Governments for early constitution of District/Block Resource Groups for enhancing coordination 
among different Government ag encies and other stake holders, for promot ing convergence at 
ground level.  In  their action taken reply,  the DoRD  has merely  stated that con vergence is an 
evolving process and therefore, while  broad  principles can be laid down by Central Government , 
the actual contours of convergence can be determined by objectives, nature and quantum of 
resources available for  convergence.  The Committee are constrained to note  that DoRD has not 
given any specific reply to the recommendations of the Committee and  instead has narrated the 
procedure in a routine manner.  While expressing their unhappiness  on the lack of seriousness on 
the part of the Department on this issue, the Committee reiterate their recommendations and desire 
that immediate necessary steps may be  taken by the Department for implementation of the 
recommendations of the Committee.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.2) 
 Registration and issue of job cards to rural households is basic requirement to avail right of work 
under MGNREGA. The Committee note that during the last 7 years of the implementation of scheme, as 
many as 12.46 crore rural households out of 13.83 rural households (2001 census) have been registered 
and issued job cards in the country by State/UT Governments. However, the Committee note that many 
discrepancies such as issue of fake job cards, inclusion of fictitious names, missing entry or delay in making 
entries in job cards, illegal custody of job c ards by influential people etc. have been noticed. Similarly, 
complaints regarding non -issue of dated receipt to job applicants have been widely reported. The 
Committee are of the strong view that there is need to bring reform in the process of issue of jo b cards. The 
Committee are of the opinion that offences such as missing entries in the job cards and unlawful 
possession of job cards with influential people including elected representatives of PRIs or MGNREGA 
functionaries should be made punishable offen ce under section 25 of the Act. The Committee, however, 
welcome the proposal for registration of application for work through mobile phones and MGNREGA 
website. The Committee feel that such steps are progressive and need to be taken further. The Committee 
desire that job cards should have photograph of the holder and other details like voter ID/Adhaar No./voter 
list no. so as to ensure that the chances of fake duplicate/multiple job cards are reduced to minimum. The 
Committee also recommend the Department t o conduct random inspections of job cards to weed out the 
fake job cards. Apart from PRIs, job cards should also be subject to social audit or audit under directions of 
Comptroller & Auditor General of India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The MGNREGA Operation al Guidelines, 2013, has detailed the process of issue of job cards.   As 
per the provisions contained in the guidelines, the Gram Panchayat has to cause a door -to-door survey to 
identify eligible households for registration under the Act. The Gram Panchayat is also required to verify the 
following:- 
(a)         Whether the household is really entitled as stated in the application. 
 (b)         Whether the applicant household or legal resident in the Gram Panchayat is concerned. 
(c)         Whether applicants are adult members of the household. 
 The Guidelines mandate that the job card should contain permanent information regarding the 
household as well as employment details of 5 years.   This inter-alia include job card members, information 
relating to job ca rdholder household, work demand and allocation, postal account number, bank account 
number, insurance policy number and EPIC number (voter ID), RSBY number, Aadhar number and 
BPL/socio-economic status. 
 All entries into the job cards of rural households sh ould be duly authenticated by an officer 
authorised by the State. Entries pertaining to employment and wages should be up -dated from time to 
time.  Missing entries or delay in entries in the job cards is considered as a violation and is now punishable 
under section 25 of the Act. 

19 
 
 To ensure transparency and accountability, it is mandated in the guidelines that the  job cards 
should be in the custody of the household to whom it   is  issued.  If job cards were found in the possession 
of any Panchayat or MGNREG A Officer without a valid reason, it would be considered as an offence and 
be punishable under Section 25 of the Act. 
 The guidelines also mandate that the details of individual in the registered households should be 
verified by Panchayat Secretary with th e assistance of Gram Rozgar Sevak and Data Entry 
Operators.  After due verification, the corrections relating to job cards are to be made in the database. 
 As per the revised Guidelines, 2013, the social audit process requires inspection and verification o f 
various registers and records including job card register detailing the cards issued to the adult members of 
rural households. 
 It is also decided to link the job cards with Aadhaar numbers so as to avoid duplication/fake cards. 
 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.3) 
 The Committee no te that Implementation of MGNREGA has created large scale opportunity for 
employment in rural areas of the country. The Committee note that 1348.89 crore person days employment 
has been generated during the last seven years of implementation of MGNREGA wor ks. However, claim of 
the Government to provide employment to 29.94 crore households out of 30.34 crore households who 
demanded employment during the aforesaid period seems to be unbelievable in the absence of authentic 
data regarding number of days of emp loyment demanded by households. The Committee are also 
concerned over decreasing trend of employment generation after the peak of 283.59 crore persondays in 
2008-09. The Committee also observe that year -wise average persondays employment generation during 
2006-07, 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12, 2012-13 (as on 31.01.2013) were 43, 42, 48, 54, 
47, 43 and 36 days respectively. The Committee are further dismayed to note that average number of 
persondays of employment provided per household in Stat es with significant BPL population like Bihar (22 
to 38 days) and West Bengal (14 to 35 days) were less than national average. The Committee are at loss 
to understand the logic of poor demand for work in States which have significant BPL population with le ss 
employment opportunities as compared to comparatively developed States. The Committee are of the 
considered view that bottleneck in implementation of MGNREGA works such as delay in payment of wages 
and alleged corruption in registration and giving actua l work are distracting people in demanding work 
under MGNREGA. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to analyse reasons for poor 
performance of all States and take corrective steps so that people in rural areas in across the country find it 
easy to gain employment under MGNREGA as per the objectives of the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The responsibility of implementation of the provisions of MGNREGA 2005 vests with the 
States/UTs.  As reported by the States/UTs, the  volume of wage -employment has grown from a meagre 
90.5 cr. person -days in 2006 -07 to 229.86 cr. person -days in 2012 -13. Being a drought year, the 

20 
 
employment demand peaked (283.59 cr.) in 2009 -10. [Hence, 2009 -10 may be considered an atypical 
year for MGNREGA performance.] The Av erage person -days per Household ranged between 42 days 
(2008-09) and 54 days (2009 -10). The physical progress of MGNREGA in terms of employment 
generation, women and SC/ST participation is indicated in the following Table. 
 
  Physical Progress under MGNREGA since inception 
No Indicator 06-07 07-08 08-09 09-10 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15* 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
1 Person-days  
(No. in Cr.) 
90.5 143.59 216.32 283.59 257.15 218.76 230.41 220.35 137.96 
2 
Average person-
days per 
Household 
 (in No.) 
43 42 48 54 47 43 46 46 36 
3 Women 
Participation 
Rate to total (%) 
40 43 48 48 48 48 51 53 55 
4 SC/ST 
participation rate 
61 56 54 51 52 40 40 40 40 
*Till 24/02/2015 
 
 The Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a self -selecting wage -employment programme, with high 
participation from marginalised groups including women, Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes 
(STs). The women participation rate and SC/ST participation rate ranged between 40 (2006 -07) and 51 
(2012-13) and 40 (2012 -13) and 61 (2006 -07), respectively. While la ck of robust demand management 
system under MGNREGA has an adverse impact on the perspective workers to turn to MGNREGA 
works, the decline in the demand of rural households under MGNREGA could be due to a myriad of 
factors external to programme management viz. available of alternative and remunerative employment 
opportunities outside MGNREGA, rain fall pattern, prevailing unskilled wage rate in rural, semi -
urban/urban areas, better connectivity to semi-urban/peri-urban/Urban areas etc. 
 
            To ensure effective implementation of the provisions of MGNREGA, 2005, Operational Guidelines 
have been issued from time to time.   The last revision was made w.e.f. 1st  April, 2013. The revised 
guidelines 2013 give detailed procedures of all aspects of the program me.  As per these procedures, the 
states are required to do the following for ensuring adequate participation of rural household in 
MGNREGA:  
 
§   initiate appropriate IEC campaigns including wall writings for wide dissemination of the   provisions of 
the Act; 
§  Special high level teams are being appointed for States with high poverty levels – Jharkhand, Bihar, 
Uttar Pradesh, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh; 
§   carry out of door -to-door survey to identify needy and eligible households for registration under 
MGNREGA; 
§   expand scope and coverage of the demand registration system to ensure that demand for work under 
MGNREGA do not go unregistered; 

21 
 
§   organise Rozgar Divas periodically to capture latent demand under the programme and to disseminate 
awareness about other provisions of the Act; 
§   prepare development plans and shelf of projects by adhering to the timelines as defined in the 
Guidelines; and 
§   Ministry has issued detailed Guidelines/Framework for “Planning for work and preparation of Labour 
Budget” under MGNREGA for the financial year 2015 -16. As a part of the LB exercise, it has been 
decided that there should be a greater focus on the backward Blocks while conducting the LB exercise. 
For this purpose, an intensive participatory planning exercise (I PPE) has been prescribed to be 
conducted in 2,500 backward Blocks in the country. 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.4) 
 The Committee find that implementation of MGNREGA has provided women in rural areas an 
opportunity to participate in remunerative activities thereby, empowering them financially. The Committee 
note that participation of women under MGNREGA works ha s been more than 40 percent in each of last 
seven years and that is more than the statutory requirement of 1/3 of the total beneficiaries. However, 
examination of the scheme by the Committee has revealed that participation of women in some States 
such as A ssam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal has been less than national 
average. The Committee also note that Assam, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have failed to meet 
statutory requirement of providing 1/3rd employment to the women  beneficiaries. The Committee in their 
1st Report (15th Lok Sabha), while showing concern over low women participation in these States, had 
recommended the Department to analyse reasons for poor performance of these States and take corrective 
steps to enhance participation of women in MGNREGA. The Committee are of the firm view that success of 
MGNREGA will be more visible if the number of women workers is large as their income raise the standard 
of household more than the male workers. Apart from generation  of employment, it will also help to widen 
the ambit of opportunities for employment to those sections of society which were so far denied equal 
opportunity. In this regard, it becomes imperative to enhance participation of more number of women in 
States which have lower Socio-economic Indicator as economic empowerment of women has been seen to 
enhance human development index. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take steps 
such as awareness among women, allowing works suitable for women as per local culture, formation of self 
help groups etc. to encourage women to demand employment in States which have lower participation of 
women under MGNREGA. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 Provision to para 6 of Schedule - II of MGNREG Act provides that prio rity shall be given to women 
in such a way that at least one -third of the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and 
demanded work under the Act. The overall participation of women as reported by States/UTs is about 48% 
during the previous four y ears (2008-09 to 2011 -12) in terms of persondays generated. Whereas during 
the year 2012 -13, the share of employment generation for women has increased to 51% and during the 

22 
 
year 2013 -14 has increased to 53% and further increased to 55% during the year 201 4-15 (till 
24/02/2015), as reported by the States.  However, the coverage of women has been reported as less than 
one-third in the States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Lakshadweep and Uttar Pradesh during 2013 -14. The reason for low participation of women in some 
states could be attributed to reasons like non -revision of Schedule of Rates, Socio-cultural constraints and 
low awareness. High demand & limited supply of work opportunities force women to compete agai nst men 
which might also have resulted in lesser participation of women workers. Some of the provisions 
enunciated in the Act/Operational guidelines, 2013 which would enhance women participation are as 
under; 
 
(1)   Payment of equal wages for men and women. 
(2) Participation/representation of women in Panchayati Raj institutions that would ensure greater 
participation of women both at the planning and execution levels under MGNREGA. 
(3) Identification of widowed women, deserted women and destitute women, who qualify as  a 
household under the Act, to ensure that they are provided job cards and are given 100 days of work. 
(4) Special works, which require less effort and those that are close to their house are to be given to 
pregnant women and lactating mothers. 
(5) Conduct time an d motion studies to formulate gender, age, level of disability, terrain and climate 
sensitive Schedule of Rates (SoRs) and also accurate capturing of work done by women at 
worksites. 
(6) At least 50% of the worksite supervisors (Mates) at all worksites to be women.  Priority is to be given 
to women workers who have put in maximum work in the last 3 years or their daughters. 
(7) Encourage participation of women groups, including Self Help Groups (SHGs) in awareness 
generation, capturing of demand, planning, implemen tation, monitoring and maintenance of works.  
SHGs can also mentor women mates. 
(8) Individual bank/post office accounts should be opened in the name of all women MGNREGA 
workers and their wages directly credited to their account for the number of days worked by them. 
(9) Worksite facilities such as crèches, drinking water, shade etc. are to be provided.  This may also be 
done through convergence with Women and Child Development Schemes like Integrated Child 
Development Services (ICDS). 
(10) By way of an amendment in Sc hedule-I of MGNREG Act, construction of Anganwadi centres have 
been included as one of the permissible works under the scheme. 
 
A new approach to IEC action plan has been mooted which would be a deviation from the 
conventional mass media driven approach in  message dissemination.  The new action plan would focus 
on mid media and interpersonal media initiatives to ensure that the messages reach the target group in a 
more effective and sustainable way. This would help the illiterate women to access and underst and 
messages of MGNREGA and thereby motivate them to be involved in MGNREGA.  The states have also 
asked to prepare their State level IEC Annual action plans.   The State -level IEC action plan would aim at 
facilitating dissemination of right based provisio ns of the Act and ensure that the workers know their right 
to demand wage employment and exercise their right by applying for such employment as per their need.   
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 

23 
 
 Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.5) 
 The Committee have been informed that Mihir Shah Committee constituted for revision in 
guidelines for implementation of MGNREGA works has suggested for creation of special condition to 
facilitate inclusion of disabled persons in MGNREGA works. However, the Committee note that as against 
2.1 crore person with disabilities (census 2001) in the country only 19,67,315 have been provided work 
since inception of the Scheme. The Committee are unhappy to note that implementing agencies have failed 
to create proper environment for working of disabled persons in MGNREGA works. The Committee are of 
considered view that identification of proper work as per needs of disabled persons and creation of proper 
work environment are imperative for encouraging disabled persons to participate in MGNREGA works as 
per MGNREGA, 2005 guidelines. The Committee, there fore, desire the Department to take steps for 
identification of special works as per specific needs of disabled persons, issue special job cards, and 
appointment of dedicated officers etc. so as to increase the participation of persons with disabilities in  the 
MGNREGA works. 
Reply of the Government 
 The prime objective of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) is to enhance the livelihood security of the poor households in rural areas of the Country.  
For holistic fulfillment o f this objective, special attention is focused upon the vulnerable section of rural 
society including differently -abled persons. The MGNREGA Operational Guidelines has dedicated a 
separate chapter entitled “Strategy for Vulnerable Groups” wherein detailed procedure has been outlined 
to facilitate inclusion of differently-abled persons in MGNREGA.    The MGNREGA Operational Guidelines 
– 2013 has however emphasized the following with a view to create special conditions for active 
participation of such differently-abled persons under MGNREGA: 
 
(1) States to identify specific works which can be done by differently-abled persons; 
(2) differently-abled persons can be grouped together as a fixed group to accomplish the works 
proposed for them; 
(3) services of a facilitator/Mat e can be utilized to mobilize differently -abled workers for MGNREGA 
works; 
(4) works could be opened specifically for the disabled; 
(5) Differently abled persons should be given preference for appointment as Mates for MGNREGA 
works and as workers for providing drinking water, to manage crèches etc., at the work site. 
(6) Suitable institutions should be identified for making modified tools/assisted devices for use at 
worksite; 
(7) Differently-abled workers to be treated with respect and with due care. 
The total number of pe rsons with disabilities in the country is 2.19 crores (Census: 2001). While 
the share of disabled in the rural areas is 1.63 crore, the total number of disabled persons who 
have registered under MGNREGA since inception as reported by the States is 14.27 la khs.  The 
disabled beneficiaries provided employment on demand under MGNREGA since inception is 
indicated below: 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
146401 336698 204772 297215 294490 395200 455307 485687 382988* 
* Till 24.02.2015 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 

24 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.6) 
 The Committee are satisfied to find that share of SCs and STs in persondays employment provided 
under MGNREGA works is more than their share in total population of most of the States except 
Maharashtra. The Committee are of the opinion that since majority of SCs and STs constitute bulk of rural 
poor, there is a need to promote awareness among them so that they can further be encouraged to 
demand more employment under MGNREGA. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
take steps for awareness generation in SCs/STs across the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The responsibility of implementation of provisions of MGNREGA 2005 is vested with the 
States/UTs.  The matter of provision of work to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes has been taken 
up as a priority area in the Ministry for review with the States. To ensure adequate participation of 
prospective MGNREGA workers, the Ministry has instructed, through the revised MGNREGA Operational 
Guidelines, 2013, the States/UTs to adhere to the following: 
  
(a) Initiate appropriate IEC campaigns including wall paintings for wide dissemination of the provisions 
of the Act. 
(b) Carry out door -to-door survey to identify needy and eligible households fo registration under 
MGNREGA. 
(c) Expand scope and coverage of demand registration system to ensure that demand for work under 
MGNREGA do not go unregistered. 
(d) Organize „Rozgar Diwas‟ periodically to capture latent demand under the programme and to 
disseminate awareness about the provisions of the Act. 
(e) Formulation of a specific plan to include special categories of vulnerable people viz.  persons with 
disabilities, primitive tribal groups, nomadic tribal groups, de-notified tribes etc.  
(f) Adoption of appropriate programme flexibility to ensure reaching of benefits of MGNREGA to the 
primitive tribal groups, de-notified tribes and nomadic tribes. 
Organisation of workers into labour groups to ensure powerful demand -side pull for improving 
performance of MGNREGA. 
 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.7) 
 The Committee note that the significant portion of budget of the Department of Rural Development 
is allocated for implementation of MGNREGA. The Committee find that even though Rs. 2,07,679.87 crore 
were available for implementation of MGNREGA works from 2005 -06 to 2012 -13, implementing agencies 
could utilise Rs. 1,95,321.03 crore during these years. The Committee also note that the trend of 
expenditure pattern has been uneven and huge unspent balance has been reported in each financial year. 
The Committee are astonished to note that there is a trend of increasing unspent balances over the years 
which was as high as 27.31% in the financial year 2010 -11. Examination by the Committee has revealed 
that huge unspent  balances were lying with some big States such as Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya 
Pradesh, Rajasthan etc. The Committee in their earlier reports had repeatedly drawn attention of the 
Department towards this trend and had recommended to analyse reasons and tak e steps to enhance 
utilization of funds allocated to the States. However, the Committee note that the Department is yet to take 

25 
 
effective steps to solve this problem. There are reports which suggest that in some of the States successful 
implementation of M GNREGA has reduced the migration of unskilled workers to urban areas. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to analysis reasons of increasing unspent balances and 
take immediate steps for effective utilization of funds available under MGNREGA. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The MGNREGA is a demand -driven wage employment programme and no allocation is made 
under this programme. Central share is released to the States/UTs on the basis of agreed to Labour 
Budgets prepared by the programme implementing  agencies under the Act. MGNREGA is a demand -
driven programme and hence utilization of funds depends on the actual demand for works. 
 
An Electronic Fund Management System (e -FMS) is being implemented to do away with unspent balance 
at sub-state level.  The system is made operational in 23 states and the remaining states will come over to 
e-FMS by March, 2015. 
 
Implementation of MGNREGA/utilization of funds by the States/UTs under MGNREGA is periodically 
reviewed in various National and State level performan ce review meetings and regional review meetings. 
Among others, States/UTs are requested to follow bottom up approach and realistic estimation of labour 
demand through household survey of job card holders, reinforcement of demand registration processes so 
that all those who wish to apply for work under MGNREGA are facilitated and appropriate planning of 
works and their execution to ensure adequate worker participation rate in MGNREGA. State Government 
is obliged to provide upto 100 days of guaranteed wage em ployment in a financial year to every rural 
household and there is also an obligation to make payment within a specified time as per the provisions of 
the Act.  The state is therefore required to maintain adequate funds at different levels of the implement ing 
agencies and unspent balances with the States/UTs serve this purpose. These unspent balances with the 
states are also adjusted while making subsequent releases by the Central Government on the basis of the 
agreed to labour budget. However, in pursuance  of persistent instructions to the States on realistic labour 
budget projection, there has been a downward trend in the unspent balance available with the states as 
reported during the last 3 years as indicated below: 
 
Financial Year  Unspent Balance  
2010-11 Rs.1545013.27 
2011-12 Rs. 1000909.35 
2012-13 Rs. 501215.99 
2013-14 Rs. 231936.82 
2014-15  
(till 18.02.2015) 
Rs. 771040.86 
 
As per the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Rural Development, the Ministry instituted a 
study through National  Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP), Delhi to find out the reasons for 
unspent balances under various rural development programmes including MGNREGA. The study report on 
MGNREGA has been submitted to the Ministry. 
 
 [O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 

26 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.8) 
 On the issue of administrative expenditure, the Committee note that States/UTs have been allowed 
to inc ur up to 6% of annual allocation under MGNREGA on salary and allowances of the Programme 
Officers and their supporting staff, the administrative expenses of the Central Council and facilities to be 
provided under schedule -II and other items as decided by t he Central Government. The Committee note 
that expenditure of Rs. 6380.21 crore (as on 31.01.2013) has been incurred under different heads of 
administrative expenditure. The Committee note that States/UTs have not been able to utilise funds 
available under the head of administrative expenditure. The effect of which could be seen on availability of 
requisite manpower and other infrastructure necessary for execution of MGNREGA works. The Committee 
also find that several instances of improper or disproportiona te use of funds available under administrative 
expenditure like booking of salaries of ineligible categories of employees, diversion of funds to other 
programmes, payment of ex -gratia etc. have been reported to the Department. The Committee are of the 
view that planning for effective and proper use of funds available for administrative expenditure for 
manpower and other infrastructure be made available to PRIs and other agencies which is essential for 
implementation of MGNREGA. Efforts should be made for pr ovision of assistance of Engineers and 
Accounts Assistants to PRI for effective implementation of work. The Committee desire the Department to 
work out strategy in consultation with State Governments for effective utilization of these funds. The 
Committee also recommend the Department to take steps to initiate action against Officials found guilty of 
improper use of funds made available under MGNREGA. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As per the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Rural Development, the M inistry 
instituted a study through National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP), Delhi to find out the 
reasons for unspent balances under various rural development programmes including MGNREGA. The 
study report on MGNREGA has been submitted to the Ministry. 
 
As per the provision of Section 18 of MGNREG Act 2005, the State Government is required to make 
available to the District Programme Coordinator and the Programme Officers, necessary staff and 
technical support as may be necessary for effectiv e implementation of the Scheme. To enable the 
States/UTs for augmenting human resources and developing capacity for critical activities Central 
Government provides upto 6% of the total expenditure on MGNREGA in a Financial Year as administrative 
expenses. This Central financial assistance is provided to States/UTs under section 22 (1) (c) of 
MGNREGA, 2005. State governments are advised to supplement this, if required, for effective 
implementation of the provisions of MGNREGA.  The 6 per cent cap on administ rative expenses shall 
operate at the State level. At least two -thirds of this 6% should be spent at the block -level and below. 
Panchayats, in accordance with their needs and requirements may utilize the administrative expenses for 
approved activities. The Central Government has issued advisories to the State Governments suggesting 
deployment of dedicated staff at various levels for the implementation of MGNREGA. The Staff that should 
be put in place at the Block and Gram Panchayat level includes a full time  Employment Guarantee 
Assistant (EGA) or Gram Rozgar Sahayak, Engineers, Programme Officer, Data Entry operator and 
Accountant.  To facilitate the implementing agencies, the new Operational guidelines, 2013 specifically 
indicate the activities whose expenses can be met from the Administrative Expenses.  The guidelines also 

27 
 
clearly indicate the activities which cannot be booked under the Administrative expenditure. The 
Administrative expenditure incurred by the States since 2006 -07 to 2009 -10 were in the ran ge of 2.52% 
and 3.48%.   The Administrative expenditure incurred, as reported by the States during the last three years 
is indicated as under: 
 
Financial Year  Total Expenditure Administrative Expenses % of Administrative Expenses 
2010-11 3937727.05 179965.15 4.57 
2011-12 3707282.22 211612.15 5.71 
2012-13 3977828.72 219477.83 5.52 
2013-14 3873602.25 236908.78 6.11 
2014-15  
(till 18.02.2015) 
2977006.50 185475.96 6.23 
 
There is a comprehensive system of monitoring and review of the implementation of MGN REGA, which 
inter-alia include Periodic Progress Report, Performance Review Committee, Quarterly Regional Reviews, 
Area Officers‟ Scheme, National Level Monitors and Vigilance & Monitoring Committees at the State and 
District levels. Independent Monitoring  and verification by National Level Monitors (NLMs) and Area 
Officers are also carried out in cases of specific complaints. The findings and reports of such review 
meetings and visits are shared with the concerned States/UT Governments for follow up action . Inquiry 
reports on specific complaints are analyzed at the central level and suitable advisory are issued to the State 
Governments for initiation of departmental inquiry, proceedings for disqualification/termination in respect of 
elected officials, lodgi ng of FIR against the delinquent official(s) in case prima -facie a criminal intent is 
established, recovery of amount misappropriated etc. Detailed instructions by way of Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) for dealing with complaints have also been issued to all States/UTs and have been 
displayed on website www.nrega.nic.in. 
 [O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.9) 
 The Committee note that creation of durable assets emphasizing on sustainable development is 
one of the stated objective of MGNREGA, 2005. The Committee also note that the Government has 
allowed new categories of works such as agricultural related works, livestock related work, rural sanitation 
etc. under list of permissible works that could be taken up by implementing agencies apart from 8 types of 
works that were initially provided under MGNREGA, 2005. The  Committee note that Act also provides for 
notification of any other works by the Central Government in consultation with State Governments. The 
Committee find that demand for inclusion of new works under the category of permissible work has been 
made by m any State Governments. The Committee are of the view that States/UTs in the country are at 
different stages of socio -economic development and at the same time, depending upon various 
geographical conditions, their functional requirement for development may  be different. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to provide flexibility to the State Governments/UTs to undertake 
works under MGNREGA that could fulfill functional requirements in rural areas across the country. This will 
help in utilization of funds along with creation of assets/ developmental works. 

28 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 I. Category (A): PUBLIC WORKS RELAITNG TO NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT. 
(i)  Water conservation and water harvesting structures to augment and improve groundwater like 
underground dykes, earthen dams, stop dams, check dams with special focus on recharging 
ground water including drinking water sources; 
(ii) Watershed management works such as contour trenches, terracing, contour bunds, boulder 
checks, gabion structures and spring  shed development resulting in a comprehensive 
treatment of a watershed; 
(iii) Micro and minor irrigation works and creation, renovation and maintenance of irrigation canals 
and drains; Renovation of traditional water bodies including desilting of irrigation tan ks and 
other water bodies; 
(iv) Afforestation, tree plantation and horticulture in common and forest lands, road margins, canal 
bunds, tank foreshores and coastal belts duly providing right to usufruct to the households 
covered in Paragraph; and 
(v) Land development works in common land. 
 
II. Category (B): COMMUNITY ASSETS OR INDIVIDUAL ASSETS FO R VULNERABLE SECTION S 
(ONLY FOR HOUSEHOLDS IN PARAGRAPH) 
 
(i) Improving productivity of lands of households specified in Paragraph 5 through land 
development and by providing su itable infrastructure for irrigation including dug wells, farm 
ponds and other water harvesting structures; 
(ii) Improving livelihoods through horticulture, sericulture, plantation, and farm forestry; 
(iii) Development of falloworwaste lands of households defined in Paragraph5 to bring it under 
cultivation; 
(iv) Unskilled wage component in construction of houses sanctioned underthe Indira Awaas Yojana 
or such other State or Central Government Scheme; 
(v) Creating infrastructure for promotion of livestock such as, poultry shelt er, goat shelter, piggery 
shelter, cattle shelter and fodder troughs for cattle; and  
(vi) Creating infrastructure for promotion of fisheries such as, fish drying yards, storage facilities, 
and promotion of fisheries in seasonal water bodies on public land; 
 
III. Category (C): COMMON INFRASTRUCTURE INCLUDING FOR NRLM  COMPLIANT SELF HELP 
GROUPS  
(i) Works for promoting agricultural productivity by creating durable infrastructure required for bio -
fertilizers and post -harvest facilities including pucca storage faciliti es for agricultural produce; 
and  
(ii) Common work-sheds for livelihood activities of self-help groups. 
 
IV. Category D: RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE:  
 
(i) Rural sanitation related works, such as, individual household latrines, school toilet units, 
Anganwadi toilets eithe r independently or in convergence with schemes of other Government 
Departments to achieve ‘open defecation free’ status. and solid and liquid waste management 
as per prescribed norms  

29 
 
(ii) Providing all-weather rural road connectivity to unconnected villages an d to connect identified 
rural production centres to the existing pucca road network; and construction of pucca internal 
roadsorstreets including side drains and culverts within a village; 
(iii) Construction of play fields;  
(iv) Works for improving disaster preparedn ess or restoration of roads or restoration of other 
essential public infrastructure including flood  control  and  protection  works, providing drainage  
in  water  logged  areas, deepening and repairing of flood channels, chaur renovation, 
construction of storm water drains for coastal protection; 
(v) Construction of buildings for Gram Panchayats, women self -help groups’ federations, cyclone 
shelters, Anganwadi centres, village haats and crematoria at the village or block level.  
(vi) Construction of Food Grain Sto rage Structures for implementing the provisions of The National 
Food Security Act 2013 (20 of 2013); 
(vii) Production of building material required for construction works under the Act as a part of the 
estimate of such construction works.  
(viii) Maintenance of rural public assets created under the Act; and  
(ix) any other work which may be notified by the Central Government in consultation with the State 
Government in this regard. 
  
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.10) 
 The Committee are unhappy to find that there is delay in completion of works under MGNREGA 
scheme, and the implementing agencies have not been able to complete works within time limit of six 
months. The Committee note that implementing agencies were able to complete only 98.36 lakh works out 
of 296.13 lakh works undertaken during first seven years (as on 30.01.2012) of implementation of 
MGNREGA. The Committee‟s examina tion has revealed that performance of smaller States such as 
Kerala, Manipur and Mizoram was better than the bigger States like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, 
Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra. The Committee find it difficult to understand that factors suc h as time 
lag between project completion and uploading of information on website, non -feasibility of some projects 
etc. could be reasons for bad performance of implementing agencies.  In this regard, the Committee find 
some merit in findings of Working Gro ups on MGNREGA for 12th Five Year Plan which inter-alia has 
pointed out that reasons such as cost escalation of  projects due to revision of wage rate and material rate 
are affecting timely completion of projects. The Committee are of the view that factors such as design of 
project, technical expertise of implementing agencies/PRIs, lack of proper planning as reflected in various 
research studies on MGNREGA etc. might be reason for large number of incomplete work. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Depa rtment to analyse reasons for increasing number of incomplete works in 
different States/UTs and take remedial steps to improve capabilities of implementing agencies to complete 
projects within given time limits. 
. 
Reply of the Government 
 The provisions in  Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) are 
effected through Schemes formulated by States under Section 4(1) of the Act. The Schemes made by the 
States are required to provide for the minimum features specified in Schedule I of th e Act which lists the 

30 
 
category of works that any Scheme prepared by a State Government under Section 4 (1) of MGNREG Act 
shall focus upon.  Schedule I of MGNREGA has been suitably amended to include various new works 
which would give thrust to activities r elating to Agriculture, watershed, Livestock, Fisheries, Rural Drinking 
Water and works in coastal areas which have scope for creation of durable assets and enhance the 
livelihood of the rural poor.  As per section 16 of MGNREGA, Gram Panchayats in the mee tings of Gram 
Sabha and ward Sabha are to determine the order of priority of the works to be taken up under the 
MGNREGA. As per Section 13 of MGNREGA, the Panchayats at district, intermediate and village levels 
shall be the principal authorities for planning and implementation of the schemes made under this Act.  The 
Panchayats at the district level shall finalize and approve block -wise shelf of projects to be taken up under 
a programme under the scheme.  The updated data in MIS reveal that 251 lakh works s tarted since 
inception, 163 lakh (65%) works have been completed has reported by the States. Delay in completion of 
works can be attributed to reasons such as execution of works spanning more than one year, revision of 
wages and material cost midway of com pletion of the work, beginning of new works before completion of 
ongoing work etc.   The Central Government has issued „MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 (4 th 
Edition) which has discussed in detail every aspect of the implementation of the scheme includ ing „Strategy 
to address incomplete works‟.  Measures suggested to address the issue are; 
 
(1)  Splitting of works into annual work elements with each annual segment given a distinct 
work identity. 
(2)   Re-estimation of value of project by the District Programme Coordinator (DPC) on a suo-
moto basis, post revision of wages and material cost.  
(3)  No sanction to be given for beginning new works in cases where Programme 
Implementing Agency (PIA) have incomplete works for more than one fiscal year/capping 
the number of works than can be opened up in any Gram Panchayat (GP) at a given time 
while there are incomplete works in the same GP. 
 
 [O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.11) 
 Regular supervision and inspection of works is necessary to ensure quality of work undertaken in 
MGNREGA. The Committee note that para 14 of Schedule I of the MGNREGA, 2005 provide for regular 
inspection and supervision of the works. Surprisingly, the Department does not have any information 
regarding number of works supervised in each States/UTs. The Committee are astonished to find that 
Department is not serious to implement guidelines issued in this regard. The Committee are of the view that 
inspection and supervision of works not only pinpoint irregularities in execution of projects, but also bring 
out difficulties being faced by the implementing agencies. Thus, regular supervision and monitoring will help 
the Government to take steps to bring improvement in project modules and implementation process of 
projects. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take up the issue with the State 
Governments concerned to ensure supervision a nd inspection of the works as laid out in the Act. At the 
same time, the Department should make provision for uploading of information of monitoring and 
supervision on MGNREGA website. 

31 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Schedule–I of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), as amended 
from time to time, lists the category of works that any Scheme prepared by a State Government under 
Section 4(1) of MGNREG Act shall focus upon.  To improve the quality of works under MGNREGA 
following steps/action has been prescribed by the Ministry: 
1.  The targets are fixed for internal verification of works at the field level by the official functionaries – 
100% of works at the Block Level, 10% of works at the District level and 2% of the works at the State 
level.   
2.  Technical Manuals on Watershed, Natural Resource Management (NRM), Forestry and MGNREGA 
Works Field Manual have been prepared and circulated to all the States.   
3.   For gap filling and value addition, Joint Convergence Guidelines of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA with the 
ongoing schemes of different Ministries have been prepared and are being implemented. 
 
The Ministry of Rural Development has set up internal and external systems to closely monitor 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA both physical and financial perf ormance of States. These mechanisms also 
assess the pace and quality of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA processes and procedures and identify 
critical issues that need to be addressed on priority. The monitoring mechanism involves; 
 
(i)    Internal Monitoring through fully functional Management Information System  (MIS). 
(ii) External Monitoring through Statutory Institutional Mechanisms like Central Employment     
Guarantee Council (CEGC) and through field visits of National Level Monitors and Area Officers.  
(iii) Review with States: Feedback on programme implementation is discussed and analyzed with State 
Governments through quarterly Performance Review Committee meeting and periodic state level 
reviews. 
(iv) Social Audit. 
(v)  Vigilance and Monitoring Committees. 
 To reduce implementation deficiencies under MGNREGA, the Ministry has taken following initiatives 
for better implementation of the scheme: 
1. On the basis of the committee constituted under the chairmanship of Dr. Mihir Shah, Member, 
Planning Commission the M GNREGA Operational Guidelines were revised and came into effect from 
on 1.4.2013.  
2. Schedule-I of MGNREG Act was amended to include various new works which would give thrust to 
activities relating to Agriculture, watershed, Livestock, Fisheries, Rural Drink ing Water and works in 
coastal areas which have scope for creation of durable assets and enhance the livelihood of the rural 
poor.  Construction of Anganwadi Centres and Playgrounds has also been subsequently included as 
permissible works.  
3. To reduce delay in payment of wages, Ministry has initiated “Electronic Fund Management system (e -
FMS)” in all States. The system is at present functional in 18 states and is expected to be rolled out 
across country by March, 2014. 
4.    The States have also been instruc ted to roll out Electronic Muster Roll (e -MR) and till last reported; e -
MR has been implemented in 202421 Gram Panchayats. 
5.   Ministry has also issued circular on Certification of Accounts and Financial Audit of MGNREGA 
Accounts at Gram Panchyats Level b y Chartered Accountant of 10 % GP of highest spending districts 
in all states. 
7.    Ministry has constituted a Programme Advisory Group (PAG) and has also set up National Resource 

32 
 
Groups (NRG) on thematic areas namely Demand Capture and Unemployment Allow ance, Planning 
and Quality of Works, delay in payment: Fund flow systems, Organisation of workers and worksite 
management, MIS and IT systems and Transparency and Accountability. 
 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.13) 
 The Committee note that a special leave petition challenging the order posted by the Hon‟ble High 
Court of Karnataka on validity of section 6(1) of MGNREGA, 2005 that empower Central Government to fix 
wage rates for the purpose of the Act, not withstanding anything contained in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 is 
pending before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India. On this issue, the Committee have been info rmed that the 
wage rate in respect of all State Governments/UTs has been fixed under a settled wage policy of the 
Government of India based on indexation to Consumer Price Index for Agriculture Labour. It has led to a 
situation where MGNREGA wage rate was less than minimum wage rate for agricultural labourers in 6 States. 
The Committee, therefore, would like the Department to initiate consultation with the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment and State Governments to solve vexing problem of incongruence of wage rate for MGNREGA and 
provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948. Needless to point out that it should be revised periodically based 
on a fixed formula that takes care of increased price/consumer index. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Hon‟ble Supreme Court ha s granted an interim stay to the orders of the High Court of Karnataka (dated 
23.9.2011) accepting the plea of the petitioner in WP No.30619/2009 challenging the constitutional validity of 
Section 6 of MGNREG Act to issue notification specifying wage rate.   Since the matter is sub -judice, the final 
view of the Government need to take into account the orders of the apex court on the pending Special Leave 
Petition.  The Government of India has also constituted a committee under the chairmanship of Dr. Pronab Sen, 
then Principal Adviser, Planning Commission to develop a mechanism to evolve a framework to create a 
separate index for updation of MGNREGA wages.  The issue is being pursued with the committee for 
submission of its report.  The Central Government has  also decided that till such time a satisfactory index is 
proposed by Dr. Sen committee and accepted by the Government, the Government could index the wages with 
the Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labourers (CPIAL) and accordingly issued a notificat ion on 14.1.2011 
revising MGNREGA wages by linking it to the CPIAL.  It has also been decided to increase the wage rate 
annually.  The wages rates have been last revised w.e.f. 1st April, 2013.  
 
The Government of India has also constituted a committee und er the Chairmanship of Prof. S. 
Mahendra Dev to suggest a proper index for revising MGNREGA wage rates every year by protecting the 
wages against inflation. The expert Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Prof. S. Mahendra Dev 
has recommended to reset the base wage rate by considering the existing MGNREGA wage rate as in 2014, or 
the Minimum Wage prescribed under the Minimum Wages Act whichever is higher. The Committee has also 
recommended adopting Consumer Price Index (Rural) instead of the Cons umer Price Index (Agricultural 

33 
 
Labour) for indexing the wage rate to inflation. The recommendations are under examination at the Government 
level.  
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.14) 
 The Committee note that section 3(3) of the Act provides for payment of wages to the workers 
within 15 days of date on which such work was done. However, most of the States have fai led to disburse 
wages within time limit as laid down in the Act. At the same time, workers are also not being compensated 
for delay in payment of wages according to provisions of Payment of Wages Act, 1936 as provided in 
MGNREGA, 2005. The examination of the issue by the Committee has revealed that main reason for delay 
in payment of wages under MGNREGA is less availability of required administrative and technical staff in 
different States which leads to administrative delay such as delay in measurement of work, not adhering to 
strict schedule of closing of muster roll within fortnight etc. Since majority of population in rural areas are 
dependent on daily wages, failure of the Government to ensure timely payment of wages to workers may 
force people to distr ess migration in search of employment in other sectors or areas which could provide 
them daily payment. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take immediate steps for 
recruitment of necessary manpower and required infrastructures at every l evel to ensure adherence to time 
limit for payment of wages to workers. The Committee also desire, the Department to enforce the 
provisions of the MGNREGA regarding payment of requisite compensation to the workers who are paid 
wages beyond the prescribed time frame. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry has initiated various steps to address concerns expressed on delay in payment of 
wages.  Electronic Fund Management System (e -FMS) has been introduced and 23 states have since 
switched over to e -FMS for ma king payments. Roll out of e -FMS in the remaining states is expected by 
March, 2014. The States have also been instructed to roll out Electronic Muster Roll (e -MR) and till last 
reported; e -MR has been implemented in 228950 Gram Panchayats. To enforce the payment of 
compensation for delay in payment of wages, the provisions in para 30 of Schedule II of the Act has been 
amended (notification dated 24 th September, 2013).  The salient features of the amendments are as 
under: 
 
1. Quantum of compensation has been p rescribed depending on the number of days of delay from the 
date of closure of the muster roll.  
2. Delay in payment of compensation beyond prescribed time limit to be treated at par with that of delay 
in payment of wages.  
3. For accountability, various processes determining the payment of wages have now been divided into 
various stages to facilitate fixing of responsibility.  
4. Provision to be included in NREGASoft to automatically calculate the compensation payable. 
5. The compensation shall be paid by the State Go vernment and subsequently recovered from the 
delinquent functionaries/Agencies.  

34 
 
6. District Programme Coordinator/Programme Officer to ensure payment of wages and compensation, 
if any, and put the system in operation for calculation of wages and compensation.  
7. Days of delay in payment of wages, compensation due and paid to be reflected in MIS and Labour 
Budget.  
 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.15) 
 The Committee note that 8.67 crore Banks/Post Office accounts have been opened in the country 
to make payment of wages to the MGNREGA wor kers. However, the Committee note that many problems 
like delay in fund transfer, insufficient cash limit of Post Offices, distance of Banks/Post Offices, single man 
working branch etc. have been noticed which causes delays in payment of wages. The Committ ee also 
note that initiative such as appointment of banking correspondents is yet to become fully operational in 
majority of the States. The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to consult States to enhance cash 
and line limit of Post office, so tha t they do not face problem of cash while making payment to MGNREGA 
workers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has been following up with the Department of Posts to facilitate the process of 
operationalization of timely and adequate disbursement of wag es through Post Offices to MGNREGA 
workers.  The issue relating to adequate Cash limit and line limit of Branch Post -offices and Sub -Post 
Offices has been taken up with the Department of Post. That Department has now authorized the Chief 
Post Master Generals (CPMGs) to enhance the maximum cash limits of Branch Post Offices and Sub -Post 
offices and line limits wherever required.  In this context, the States have been advised by the Ministry to 
identify Branch Post -offices and sub -post offices requiring adequ ate cash and line limits and take up the 
matter with the CPMGs concerned.  
 
In accordance with these guidelines, it has been reported that in the state of Andhra Pradesh, the Post 
Offices are disbursing wages in 70% of the Blocks.  The Department of Posts has increased the lime limit 
of post offices to Rs.50,000.  
 
With reference to covering Gram Panchayats (GPs) which do not have a branch post office, the matter has 
been taken up with Department of Posts to permit opening of branches on a franchise model. 
 
Department of Financial Services has informed that there are 2.65 lakh banking correspondents in the 
country appointed by various banks.  Out of these, the banking correspondents are disbursing wages in the 
state of Andhra Pradesh (full), Karnataka, Jhark hand and Maharashtra (partly).  The policy of Ministry of 
Rural Development is to fully operationalize the disbursement of wages at GP level using biometric 
authentication through banking correspondents before June, 2014. 

35 
 
 
The Ministry has advised the Stat es to roll -out Electronic Fund Management System (e -FMS) by March, 
2015.  Besides, Banks, the post offices are using e -FMS platform to remit the wages of the MGNREGA 
workers directly to their accounts.  The aim of rolling out e -FMS is to maintain transpare ncy and reduce 
delays in wage payments under MGNREGA. 
 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.16) 
 On the issue of u se of information and Communication Technology for timely payment of wages, 
the Committee note that Government have proposed many steps such as of Electronic Fund Management 
System (e -FMS), Electric Muster Roll (e -MR), Electronic Transfer of Data Files, Bi ometric based 
authentication for payment to workers etc. to speed up formalities associated with payment of wages. The 
Committee appreciate efforts of the Department taken in this regard and recommend fast track 
implementation of these proposals which are intended to benefit workers across the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry has also initiated various steps to address areas of concern relating to delay in 
payment of wages.  Electronic Fund Management System (e -FMS) has been introduced and 2 3 states 
have since started making payments through e -FMS. Roll out of e-FMS in the remaining states is expected 
by March, 2015. The States have also been instructed to roll out Electronic Muster Roll (e -MR) and till last 
reported; e-MR has been implemented in 228950 Gram Panchayats.  The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), along with pension schemes of National Social Assistance 
Scheme (NSAP) has been identified for Direct Benefit Transfers.  For the roll out of DBT, the Minis try is 
required to digitize its beneficiary database and seed them with Aadhaar numbers. To speed up the 
process of seeding with Aadhaar numbers and its authentication, it is also proposed to enlist the services of 
Centre for Development of Advanced Comput ing (CDAC), Ministry of Information Technology for 
authentication, door-to-door survey by Gram Rozgar Sahayaks (GRS) for seeding Aadhaar numbers and 
deployment of mobile module by UID in the mobiles of GRS.  
 Follow-up action as under has been taken to expedite the roll-out of e-FMS by the States: 
(a) The Ministry vide its Office Memorandum dated 23.09.2013 has set up a task force for implementation 
of e -FMS in all districts under MGNREGA. Andhra Pradesh has fully switched over to e -FMS for 
payment of wages, Material and Administrative expenses.   
(b) The States of Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Kerala Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, 
Tripura, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana,  Uttar Pradesh, Uttrakhand, West Bengal and Puducherry have 
switched over to e -FMS Time-lines have been fixed for the states to switch over to e -FMS.  For the 
purpose, the states have been divided into five groups with time lines fixed separately depending  on 
the type of payments viz. Wages, Material Administrative expenses. These time lines range from 
November, 2013 to March, 2014. 
(c)  Time-lines have been fixed for the States to switch over to e -FMS. All States to be on e -FMS form 1 st 
April, 2015 onwards. 

36 
 
(d) In some locations VSATS are to be provided (477 blocks), all there will be converted to e -FMS once 
VSATS are operationalized. 
 
 [O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011 -MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural  Development 
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.18) 
 The Committee note that National level monitors are deployed by the Ministry of Rural 
Development to ensure effective implementation of rural development programmes in a transparent 
manner. The NLMs are  deployed for regular and special monitoring of scheme/programme of the Ministry 
and to enquire into complaints regarding mis -utilization of funds, irregularities etc. The Committee note that 
1910 visits have been undertaken by the NLMs and findings of 404  complaints as inquired by NLMs have 
been shared with States concerned for taking corrective action. The Committee also note that 116 cases of 
complaints related to MGNREGA have been investigated by the NLMs. The Committee regard NLM as an 
important mechanism for monitoring of Scheme/programmes of rural Development including MGNREGA. 
However, there is need to enhance the frequency of regular and special monitoring as it will help the 
Ministry to gather information on implementation of programmes at the grou nd level that may help the 
Ministry to intervene if any irregularities are detected. At the same time, the Ministry should ensure that 
corrective action is taken by State concerned on report of the NLMs. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The monitoring of RD prog rammes including MGNREGA through the National Level Monitors 
(NLM) help to identify lacunae and discrepancies on a regular basis by developing a set of performance 
indicators for each of the Rural Development programmes.  Information collected on these ind ictors 
through various mechanism help the programme managers to carry out mid -course corrections as and 
when necessary.  The NLM scheme provides for covering all the districts in the country in a year by NLMs 
for regular monitoring.  The irregularities det ected during regular monitoring are required to be furnished 
by the NLMs in the prescribed proforma.  The NLMs are also deputed for special monitoring and enquiry 
on specific complaints.  The number of visits by NLMs has considerably increased in the recen t past. 
During the year 2012 -13, the NLMs had made 591 visits covering an equal number of districts for 
monitoring the implementation of various Rural Development programmes. During this period, 16 cases of 
complaints pertaining to the implementation of MGNREGA were investigated by the NLMs.  
 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 2.19) 
 The Committee note that social au dit are not being held at regular interval of six months in most of 
the States. The Committee note that 2,91,776 Social audits have been conducted during 2011 -12 in 
1,72,852 Panchayats out of 2,48,204 Gram Panchayats in the country. Also there is negligibl e participation 
of Gram Sabhas during social audits due to lack of awareness and failure of administration to ensure 

37 
 
regular meetings of Gram Sabhas. The Committee also observe that performance of MGNREGA is better 
in those States which have a healthy trad ition of social audit. The Committee are of the considered view 
that apart from ensuring quality of works, regular social audit has the potential to strengthen the spirit of 
grass root democracy. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take s teps for mandatory 
holding of social audit at a regular interval of six months. The Committee also desire the Department to 
designate a nodal officer in each District who should be given responsibility to ensure regular social audit in 
the District. The Co mmittee are happy to note that Department have amended the MGNREGA Audit of 
Schemes rules to establish Social Audit Units in each State as independent organisation who would be 
responsible for facilitating social audit by Gram Sabhas. In Committee‟s view e stablishment of such 
independent organisation in the States would go a long way to strengthen the spirit of participative 
democracy through social audit. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has, in consultation with the Comptroller & Auditor General of I ndia, notified on 30th 
June, 2011, the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Schemes Rules, 2011.  
The laying down of above rules is a major step in making social audit the principal instrument for 
transparency and accountability in t he implementation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA.  It aims to encourage 
public participation and put in place an independent institutional mechanism to increase the awareness of 
the labourers about their rights and entitlement under MGNREGS.   
 
The salient features of the Audit of Scheme Rules 2011 are:- 
 Every Gram Panchayat to have at least one social audit every six months; 
 Social Audit Unit to be  independent of implementing agencies to facilitate social audit by Gram 
Sabha; 
 Social Audit Unit to be responsible for building  capacities of Gram Sabhas for conducting social audit 
by identifying, training and deploying suitable resource persons at village, block, district and state 
level; 
 Social Audit Unit to create awareness amongst the labourers about their rights  and entitlements 
under the Act; 
 Social Audit Unit to facilitate verification of records with primary stakeholders and work sites; 
 Resource persons to be drawn from primary stakeholders and other civil society organizations having 
knowledge and experience of working for the rights of the people; 
 Resource persons to be deployed for facilitating social audit in a Panchayat not to be residents of the 
same Panchayat; 
 Resource persons to inform the labourers and the village community about the Gram Sabha 
conducting social audit; 
 All elected members of Panchayats and implementing staff to be present and respond to queries at 
the Gram Sabha; 
 Social audit report to be prepared in local language and displayed on the notice board of the Gram 
Panchayat; 
 Summary of find ings of social audit to be submitted by the State Government to the Comptroller & 
Auditor General of India. 
 
Establishment of Social Audit Directorate/Society : Independent Social Audit Units (either Society or 
Directorate) have been set up in 10 States; vi z. Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal. 6 States namely Gujarat, 

38 
 
Himachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Punjab, Sikkim and Tripura have outsourced facilitation of Social Audit in th e 
State to external agencies. Cabinet approval for setting up Directorate in Maharashtra and Society in 
Manipur has since been accorded.   
Appointment of Director (Social Audit) :  14 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Himachal 
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Mizoram Tamil Nadu, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttar 
Pradesh, Nagaland and West Bengal have appointed Director (Social Audit) and selection process has 
been completed in the states of Bihar and Chhattisgarh. 
Pilot Social Audit : 17  states namely Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have already conducted pilot social a udit in identified 
Blocks.  
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 2.20) 
 On the issue of formulation of Grievance Red ressal Rules, the Committee note that only 8 
States/UTs namely, Andaman & Nicobar islands, Haryana, Kerala, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Rajasthan, Sikkim 
and Uttar Pradesh have framed grievance redressal rules. The Committee desire the Department to take 
the matter for framing of Grievance Redressal Rules by rest of the States also. The Committee also note 
that Department do not have any provision for compilation of data related to complaints received by the 
Grievance Redressal Authorities. The Committee, therefore , recommend the Government to initiate 
measures for compilation and uploading of information related to number of cases received and resolved 
by the Grievance Redressal Authorities in each State on MGNREGA MIS.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In compliance wi th Section 19 of MGNREGA, the State Governments shall, by rules, determine 
appropriate grievance redressal mechanisms at the Block level and the district level for dealing with any 
complaint by any person in respect of implementation of the Scheme and lay down the procedure for 
disposal of such complaints. The matter regarding issuance of various rules governing the implementation 
of MGNREGA was recently reviewed during the PRC meeting held on 24 -25 September, 2013.  It was 
reported that 17 states namely; A ndhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, 
Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, 
Odisha, Rajasthan, West Bengal and Sikkim have since notified/framed Grievance Redressal Rules. The 
recommendation of the Committee regarding notification of rules in the remaining states and compilation 
and uploading of information related to cases received and resolved have also been taken up with the 
states for compliance.  
 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 

39 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 2.21) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry have proposed for appointment of ombudsman in each 
District for grievance redressal for the issues related to MGNREGA. The Committee also note that so far 
263 Ombudsman have been appointed in 22 States. The Committee while appreciating efforts of the 
Government for appointment of ombudsman would like the Department to take steps for early appointment 
of ombudsman in remaining Districts. The Committee also desire the Department to take steps for 
generating awareness about the institution of ombudsman, so that, more people could be encouraged to 
lodge their complaints/grievances. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Appointment of Ombudsman is reviewed from time to time and as reported during the recent PRC 
meeting, 408 districts of 24 states have been covered by appointment of Ombudsman.   Appointments of 
Ombudsman in the remai ning states/districts are also being expedited. The job card holders are made 
aware of the services of the Ombudsman through the new approach in IEC strategy. The new IEC 
strategy for MGNREGA focus on mid media and interpersonal media initiatives to ensure  that the key 
messages reach the target group in a more effective and sustainable way.  This would help the illiterate 
MGNRGA workers to access and understand these key messages.  The state-level IEC action plan would 
aim at facilitating dissemination of right based provisions of the Act and ensure that the workers know the 
procedure to exercise these rights for redressal of their grievances.  
 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 2.25) 
 The Committee observe that PRIs have been given a lot of responsibilities for implementation of 
MGNREGA including formulation of District Perspective Plan. The Committee also note that m ajority of 
Schemes of the Ministry of Rural Development are being carried out through PRIs. However, the 
Committee observe that no separate funds have been earmarked by the Ministry for capacity building of 
PRIs. The Committee feel that in order to achieve  the objective of democratic decentralization, it is 
necessary to provide adequate funds for arranging manpower and other necessary infrastructure. At the 
same time, there must be provision for regular training of elected representatives of panchayats and 
personnel rather than one time training for single day so that, they can successfully carry out 
responsibilities entrusted to them. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to carve out a 
reasonable fund out of funds earmarked for rural development  programmes for capacity building of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
 

40 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Training of functionaries engaged in the implementation of MGNREGA is one of the permissible 
activities under the Administrative expense (6%). States in collaborat ion with SIRD prepares training 
calendar and modules for training of functionaries. Under the major head of MGNREGA, there is a minor 
head for Capacity Building and Technical Support. For the current financial year, Rs 6.00 crore has been 
earmarked for it. This budget is primarily used for conducting capacity building programme at the national 
level, for example during this year Ministry in association with NIRD is organizing a three days Training of 
Trainers for State Resource Team on MGNREGA Operational G uidelines, 2013. Under this TOTs ten 
TOTs will be conducted and from each State minimum ten officials/ experts will be trained. The trained 
officials/ experts in turn will conduct TOTs for District Team and District team in turn will conduct TOT for 
Block Team.  To apprise the State and district level officers about the recent initiatives taken by the 
Ministry for the effective implementation of MGNREGA Ministry organises regional workshops, 
conferences (Project director conference), Performance Review Committee meeting etc. 
 
The revised Operational Guidelines 2013 has a dedicated chapter on Capacity Building and Awareness 
Generation. The chapter provides in detail training structure at different levels, national, state and district. 
It also provides indicat ive training session plan and modules for different MGNREGA functionaries. In 
respect of adequate functionaries at each level the revised MGNREGA Operational Guidelines suggest 
that at least one GRS be deployed in every GP except in GPs where demand for wo rk under MGNREGA 
is almost non -existent. More than one GRS may be deployed in GPs that have high labour potential and 
GPs with scattered habitations and tribal areas, Cluster Facilitation Teams (CFTs) for a cluster of GPs in 
those blocks that require a mor e intensive approach to be adopted for successfully meeting the objectives 
of MGNREGA, a full-time Additional DPC exclusively appointed for MGNREGS to look into the day -to-day 
operations of MGNREGS and provide leadership in programme implementation at the district level etc. 
 
In order to strengthen the Panchayati Raj system across the country, a centrally sponsored scheme 
namely Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) approved in March, 2013 is being 
implemented by this Ministry of Panchayati R aj.  Under the scheme the States have to submit their 
Perspective Plans and Annual Plans for assessing financial assistance for the identified activities under 
the scheme. The proposals for Perspective and Annual Plans are considered and examined by Centra l 
Executive Committee (CEC) constituted under this scheme and the financial assistance is provided to 
States for the activities (and the quantum of those activities) approved by CEC.  The States themselves 
have to choose the activities  that they want to implement in their States under RGPSA. The activities for 
which the funds are provided to States include provision of manpower at the Gram Panchayat level and 
Capacity Building and Training. Under the component of manpower, the funds under the Scheme are 
admissible for administrative, accounting and data entry support to Gram Panchayats and technical 
assistance at a modest level for blocks. As regards the component of Capacity Building and Training 
intention is to ensure that all the Elected Representatives a s well as functionaries of Panchayats have 
appropriate knowledge and skills to discharge their functions. These activities will be funded as per the 
National Capability Building Framework. The total plan allocation available for the RGPSA, including for 
the administrative support at the level of Gram Panchayat and activities relating to Capacity Building and 
Training, during the current financial year is Rs. 655 Crore. 
 
 [O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 

41 
 
  
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 2.26) 
 
 The Committee find that most of the States have failed to meet the target set for recruitment of 
dedicated staff for implementation of MGNREGA. So far, the States have been able to recruit only 2,12,586 
dedicated personnel as against the target of 2,64,085 for implementation of MGNREGA upto the year 
2010-11. The Committee find that absence of required administrative and technical staff results in delay of 
preparation of muster roll, estimation and evaluation of works etc. which ultimately affects generation of 
employment and delay in payment of wages to workers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to pursue with the all States/UTs to ensure recru itment of qualified manpower for 
implementation of the MGNREGA. The Committee also desire the Department to allow recruitment of one 
technical assistant for each Panchayat so that PRIs do not face any problem in planning of schemes under 
MGNREGA and the Department should also ensure availability of adequate funds in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As per Section 18 of the MGNREG Act, it is the responsibility of the State Government to make 
available to the District Programme Coordinator and the Progr amme Officers necessary staff and technical 
support as may be necessary for the effective implementation of the Scheme. The Central Government has 
issued advisories to the State Governments suggesting deployment of dedicated staff at various levels for 
the implementation of MGNREGA. The Staff that should be put in place at the Block level includes a full 
time Engineers/Technical Assistants, Programme Officer, Data Entry operator and Accountant. Whereas, 
Employment Guarantee Assistant (EGA) or Gram Rozgar Sa hayak and Mates are required to be deployed 
at Gram Panchayat Level.  It is for the State Government to ensure that full time dedicated personnel, 
wherever required, are in place for implementing MGNREGA. The Ministry has issued MGNREGA 
Operational Guideli nes, 2013 wherein detailed guidelines for deployment of dedicated personnel are 
explained in Chapter 4 therein on „Institutional Architecture and Human Resources‟.  The States have been 
instructed to upload the status of deployment of staff in MIS every mo nth. Permissible administrative 
expenditure limit has already been enhanced from 4% to 6% for deployment of dedicated staff.  Minimum 
Institutional Architecture – deployment of necessary staff and technical personnel was one of the focus 
issues deliberated during the recent MGNREGA Performance Review Committee meeting held on 30 -31st 
January, 2014. The MGNREGA Operational guidelines also indicate in detail the training requirements of 
various stakeholders, trainers who will provide these requirements and su ggested training modules. The 
training modules and trainers have been suggested depending on the level of the stakeholders involved. 
. 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 2.27) 
 The Committee are concerned to note that targets for training programme for Elected Panchayat 
Representatives (EPRs) in many States are not being met. The Committee note that, only 4,67,222 EPRs  
have been trained against the target for training of 6,37,484 during the year 2011 -12. Similarly, targets for 

42 
 
training for dedicated personnel under MGNREGA schemes have not been achieved. The Committee also 
find that present system of one day or one week training programme for PRIs functionaries do not serve the 
purpose to acquaint EPRs about administrative machinery and process related to work assigned to them. 
The Committee feel that unless PRIs representatives and staff are adequately trained it would not be 
possible to achieve the targets of MGNREGA. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
chalk out a detailed programme in consultation with National Institute of Rural Development and State 
institutes of Rural Development for providing com prehensive training programmes for EPRs and other 
dedicated personnel under MGNREGA. The Committee also desire that the Department should coordinate 
training programmes in consultation with the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The MGNREGA Operational Guidelines 2013 has a dedicated chapter on Capacity Building which 
covers all aspects of training at every level of implementation of the programme. The State Governments 
may incur the expenditure on training from the Administrative expenses. These guidelines indicate in detail 
the training requirements of various stakeholders, trainers who will provide these requirements and 
suggested training modules. The training modules and trainers have been suggested depending on the 
level of the stake holders involved i.e. District Programme Coordinator (DPC)/other district level officers, 
District Trainer team, Programme Officer/Assistant Programme Officer, Junior Engineer/Cluster Facilitation 
Teams/ Technical Assistant, Programme Implementation Agency  (PIA) team, Gram Rozgar Sahayak or 
Employment Guarantee Assistant/Mates, Gram Panchayat Leaders and MGNREGA workers. Thus the 
training involves District level functionaries /Implementing agencies and upto the actual beneficiaries of the 
scheme.   
 
To acqu aint the State MGNREGA functionaries and faculty members of State Institute of Rural 
Development (SIRD) with the new provisions of MGNREGA Operational Guidelines -2013, the Ministry 
through NIRD propose to conduct a three -day Training of Trainers (ToT) prog ramme. The prime objective 
of this training is to develop a cadre of identified trainers/ experts in the subject matter of MGNREGA 
implementation in respective States. This ToT programme has been designed for mid -level to senior-level 
MGNREGA implementing officers in the State and faculty members of the State Institute of Rural 
Development. From each State following staff/experts will be trained: 
 
i. Commissioner/ Director in charge of MGNREGA (1) 
ii. Finance/ Accounts (1) 
iii. Engineer (1) 
iv. MIS (1) 
v. Social Mobilisation (1) 
vi. Social Audit (1) 
vii. State Quality Monitor (1) 
viii. SIRD Faculty (3) 
 
These trained staff/experts will function as a State Resource Team (SRT). These trained functionaries will 
in turn create District Resource team and in turn Block Resource Team. 
 
The Ministry  of Rural Development has a full -fledged training division which caters to the training 
requirements of all rural development programmes being implemented by the Ministry. Training imparted 

43 
 
during the last 3 years by the training division through the State  Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs)/ 
Extension Training Centres (ETCs) are given as under; 
 
Year Training Programmes conducted Participants 
2010-11 41030 1764209 
2011-12 23878 1144213 
2012-13 24763 1399911 
 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 2.28) 
 The Committee note that many positive as well as negative trends have been observed in the 
implementation of MGNREGA Scheme since 2006. Keeping in view of these trends, it becomes imperative 
to take steps for revamping of MGNREGA in order to realize the objectives of world‟s largest employment 
guarantee programme. The Committee are of the view that capacity building of PRIs for proper planning 
should be the priority area towards efforts for revamping of MGNREGA. Further, success in engaging PRIs 
and Gram Sabha for formulation of District Perspective Plan (PPP) will lead to effective utilization of 
resources allocated for implementation of MGNREGA. Secondly, there is need for giving more emphasis 
on semi-skilled and skilled works as it will help rural population to acquire skill. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to devise ways to bring more synergy wit h MGNREGA and National Rural 
Livelihood Mission (NRLM)-Ajeevika. Monitoring and Vigilance of MGNREGA works is another area which 
require attention. The Committee observe that present system of vigilance & Monitoring viz. Social audit, 
National level monitor, supervision & inspection of works etc. has not been able to prevent misappropriate 
of funds, violation of guidelines etc.. The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to take steps to 
strengthen mechanism for monitoring & vigilance. The Committee al so recommend the Department to 
establish vigilance cell at State and District level and Vigilance and Monitoring Committee at the local level 
as proposed by Mihir Shah Committee on revision of guidelines of MGNREGA. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 An important g oal of MGNREGA is to deepen democracy at the grassroots and bring about 
greater transparency, responsiveness and accountability in local governance. MGNREGA provides a 
powerful, legal entitlement and opportunity to realise the objectives of the 73rd Amendm ent of the 
Constitution.  The Act formally declares the Panchayats at the three levels as “principal authorities for 
planning and implementation of the Schemes made under this Act” and this provision is backed up by 
substantial guaranteed resources. Capaci ty building and technical support of State/District/Block level 
rural development functionaries/agencies and Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs) officials and awareness 
generation of potential and existing workers forms the most strategic aspect in effective ly implementing 
rural development schemes, policies and plans of the government.  Detailed guidelines in this regard 
have been shared with the States/UTs through the revised MGNREGA Operational Guidelines.  
 
The mandate of MGNREGA is to provide guaranteed wage employment upto 100 days to every rural 
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work and thereby enhance livelihood 

44 
 
opportunities. National Rural Livelihood Mission (Ajeevika) and MGNREGA have similar mandates to 
reach out to th e most marginalised sections of the society.  Aajeevika Skills aims to skill rural youth who 
are poor and provide them with jobs having regular monthly wages at or above the minimum wages. 
Ajeevika Skills allows convergence with MGNREGS to the extent that Youth who have worked as 
labourers in MGNREGA worksites for at least 35 days in each of the previous three years will also be 
eligible even if they are not in the BPL list.  Under the new Aajeevika Skills Guidelines 2013, skilling 
projects are now possible  for training and placement for improved Public Service Delivery, which could 
include MGNREGA also.   
 
 
All States are required to make arrangements for a three -tier vigilance mechanism to proactively detect 
irregularities in the implementation of the Act and to follow up detected irregularities and malfeasance 
including those identified during Social Audit and ensure that the guilty are punished and recoveries 
made.  Vigilance Cells are to be set up at the State and District level and Vigilance & Monitorin g 
Committees at the local level.  Specific duties and responsibilities have also been assigned to these 
Vigilance Cells and Vigilance & Monitoring Committees.  
 
To operationalize the new Mahatma Gandhi NREGA Operational Guidelines and to analyze the policy  
planning and implementation issues and provide support to State Government for effective 
implementation of the programme, a Programme Advisory Group (PAG) on Mahatma Gandhi
 NREGA has been constituted. The PAG would identify policy and implementation issues related to 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA at the local, state and national level for focusing entitlements and livelihoods, 
covering processes and procedures, systems and institutions, techniques and technologies. PAG has 
decided to set up National Resource Groups  (NRGs) on the six thematic areas and identified core 
resource persons for each group i.e. NRG on Demand Capture and Unemployment, NRG on Planning 
and Quality of Works, NRG on delays in payment: Fund flow system, NRG on Organization of works and 
Worksite Management, NRG on MIS and IT systems, NRG on Transparency and Accountability.  
Other important measures in place to ensure transparency and accountability are: 
 
 Provisions in MGNREG Act entails Employment within 15 days of application for work, failing whi ch 
unemployment allowance will have to be paid. 
 Compensation for delayed payment of wages is admissible if the payment is not made within 15 days 
of closure of the Muster Roll.  The process will be closely monitored through MIS and responsibility 
fixed.  
 The Ministry has notified MGNREGA Audit of Schemes Rules 2011 in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 With a view to ensuring timely payment, infusing transparency and enhancing the integrity of wage 
payment, Schedule II of MGNREG  Act was amended to ensure wage disbursement to MGNREGA 
workers through institutional accounts in Banks or Post Offices (unless specifically exempted). 
 To reduce time required in payment of wages, State Governments have been instructed to roll -out 
electronic Fund Management System (e -FMS). 23 States have since switched over to e -FMS.  Time 
lines have been fixed for states to switch over to e-FMS by March, 2015.  
 To strengthen the institutional outreach for wage disbursement, State Governments have been 
instructed to roll out the Business Correspondent Model to make wage payment through Banks with 
Biometric authentication at GP/village level. 
 Permissible administrative expenditure limit was enhanced from 4% to 6% for deployment of dedicated 
staff for MGNREGA, strengthening management and administrative support structures for social audit, 
grievance redressal and Information and Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure. 

45 
 
 ICT based MIS has been made operational to make data available to public scrutiny inclu ding job 
cards, muster rolls, employment demanded and number of days worked, shelf of works, funds 
available / utilised, social audit findings, registration of grievances, etc.  Uploading of Photographs of 
works has been instructed.  
 Instructions have been issued for affixing photographs to the existing job cards. 
 States have been instructed to switch to e-Muster Rolls to check instances of tampering and misuse of 
muster rolls. 
 Instructions have been issued directing all States to appoint Ombudsman at distr ict level for grievance 
redressal. 
 The State and district level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees have been established for monitoring 
of the scheme. 
 
 [O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 

46 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
-NIL- 

47 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.12) 
 The Committee note that water related works constitute majority of works (54.58 percent) 
undertaken in MGNREGA, while work on private lands of SC/ST/BPL/SML and IAY and Land reform 
beneficiaries, Land development, rural connectivity and others (Bharat Nirman Kendra) constitute the 
10.38%, 11.38%, 19.47% and 3.7% respectively. The Committee take note of the fact that MGNREGA 
works are being criticized for poor quality of assets created under it. Th e Committee's examination has 
revealed that expenditure limit of 40 percent imposed on material component including skilled and semi -
skilled workers is restricting implementing agencies to undertake works requiring material components or 
skilled workers. T he Committee find some merit in argument of the Department that works with higher 
material component will invariably bring in contractor system. However, the Committee are of the 
considered view that adopting a uniform yardstick for wage material ratio acr oss the country causes 
problems in hilly States such as Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh etc. and other difficult areas of the 
country such as Andaman & Nicobar Islands and flood prone areas where cost of raw material and 
transportation is higher than res t of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
allow specific relaxation in wage -material ratio in case of aforementioned hilly and difficult areas/States. 
Needless to emphasise that there should be in-built flexibility to meet the specific situations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The primary objective of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) is to enhance the livelihood security of the rural households by providing up to 100 days of 
guaranteed wage employmen t in a year to every household on demand for doing unskilled manual work.  
The focus of activities under MGNREGA is on wage employment as given in Schedule -I of MGNREG Act, 
which list out the activities in the order of their priority.  
 
Vide the Notificati on dated 21.07.2014, amendments have been made by the Government in paragraph 4 
and 20 of Schedule –I of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) 
providing for at least 60% of the works in a district in terms of cost for creatio n of productive assets directly 
linked to agriculture and allied activities through development of land, water and trees.  To ensure quality, 
productivity and durability of assets created under MGNREGA, cost of material component including the 
wages of the  skilled and semi -skilled works shall not exceed 40% at the Gram Panchayat level for all the 
works taken up by the Gram Panchayats.  For works taken up by the implementing agencies other than 
Gram Panchayats, the overall material component shall not exceed 40% at the district level. 
 [O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 

48 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.17) 
 
 The Committee note that provisions under MGNREGA for payment of unemployment allowances 
where demanded work is not given in stipulated time is not being adhered to almost all States/ UTs. The 
Committee are also asto nished to note that so far only 4078 workers were paid unemployment allowances 
in 8 States during 2006-09 and Rs. 1,23,589 has been paid to eligible beneficiaries in 2010-11 in six States. 
The Committee also note that non -issuance of dated receipt of deman ded work as pointed out by audit 
report of C&AG of India, prevents workers to claim unemployment allowance. The Committee are of 
considered view that payment of unemployment allowance is the only provision which provides legitimacy 
to guarantee provided in  the MGNREGA and differentiates it from earlier employment schemes. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to impress upon the State Governments to take steps 
for issuance of dated receipt of demanded work so that the workers can claim unemploy ment allowance. 
The Committee would like the Government to ensure that State -wise details of payment of unemployment 
allowance form part of Annual Reports which are laid in Parliament/State Legislatures on the functioning of 
MGNREGA. The Committee also rec ommended that since MGNREGA is a Centrally sponsored scheme, 
funds for unemployment allowance under section 7 of the Act should also be met by the Central 
Government. 
Reply of the Government 
 Central Government meets the cost of (i) amount required for pay ment of wages for unskilled 
manual work under the Scheme (ii) Up to three -fourths of the material cost of the Scheme including 
payment of wages to skilled and semi -skilled workers subject to the provisions of Schedule II of the Act (iii) 
6% of the total cost of the Scheme towards administrative expenses. The State Government meets the cost 
of (i) Unemployment allowance Payable under the Scheme (ii) One -fourth of the material cost of the 
scheme including Payment of Wages to skilled and semi -skilled workers s ubject to the provisions of 
Schedule II of the Act and (iii) administrative expenses of the State Council.  MGNREG Act being a 
demand driven  wage employment programme, the  resource transfer from Centre to States is based on the 
demand for employment in each State. This provides an incentive for States to leverage the Act to meet the 
employment needs of the poor. Whereas the provision enunciated in Section 7 of the Act serves as a 
disincentive for failing to provide work on time, as the States then bear the cost of unemployment 
allowance.  This provision which serves as a deterrent to the States for not providing employment would 
therefore be, in the interest of job seekers under MGNREGA. The states are required to provide details of 
unemployment due and paid in MIS regularly. 
 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

49 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 2.22) 
 The Committee are astonished to note that despite constitution of District Planning Committees (DPCs) 
in most of the States, PRIs have not been able to formulate District Perspective Plan, a necessary condition of 
effective utilization of funds available under MGNREGA. The Committee note that most of the States are still 
following top down approach of planning for MGNREGA based upon labour budget. The Committee are of the 
considered view that formulation of District Perspective Planning (DPP) based upon active participation of Gram 
Sabhas is essential for effective utilization of resources. Aim of holistic development of rural India is not possible 
in the absence of well laid out plan. The Committee recommend that preparation of DPP should be starting point 
for MGNREGA so that there could be better utilization of huge funds available under MGNREGA. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to initiate consultation with States and Union Territories and 
chalk out strateg y for preparation of DPP through active participation of Gram Sabhas within a specific time 
frame so that there could be better utilization of resources for all-round development of rural areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Schemes made by the States are  required to provide for the minimum features specified in 
Schedule I of the MGNREG Act which lists the category of works that any Scheme prepared by a State 
Government under Section 4 (1) of MGNREG Act shall focus upon.  Schedule I of MGNREGA has been 
suitably amended to include various new works which would give thrust to activities relating to Agriculture, 
watershed, Livestock, Fisheries, Rural Drinking Water and works in coastal areas which have scope for 
creation of durable assets and enhance the livel ihood of the rural poor. MGNREGA Guidelines on 
decentralized planning envisage preparation of a District Perspective Plan, which identifies the needs and gap 
in the Districts in all sectors. Labour Budget (LB) entails planning, approval and funding under M GNREGA.  
Sub-section 6 of Section 14 of the MGNREG Act mandates that the District Programme Coordinator (DPC) 
shall prepare in the month of December every year, a labour budget for the next financial year containing the 
details of anticipated demand for unskilled manual work in the district and the plan for engagement of workers 
in the works covered under the programme. It is also mandated that the LBs be prepared in accordance with 
the process prescribed in Sections 13 to 16 of MGNREG Act.  The DPCs has to ensure strict adherence to the 
principles of bottom -up approach from planning to approval of the selected shelf of projects by each of the 
Gram Sabhas (GSs) in the district.  As per section 16 of MGNREGA, Gram Panchayats in the meetings of 
Gram Sabha and ward Sabha are to determine the order of priority of the works to be taken up under the 
MGNREGA. As per Section 13 of MGNREGA, the Panchayats at district, intermediate and village levels shall 
be the principal authorities for planning and implementation of  the schemes made under this Act.  The 
Panchayats at the district level shall finalize and approve block -wise shelf of projects to be taken up under the 
scheme.  Bottom -up approach is being adopted to allow the local community including the MGNREGA 
workers to express their views by participating in the process of selection of works which would help to define 
the development course for the area in line with their expectations and needs.  
 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 

50 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 2.23) 
 The Committee note that one of persistent complaints against  MGNREGA scheme relates to less 
availability of labour during agriculture season. The Committee have been informed that only 47 days of 
employment were provided in the period for the year 2010 -11 of which 12 days of employment were 
provided from July to No vember, 2010 which corresponds to the peak agriculture season. The remaining 
35 days of employment were provided mostly in the lean agriculture season as supplementary 
employment. The Committee have also been informed that since MGNREGA Act provided for 10 0 days of 
guaranteed wage employment in a financial year, so, the guaranteed employment may be availed of by the 
registered households any time during the year. Hence, restricting it to any particular season would be 
against the spirit of the Act. The Comm ittee are of the view that agriculture is the backbone of our rural 
economy and labour availability in our agricultural sector cannot be ignored as it may lead to shortfall in 
food production in the country. Further, aim of MGNREGA is not to substitute agr iculture labour but to 
provide additional income support to people/household in rural areas. The Committee, therefore, are of 
considered view that lack of proper planning of works under MGNREGA without keeping in view of local 
agriculture practice is causi ng the problem of labour availability in agriculture sector. The problem could 
only be solved if there is follow up of guidelines about preparation of District Perspective Planning by 
District Planning Committees and annual planning by Gram Sabha clearly i ndicating works availability in a 
year while taking care of local agricultural practices. It would enable workers in rural areas to avail 
employment opportunity under MGNREGA in non -agricultural season while simultaneously ensuring labour 
availability for agriculture. The Committee also note that similar kind of initiatives have been taken by Gram 
Sabha and Gram Panchayat in Bikaner, Idukki, Trivandrum, West Sikkim District and Chitoor Districts in the 
Country. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Depart ment to take efforts for planning of MGNREGA 
works for each financial year as attempted in the aforesaid Districts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The provisions in Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) are 
effected through Schemes formulated by States under Section 4(1) of the Act. The Schemes made by the 
States are required to provide for the minimum features specified in Schedule I of the Act which lists the 
category of works that any Scheme prepared by a State Government under Sec tion 4 (1) of MGNREG 
Act shall focus upon.  As per section 16 of MGNREGA, Gram Panchayats in the meetings of Gram Sabha 
and ward Sabha are to determine the order of priority of the works to be taken up under the MGNREGA. 
As per Section 13 of MGNREGA, the P anchayats at district, intermediate and village levels shall be the 
principal authorities for planning and implementation of the schemes made under this Act.  A month -wise 
analysis of the persondays of employment generated under MGNREGA reveals that the ma jority of the 
work has been provided during the lean agriculture season.  For instance, during FY 2010 -11 to 2012-13, 
around 60-70% of the persondays were generated during the lean agricultural season (January-June). 
 
MGNREGA works by their very nature pla ce stress on increasing land productivity, recharging ground 
water and increasing water availability which all have positive impact on Agricultural productivity. Recent 
amendment of the Act to permit MGNREGA works on individual land of small and marginal f armers who 
constitute a majority of the farming community, in addition to the individual land of SC/ST/BPL/IAY/ land 
reform beneficiaries, will augment the impact on agricultural productivity and household income. With the 
objective of expanding and deepen ing the positive synergy between MGNREGA and agriculture, 
especially in the context of small and marginal farmers, Ministry has permitted works under MGNREGA 

51 
 
relating to NADEP composting, vermi -composting and liquid bio -manures, livestock related works, 
irrigation command related works (rehabilitation of minors, sub-minors and field channels), etc. 
  
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 2.24) 
 The Committee note that in order to optimize the desired outcome in an accelerated manner, the 
Department has taken steps for convergence of various  schemes implemented by different Ministries and 
Departments as well as the programmes operated by the Department of Rural Development. The 
Committee also note that most of the State Governments have started convergence at planning, 
management and work lev el. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that no information is 
maintained by the Department on number of projects taken up in each State/UTs under MGNREGA 
convergence guidelines. Similarly, the Department does not maintain information on constituti on of 
District/Block resource Groups in State/UTs which are responsible for facilitating convergence at the 
ground level. The Committee are of the considered view that convergence between different schemes of 
Central and State Government is prerequisite fo r optimum utilization of resources and to avoid wasteful 
expenditure. Therefore, it becomes imperative to give more attention towards convergence of schemes. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to initiate measures for bringing more programm es 
such as literacy mission, mid -day meal scheme, National Rural Health Mission etc. under the ambit of 
convergence under MGNREGA. At the same time, the Department should also explore ways for 
convergence of National Rural Livelihood Mission with MGNREGA. It will help to promote spirit of 
entrepreneurship in rural India. The Committee also desire the Department to maintain upto date 
information on number of convergence projects implemented in the country along with details of resource 
saved on these project s. The Committee also desire the Department to initiate consultation with State 
Governments for early constitution of District/Block resources group as it will help to enhance coordination 
among different Government agencies and other stake holders which a re necessary for promoting 
convergence at the ground level. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Convergence is an evolving process and therefore, while broad principles can be laid down by the 
Central Government, the actual contours of convergence will be determine d by (i) the objective of 
convergence and (ii) the nature and quantum of resources available for convergence.  Specific guidelines 
for convergence with different schemes were issued from time to time by the Ministry; 
 Indian Council of Agricultural Research  (ICAR) and MGNREGA convergence guidelines issued on 
23.12.2008 
 Ministry of Environment & Forests and MGNREGA convergence guidelines issued on 19.1.2009. 
 Ministry of Water Resources and MGNREGA convergence guidelines issued on 18.2.2009. 
 Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) and MGNREGA convergence guidelines 
issued on 29.5.2009. 

52 
 
 Ministry of Agriculture and MGNREGA convergence guidelines issued on 30.10.2009. 
 Revised advisory for MGNREGA convergence with schemes of Ministry of Agriculture issued on 
13.6.2013.  
 Advisory for Bharat Nirman Rajiv Gandhi Sewa Kendra (BNRGSK) convergence with Backward 
Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) issued on 30.12.2009. 
 Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA), Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation and MGNREGA convergence 
guidelines issued on 11.9.2012. 
 Ministry of Youth Affairs and MGNREGA convergence for construction of play fields issued on 
11.2.2013. 
 Rubber Board (Ministry of Commerce) and MGNREGA convergence guidelines issued on 2.8.2013.   
 
Two schemes of Ministry of Rural Develop ment – National Rural Livelihood Mission (Ajeevika) and 
MGNREGA have similar mandates to reach out to the most marginalised sections of the society.  The 
major works undertaken through MGNREGA would enhance livelihood opportunities leading to increase 
in income and thereby alleviating poverty and combating distress migration. Whereas, Aajeevika aims at 
creating efficient and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor enabling them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancem ents and improved access to financial 
services. Aajeevika Skills aims to skill rural youth who  are poor and provide them with jobs having 
regular monthly wages at or above the minimum wages. Ajeevika Skills allows convergence with 
MGNREGS in the following manner: 
 
(1) Youth who have worked as labourers in MGNREGA worksites for at least 35 days in each of the 
previous three years will also be eligible even if they are not in the BPL list.  
(2) Under the new Aajeevika Skills Guidelines 2013, skilling project s are now possible for training and 
placement for improved Public Service Delivery, which could include MGNREGA also. 
 
So far, State Convergence Plan (SCP) has formulated in 21 States. 
 
[O. M.No. H.11013/17/2011-MGNREGA -II (Vol. II) dated: 03 March, 2015 Department of Rural Development  
(Ministry of Rural Development)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

53 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE  
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       DR. P. VENUGOPAL 
10 August, 2015                    Chairperson 
19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Rural Development 

54 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY,  
THE 10 AUGUST, 2015 
 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room „B', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
                Dr. P. Venugopal      -  Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Kirti Azad 
3. Shri Harish Chandra Chavan 
4. Shri Manshankar Ninama 
5. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
6. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
7. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
8. Smt. Butta Renuka 
9. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
10. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
11. Shri Ajay Misra Teni 
12. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi 
15. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
16. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
17. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
18. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
19. Shri A. K. Selvaraj 
20. Smt. Kanak Lata Singh 
21. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.C.Tiwari   -  Director 
3. Smt. B. Visala   - Additional Director 
 

55 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, 
the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
(i) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(ii) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(iii) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(iv) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(v) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Forty Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (MGNREGA)'; and 
 
(vi) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
 
  
3. After detailed discussions, the Committee adopted the Reports without any modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Reports and present the same to the 
Parliament.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
--------- 

56 
 
APPENDIX - II 
[Vide  para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY SECOND REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations:               27 
       
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted     
  by the Government :  
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 
        18, 19, 20, 24, 25, 26 and 27. 
         
Total:                    22 
Percentage:              81.48 %      
      
III. Recommendations which the Committee do  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies :      
            
Total:          00 
Percentage:         00 %    
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of   
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee :         
Serial Nos. 11, 16, 21, 22 and 23. 
Total:          05 
Percentage:              18.52 %         
   
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies   
of the Government are still awaited :       
  Serial Nos. NIL. 
Total:          00 
Percentage:         00 %       
 
  