STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2017-2018) 
      
 
        SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
   
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-Grameen PMAY(G) previously Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)'.] 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
40 


FORTIETH REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2017-2018) 
 (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-Grameen PMAY(G) previously Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)'.] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29 December, 2017 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29 December, 2017 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2017/ Pausha, 1939 (Saka) 
 


CRD No.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
© 2017 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____ Edition) 
and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-2018)   ......................................        (ii)   
 
INTRODUCTION      …....................................        (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report   ..........................................................................       1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ...........................................................................      19   
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies………….............................................................................       36 
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee ............................................................................        37 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ......................................        42   
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
I. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 9 December, 2016………………......      19 
 
 I. Extract of Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee held on.......................                      43 
 
 II.     Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
         Twenty Sixth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development..........45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(2017-2018) 
 
          Dr. P. Venugopal  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri Kirti Azad 
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
7. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
8. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
9. Shri Manshankar Ninama 
10. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
11. Smt. Mausam Noor 
12. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
13. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
14. Smt. Renuka Butta 
15. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
16. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad  
17. Shri Balka Suman 
18. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
19. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
20. Shri Ajay Mishra (Teni) 
21. Shri Chintaman Navsha Wanaga 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Munquad Ali 
23. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
24. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo 
25. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
26. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
27. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
28. Shri A.K. Selvaraj 
29. Shri A. V.Swamy 
30. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
31. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
Secretariat 
 
1.   Shri Abhijit Kumar  -  Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri S. Chatterjee   -  Director 
3.  Smt. Emma C. Barwa  -  Deputy Secretary 
4.   Shri Inam Ahmed   - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 (ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2017-2018) having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the 40th Report on the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Rural Development (16th Lok Sabha) on Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-Grameen PMAY(G) 
previously Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY). 
2.  The Twenty Sixth Report was presented to the Speaker on 31 August, 2016 and to Lok Sabha on 
18 November, 2016 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 20 June, 2017.  
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
07 December, 2017. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                              DR.  P. VENUGOPAL 
28 December, 2017                                  Chairperson, 
07 Pausha, 1939 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2016-17) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty Sixth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-Grameen PMAY(G) 
previously Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)'. 
 
2. The Twenty-Sixth Report was presented to Speaker on 31.08.2016 and to 
Lok Sabha on 18 November, 2016 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 
31.08.2016. The Report contained 23 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government.  These have 
been examined and categorised as follows: - 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Serial Nos.  1,3, 4, 5,7,8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 
21 and 22. 
Total:18 
Chapter-II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
Nil  
Total: 00 
Chapter-III 
(iii)  Observation/Recommendation in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Serial Nos. 2,6,11,20 and 23 
Total: 05 
Chapter-IV  
 
(iv) 
  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Nil 
Total:00 
Chapter-V 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ 
recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be furnished to the 
Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments.  
 
Expeditious efforts for eradicating rural shelterlessness recommended 
   Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
6. The Committee in their afore-said recommendation had recommended as under:- 
"Housing is universally recognized as basic need and investment in 
housing leads to improvement in social status coupled with similar 
improvement in economic and health parameters. In the case of 
construction in rural areas it accompanies employment generation by use 
of locally available technologies. The Committee are, however, 
constrained to find that as per Socio-Economic Caste Census, SECC, 
2011 data as large as 4 crore eligible beneficiaries require shelter in the 
country mainly in Uttar Pradesh (48.31 lakh), Madhya Pradesh (47.45 
lakh), West Bengal (45.63 lakh), Odisha (41.48 lakh) etc. The Committee 
also find that role of the Government pertains to reducing housing 
shortage, improving the quality of housing especially the poor mainly 
through its flagship scheme of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) that was aimed 
at providing houses to BPL families. The Committee's examination has 
also revealed that although public housing programme started in the 
country way back in 1957, yet actual work started only after four decades 
in 1996 when the erstwhile IAY became functional as independent 
scheme with assigned role from time to time. The Committee are 
constrained to note in a period spanning over two decades of its 
implementation only 3.60 crore families have been assisted in constructing 
their houses with small amount of Rs. 1.06 lakh crore utilized for that 
purpose. The Committee find in IAY Assistance have been provided (i) 
construction of new houses (ii) upgradation of Kutcha/dilapidated houses 
and (iii) purchase of house sites. The Committee find that with Union 
Cabinet nod, the existing IAY has been re-structured into Pradhan Mantri 
Awaas Yojana (Grameen) PMAY(G) with a view to pursue the objective of 
'Housing for All, by 2022' with revised features ranging from providing 
assistance for construction of 1 crore houses in rural areas over a period 
of 3 years from 2016-17 to 2018-19, enhancing the per unit assistance 

3 
 
from Rs. 70,000 to Rs. 1.20 lakh in plains and from Rs. 75,000 to Rs. 1.30 
lakh in hilly States/difficult areas and IAP districts using SECC, 2011 data 
for identification of beneficiaries and so on. The Committee feel that with 
the PMAY(G) a beginning for reducing shelterlessness in the country by 
utilizing SECC, 2011 data has been made. The Committee feel that still 
there is as large as 3 crore shelterless population yet to be benefited by 
PMAY(G) scheme. The Committee, therefore, feel that an all out effort be 
made by Government of India alongwith all Stakeholders to eradicate 
shelterlessness from the country in a phased and time-bound manner." 
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
" To realize the Government’s commitment towards achieving ‘Housing for 
All’ by 2022, the erstwhile rural housing scheme of Indira Awaas Yojana 
(IAY) has been restructured into Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana- Gramin 
(PMAY-G) with effect from 1st April, 2016. Recognizing the crucial role to 
be played by States in achieving this shared vision, the Framework for 
Implementation of PMAY-G has been drafted in consultation with State 
Govts. and firmed up under the guidance of a Committee consisting of 
Principal Secretary, Department of Rural Development of select States. 
Active stakeholder participation in policymaking and implementation is 
being ensured through consultation forums such as Performance Review 
Committee Meeting, Regional Review Meeting etc.  
Several features have been incorporated into the scheme architecture to 
improve delivery and strengthen monitoring. These include Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT), comprehensive online monitoring through AwaasSoft 
(MIS) and AwaasApp (mobile App), constitution of Programme 
Management Units (PMUs) at various levels, selection on the basis of 
objective parameters from the Socio Economic and Caste Census 
(SECC), improving quality of house construction by  developing zone wise 
house design typologies incorporating disaster resilient features and 
improving workmanship and skilling of rural masons through training, 
assessment and certification endorsed by National Skill Corporation of 
India (NSDC). 
In view of the above initiatives and active participation by all stakeholders, 
it is expected that the mandate to eradicate shelterlessness will be 
realized by 2022." 
 
8. The Committee found that with the Union Cabinet nod, the erstwhile IAY 
had been re-structured into Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana (Grameen)  
PMAY-(G) with a view to pursue the objective of 'Housing for All by 2022'. 

4 
 
While observing that with the inclusion of revised features in PMAY-(G), a 
beginning for reducing shelterlessness in the country had been made, still the 
Committee felt that there was as large as 3 crore shelterless population yet to 
be benefited by PMAY-(G) scheme and thus, had recommended that an all out 
effort be made by the Government of India alongwith all the stakeholders to 
eradicate the shelterlessness from the country in a phased and time-bound 
manner. In its reply, the Ministry of Rural Development have outlined several 
features that have been incorporated into the scheme architecture alongwith 
the initiatives that have been taken to achieve the vision of eradicating 
shelterlessness by the year 2022. The Committee while acknowledging the 
novel approach being employed by the Ministry are hopeful that the efforts 
are in right direction and may yield positive results, yet the apprehension, 
regarding achievement of such a humongous target of eradicating 
shelterlessness in the country by 2022, still remains, and the Committee hope 
that the Ministry of Rural Development will leave no stone unturned in pursuit 
of the realisation of the vision 'Housing for All by 2022'. 
 
Lower performance during Eleventh Plan and housing shortage during Twelfth 
Plan criticized 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
9. The Committee in their afore-said recommendation had recommended as under:- 
 
" The Committee are dismayed to note that during Eleventh Plan in all the 
years barring 2008-09 houses constructed had been less than that of 
target fixed. The Committee are also constrained to note that during 
Twelfth Plan (2012-17) so far huge housing shortage of as high as 43.67 
million units is seen. On the contrary, the Committee find the DoRD has 
held the view before the Committee that problem of rural shelterlessness 

5 
 
has been considerably reduced by way of implementation of IAY since 
1996. The Committee thus, do not agree with MoRD's view. In this 
connection, t he MoRD has also argued before the Committee that various 
States like Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh and 
Telangana have launched their own schemes for rural housing out of their 
State Plans and various States like Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra, 
Sikkim and Goa provide additional resources to beneficiaries over and 
above the assistance given under erstwhile IAY. Besides, private bodies 
like HUDCO has also been contributing their funds for construction of low 
cost rural housing. In addition, Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Ministry of Labour have been implementing housing schemes for specific 
target groups. However, the Committee are constrained to note that 
MoRD is not equipped with relevant data of workdone by different 
States/UTs by stating that the relevant data is available with respective 
State/UTs Governments. In the absence of data, the Committee are 
unable to comprehend exact contributions made by States/UTs 
Governments for reducing rural shelterlessness in the country The 
Committee, therefore recommend the MoRD to obtain the relevant 
accurate data from States/UTs and apprise the Committee of the same for 
ascertaining work done in this regard by different States/UTs, HUDCO 
etc." 
 
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
 
 
"The Socio Economic and Caste Census (SECC) conducted in the year 
2011 provides exhaustive, recent and reliable data on housing shortage in 
rural India. Therefore, it is being used as the baseline for identification of 
beneficiaries under PMAY-G. As per SECC-2011 data, a total of 4.03 
crore households have been identified as houseless or living in zero, one 
and two room kutcha houses (both kutcha roof and kutcha wall) in rural 
India. Taking cognizance of the fact that between 2011, when SECC was 
carried out and 2016, when PMAY-G came into effect, many houses might 
have been constructed under Central/State Housing schemes or self 
constructed, Gram Sabhas have been assigned the responsibility of 
verifying the SECC list so that households with pucca houses may be 
removed from the list. Presently, 3.81 crore households out of a universe 
of 4.03 crore households have been verified by the Gram Sabha. Out of 
the verified households, 1.30 crore households have been rejected on 
grounds of having a pucca house, migration, death etc whereas the 
remaining 2.51 crore households have been found eligible to receive 
assistance under the scheme. Substantial part of the reduction in housing 
shortage, as highlighted by the verification exercise, is attributable to the 
 

6 
 
housing schemes sponsored by the Central and State government, 
especially erstwhile IAY. However, as observed by the Committee, despite 
implementation of IAY as an independent programme since 1996, there 
still existed a large number of rural families with limited access to basic 
housing amenities. Therefore, to address gaps in rural housing and 
achieve ‘Housing for All’ by 2022, IAY was restructured into PMAY-G 
w.e.f. 1st April 2016. 
As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry is in the process of 
compiling data on houses constructed under various housing schemes 
sponsored by States /UTs and HUDCO. Meanwhile, data available with 
the Ministry on houses constructed under State sponsored schemes which 
are being monitored through AwaasSoft is placed at Annexure I."  
 
11. The Committee were dismayed to note the non-achievement of targets 
fixed regarding construction of houses during Eleventh Plan and issue of 
housing shortage during Twelfth Plan. Contrary to the stand of Ministry of 
Rural Development that the problem of rural shelterlessness had 
considerably reduced by way of implementation of IAY since 1996, the 
Committee did not uphold the view of Ministry of Rural Development. 
Arguing further, Ministry of Rural Development had stated before the 
Committee that houses were also constructed under various schemes 
sponsored by States/UTs, HUDCO. The Committee, therefore, recommended 
the Ministry of Rural Development to furnish the relevant accurate data from 
States/UTs pertaining to the houses constructed by different States/UTs, 
HUDCO etc. Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Reply have 
stated that substantial part of the reduction in housing shortage, as 
highlighted by the verification exercise, is attributable to the housing 
schemes sponsored by the Central and State Government, especially 
erstwhile IAY and that the Ministry of Rural Development is in the process of 

7 
 
compiling data on houses constructed under various housing schemes 
sponsored by States/UTs and HUDCO. The Committee are aghast at the 
casual approach elicited from the response of the Ministry of Rural 
Development in their inability to get the requisite information duly compiled 
and supplied to the Committee. Such inordinate delay in the compilation of 
the information desired by the Committee is creating hindrance in the 
objective assessment of the real picture at ground level vis-a-vis 
shelterlessness in the country and the role of the PMAY-(G) specially in 
addressing the issue. Thus, the Committee strongly reiterate its 
recommendation that the Ministry of Rural Development may expeditiously 
furnish the data from States/UTs, HUDCO etc. regarding the houses 
constructed by them. 
 
Separating performance under Backlog from Annual Performance recommended 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
12. The Committee in their afore-said recommendation had recommended as under:- 
 
" The Committee are dismayed to note that there is huge discrepancy of 
data with regard to achievement of target under PMAY(G) during 2015-16 
showing over-all achievement of as high as 82.41 percent with State of 
Odisha showing as high as 200.23 percent achievement and Karnataka 
showing as high as 198.07 percent achievement. The Committee also find 
that on the contrary Madhya Pradesh is showing as low as 6.48 percent 
achievement. The Committee's examination has revealed that work done 
shown includes backlog of previous year's also. In this connection, the 
MoRD have admitted before the Committee that data is misleading. The 
Committee feel that with a view to see the real work done with regard to 
construction of houses for the benefit of common-man and for keeping the 
record straight, annual target for construction of houses must not include 

8 
 
backlog. The Committee also feel that work done on clearing backlog 
should be shown separately for arriving at a logical conclusion." 
13. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
 
" As per the guidelines of the erstwhile scheme of IAY, time period of 2-3 
years from the date of sanction of first installment was provided for 
construction of a house. Consequently completion against targets 
allocated in a particular financial year (FY) would spillover to the 
subsequent financial years. Hence completion in a particular FY could not 
be benchmarked against targets allocated in that year. This issue has 
been resolved under PMAY-G through two interventions; allowing 12 
months from the date of sanction for house completion and advance 
communication of targets to expedite the process of sanctioning. 
Further, to bring closure to the erstwhile rural housing scheme of IAY, 
States/UTs have been directed to make an assessment of the number of 
incomplete IAY houses and expedite construction of the same. As 
reported by States/UTs, 36.39 lakh houses sanctioned under IAY from the 
year 2013-14 to 2015-16 were incomplete as on 01.04.2016 (Annexure 2). 
As a result of constant review and monitoring by the Ministry and 
initiatives adopted by States, more than 32 lakh pending IAY houses have 
been reported as completed in FY 2016-17. During the presentation of the 
Annual Action Plan under PMAY-G, most States have committed to 
complete construction of pending IAY houses in FY 2017-18. 
 Additionally, States/UTs are being repeatedly urged to upload all houses 
completed under IAY on AwaasSoft at the earliest. In order to facilitate 
monitoring of progress in clearing backlogs, reports have been designed 
on AwaasSoft which also show year on year data viz., houses completed 
vis-à-vis the houses sanctioned in a particular financial year in addition to 
cumulative completions which may pertain to houses sanctioned in 
previous years.  Presently, progress under IAY can be tracked separately 
from the progress under PMAY-G through reports available on 
AwaasSoft." 
14. The Committee had taken into note huge discrepancy of data with 
regard to the achievement of target under PMAY-(G) during 2015-16 and it 
was revealed that the work done showed included backlog of previous years 
also. Ministry of Rural Development had also admitted before the Committee 

9 
 
that the data was misleading and thus, the Committee had recommended 
that the annual target for construction of houses must not include backlog 
and that the work done on clearing backlog should be shown separately for 
arriving at logical conclusion. In their action taken reply, Ministry of Rural 
Development have stated that as a result of constant review and monitoring 
by the Ministry and initiatives adopted by the States, more than 32 lakh 
pending IAY houses have been reported as completed in Financial Year 2016-
17 and that most States have committed to complete the construction of 
pending IAY houses in Financial Year 2017-18. The Ministry have further 
stated that progress under IAY can be tracked separately from the progress 
under PMAY-(G) through reports available on AwaasSoft . Appreciating 
efforts undertaken by the Ministry in clearing the pending backlog of houses, 
the Committee are of the view that proper demarcations of IAY targets and 
PMAY-(G) targets should be indicated and worked upon for specific 
assessment of the ongoing PMAY-(G)'s annual performance vis-a-vis its 
target with clarity. 
 
Expeditious upgradation of Katcha houses specially in nine States recommended 
    Recommendation (Sl No. 6) 
 
15. The Committee in their afore-said recommendation had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee are constrained to note that as per Socio-Economic & 
Caste Census (SECC), 2011, data large number of eligible beneficiaries in 
different States more prominent in Bihar (65.65 lakh), Uttar Pradesh (48.3 
lakh) and Madhya Pradesh (47.45 lakh) and so on. The Committee also 
find that based on SECC, 2011 data, large number of katcha houses are 
figuring in Bihar, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand etc. In this 

10 
 
connection, the Committee have been enlightened by MoRD that problem 
of Katcha houses is accute in nine States of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh, West Bengal, Odisha, Rajasthan, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand and 
Maharashtra. In the light of large number of Katcha houses spread across 
the States specially the nine States identified by MoRD, the Committee 
feel that there is a need to undertake special drive on the part of 
MoRD/State Governments and other stakeholders for their necessary 
upgradation for achieving 'Housing for All, by 2022' in a time-bound 
manner." 
16. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
" Under PMAY-G, allocation of targets is linked to the extent of housing 
shortage i.e. number of kutcha houses in a State/UT as per SECC data.  
Hence, higher targets are allocated to States with higher number of kutcha 
houses. To ensure that States are able to meet the allocated targets, they 
are required to present their Annual Action Plan to the Ministry wherein 
the status of implementation of crucial initiatives such as constitution of 
Programme Management Units (PMUs), mason training, finalization of 
Permanent Waitlist (PWL), geo tagging of houses, sensitization of 
beneficiaries etc are reviewed. Implementation of the scheme is regularly 
monitored in the nine focus States of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh, West Bengal, Odisha, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand 
and Maharashtra through meetings, field visits by senior officials and 
video conferences. All States have been time and again advised to utilize 
administrative funds available under the scheme to strengthen their 
implementation structures by employing dedicated staff and provide 
performance linked incentives to field functionaries to expedite 
construction. Exposure visits are being organized by the Ministry to allow 
exchange of best practices among States. To build capacity of 
stakeholders in the use of AwaasSoft and AwaasApp, training workshops 
are being held as and when required by States. 
As a result of the above initiatives, these focus States have been at the 
forefront of implementation of the scheme. Most of these States are in 
advanced stages of finalization of Permanent Waitlist, registration and 
sanctioning of beneficiaries and geo tagging of proposed construction site.  
Four States viz; Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Maharashtra have 
taken up training of rural masons on a large scale to meet demand for 
skilled masons. To ensure that adequate resources are available for the 
mason training programme, the Ministry has asked States to submit 
proposals for gap funding in case there is a shortfall in administrative 
funds." 

11 
 
17. The Committee were apprised of the acute problem of Katcha houses in 
nine States of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand and Maharashtra by the Ministry of Rural 
Development and in light of the existing plight, the Committee had recommended 
to undertake special drive on the part of Ministry of Rural Development/State 
Governments for the necessary upgradation of katcha houses for achieving 
'Housing for All by 2022' in a time-bound manner. Submitting to the Committee in 
its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Rural Development have stated that 
through various initiatives undertaken, these focus States have been at the 
forefront of implementation of the scheme and most States are in advanced 
stages of finalization of permanent waitlist, registration and sanctioning of 
beneficiaries and geo-tagging of proposed construction sites. Although, the 
Ministry of Rural Development have outlined the various provision and 
procedures employed in the nine States specifically, yet the Committee are not 
satisfied with the response of the Department in tackling the specific problem of 
upgradation of katcha houses. The Committee had categorically desired that a 
special drive need to be undertaken to resolve the issues of katcha houses 
upgradation in these States. The Committee are constrained to note that the reply 
of Department lacks clarity and their approach seems to be lackadaisical in this 
regard. Thus, the Committee strongly reiterate the need of a 'special drive' for 
expeditious upgradation of the katcha houses in these nine States. 
Government asked to construct houses on lands under PMAY in areas with 
proper infrastructure 
   Recommendation (Sl No. 11)  
18. The Committee in their afore-said recommendation had recommended as under:- 

12 
 
" The Committee's examination has also revealed various issues like 
possibility of allowing construction on vacant revenue lands with basic 
infrastructure like proper road connectivity avoiding submergence or 
exchange of lands from nearby Gram Panchayats, permitting 
construction of multi-storey houses where land is unavailable. The 
Committee have been informed that details of revenue lands are not 
maintained by MoRD and in case of landless beneficiary, States/UTs 
have been impressed upon to first allot land to landless beneficiary. The 
Committee find that issues like infrastructure fall within the domain of 
State Governments. On the issue of construction of multi-storey houses 
where land is unavailable, the Committee have been informed that there 
is no bar on such constructions. The Committee, therefore, feel that 
though the infrastructure is within the domain of State Governments, yet 
IAY houses should be constructed in areas with basic infrastructure. The 
Committee also feel that States/UTs may also open up construction for 
landless in multi-storey buildings where land is unavailable. This will not 
only minimise the need for extra land but will create the possibility of 
accommodating more number of units on lesser number of plots. The 
Committee recommend the MoRD to strategize the utilisation of 
available lands by bringing in the concept of multi story units." 
19. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
" Under PMAY-G, the beneficiary constructs the house on the land 
belonging to him. However, in respect of landless beneficiaries, the 
following provision has been incorporated in the Framework for 
Implementation of PMAY-G: 
“In case of landless beneficiaries the State shall ensure that the 
beneficiary is provided land from the government land or any other land 
including public land (panchayat common land, community land or land 
belonging to other local authorities).  For the selected land, connectivity 
and availability of drinking water may be ensured. The States will ensure 
that the provision of land to the landless beneficiary is accomplished once 
the Permanent Wait List is finalized.”  
Depending on need and suitability, States may consider facilitating 
construction of multi storey units after taking consent of the beneficiaries." 
20. Among the various issues that arose before the Committee during its 
examination of PMAY-G was the possibility of allowing construction on vacant 
revenue lands with basic infrastructure like proper road connectivity, avoiding 

13 
 
submergence or exchange of lands from nearby Gram Panchayats permitting 
construction of multi-storey houses where land is unavailable. To minimize the 
need for extra land and accommodating more number of units on lesser number 
of plots, the Committee had recommended the Ministry of Rural Development to 
strategize the utilization of available lands by bringing in the concept of multi 
storey units. With reference to the recommendation, the Committee find the 
Action Taken Reply of the Ministry of Rural Development primarily vague and 
unsatisfactory. The issue of landless beneficiaries is a prominent impediment in 
the achievement of target under erstwhile IAY and can be a stumbling block in 
PMAY-(G) as well. Taking this in view, the Committee had recommended the 
construction of multi storey units. However, the response of the Department of 
Rural Development seems to be bereft of any intentions to concretize the idea on 
actual basis. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating its recommendation for 
usage of available lands in building multi storey units, urge the Department of 
Rural Development to take some productive measures for the realization of this 
concept.   
Expeditious action on Training Assessment and Certification of Rural Masons 
and House Design recommended 
   Recommendation (Sl No. 16) 
21. The Committee in their afore-said recommendation had recommended as under:- 
" The Committee are constrained to note that training, Assessment and 
Certification of Rural Masons to improve the quality of construction and 
enhance employability through skill development has not picked up. In this 
connection, the Committee find Qualification Packs (QPs) consisting of 
different National Occupational Standards (viz., brick, masonry, shuttering, 
basic carpentry etc) has been cleared by National Skill Development 
Corporation (NSDC). Besides on-site training is being taken only in the 
States of Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, that was to be completed 

14 
 
by June, 2016 and subsequently will be upscaled in respective/remaining 
States. 
On the area of House Design the Committee find that Ministry has initiated 
with UNDP and IIT, Delhi an exercise to catalogue locally available 
appropriate, cost effective technologies in different Zones in 18 States. 
The Committee are constrained to note that of Maghalaya, Tripura and 
Maharashtra has been able to finalise the catalogue. The Committee also 
recommend that all is not well in the areas of Training of Masons and 
finalising technologies for house design etc. In this connection, it came out 
during the course of evidence that low cost technologies like use of 
bamboo be promoted for construction of houses as has been done in 
Tripura and Sikkim. In view of the foregoing, the Committee feel early 
action on Training of Rural Masons, Assessment and Certifications is 
essential. The Committee also feel that use of bamboo be promoted in 
construction of houses in big way in areas where it is in-abundance." 
22. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
"Pilot Training, as per the Qualification Pack (QP) for rural masons 
endorsed by NSDC, has been conducted in 7 States viz., Jharkhand, 
Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Uttarakhand, Gujarat, Kerala and Rajasthan.  
Based on their experiences and leanings from the pilot initiative, these 
States are in the process of scaling up training of rural masons. 
Remaining States / UTs are taking up pilot training at the earliest possible. 
States have been advised to send proposals for gap funding of mason 
training programme if administrative funds available with them are 
inadequate for financing the same. The Ministry is also in consultation with 
Directorate General of Employment and Training (DGE&T) to impart rural 
mason training by leveraging the wide network of polytechnics all over 
India and provide certification recognized by National Council of 
Vocational Training (NCVT) to the masons.  
To make available a wide menu of house design typologies to PMAY-G 
beneficiaries, the Ministry in collaboration with UNDP and IIT, Delhi has 
initiated an exercise to catalogue locally appropriate, cost effective, 
disaster resilient technologies and housing typologies for different housing 
zones in 18 states of India. In each state housing zones have been 
identified based on climate, topography, cultural and traditional housing 
practices and vulnerability to disasters.  Field studies have been 
conducted in all the 18 states viz. Bihar, Odisha, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, 
Tripura, West Bengal, Assam, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Sikkim, Manipur, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
 

15 
 
 Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh and Mizoram. ‘Pahal’-a 
catalogue of house design typologies for 10 States has been released by 
the Hon’ble PM on 20th November, 2016. For remaining States the 
typologies would be finalised during the year 2017. Demonstration houses 
or public buildings, as per the identified typologies, have been constructed 
in the States of Tripura and Maharashtra and is in the process of 
construction in the State of Meghalaya. The design typologies developed 
for the North East propagate intensive use of chemically treated bamboo 
for walling and roofing purpose. Use of bamboo in construction is being 
promoted by the Ministry by providing beneficiaries with the choice of 
constructing houses with bamboo as the predominant material of 
construction." 
23. Finding inadequacy in the areas of training of masons and finalizing 
technologies for house design etc., the Committee had recommended that early 
action on training of rural masons, assessment and certifications were essential 
and that the use of bamboo needed to be promoted in the construction of houses 
in big ways in the areas where it is in abundance. Ministry of Rural Development 
have provided considerable details about the pilot training as per the 
Qualification Pack (QP) for rural masons endorsed by NSDC conducted in 7 
States and that the other States are taking up pilot training at the earliest 
possible. Regarding house typologies, it has been replied that while house 
design typologies for 10 States have been released by the Hon'ble Prime Minister 
on 20 November, 2016, for remaining States, the typologies would be finalized 
during the year 2017. Use of bamboo is also being promoted by the Ministry as 
the predominant material of construction in its area of abundance. Taking note of 
the efforts undertaken by the Ministry of Rural Development in filling the lacuna 
in the areas of training and house design besides the novelty in the usage of 
bamboos, the Committee are still of the view that the pace of implementation of 
the steps initiated by the Ministry of Rural Development need to be augmented 

16 
 
further and training of masons in the remaining states alongwith the finalization 
of house typologies need to be expeditiously completed for ensuring the timely 
achievement of results. 
Early decision on inclusion of left over eligible under households under SECC, 
2011 recommended 
   Recommendation (Sl No. 20) 
24. The Committee in their afore-said recommendation had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee appreciate that the issue of inclusion of left over eligible 
rural households under SECC, 2011 data is under consideration of the 
MoRD and a domain can be assigned only after approval of updating the 
SECC data base and procedure thereof is obtained from the Cabinet. The 
Committee feel that since the issue is of vital importance for rural people 
MoRD should urgently take up the issue with Cabinet soon after approval 
of SECC, 2011 data base" 
25. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
"Due procedure has been prescribed in the Framework for Implementation 
(FFI) of PMAY-G for updation of Permanent Waitlist (PWL). All States 
have been asked to follow the due procedure prescribed in the FFI to 
assess and consolidate the list of left out eligible households and 
communicate the same to the Ministry. Based on the information received 
from all States a proposal would be placed before the Union Cabinet for a 
decision on including these households in the PWL." 
26. It was felt by the Committee that an early decision on the inclusion of left- 
over eligible rural households under SECC, 2011 needed to be taken and thus, the 
Committee had recommended the Ministry of Rural Development to urgently take 
up the issue with the Cabinet. However, to the utter dismay of the Committee, the 
reply of Ministry of Rural Development is not at all satisfactory as even after such 
an inordinate period, the Ministry of Rural Development have not been able to 
compile a list of left out eligible households across the States and it seems that 
the vitality of such exercise has not been taken in true spirit. Thus, the Committee 
strongly reiterate its recommendation regarding early decision on the inclusion of 

17 
 
left-over eligible households under SECC, 2011 and urge the Ministry of Rural 
Development to ensure speedier efforts for the completion of the procedure. 
Expeditious finalisation of modalities for PMAY(G) recommended 
   Recommendation (Sl No. 23) 
27. The Committee in their afore-said recommendation had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee are glad to find that three year programme under 
PMAY(G) has been taken up by Government for addressing the issue of 
rural shelterlessness in the country and for that the tentative targets based 
on provisional figures on housing shortages as per SECC, 2011 have 
been informally communicated to States/UTs for advance planning. 
Further Banks at the State level of State Level Banking Committee 
(SCBC) have been asked to work out modalities for facilitating institutional 
credit upto Rs.70,000/- for willing PMAY(G) beneficiary for forging credit 
linkages between beneficiary and Prime Lending Institutions (PLIs). In this 
connection, the Committee have been informed that MoRD has reviewed 
the progress with PMAY(G) nodal officers on 6th April, 3rd May, and 6th 
June, 2016. In this connection, the Committee also find that Madhya 
Pradesh Government has come out with a Mukhya Mantri Awaas Yojana 
envisaging no eligibility criteria. In this connection, the MoRD has stated 
that it has no plans to start any such scheme at Central level. However, 
the Committee find that Odisha has already started a scheme Biju Pacca 
Ghar Yojana (Mining), the Committee feel that more and more States 
should come out with such schemes. In this connection, the Committee 
find that two other issues have come up before the Committee, one the 
need for minimising documentation for Bank loan and other making 
available Bank loan to beneficiary based on Pattas. In this connection, on 
the issue of minimising documentation for Bank loan to beneficiaries, the 
Committee learn that consultations with Department of Financial Services 
are currently underway and on the second issue the MoRD has opined 
that the matter has to be taken up at the level of Parliament. In view of the 
foregoing, the Committee recommend expeditious completion of 
consultation with Department of Financial Services be done and the views 
of MoRD on the issue of dealing with the subject matter of making 
available loan based on Patta be furnished to the Committee in the first 
instance for their consideration for arriving at logical conclusion." 
28. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
" PMAY-G has a provision for facilitating institutional loan of upto 
Rs.70,000 for willing beneficiaries.  States have been urged to push the 

18 
 
same through State, District and Block level Bankers Committee 
meetings.  
In this direction, the Ministry of Rural Development had held a Workshop 
on ‘Providing Institutional Finance to Beneficiaries of PMAY-G’ on 14th 
September, 2016 which witnessed wide ranging participation from 
representatives of State Governments, Scheduled Commercial Banks, 
Regional Rural Banks, Housing Finance Institutions, Non Banking 
Financial Companies, Microfinance Institutions, Indian Bankers 
Association, Department of Financial Services, NABARD, NHB and RBI. 
Based on the outcome of the workshop, Ministry of Rural Development is 
in advanced stages of consultation with National Housing Bank (NHB) for 
developing a loan product for the beneficiaries of PMAY-G." 
29. On the issue of minimizing documentation for bank loan to the 
beneficiaries of PMAY-(G) and making available bank loan to beneficiary based 
on pattas, the Committee had recommended expeditious completion of 
consultation with Department of Financial Services regarding minimizing of 
documentation and had solicited views of the Ministry of Rural Development on 
the issue of dealing with the subject matter of making available loan based on 
Patta. Based on the reply of Ministry of Rural Development, the Committee 
observes that the process of consultation for reaching a productive conclusion to 
minimize documentation for bank loans to the beneficiaries of PMAY-(G) is still in 
the consultation stages, while on the issue of making available bank loans to 
beneficiaries based on pattas, the Committee find Ministry of Rural Development 
to be silent. Therefore, the Committee again recommend the Ministry of Rural 
Development to expedite the completion of consultation with the Department of 
Financial Services for minimising the documentation required for availing bank 
loans by the PMAY-G beneficiaries and also furnish their views to the Committee 
regarding the issue of dealing with the subject matter of making available loan to 
the beneficiaries based on pattas.    

19 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATION WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
                             
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
 
 Housing is universally recognized as basic need and investment in housing leads 
to improvement in social status coupled with similar improvement in economic and 
health parameters. In the case of construction in rural areas it accompanies 
employment generation by use of locally available technologies. The Committee are, 
however, constrained to find that as per Socio-Economic Caste Census, SECC, 2011 
data as large as 4 crore eligible beneficiaries require shelter in the country mainly in 
Uttar Pradesh (48.31 lakh), Madhya Pradesh (47.45 lakh), West Bengal (45.63 lakh), 
Odisha (41.48 lakh) etc. The Committee also find that role of the Government pertains 
to reducing housing shortage, improving the quality of housing especially the poor 
mainly through its flagship scheme of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) that was aimed at 
providing houses to BPL families. The Committee's examination has also revealed that 
although public housing programme started in the country way back in 1957, yet actual 
work started only after four decades in 1996 when the erstwhile IAY became functional 
as independent scheme with assigned role from time to time. The Committee are 
constrained to note in a period spanning over two decades of its implementation only 
3.60 crore families have been assisted in constructing their houses with small amount of 
Rs. 1.06 lakh crore utilized for that purpose. The Committee find in IAY Assistance have 
been provided (i) construction of new houses (ii) upgradation of Kutcha/dilapidated 
houses and (iii) purchase of house sites. The Committee find that with Union Cabinet 
nod, the existing IAY has been re-structured into Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana 
(Grameen) PMAY(G) with a view to pursue the objective of 'Housing for All, by 2022' 
with revised features ranging from providing assistance for construction of 1 crore 
houses in rural areas over a period of 3 years from 2016-17 to 2018-19, enhancing the 
per unit assistance from Rs. 70,000 to Rs. 1.20 lakh in plains and from Rs. 75,000 to 
Rs. 1.30 lakh in hilly States/difficult areas and IAP districts using SECC, 2011 data for 
identification of beneficiaries and so on. The Committee feel that with the PMAY(G) a 
beginning for reducing shelterlessness in the country by utilizing SECC, 2011 data has 
been made. The Committee feel that still there is as large as 3 crore shelterless 
population yet to be benefited by PMAY(G) scheme. The Committee, therefore, feel that 
an all out effort be made by Government of India alongwith all Stakeholders to eradicate 
shelterlessness from the country in a phased and time-bound manner. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
      
 To realize the Government’s commitment towards achieving ‘Housing for All’ by 
2022, the erstwhile rural housing scheme of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) has been 
restructured into Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana- Gramin (PMAY-G) with effect from 1st 
April, 2016. Recognizing the crucial role to be played by States in achieving this shared 
vision, the Framework for Implementation of PMAY-G has been drafted in consultation 
with State Govts. and firmed up under the guidance of a Committee consisting of 
  

20 
 
Principal Secretary, Department of Rural Development of select States. Active 
stakeholder participation in policymaking and implementation is being ensured through 
consultation forums such as Performance Review Committee Meeting, Regional Review 
Meeting etc. Several features have been incorporated into the scheme architecture to 
improve delivery and strengthen monitoring. These include Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT), comprehensive online monitoring through AwaasSoft (MIS) and AwaasApp 
(mobile App), constitution of Programme Management Units (PMUs) at various levels, 
selection on the basis of objective parameters from the Socio Economic and Caste 
Census (SECC), improving quality of house construction by  developing zone wise 
house design typologies incorporating disaster resilient features and improving 
workmanship and skilling of rural masons through training, assessment and certification 
endorsed by National Skill Corporation of India (NSDC). 
 In view of the above initiatives and active participation by all stakeholders, it is 
expected that the mandate to eradicate shelterlessness will be realized by 2022. 
 [O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that various States/UTs while 
implementing rural housing schemes have been facing problems such as structural 
deficiencies in fund flow mechanism, weak system of monitoring, inadequate per unit 
assistance, opaque system of beneficiary selection etc. The Committee also find that 
with a view to overcome these deficiencies IAY has been re-designed with improved 
features under PMAY(G) in financial year 2016-17. Besides for rooting out rural 
shelterlessness in a comprehensive way, various valuable suggestions like devising 
objective and verifiable norms for identification and selection of beneficiaries thereby 
reducing scope of discretion for targeting genuinely deprived etc. have been outlined 
before the Committee. The Committee welcome these steps and recommend the MoRD 
to take up all these suggestions with States/UTs Government in a more focused and 
comprehensive manner under PMAY(G). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Initiatives and measures introduced under PMAY-G are being actively 
implemented by States/UTs. Preparation of Annual Action Plans (AAP) by States/UTs, 
delineating the activities, strategies and timelines involved in achieving the yearly 
targets allocated to them and its approval by the Ministry has been made an integral 
part of the scheme. The Ministry is regularly reviewing progress made with respect to 
timelines finalized in the AAP and general preparedness of State/UT governments to 
deliver the mandate under PMAY-G at various forums.  
 

21 
 
 Monitoring and implementation structures have been strengthened throughout 
the country by constitution of Programme Management Units (PMUs) at various levels 
in States. The process of verification of priority lists based on SECC, 2011 has been 
completed by most States.  3.81 crore households out of a universe of 4.03 crore 
households, identified on the basis of housing deprivation parameters from SECC data,  
have been verified by the Gram Sabha. Out of the verified households, 1.30 crore 
households have been rejected on grounds of having a pucca house, migration, death 
etc whereas the remaining 2.51 crore households have been found eligible to receive 
assistance under the scheme. Most States are in advanced stages of finalization of 
Permanent Waitlist and uploading of same on the MIS- AwaasSoft. All States except 
Jammu & Kashmir and Arunachal Pradesh have completed the transition to 
comprehensive electronic payments. Most States/UTs have certified that all IAY 
scheme funds lying unutilized in bank accounts at district, block and GP level have been 
transferred to a dedicated State nodal account for the rural housing scheme. The mobile 
application AwaasApp is being widely used by field functionaries to capture geo 
referenced, time and date stamped photographs of beneficiaries in front of existing 
dwellings, proposed construction site and carry out inspections at various stages of 
house construction. Pilot training leading to assessment and certification of rural 
masons as per Qualification Pack endorsed by National Skill Development Corporation 
(NSDC) has been conducted in many States which are presently in the process of 
upscaling mason training to ensure availability of skilled masons and construction 
quality. To increase choices available to beneficiaries, ‘Pahal’-a catalogue of house 
design typologies incorporating disaster resilient features has been launched for 10 
States. Effective convergence has been achieved with MGNREGS through 
development of web link between AwaasSoft and NREGASoft to allow creation of a 
MGNREGA work against each PMAY-G house sanctioned on a real time basis. This 
has ensured that a beneficiary is able to claim his/her entitlement of 90/95 days of paid 
unskilled labour for construction of PMAY-G house under convergence with 
MGNREGA. Substantial progress has been made in strengthening all aspects of 
programme delivery with active participation of States since the launch of PMAY-G. 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
 The Committee's examination of physical performance showing details of 
houses targeted vis-a-vis houses constructed under erstwhile IAY during the last three 
years i.e. 2013-14 to 2015-16 has revealed that there has been huge gap between 
houses targeted vis-a-vis houses constructed. For instance, during 2013-14, 2014-15 
and 2015-16 as against houses targeted of 24.80 lakh, 25.14 lakh and 20.79 lakh, the 
houses constructed were as low as 15.92 lakh, 16.52 lakh and 18.01 lakh respectively. 
While reviewing the slow progress of workdone during 2013-14 and 2014-15 reasons 
like reduction in outlays to the extent of Rs. 2,200 crore and Rs. 5,000 crore and 
imposition of Model Code of conduct have been outlined before the Committee. 
From the State-wise performance during 2013-14, the Committee are 
constrained to note that worst performing States were Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, West Bengal, Assam, Gujarat, Uttarakhand etc. alongwith almost all North 

22 
 
Eastern States. The Committee are dismayed to note that against big States like 
Punjab, zero has been shown. The Committee also note that few States which have 
fairly performed well are Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, 
Odisha, Kerala, Rajasthan and Sikkim. During 2014-15, the Committee find that Uttar 
Pradesh, West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand and Assam have joined the well performing 
States whereas Madhya Pradesh continues to lag behind. In respect of 
 Punjab again zero has been shown. The Committee also find that performance of 
Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra has gone down from previous year and bifurcation of 
Andhra Pradesh and non-availability of minority category in Maharashtra have been 
attributed as reasons for decline before the Committee. The Committee find that Bihar, 
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh are experiencing structural deficiencies 
in fund flow and lack of dedicated machinery for implementation. The DoRD has also 
admitted before the Committee that there is a pertinent need to strengthen the existing 
system for delivering the mandate of 'Housing for All'. 
 During 2015-16, the Committee are happy to note that all States barring Madhya 
Pradesh, Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Jammu & Kashmir, Meghalaya and Sikkim 
have started showing improvement over previous year. The Committee are also 
satisfied to note that West Bengal has joined in the group of States performing 
exceedingly well namely Telangana, Odisha, Karnataka, Uttarakhand and Tripura. 
However, the Committee are dismayed to find that performance of big States like Uttar 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Haryana, Sikkim have again gone down. The Committee are also 
constrained to find nil performance shown against Punjab. During 2016-17, the 
Committee find that big States like West Bengal has constructed 96,771 houses, Uttar 
Pradesh has 82,761, Madhya Pradesh has 66,237 and Bihar has completed 50,237 
houses. In the absence of annual houses targeted, the Committee are unable to make 
out any tangible conclusion. 
 
The Committee also find that DoRD is optimistic that these capacity constraints 
will not impede the time table for rural housing in future as all States/UTs have been 
asked to ensure completion of backlog houses i.e. houses sanctioned during 2013-14 
and 2014-15 by September, 2016. The Committee apprehend considering the quantum 
of State/UTs-wise backlog and implementation constraints, States/UTs may again 
proceed in a hurried way only for the sake of achieving work assigned to them for the 
satisfaction of MoRD and not in a real and judicious way at ground level. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that actual transformation at ground level in various 
States/UTs level may be achieved by holding regular exchange programmes of good 
performing States like West Bengal, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Tripura and Telangana with 
slow moving States like Madhya Pradesh, Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir for yielding 
better results. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The need for closure under IAY to enable a smooth transition to PMAY-G has 
been time and again impressed upon States. They have been directed to make an 
assessment of the number of incomplete IAY houses and expedite construction of the 

23 
 
same through resource mobilisation, technical facilitation, performance incentives and 
robust monitoring.  To ensure that States/UTs have sufficient funds to undertake 
completion of houses pertaining to previous years, funds have been released to them 
as committed liabilities. As a result, more than 32 lakh pending IAY houses have been 
reported as completed in FY 2016-17. During the presentation of the Annual Action Plan 
under PMAY-G, most States have committed to complete construction of pending IAY 
houses in FY 2017-18. As suggested by the Committee, the good practices adopted by 
different states in the implementation of the rural housing scheme are shared with other 
States during various meetings held with officials of the State Governments viz., 
performance review committee meeting, Regional Review Meeting and State nodal 
officers meetings. State Govts. are encouraged to visit other States through exchange 
programmes for better exposure. 
 [O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that there is huge discrepancy of data with 
regard to achievement of target under PMAY(G) during 2015-16 showing over-all 
achievement of as high as 82.41 percent with State of Odisha showing as high as 
200.23 percent achievement and Karnataka showing as high as 198.07 percent 
achievement. The Committee also find that on the contrary Madhya Pradesh is showing 
as low as 6.48 percent achievement. The Committee's examination has revealed that 
work done shown includes backlog of previous year's also. In this connection, the 
MoRD have admitted before the Committee that data is misleading. The Committee feel 
that with a view to see the real work done with regard to construction of houses for the 
benefit of common-man and for keeping the record straight, annual target for 
construction of houses must not include backlog. The Committee also feel that work 
done on clearing backlog should be shown separately for arriving at a logical 
conclusion. 
Reply of the Government 
 As per the guidelines of the erstwhile scheme of IAY, time period of 2-3 years 
from the date of sanction of first installment was provided for construction of a house. 
Consequently completion against targets allocated in a particular financial year (FY) 
would spillover to the subsequent financial years. Hence completion in a particular FY 
could not be benchmarked against targets allocated in that year. This issue has been 
resolved under PMAY-G through two interventions; allowing 12 months from the date of 
sanction for house completion and advance communication of targets to expedite the 
process of sanctioning. 
 Further, to bring closure to the erstwhile rural housing scheme of IAY, States/UTs 
have been directed to make an assessment of the number of incomplete IAY houses 
and expedite construction of the same. As reported by States/UTs, 36.39 lakh houses 
sanctioned under IAY from the year 2013-14 to 2015-16 were incomplete as on 
01.04.2016 (Annexure 2). As a result of constant review and monitoring by the Ministry 
and initiatives adopted by States, more than 32 lakh pending IAY houses have been 
 

24 
 
reported as completed in FY 2016-17. During the presentation of the Annual Action Plan 
under PMAY-G, most States have committed to complete construction of pending IAY 
houses in FY 2017-18. 
 Additionally, States/UTs are being repeatedly urged to upload all houses 
completed under IAY on AwaasSoft at the earliest. In order to facilitate monitoring of 
progress in clearing backlogs, reports have been designed on AwaasSoft which also 
show year on year data viz., houses completed vis-à-vis the houses sanctioned in a 
particular financial year in addition to cumulative completions which may pertain to 
houses sanctioned in previous years.  Presently, progress under IAY can be tracked 
separately from the progress under PMAY-G through reports available on AwaasSoft. 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that large number of incomplete 
houses are figuring in different States/UTs during 2013-14 and 2014-15 and there is a 
big gap between houses sanctioned, houses completed and houses yet to be 
completed. For instance during 2013-14 and 2014-15 as against the total houses 
sanctioned of 47.53 lakh, the houses completed was as low as 29.28 lakh and 18.24 
lakh houses are awaiting completion. The Committee are also constrained to note that 
major States with large number of incomplete houses are Bihar (7.48 lakh), Assam 
(2.02 lakh), Madhya Pradesh (1.07 lakh), Jharkhand (0.95 lakh), Maharasthra (0.89 
lakh), West Bengal (0.94 lakh) and Odisha (0.59 lakh) in other States the figureis 
relatively low. In this connection, with regard to completion of incomplete houses, the 
Committee have been enlightened by MoRD that series of meetings with concerned 
Chief Secretaries have been held for push for completion of pending houses and States 
like Odisha and Rajasthan have started incentivizing their staff for this purpose and 
other States like Jharkhand and Maharashtra have mobilized additional resources from 
States plans and Uttar Pradesh has done considerable progress. The Committee find 
that during 2016-17 considerable progress has been made in West Bengal, Uttar 
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Bihar where as many as 96,771, 82,761, 66,237 and 
50,237 houses respectively have been constructed. The Committee are constrained to 
find that in Jharkhand and Gujarat not much progress has been made where as low as 
4,524 and 6,522 houses have been completed. The Committee feel that although some 
States have started remedial steps, yet there is lot more required for eliminating the 
pendencies prevailing in Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Karnataka, Bihar and Odisha. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that incentivizing staff and providing additional 
resources from State Plans be taken up in these States also. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

25 
 
 States like Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Bihar and Odisha have engaged field level 
functionaries and designed performance linked incentives to monitor and facilitate 
completion of houses. The State of Karnataka is providing assistance of Rs 50,000 over 
and above the unit assistance to ensure adequate resources are available for 
construction of house. 
 As a result of the above measures such as tagging of field functionaries to 
beneficiaries, performance linked incentivisation, regular on and off field monitoring etc, 
States which have been cited by the Committee viz; Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Karnataka, Bihar and Odisha have made substantial progress in completion of pending 
IAY houses (Annexure III). These States have been advised to resolve the issue of 
remaining incomplete houses by the end of FY 2017-18.   
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
 
 
The Committee's examination of the system of verification of houses completed 
across States/UTs reveal that three levels of monitoring, one under AwaasSoft for 
reporting and monitoring, second through Android based mobile application and third 
through National Level Monitors (NLM) is being done for bringing about transparency in 
utilization of funds and opening of State Nodal Accounts (SNAs) have been started. The 
Committee are constrained to note that progress of Mobile Application is in formative 
stage whereas opening of SNAs has only reached above half-way mark. In the case of 
Mobile Application, the Committee are constrained to note that only 16 States have 
done some preliminary work. The Committee also find that States which have done well 
in information technology do not at all figure in. About opening of SNAs the Committee 
are dismayed to note that only 24 States have opened SNAs. In view of the foregoing, 
the Committee feel that all out efforts be made to complete the Mobile Application as 
also SNAs expeditiously. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 All States / UTs have opened a dedicated nodal account for the rural housing 
scheme. Central releases and state matching share under PMAY-G are being 
transferred into this account (SNA) and electronically from the SNA to the bank A/C of 
the beneficiary thereon. Most States/UTs have also certified that all IAY scheme funds 
lying unutilized in bank accounts at district, block and GP level have been transferred to 
the SNA. All States except Jammu & Kashmir and Arunachal Pradesh have completed 
the transition to comprehensive electronic payments.  
 As per the Framework for Implementation of PMAY-G, the mobile application 
‘AwaasApp’ has been made mandatory for carrying out inspections at various stages of 
house construction. An offline version of the app has also been developed to enable 
data capture and transmission in areas with limited internet bandwidth. Presently, the 
app is being compulsorily used by field functionaries in all States except Arunachal 
Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka and Telangana. More than 63 lakh inspections have been 
conducted using AwaasApp in FY 2016-17. To ensure that resources are targeted to  
 

26 
 
genuine beneficiaries who lack basic housing amenities, uploading of photographs of 
beneficiaries in front of their existing dwellings and proposed construction site has been 
made mandatory for sanctioning houses under PMAY-G. Around 28 lakh proposed 
construction site and existing dwellings have been geo tagged using AwaasApp under 
PMAY-G in FY 2016-17. 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
 
 
Issue of verification of lands before releasing the PMAY(G) amount also came 
up before the Committee. In this connection, the Committee are glad to note that all 
States/UTs have been asked to resolve the issues pertaining to land ownership and 
transfer while making sufficient provision of lands. The Committee feel that this issue 
should be taken up in a comprehensive way by implementing agencies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Uploading of geo-tagged photograph of proposed construction site using 
AwaasApp has been made mandatory for sanctioning houses under the scheme.  The 
Ministry has advised all States to identify landless households and ensure that the 
beneficiary is provided land for construction of house. The responsibility of the State to 
provide homestead to landless PMAY-G beneficiaries has been reiterated in various 
forums. Status of action taken to provide land is being regularly reviewed by the Ministry 
through meetings, video conferences and during presentation of the Annual Action Plan. 
States like Maharashtra and Karnataka are implementing state sponsored Rural House 
Site schemes to facilitate purchase of homestead. Five thousand beneficiaries have 
been provided financial assistance of Rs 50,000 for purchase of homestead under 
Government of Maharashtra’s ‘Pandit Dindayal Upadhyaya Gharkul Scheme’ in FY 
2016-17. The Government of Karnataka maintains separate budgetary provision every 
year for a scheme which provides sites to landless families under which 5,039 
households have been assisted in FY 2016-17. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
 
The Committee's examination has revealed that C&AG has highlighted various 
issues about implementation of IAY like non-assessment of housing shortage in some 
States, non-availability of Waiting List in 3 States, in-ordinate delay in completion of 
IAY houses, slow pace convergence in major States etc. 
 The Committee find that various valuable suggestions like providing technical 
facilitation to the beneficiary, prompt disbursal of financial assistance through e-
payment, enabling credit linkage with institutional lender etc. have been made. Besides, 
for bringing about transparency, list of beneficiary has been put on public available 
domain with safeguards and work in 2,532 Backward Blocks in the country for 

27 
 
convergence has also been outlined. The Committee have also been informed that all 
issues arising out of C&AG Report have been addressed in PMAY(G). The Committee, 
however, feel that leaving everything to the new set-up under PMAY(G) may again 
cause problem at ground level and as such, all States/UTs be asked to adopt the 
valuable suggestions alongwith progress made on other areas outlined above. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 To ensure that all States are adopting the key initiatives introduced under PMAY-
G and are able to meet the targets allocated to them, the process of appraisal and 
approval of Annual Action Plan (AAP) has been made an integral part of the scheme. 
States are required to present their AAP to the Ministry wherein the status of 
implementation of crucial initiatives such as constitution of Programme Management 
Units (PMUs), mason training, finalization of Permanent Waitlist (PWL), geo tagging of 
houses, sensitization of beneficiaries etc are reviewed. Additionally, implementation of 
various aspects of the scheme is regularly monitored in all States through meetings, 
field visits by senior officials and video conferences. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
 
The Committee's examination has brought out an important issue of tackling the 
issue of rural shelterlessness in areas that have been declared as reserved for 
Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs) without any SC and ST 
population in different States especially in Maharashtra. In this connection, the 
Committee has been informed that 60% of allocation go for SC and ST population and 
as the process of verification of SECC, 2011 data is already underway at Gram Sabha 
level and updation of Awaas Soft is also underway, it is too early to notice such 
discrepancies. Moreover, no State Government including Maharashtra has brought any 
similar incidence to the notice of MoRD. The Committee, however, feel that soon after 
the verification of SECC, 2011 data by Gram Sabha is completed, a drive for 
ascertaining the exact quantum of SC and ST population be started across the 
States/UTs for tackling the issue in effective manner. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As per the Framework for Implementation of PMAY-G, at least 60% of the targets 
are to be earmarked for SC/ST at the National Level. In order to achieve the same, 
States/UTs are required to allocate at least 60% of their targets to SC/ST households 
subject to availability of eligible PMAY-G beneficiaries. The task of distribution of 
category wise targets among districts has been assigned to the States to provide them 
with functional autonomy and flexibility in distributing targets as per the socio-economic 
and population profile of the districts. 

28 
 
 However, in case all eligible SC and ST households are covered and it is duly 
certified as such by the State/UT, the Ministry may consider reallocating the targets to 
‘Others’. Any proposal to change SC/ST targets is cross verified with the actual number 
of beneficiaries available in the Permanent Waitlist (PWL) as ascertained by the SECC 
verification exercise. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
 
The Committee's examination of financial performance under PMAY(G) has 
revealed various issues like insufficiency of funds, huge gap between allocation and 
releases and under-utilization of released amount during the last couple of years. For 
instance, the Committee are constrained to note that during first three years of XII Plan 
i.e. 2012-13 to 2014-15, the Budget Outlays have been significantly reduced at RE 
stage and BE (2015-16) has been brought down considerably over previous year. For 
instance, during 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 the BE of Rs. 11,075 crore, 15,184 
crore and 16,000 crore have been reduced to the level of Rs. 9,024 crore, Rs. 13,184 
crore and Rs. 11,000 crore respectively at RE stage. As regard gap between Allocation 
vis-a-vis Releases, the Committee notice that during 2012-13 and 2013-14 as against 
the Centre allocation (at RE State) of Rs.9024 crore and Rs.13,184.00 crore, the 
Central Releases were as low as Rs.7,868.76 and Rs.12,983.64 crore. The Committee 
find that during subsequent year, the releases had been largely as par with allocations. 
As regard under-utilisation of Central Releases, the Committee find that during 2013-14 
as against the Central Release of Rs.11,096.96 crore, the utilisation was as low as Rs. 
10.576.04 crore. The Committee also notice higher utilisation during the subsequent 
year i.e. 2014-15 and 2015-16. The Committee feel that frequency of reductions of 
funds and less release in one year followed by subsequent increase in next year does 
not augur well with overall financial performance for rural housing. The Committee, 
therefore, feel that reductions and year-wise variations in releases should be avoided 
for ensuring free flow of funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Government is committed to provide 1 crore houses in rural India by 2018-
19 under PMAY-G. Sufficient resources have been provisioned to achieve this 
milestone towards ‘Housing for All’. In addition to budgetary support of Rs 60,000 crore, 
the option to avail loan upto Rs 21,975 crore from NABARD is open for the Ministry. 
This option may be exercised for meeting resource gap and smoothening variation in 
releases as and when required. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
 
The Committee's examination of performance of erstwhile IAY during the last 
couple of years has revealed that rural housing sector has been experiencing a number 

29 
 
of challenges like inadequacy of per unit assistance in view of rising cost of input costs, 
poor quality of workmanship affecting durability and safety of houses, difficulty in 
mobilization of additional resources through institutional lending due to poor credit 
worthiness, convergence issues with MGNREGA and so on. The Committee find that 
most of the issues find place in the existing Guidelines for PMAY(G) also. The 
Committee have also been informed that the MoRD has come out with several 'Reform 
Initiatives' undertaken during 2014-15 and 2015-16 for comprehensive addressing the 
challenges outlined above. The Committee however find that barring enhanced unit 
assistance, progress on almost all 'Reform Initiatives' is at preliminary stages. In the 
light of slow progress of work done on 'Reform Initiative' launched two years back, the 
Committee conclude that things are not moving with proper momentum particularly 
when the goal of Housing for All by 2022' is not very far. The Committee therefore 
recommend that MoRD to strategize implementation of PMAY(G) in time bound 
manner. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Most reform initiatives introduced under IAY have been made an integral part of 
PMAY-G and considerable progress has been made with respect to them. The status of 
implementation of various initiatives is provided in the reply to Recommendation No. 3. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
The Committee's examination has revealed that since the inception of IAY, the 
construction of the houses in the plain region and in the hilly regions were not seen on 
the same footing. It was well understood and realized that the different sites presented 
different sorts of challenges and needed to be taken care of specifically. Thus arose the 
concept of differential assistance amount under this scheme for plain/hilly terrain. 
Harping on the issue of unit assistance to the beneficiary of hilly areas, the Committee 
realise the complexity employed in terms of building of a residential unit in the hills as 
the input cost in terms of labour and material keeps on inflating with the rising altitude of 
the area. Materials need to be carried to higher altitudes and this entails increased 
burden on the beneficiary – monetary wise. Shortage of labour community with 
increasing height only adds to the problem as the available resources hike their 
charges. In this connection, it came out before the Committee that enhanced per unit 
assistance of Rs.1.30 lakh is not perfectly designed as most of the locations specifically 
in hilly States like Uttarakhand are situated at an altitude of over 7000 feet above the 
sea level and practically it is not possible to manage construction of PMAY(G) houses 
within the enhanced per unit assistance. In this connection, MoRD has laboured to 
convince the Committee that in the case of hilly and difficult areas the real cost of 
construction comes to Rs.1.60 lakh by way of addition of Rs.18,000 available under 
MGNREGA entitling the beneficiary under PMAY(G) to work under MGNREGA for 90 
days with a per day remuneration of Rs.200/- and Rs.12,000/- available under Swachch 
Bharat Mission (G). The MoRD has also enlightened the Committee that concerned 
State Governments may top up the assistance available to address these area specific 
requirements. In this connection, the Committee have been enlightened that State 

30 
 
Government of Sikkim have already topped up the amount of around Rs.2 lakhs over 
and above the per unit assistance. The Committee therefore feel that MoRD should take 
up the issue with concerned States for addressing the issue of inadequacy of per unit 
assistance for hilly States and difficult areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Presently, there are many States namely Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil 
Nadu, Sikkim, Kerala, Karnataka, Goa, Maharashtra etc which are providing assistance 
over and above the unit assistance under PMAY-G. Instances of States providing top up 
i.e. additional assistance to beneficiaries is appreciated and shared with other States in 
various forums viz., Performance Review Committee Meeting, Regional Review 
Meeting and through Video Conferences etc so that the same may be emulated by 
them if required. 
 The Ministry is also encouraging State/UTs to take up local production of 
construction material such as mud and fly ash blocks, in convergence with MGNREGA, 
so that material for construction may be made easily available to PMAY-G beneficiaries 
at lower than market rates. States/UTs have been advised to facilitate procurement of 
construction material like cement, bricks etc at lower than market rates by entering into 
agreements with producers. For States with high transportation and head load cost, 
provision of in kind assistance to beneficiaries is allowed subject to the approval of the 
Empowered Committee of the Ministry. Consent of the beneficiaries is paramount in 
cases involving in kind assistance or material support. 
 Some States like Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Odisha have taken up local 
production of mud and fly ash bricks on a considerable scale. The State of Nagaland 
provides in kind assistance i.e. CGI sheets to PMAY-G beneficiaries wherein cost of 
transportation is also covered. The State of Tamil Nadu provides cement and bricks at 
low rates to PMAY-G beneficiaries in addition to top up of Rs 50,000 for casting RCC 
roofs. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
The Committee are constrained to note that training, Assessment and 
Certification of Rural Masons to improve the quality of construction and enhance 
employability through skill development has not picked up. In this connection, the 
Committee find Qualification Packs (QPs) consisting of different National Occupational 
Standards (viz., brick, masonry, shuttering, basic carpentry etc) has been cleared by 
National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC). Besides on-site training is being taken 
only in the States of Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, that was to be completed 
by June, 2016 and subsequently will be upscaled in respective/remaining States. 
 On the area of House Design the Committee find that Ministry has initiated with 
UNDP and IIT, Delhi an exercise to catalogue locally available appropriate, cost 
effective technologies in different Zones in 18 States. The Committee are constrained to 

31 
 
note that of Maghalaya, Tripura and Maharashtra has been able to finalise the 
catalogue. The Committee also recommend that all is not well in the areas of Training of 
Masons and finalising technologies for house design etc. In this connection, it came out 
during the course of evidence that low cost technologies like use of bamboo be 
promoted for construction of houses as has been done in Tripura and Sikkim. In view of 
the foregoing, the Committee feel early action on Training of Rural Masons, 
Assessment and Certifications is essential. The Committee also feel that use of bamboo 
be promoted in construction of houses in big way in areas where it is in-abundance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Pilot Training, as per the Qualification Pack (QP) for rural masons endorsed by 
NSDC, has been conducted in 7 States viz., Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, 
Uttarakhand, Gujarat, Kerala and Rajasthan.  Based on their experiences and leanings 
from the pilot initiative, these States are in the process of scaling up training of rural 
masons. Remaining States / UTs are taking up pilot training at the earliest possible. 
States have been advised to send proposals for gap funding of mason training 
programme if administrative funds available with them are inadequate for financing the 
same. The Ministry is also in consultation with Directorate General of Employment and 
Training (DGE&T) to impart rural mason training by leveraging the wide network of 
polytechnics all over India and provide certification recognized by National Council of 
Vocational Training (NCVT) to the masons.  
 To make available a wide menu of house design typologies to PMAY-G 
beneficiaries, the Ministry in collaboration with UNDP and IIT, Delhi has initiated an 
exercise to catalogue locally appropriate, cost effective, disaster resilient technologies 
and housing typologies for different housing zones in 18 states of India. In each state 
housing zones have been identified based on climate, topography, cultural and 
traditional housing practices and vulnerability to disasters.  Field studies have been 
conducted in all the 18 states viz. Bihar, Odisha, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Tripura, 
West Bengal, Assam, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Manipur, 
Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh and 
Mizoram. ‘Pahal’-a catalogue of house design typologies for 10 States has been 
released by the Hon’ble PM on 20th November, 2016. For remaining States the 
typologies would be finalised during the year 2017. Demonstration houses or public 
buildings, as per the identified typologies, have been constructed in the States of 
Tripura and Maharashtra and is in the process of construction in the State of 
Meghalaya. The design typologies developed for the North East propagate intensive 
use of chemically treated bamboo for walling and roofing purpose. Use of bamboo in 
construction is being promoted by the Ministry by providing beneficiaries with the choice 
of constructing houses with bamboo as the predominant material of construction.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 

32 
 
The Committee appreciate that from 2015-16 all payments under PMAY(G) will 
be done electronically on Awaas Soft – PFMS Platform in State Nodal Accounts (SNAs) 
of State Governments for payment to beneficiaries' Bank/Post Office Accounts. The 
Committee however constrained to note that only 24 States have completed the 
process of transfer of funds to SNAs and remaining States have been asked to comply 
the same by May, 2016. Similarly on the use of Mobile App 'Awaas Soft' for inspection 
of houses the Committee find that during 2015-16 only 14 States have come forward in 
using it with only 7000 inspections done. In this connection, the Committee have been 
informed that to overcome problem of internet connectivity, offline module is being 
developed for data capturing. In this connection, the MoRD has candidly admitted 
before the Committee that some training and capacity building of officials is essential. 
The Committee agree with MoRD on the issue. In view of the above, the Committee 
recommend both these issues of opening up of SNAs in remaining States and use of 
Mobile App 'Awaas Soft' need urgent expansion for effective implementation of 
PMAY(G) in a transparent manner. 
Reply of the Government 
 The action taken and progress made in respect of opening up of SNA and use of 
the mobile app; AwaasApp is provided in the reply to Rec. SI. No.8. In addition, training 
workshops and video conferences are being organized by the Ministry on a regular 
basis to build capacity of State MIS officials and data entry operators on use of 
AwaasApp and AwaasSoft. To enhance outreach, user friendly video tutorials covering 
various features of the app, have been developed and uploaded on the homepage of 
AwaasSoft. A dedicated toll free helpline (1800-11-6446) has been launched in January, 
2017 to collect and resolve grievances and technical complaints related to AwaasSoft 
and AwaasApp in a streamlined manner.                                          
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
The Committee's examination has revealed that 'Dedicated Staffing' for 
implementation of PMAY(G) has been outlined as part of 'Reform Initiatives' of MoRD 
taken up during 2014-15 and 2015-16. However, the Committee are constrained to note 
that instructions in this regard given to States are advisory in nature and it is for the 
State Governments to decide whether it needs to hire dedicated personnel at different 
level of administration or utilise the existing State Government machinery. In this 
connection, the Committee appreciate this, many States like Maharashtra, Jharkhand, 
Bihar, Rajasthan have already set up mechanism/hired personnel at different level and 
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka have their own dedicated organisations. The 
Committee recommend MoRD to impress upon other State Governments to emulate the 
example of these States for delivering effective results under PMAY(G) urgently. 
Reply of the Government 
 The necessity of constituting Programme Management Units (PMUs) at State, 
district and block level to strengthen implementation and monitoring of the scheme has 
been repeatedly impressed upon States. Progress in constitution of PMU is a crucial 

33 
 
parameter which is reviewed during the presentation of the Annual Action Plan by 
States. The matter has been emphasized and reiterated during meetings, video 
conferences and visits of senior officials of the Ministry. While most States have 
constituted PMU’s at the state level, they are in the process of recruiting and engaging 
personnel for staffing PMU’s at sub state level. To ensure utilization of administrative 
funds for constitution and reinforcement of PMUs, release of such funds has been made 
conditional upon 60% utilization of total available administrative funds with the States.   
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
The Committee appreciate that Gram Panchayat wise list of beneficiaries as per 
SECC, 2011 data for the purpose of receiving assistance under PMAY(G) has been 
uploaded in all States on 26th May, 2016 and States/UTs have been communicated the 
procedure for accessing the list of beneficiaries from 'Awaas Soft' and also about 
processes like placing the list of beneficiaries before Gram Sabha, verification thereof 
by Gram Sabha, appellate mechanism to be followed for addition/deletion of name etc. 
In this connection, the Committee have been informed that all this excercise require at 
least 90 days time to be followed for finalising the Priority List. The Committee have also 
been informed that State Governments are already in the process of finalising the same 
and by 15th August, 2016, it is expected that entire process should be completed. The 
Committee apprehend that MoRD had missed the deadline and therefore recommend 
MoRD to complete the process urgently. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The process of verification, finalization and uploading of priority lists is in 
advanced stages. As on 1st June, 2017, 2.47 crore households have been identified as 
eligible to receive assistance under PMAY-G after verification of priority lists by Gram 
Sabha and review of grievances/complaints by Appellate Authority. The priority lists 
thus finalized are to form the basis of selection till 2022. Since a total of one crore 
houses are to be constructed under PMAY-G by March, 2019, requisite number of 
eligible beneficiaries are readily available which would addresses the concern 
expressed by the Committee. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that progress of work done on 
convergence of PMAY(G) with MGNREGA/SBM(G) has been concentrated only in few 
States. The Committee while examining the details of toilets constructed under IAY 
during 2014-15 and 2015-16, the Committee find that in West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, 
Bihar, Odisha, Maharashta, Madhya Pradesh, Assam, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu have 
done some work, whereas against Andhra Pradesh, Telengana, Karnataka, Punjab and 
also against some UTs zero has been shown. The Committee have also been informed 

34 
 
that for convergence of PMAY(G) with MGNREGA and SBM(G) real time web link, 
capturing job card number MGNREGA beneficiary during the time of issuing sanction 
for PMAY(G) Beneficiary and for that requisite changes in software have been made for 
all States to enable auto creation of work in MGNREGA on generation of Awaas Soft. In 
view of the foregoing, the Committee feel that necessary preparedness for convergence 
of PMAY(G) with MGNREGA/SBM(G) and its expansion in other States in a big way is 
urgently needed. 
Reply of the Government 
 Convergence with MGNREGA for providing 90/95 days of unskilled wages for 
construction of house and construction of toilet through convergence with SBM (G) or 
MGNREGA has been made mandatory under PMAY-G. To ensure that this translates 
into real time convergence on ground, a web link has been developed between 
AwaasSoft and NREGASoft to allow creation of a NREGA work against each PMAY-G 
house sanctioned thus enabling a beneficiary to claim his/her entitlement of 90/95 days 
of paid unskilled labour for construction of PMAY-G house. 
 Further, as per scheme guidelines the house is not regarded as complete unless 
the toilet has been constructed. It is mandatory to upload photograph of the house 
alongwith the toilet through AwaasApp to reflect completion in reports. From the current 
financial year 2017-18, States have been advised to take up construction of toilet in 
convergence with MGNREGA. The projected number of toilets to be built for PMAY-G 
houses has been incorporated into the labour budget for MGNREGA for FY 2017-18 to 
allow necessary planning by States. The status of progress with regard to convergence 
is reviewed during the presentation of the Annual Action Plan and in various other 
forums.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22) 
 
 The Committee's examination has revealed that uncertainty is prevailing over the 
mobilisation of funds for ambitious three years time table drawn up under Pradhan 
Mantri Awaas Yojana (Grameen) [PMAY(G)] from the first year itself. In this connection, 
the Committee find Rs.81,975 crore have been estimated for construction of 1 crore 
units at the rate of 33 lakh units per year from 2016-17 to 2016-19 with annual 
requirements of Central funds of Rs.25,988 in first year i.e. 2016-17. In this connection, 
the Committee find that barely Rs.15,000 crore have been provided in the Budget 2016-
17 leaving as large as 10,000 crore yet to be arranged. The Committee find that 
additional Budget support of Rs.5,000 crore is under active consideration of Ministry of 
Finance and modalities for additional resources for NABARD are being worked out. The 
Committee feel that uncertainty prevailing on this issue be ended by expediting the 
related issues with Ministry of Finance/NABARD. 
 
 

35 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Government is committed to provide 1 crore houses in rural India by 2018-
19 under PMAY-G. Sufficient resources have been provisioned to achieve this 
milestone towards ‘Housing for All’. In addition to budgetary support of Rs 60,000 crore, 
the option to avail loan upto Rs 21,975 crore from NABARD is open for the Ministry. As 
against BE of Rs 15,000 crore, Rs 16,074 crores was provided as budgetary assistance 
in FY 2016-17 to meet higher fund requirement under the rural housing scheme. This 
has been enhanced to Rs 23,000 crores in FY 2017-18. No shortage of resources is 
envisaged since the provision to borrow funds upto Rs 21,975 crores from NABARD is 
available to the Ministry at all times. This option may be exercised for meeting resource 
gap and smoothening variation in releases as and when required. The modalities of 
borrowing from NABARD are under finalization. 
 [O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
  

36 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
   Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that during Eleventh Plan in all the 
years barring 2008-09 houses constructed had been less than that of target fixed. The 
Committee are also constrained to note that during Twelfth Plan (2012-17) so far huge 
housing shortage of as high as 43.67 million units is seen. On the contrary, the 
Committee find the DoRD has held the view before the Committee that problem of rural 
shelterlessness has been considerably reduced by way of implementation of IAY since 
1996. The Committee thus, do not agree with MoRD's view. In this connection, t he 
MoRD has also argued before the Committee that various States like Odisha, Uttar 
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana have launched their own schemes 
for rural housing out of their State Plans and various States like Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, Sikkim and Goa provide additional resources to beneficiaries over and 
above the assistance given under erstwhile IAY. Besides, private bodies like HUDCO 
has also been contributing their funds for construction of low cost rural housing. In 
addition, Department of Animal Husbandry and Ministry of Labour have been 
implementing housing schemes for specific target groups. However, the Committee are 
constrained to note that MoRD is not equipped with relevant data of workdone by 
different States/UTs by stating that the relevant data is available with respective 
State/UTs Governments. In the absence of data, the Committee are unable to 
comprehend exact contributions made by States/UTs Governments for reducing rural 
shelterlessness in the country The Committee, therefore recommend the MoRD to 
obtain the relevant accurate data from States/UTs and apprise the Committee of the 
same for ascertaining work done in this regard by different States/UTs, HUDCO etc. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Socio Economic and Caste Census (SECC) conducted in the year 2011 
provides exhaustive, recent and reliable data on housing shortage in rural India. 
Therefore, it is being used as the baseline for identification of beneficiaries under 
PMAY-G. As per SECC-2011 data, a total of 4.03 crore households have been 
identified as houseless or living in zero, one and two room kutcha houses (both kutcha 
roof and kutcha wall) in rural India. Taking cognizance of the fact that between 2011, 
when SECC was carried out and 2016, when PMAY-G came into effect, many houses 
might have been constructed under Central/State Housing schemes or self constructed, 
Gram Sabhas have been assigned the responsibility of verifying the SECC list so that 
households with pucca houses may be removed from the list. Presently, 3.81 crore 
households out of a universe of 4.03 crore households have been verified by the Gram 
Sabha. Out of the verified households, 1.30 crore households have been rejected on 
grounds of having a pucca house, migration, death etc whereas the remaining 2.51 
crore households have been found eligible to receive assistance under the scheme. 
Substantial part of the reduction in housing shortage, as highlighted by the verification 
exercise, is attributable to the housing schemes sponsored by the Central and State  
 

38 
 
government, especially erstwhile IAY. However, as observed by the Committee, despite 
implementation of IAY as an independent programme since 1996, there still existed a 
large number of rural families with limited access to basic housing amenities. Therefore, 
to address gaps in rural housing and achieve ‘Housing for All’ by 2022, IAY was 
restructured into PMAY-G w.e.f. 1st April 2016. 
 
 As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry is in the process of compiling 
data on houses constructed under various housing schemes sponsored by States /UTs 
and HUDCO. Meanwhile, data available with the Ministry on houses constructed under 
State sponsored schemes which are being monitored through AwaasSoft is placed at 
Annexure I. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  
   Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
 Committee are constrained to note that as per Socio-Economic & Caste Census 
(SECC), 2011, data large number of eligible beneficiaries in different States more 
prominent in Bihar (65.65 lakh), Uttar Pradesh (48.3 lakh) and Madhya Pradesh (47.45 
lakh) and so on. The Committee also find that based on SECC, 2011 data, large 
number of katcha houses are figuring in Bihar, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand 
etc. In this connection, the Committee have been enlightened by MoRD that problem of 
Katcha houses is accute in nine States of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, West 
Bengal, Odisha, Rajasthan, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand and Maharashtra. In the light of 
large number of Katcha houses spread across the States specially the nine States 
identified by MoRD, the Committee feel that there is a need to undertake special drive 
on the part of MoRD/State Governments and other stakeholders for their necessary 
upgradation for achieving 'Housing for All, by 2022' in a time-bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Under PMAY-G, allocation of targets is linked to the extent of housing shortage 
i.e. number of kutcha houses in a State/UT as per SECC data.  Hence, higher targets 
are allocated to States with higher number of kutcha houses. To ensure that States are 
able to meet the allocated targets, they are required to present their Annual Action Plan 
to the Ministry wherein the status of implementation of crucial initiatives such as 
constitution of Programme Management Units (PMUs), mason training, finalization of 
Permanent Waitlist (PWL), geo tagging of houses, sensitization of beneficiaries etc are 
reviewed. Implementation of the scheme is regularly monitored in the nine focus States 
of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Odisha, Rajasthan, 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Maharashtra through meetings, field visits by senior 
officials and video conferences. All States have been time and again advised to utilize 
administrative funds available under the scheme to strengthen their implementation 
structures by employing dedicated staff and provide performance linked incentives to 

39 
 
field functionaries to expedite construction. Exposure visits are being organized by the 
Ministry to allow exchange of best practices among States. To build capacity of 
stakeholders in the use of AwaasSoft and AwaasApp, training workshops are being held 
as and when required by States. 
 As a result of the above initiatives, these focus States have been at the forefront 
of implementation of the scheme. Most of these States are in advanced stages of 
finalization of Permanent Waitlist, registration and sanctioning of beneficiaries and geo 
tagging of proposed construction site.  Four States viz; Odisha, Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand and Maharashtra have taken up training of rural masons on a large scale to 
meet demand for skilled masons. To ensure that adequate resources are available for 
the mason training programme, the Ministry has asked States to submit proposals for 
gap funding in case there is a shortfall in administrative funds. 
 [O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  
   Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
 
The Committee's examination has also revealed various issues like possibility 
of allowing construction on vacant revenue lands with basic infrastructure like proper 
road connectivity avoiding submergence or exchange of lands from nearby Gram 
Panchayats, permitting construction of multi-storey houses where land is unavailable. 
The Committee have been informed that details of revenue lands are not maintained 
by MoRD and in case of landless beneficiary, States/UTs have been impressed upon 
to first allot land to landless beneficiary. The Committee find that issues like 
infrastructure fall within the domain of State Governments. On the issue of 
construction of multi-storey houses where land is unavailable, the Committee have 
been informed that there is no bar on such constructions. The Committee, therefore, 
feel that though the infrastructure is within the domain of State Governments, yet IAY 
houses should be constructed in areas with basic infrastructure. The Committee also 
feel that States/UTs may also open up construction for landless in multi-storey 
buildings where land is unavailable. This will not only minimise the need for extra land 
but will create the possibility of accommodating more number of units on lesser 
number of plots. The Committee recommend the MoRD to strategize the utilisation of 
available lands by bringing in the concept of multi story units. 
Reply of the Government 
 Under PMAY-G, the beneficiary constructs the house on the land belonging to 
him. However, in respect of landless beneficiaries, the following provision has been 
incorporated in the Framework for Implementation of PMAY-G: 
“In case of landless beneficiaries the State shall ensure that the 
beneficiary is provided land from the government land or any other land 
including public land (panchayat common land, community land or land 

40 
 
belonging to other local authorities).  For the selected land, connectivity 
and availability of drinking water may be ensured. The States will ensure 
that the provision of land to the landless beneficiary is accomplished once 
the Permanent Wait List is finalized.”  
 Depending on need and suitability, States may consider facilitating construction 
of multi storey units after taking consent of the beneficiaries. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
 
The Committee appreciate that the issue of inclusion of left over eligible rural 
households under SECC, 2011 data is under consideration of the MoRD and a domain 
can be assigned only after approval of updating the SECC data base and procedure 
thereof is obtained from the Cabinet. The Committee feel that since the issue is of vital 
importance for rural people MoRD should urgently take up the issue with Cabinet soon 
after approval of SECC, 2011 data base. 
Reply of the Government 
 Due procedure has been prescribed in the Framework for Implementation (FFI) 
of PMAY-G for updation of Permanent Waitlist (PWL). All States have been asked to 
follow the due procedure prescribed in the FFI to assess and consolidate the list of left 
out eligible households and communicate the same to the Ministry. Based on the 
information received from all States a proposal would be placed before the Union 
Cabinet for a decision on including these households in the PWL. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23) 
 
 The Committee are glad to find that three year programme under PMAY(G) has 
been taken up by Government for addressing the issue of rural shelterlessness in the 
country and for that the tentative targets based on provisional figures on housing 
shortages as per SECC, 2011 have been informally communicated to States/UTs for 
advance planning. Further Banks at the State level of State Level Banking Committee 
(SCBC) have been asked to work out modalities for facilitating institutional credit upto 
Rs.70,000/- for willing PMAY(G) beneficiary for forging credit linkages between 
beneficiary and Prime Lending Institutions (PLIs). In this connection, the Committee 
have been informed that MoRD has reviewed the progress with PMAY(G) nodal officers 

41 
 
on 6th April, 3rd May, and 6th June, 2016. In this connection, the Committee also find 
that Madhya Pradesh Government has come out with a Mukhya Mantri Awaas Yojana 
envisaging no eligibility criteria. In this connection, the MoRD has stated that it has no 
plans to start any such scheme at Central level. However, the Committee find that 
Odisha has already started a scheme Biju Pacca Ghar Yojana (Mining), the Committee 
feel that more and more States should come out with such schemes. In this connection, 
the Committee find that two other issues have come up before the Committee, one the 
need for minimising documentation for Bank loan and other making available Bank loan 
to beneficiary based on Pattas. In this connection, on the issue of minimising 
documentation for Bank loan to beneficiaries, the Committee learn that consultations 
with Department of Financial Services are currently underway and on the second issue 
the MoRD has opined that the matter has to be taken up at the level of Parliament. In 
view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend expeditious completion of 
consultation with Department of Financial Services be done and the views of MoRD on 
the issue of dealing with the subject matter of making available loan based on Patta be 
furnished to the Committee in the first instance for their consideration for arriving at 
logical conclusion. 
Reply of the Government 
 PMAY-G has a provision for facilitating institutional loan of upto Rs.70,000 for 
willing beneficiaries.  States have been urged to push the same through State, District 
and Block level Bankers Committee meetings.  
 In this direction, the Ministry of Rural Development had held a Workshop on 
‘Providing Institutional Finance to Beneficiaries of PMAY-G’ on 14th September, 2016 
which witnessed wide ranging participation from representatives of State Governments, 
Scheduled Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks, Housing Finance Institutions, 
Non Banking Financial Companies, Microfinance Institutions, Indian Bankers 
Association, Department of Financial Services, NABARD, NHB and RBI. Based on the 
outcome of the workshop, Ministry of Rural Development is in advanced stages of 
consultation with National Housing Bank (NHB) for developing a loan product for the 
beneficiaries of PMAY-G.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/02/2016-RH(A/C) dated 12 June, 2017] 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter I of the Report) 

42 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                              DR.  P. VENUGOPAL 
28 December, 2017                                  Chairperson, 
07 Pausa, 1939 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on Rural Development   

43 
 
      
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2017-2018) 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY,  
07  DECEMBER, 2017 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room. 'B,' 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
Dr. P. Venugopal  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
2. Shri Sisir Adhikari 
3. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
5. Shrimati Mausam Noor 
6. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
7. Smt. Renuka Butta 
8. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
9. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
10. Shri Ajay Misra (Teni) 
11. Shri Chintaman Wanaga 
 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
13. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo 
14. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
15. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
16. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri. Shilpi Chatterjee  - Director 
2. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) 
1. Shri Prasant Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Alka Upadhyaya - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi - Joint Secretary 
Government of Meghalaya 
 
1.  Shri  Y. Tsering  -  Chief Secretary  
2.  Smt. I.R. Sangma  - Secretary 
 

44 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee to the 
sitting convened to consider and adopt two draft Reports viz. (i) Draft Report on the 
Action Taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in the 
26th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-Grameen' pertaining 
to the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) and  
XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX  XXX. 
3. The Committee took up for consideration two draft Reports and after 
deliberations adopted the same without any modifications. The Committee also 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the reports and present the same to Parliament.    
[Witnesses from the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) 
and State Government of Meghalaya were then called in] 
 
4.    XXX     XXX      XXX       XXX  XXX     XXX       
5. XXX     XXX      XXX       XXX  XXX     XXX       
6.    XXX     XXX      XXX       XXX  XXX     XXX       
[The witnesses then withdrew] 
 
7. XXX     XXX      XXX       XXX  XXX     XXX        
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 

45 
 
APPENDIX – II 
[Vide  para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
 ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT   
(16TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations:     23 
       
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted     
  by the Government :  
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21 and
 22 
         
Total:          18 
Percentage:               78.3 %      
      
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies : NIL      
            
Total:          00 
Percentage:                     0  %    
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of    
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee :   
      
Serial No. 2, 6, 11, 20 and 23 
 
Total:          5 
Percentage:               21.7 %         
   
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the  
  Government are still awaited : NIL       
  
Total:          00 
Percentage:                     0  %       
 
  
 
 
 
 
 