STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2017-2018) 
      
 
        SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ  
 
   
 
[Action taken report on the  Oberservations/Recommendations contained in Thirty Fourth Report  
on 'Demands for Grants (2017-18)'  pertaining to Ministry of Panchayati Raj.] 
 
 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
41 


FORTY-FIRST REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2017-2018) 
 (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ  
 
 
 
[Action taken report on the  Oberservations/Recommendations contained in Thirty Fourth Report  
on 'Demands for Grants (2017-18)'  pertaining to Ministry of Panchayati Raj.] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29 December, 2017 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29 December, 2017 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2017/ Pausha, 1939 (Saka) 
 
 


 
CRD No.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
© 2017 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____ Edition) 
and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-2018)   ......................................        (ii)   
 
INTRODUCTION      …....................................        (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report   ..........................................................................       1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ...........................................................................     11    
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies………….............................................................................       23 
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee ............................................................................        24 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ......................................        25   
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 9 December, 2016………………......      19 
 
 I. Extract of Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee held on.......................                      27 
 
 II.     Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
         Thirty Fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development..........29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(2017-2018) 
 
          Dr. P. Venugopal  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri Kirti Azad 
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
7. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
8. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
9. Shri Manshankar Ninama 
10. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
11. Smt. Mausam Noor 
12. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
13. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
14. Smt. Renuka Butta 
15. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
16. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad  
17. Shri Balka Suman 
18. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
19. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
20. Shri Ajay Mishra (Teni) 
21. Shri Chintaman Navsha Wanaga 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Munquad Ali 
23. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
24. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo 
25. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
26. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
27. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
28. Shri A.K. Selvaraj 
29. Shri A. V.Swamy 
30. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
31. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
Secretariat 
 
1.   Shri Abhijit Kumar  -  Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri S. Chatterjee   -  Director 
3.  Smt. B. Visala    -  Additional Director 
4.   Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 (ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development  
(2017-2018) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present the 41st Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 34th Report of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development (16th Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants (2017-18)' pertaining to Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj. 
2.  The Thirty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 March, 2017 and 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. Replies of the Government to 
all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 4th June, 2017. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
7th December, 2017. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                              DR.  P. VENUGOPAL 
28 December,  2017                                  Chairperson, 
07 Pausha, 1939 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2017-18) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Thirty Fourth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2017-18) pertaining to Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj'. 
 
2. The Thirty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 March, 2017 
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report 
contained 10 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government.  These have 
been examined and categorised as follows: - 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Serial Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 
Total:09 
Chapter-II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
Serial No. NIL 
Total: 00 
Chapter-III 
(iii)  Observation/Recommendation in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Serial No. NIL 
Total: 00 
Chapter-IV  
 
(iv) 
  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Serial No. 6  
Total:01 
Chapter-V 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that final reply in respect of recommendation for 
which only interim reply has been submitted by the Government included in 
Chapter - V of this Report and Replies to recommendations made in the Chapter I 
of this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
 Media and Publicity 
(Recommendation Serial No. 4, Para No. 4) 
 The Committee in their afore-said recommendation had recommended as under:- 
6. "The Committee note that for strengthening Panchayats and Gram Sabhas, the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj needs to reach out to multiple and diverse groups especially 
the rural populace and Media and Publicity plays a very important and crucial role in this 
regard. The Committee are unhappy to note that there has been meagre increase in 
budgetary allocation for the year 2017-18 (Rs.11.00 crore) as against the BE allocation 
of Rs. 8.00 crore and RE of Rs. 8.00 crores for the year 2016-17. The Committee have 
been assured by the Ministry that Rs. 11.00 crore allocation is sufficient for the Media 
and Publicity. However, the Committee is of the view that Media and Publicity being a 
very important scheme through which the rural populace are made aware about the 
panchayats and gram sabhas more funds should be allocated under this scheme. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj should have better allocation 
and utilization under this scheme and also Ministry of Panchayati Raj should approach 
Ministry of Finance for higher allocation." 
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
"As rightly observed by the Committee, Media & Publicity Scheme 
assumes greater significance in creating awareness about the role and 
functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) among the masses, as 
well as to formulate new innovative programmes and to improve the 
existing ones through sharing of experiences etc. in the field of local self-
government, and also to bring about a huge transformation in participative 
democracy so that PRIs especially Gram Panchayats become well-aware, 
well-informed & well-equipped and improve their performance & service-
delivery mechanism ensuring accountability & transparency etc. MoPR 

3 
 
attaches great importance to IEC activities, which assume added 
significance in the context of the role of Panchayats in implementation of 
almost all Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) and direct transfer of 
grants to Gram Panchayats as recommended by Fourteenth Finance 
Commission (FFC). Although it is a significant challenge reaching the 
desired/ prime target audience, it is being strategized that the allocated 
funds be utilized effectively and judiciously to reach out the last mile. 
The Committee was informed that the first issue of comprehensive 
magazine by the Ministry “Gramodaya Sankalp” was released during the 
National Panchayati Raj Day held on 24th April, 2017 at Lucknow, Uttar 
Pradesh. Major contents of the magazine have been embedded with the 
QR codes to enable readers to watch related audio-visual videos.  More 
than two lakh copies of the magazine have been dispatched to all tier of 
Panchayats and Panchayat Secretaries of Gram Panchayats. The official 
YouTube channel of the Ministry has been launched on 24 April 2017, 
through which inspirational and training films or documentary on key issues 
relating to Panchayati Raj can be seen. Mobile Apps have been developed 
by the Ministry for accessing “Gramodaya Sankalp” magazine and the 
YouTube channel to harness the increasing uses of smartphones in rural 
areas. 
The recommendation of the Committee as regards approaching the 
Ministry of Finance for higher allocation under Media & Publicity Scheme 
for its better, effective and result-oriented utilization has been noted. The 
higher allocation will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance at RE stage 
after substantial utilization of allocated budget."   
 
Comments of the Committee 
8. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had emphasized on the 
Media and Publicity schemes for generating awareness amongst the rural 
populace about the Panchayats and Gram Sabhas and the need for allocation of 
more funds in this area and recommended that Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) 
should have better allocation and utilization under the scheme and also that 
MoPR should approach Ministry of Finance for higher allocation. The MoPR in 
their Action Taken Reply have stated that the first issue of comprehensive 
magazine 'Gramodaya Sankalp' and official Youtube channel of Ministry was 
launched on 24 April, 2017.  Mobile apps have also been developed to access the 
magazine and youtube channel through smartphone. Although,  

4 
 
these initiatives are very progressive but the Committee would like to point out 
here that these are highly dependent on network connectivity which at present is 
yet to reach desired standards particularly in the rural and backward areas. There 
is an urgent need to strengthen the network connectivity for widespread 
awareness in rural areas. The Committee is therefore, of the view that the other 
traditional means of communication viz. print media and radios/television should 
also be used extensively. The MoPR have further informed the Committee that the 
matter of higher allocation will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance at RE 
stage after substantial utilization of allocated budget. The Committee desire  that 
MoPR should pursue the Ministry of Finance for more budget and also make all 
out efforts to educate the rural populace about Panchayati Systems and its 
schemes and also undertake an extensive awareness campaign in this regard. 
The allocated funds should be utilized effectively and judiciously to reach out the 
last mile. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Ministry.    
[OM. NO. H-11013/1/2017-Parl, dated 14 June, 2017] 
 
 Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) 
(Recommendation Serial No. 6, Para No. 6) 
9. The Committee in their afore-said recommendation had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee observed that Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) is 
a newly restructured scheme and finalization of scheme is still pending. 
The Committee have been informed by Ministry of Panchayati Raj that it 
has been decided to continue the financial assistance to States for 
capacity building and training activities of PRIs and funds to the sum of 
Rs. 544 crore (approx.) have so far been released to 22 States (as on 
2/01/2017). Under this scheme there are 4 components namely (i) Mission 

5 
 
mode project in e-panchayats (ii) Incentivization of Pachayats (iii) ATM 
services in Panchayat Bhawans and    (iv) Capacity Building Panchayat 
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (PSA) with allocation of BE for the year 2017-18 of 
Rs. 17.00 crore, Rs. 34.00 crore, Rs. 10.00 crore and Rs. 691.90 crore 
respectively. The Committee feel that restructuring process of RGSA 
should be completed within a specific time-frame. In this regard the 
Committee were also informed that proposed RGSA restructuring is being 
done to address the current challenges faced by the rural local bodies and 
increased flow of funds to Gram Panchayats particularly through FFC. 
Also, the committee constituted under Chairmanship of Vice-Chairman of 
NITI Aayog will finalise the report in a month and half. The Committee, 
therefore, hope that the committee so constituted will be able to complete 
the report within the specific time frame and the Ministry will restructure 
RGSA as soon as possible for its effective implementation on the 
grounds." 
 
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
"It is stated that during the year 2016-17 against the RE provisions of Rs. 
592.95 crore, funds were utilised to the tune of Rs. 592.94 crore. Out of 
this, funds to the tune of Rs. 586.42 crore were released to 25 States and 
one Union Territory under the scheme. As already submitted above in 
response to Recommendation No. 3 of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Finance has permitted this Ministry to utilize the funds under BE 2017-18 
for this scheme for activities related to Capacity building and training and 
some other components as indicated in the above mentioned response to 
Recommendation No. 3. The Committee has submitted its report on 26th 
May, 2017. Formulation of restructured scheme is under process. Efforts 
will be made by this Ministry to obtain the approval of the scheme at the 
earliest."  
[OM. NO. H-11013/1/2017-Parl, dated 14 June, 2017] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
11. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had stated that the 
restructuring process of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) should be 
completed within a specific time-frame. It was also informed to the Committee 

6 
 
that a Committee constituted under Chairmanship of Vice-Chairman of NITI 
Aayog would finalize the report at the earliest. In this regard, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR) in their written reply have stated that the Committee under 
the Chairmanship of NITI Aayog has submitted its report on 26th May, 2017 and 
formulation of restructured scheme is under process and efforts are being made 
by the MoPR to obtain the approval of the scheme at the earliest. The Committee 
hope that the process of restructuring and approval of the scheme will be 
expedited so that the RGSA would be effectively implemented at the ground level 
at the earliest. 
[OM. NO. H-11013/1/2017-Parl, dated 14 June, 2017] 
 
 Mission Mode Project on e-Panchayat 
(Recommendation Serial No. 8, Para No. 8) 
12. The Committee in their afore-said recommendation had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee observed that e-Panchayat is one of the Mission Mode 
Projects (MMP) under Digital India Programme. The Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj further informed the Committee that under the programme, 
a suite of core common software applications has been developed to 
address various aspects of Panchayat functioning including budgeting, 
planning, accounting, monitoring, social audit and delivery of citizen 
services. The Committee were also informed about the web based 
application PRIA-Soft which facilitates the compliance of States with 
Model Accounting System (MAS) as well as it enables the State to 
financially manage the PRIs in a better manner. However, the Committee 
are very unhappy to note that there is no network connectivity in major 
rural areas of the country. The Committee also note that by mid-next year 
1.50 lakh Gram Panchayats will be connected digitally. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that Ministry of Panchayati Raj would take 
effective and expeditious steps to increase the connectivity coverage so 

7 
 
that the e-Panchayat is enabled in every village of every State particularly 
in the North and Eastern States of the country." 
13. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
 
"In order to expedite the rollout of e-Panchayat, the availability of 
broadband connectivity at Panchayat level is a pre-requisite and the 
Department of Telecommunications(DoT) is in the process of modifying 
the implementation strategy of BharatNet to expedite the rollout of 
BharatNet to connect all the Gram Panchayats in the country (including 
North-East) by March, 2019. MoPR is regularly pursuing this matter with 
DoT." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
14. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had stated that Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj should take effective and expeditious steps to increase the 
connectivity coverage so that the e-Panchayat which is a mission mode project is 
enabled in every village of every State, particularly in North and Eastern States of 
the country. In this regard, the MoPR in their Action Take Reply have stated that 
to expedite the roll out of e-Panchayat, the availability of broadband connectivity 
at Panchayat level is a must and Department of Telecommunications (DoT) is in 
the process of modifying the implementation strategy of BharatNet by March, 
2019 and MoPR is regularly taking up this matter with DoT. The Committee are 
unhappy with the Action Taken Reply from MoPR as the Committee feel that the 
MoPR are not making enough efforts to expedite the roll out of the e-Panchayat 
and Mission Mode Project for connecting Panchayats on e-Platform. The 
Committee, therefore, once again strongly recommend that the MoPR should 
make extra efforts to pursue Department of Telecommunication for completion of 
process of modification of implementation strategy of Bharat Net to expedite the 
rollout of Bharat Net to connect all the Gram Panchayats in the country (including 
North-East) by March, 2019 without which the initiative will 

8 
 
 remain on paper only. The Committee hope that the MoPR would take up the 
matter with more urgency so that project is completed within the time-frame and 
there is no extension of the time-frame beyond March, 2019. 
[OM. NO. H-11013/1/2017-Parl, dated 14 June, 2017] 
 
 ATMs Services in Panchayat Bhawans 
(Recommendation Serial No. 10, Para No. 10) 
15. The Committee in their afore-said recommendation had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that a scheme for providing ATM services in 
Panchayat Bhawans which was being conceptualized during 2016-17 will 
now be taken up in the year 2017-18 as a sub-scheme under the RGSA 
scheme of Ministry of Panchayati Raj, for which an inter-ministerial 
Committee has already been constituted. The allocated fund under BE for 
the year 2017-18 is Rs. 10.00 crore. The Committee therefore, hope that 
this year the conceptualization of ATM services will be finalized and the 
amount allocated will also be utilized unlike last financial year. The 
Committee were also informed that no special provision is made in the 
budget for allocation of funds specifically for Construction and Repair of 
Gram Panchayat Bhawans. In this context, the Committee were further 
informed that based on the proposals submitted by the States, funds are 
allocated to the States by the Ministry out of the available budget. The 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj also submitted that States such as Andhra 
Pradesh, Telegana etc. are utilizing of MGNREGA for construction of 
Gram Panchayats Bhawans (GPB) and that there is no need for 
depending on one financial source only for the purpose. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj alongwith 
Ministry of Rural Development can create a convergence plan with related 
schemes so that there is no hurdle in construction of Gram Panchayat 
Bhawans (GPB). The Committee also feel that Gram Panchayat Bhawans 
play a very important role in delivering various services to the citizens 
specially under Digital India Programme. The Committee also hope that 

9 
 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj would make all out efforts and impress upon 
the States to work out time table for expeditious construction of GPBs 
across overall in country." 
16. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
 
"A pilot of the ‘ATM services in Panchayat Bhawans’ is planned to be 
undertaken once the same is approved under restructured RGSA, which is 
under process for formulation. 
As regards the issue of construction of Gram Panchayat buildings, it is 
stated that as per information available with this Ministry there are around 
48000 Gram Panchayats which do not have buildings. With a view to 
mitigate this problem, the Panchayati Raj Departments of States have 
been requested for issuing appropriate instructions to the concerned 
authorities of PRIs at all levels for construction of buildings at Gram 
Panchayat level utilizing inter alia the funds available under the Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS). 
The guidelines of that scheme under Chapter 7, para 7.1.3 of the existing 
scheme provide for funds for construction of Gram Panchayat buildings. 
Ministry’s letter to States No. K-11022/2/2017-CB dated 2nd May, 2017 for 
convergence with other schemes like MGNRES is enclosed as Annexure."      
Comments of the Committee 
17. The Committee in earlier recommendation had stated that Gram Panchayat 
Bhawans (GPBs) play a very important role in delivering various services to the 
citizens specially under Digital India Programme. Therefore, the Committee had 
recommended that MoPR should make efforts to impress upon the States to work 
out time-table for expeditious construction of GPBs across the country. The 
MoPR in their Action Taken Reply have stated that there are around 48,000 Gram 
Panchayat which do not have buildings. Further, they have stated that with a view 
to mitigate the problem, the Panchayati Raj Departments of the States have been 
requested for issuing appropriate instructions to the concerned authorities of 
PRIs at all level for construction of buildings at Gram Panchayats level utilizing 
inter-alia the funds available under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural  
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS). The Committee are  

10 
 
disappointed to note that there are still 48,000 Gram Panchayats that do not have 
buildings and that it is a huge number keeping in view that GPBs play a very 
important part in delivering services to the citizens and also to connect every 
Gram Panchayat digitally under Digital India Programme and the absence of 
proper building affects the delivery system. The Committee, therefore, once again 
strongly recommend that MoPR should pursue the state Panchayati Raj 
Departments to utilize the funds available under MGNREGS to construct GPBs in 
each and every village on priority with adherence to strict timelines. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.   
[OM. NO. H-11013/1/2017-Parl, dated 14 June, 2017] 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATION WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1 & 2) 
 
 The Committee note that the Detailed demands for Grants (2017-18) of the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj under Demand No. 68 were laid on the table of the House on 
08.02.2017. Under Demand No. 68, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been allocated 
sum of Rs. 790.79 crore for the financial year 2017-18. The Committee have examined 
the Demands of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for the year 2017-18. The 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been set out in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
The Committee note that BE for the year 2016-17 was at Rs. 768.33 crore and 
RE of 2016-17 is Rs. 675.15 crore and BE of 2017-18 is at Rs. 790.79 crore. The 
Committee are not happy with the meagre increase at only 3% in the BE allocation for 
the current financial year and strongly feel that there should be substantial 
enhancement in the budgetary allocation especially at the BE level. The Committee also 
noted that though there has been almost 90% utilization of funds, still the Committee 
feel that there are un-utilized funds of Rs. 65.23 crore which does not reflect well on the 
Ministry. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
should insist on higher allocation of funds and also envisage roadmap for utilization of 
funds so that there is no scope of under utilization of funds and also there is better 
implementation of the schemes. The Committee with deep concern note that actual 
utilization of funds under Ministry of Panchayati Raj for the year 2016-17 for some 
schemes are less than the allocated funds which include schemes like Action Research 
and Research Studies where the funds of Revised Estimate (RE) was at Rs. 2.50 crore 
whereas actual expenditure is at Rs. 1.38 crore similarly for Mission Mode Project on e-
Panchayat, RE was at Rs. 16.55 crore whereas actual expenditure is Rs. 8.28 crore and 
in Membership to International Local Governance Bodies (CLGF-Contribution) RE was 
at Rs. 0.10 crore and actual expenditure is "NIL", the Committee also note that the 
actual expenditure under Membership to International Local Governance Bodies 
(CLGF-Contribution) has been "NIL" in the 2015-16. The Committee therefore, strongly 

12 
 
recommend that the Ministry should ensure that the funds allocated for the schemes 
should be utilized judiciously so that the benefits of these schemes are fully accrued to 
the rural population. The Committee would like the Ministry to address these issues 
seriously and intimate the initiatives taken by them in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
      
 The Budget Estimate, Revised Estimate and Actual Expenditure for 2016-17 are 
as follows: - 
 (Rs. in crore) 
 
"From above table, it is obvious that the Ministry utilized 99.84% of the RE 
budget. In current year, the Ministry is making all out efforts for utilizing 
the allotted budget. Regular review of planning and allocation of budget is 
being conducted including meetings of Central Executive Committee 
(CEC) under chairmanship of the Secretary to expedite appropriate 
budget utilization. Further, States are being pursued to prepare 
Sl. 
No 
Major 
Head 
Scheme Name 2016-17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BE 
2016-17 
RE 
2016-17 
Actual 
Exp. 
 Exp. as % age 
w.r.t to RE 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1  Action Research & Publicity  
1.1 2515 Action Research 15.00 2.50 2.50 100.00 
1.2 2515 International Contribution  1.90 1.90 1.84  96.84 
 
1.3 2515 Media & Publicity  8.00 8.00 8.00 100.00 
 
2  Digital India Initiative e-Panchayat 
2.1 2515 Mission Mode Project on e-
Panchayats 
22.00 16.55 16.55 100.00 
2.2 2515 Incentivization of Panchayats 38.00 33.00 33.00 100.00 
2.3 2515 ATM Services in Panchayat 
Bhawans 
   10.00     0.00 0.00   0.00 
3  Capacity Building: Panchayat  Sashaktikaran Abhiyan 
3.1 2515 
2552 
Capacity Building:   Panchayat 
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan  
655.00 592.95 592.77 99.97 
4 2515 International Co-operation      0.10      0.10      0.25 250.00 
 
  Total of Plan 750.00 655.00  654.91 
 
 
  99.99 
 
5 3451 Secretariat Service (Non Plan) 
 
  18.33 20.15   19.13   94.94 
   Grand Total (Plan & Non Plan ) 768.33 675.15 674.04 99.84 

13 
 
comprehensive annual action plan in accordance with schematic 
provisions." 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/1/2017-Parl  dated 14 June,  2017] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
 The Committee note that Rajeev Gandhi Shashatikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) is a 
centrally sponsored scheme was launched during 12th Five Year Plan period to 
strengthen the Panchayati Raj system across the country and to address the critical 
gaps in its implementation. Further, w.e.f. year 2015-16, the provisions of funds to the 
States under scheme was transferred to States. During the year 2015-16, as the funds 
were received under Central component only, the funds were provided as 100% central 
funding. The Committee observe that a comprehensive overhaul of the RGPSA scheme 
is being proposed in the context of the institution of the Fourteenth Finance Commission 
(FFC) award and the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has not given any specific time-frame 
as to when RGPSA will be overhauled. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj should expedite the process of restructuring of 
RGPSA within a specific timeframe. The Committee are concerned to note that one of 
the major challenges being faced by the Ministry in implementation of RGPSA is with 
regard to funding for RGPSA. The Committee observed that funds for RGPSA are 
extremely critical, as the cut in budgetary provisions of RGPSA was done in RE stage in 
2015 and simultaneously stoppage of central support under Backward Regions Grant 
Fund (BRGF) whose capacity building component was widely used by States for PRI 
training and till date only Rs. 112 crore has been released and proposals for the 
remaining amount are under process. The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that the 
funding of the scheme till its overhaul is done,  12th Five Year Plan Outlay funds should 
be released to support the capacity building component widely used by the states for 
PRI training. The Committee hope that the challenges faced by Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj in implementation of RGPSA would be resolved expeditiously and a specific time 
frame would be chalked out for overhauling of RGPSA scheme. 
 
 
 

14 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 "It had been submitted before the esteemed Committee that this Ministry 
had initiated the process for restructuring of RGPSA with the main objective of 
helping PRIs to develop governance capabilities. Consultations with State 
Governments had also been held as a part of the restructuring process of 
RGPSA. In the meantime, with a view to leverage the pivotal role of PRIs, it was 
decided to constitute an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Vice-
Chairman NITI Aayog to restructure the existing scheme of Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj as Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) to address the 
current challenges faced by the rural local bodies and the increased fund flow to 
the Gram Panchayats through Fourteenth Finance Commission award. 
 The Committee held four meetings on 19th December, 2016, 12th 
January, 2017, 20th February, 2017 and 17th March, 2017 including meeting 
with the Senior Officers of State Panchayati Raj Departments and Sarpanches 
and examined all aspects of the scheme. The Committee has submitted its report 
on 26th May, 2017. Formulation of the new restructured scheme is under 
process.  
 In the current year, following budget has been provided and Ministry has 
been allowed to utilize the budget upto September 30, in accordance with the 
schematic provision of RGPSA scheme:"  
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/1/2017-Parl  dated 14 June,  2017] 
 
 
 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Major 
Head 
Scheme Name 2017-18 
BE 
1 2 3 4 
1  Action Research & Publicity   
1.1 2515 Action Research 4.00 
1.2 2515 International Contribution 1.90 
1.3 2515 Media & Publicity 11.00 
2  Digital India Initiative e-Panchayat  
2.1 2515 Mission Mode Project on e-Panchayats 17.00 
2.2 2515 Incentivization of Panchayats 34.00 
2.3 2515 ATM Services in Panchayat Bhawans 10.00 
3  Capacity Building: Panchayat  Sashaktikaran Abhiyan  
3.1 2515 Capacity Building:   Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan  691.90 
4 2515 International Co-operation 0.20 
  Total of Plan 770.00 
5 3451 Secretariat Service (Non Plan) 
 
20.79 
  Grand Total (Plan & Non Plan ) 790.79 

15 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
 The Committee note that for strengthening Panchayats and Gram Sabhas, the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj needs to reach out to multiple and diverse groups especially 
the rural populace and Media and Publicity plays a very important and crucial role in this 
regard. The Committee are unhappy to note that there has been meagre increase in 
budgetary allocation for the year 2017-18 (Rs.11.00 crore) as against the BE allocation 
of Rs. 8.00 crore and RE of Rs. 8.00 crores for the year 2016-17. The Committee have 
been assured by the Ministry that Rs. 11.00 crore allocation is sufficient for the Media 
and Publicity. However, the Committee is of the view that Media and Publicity being a 
very important scheme through which the rural populace are made aware about the 
panchayats and gram sabhas more funds should be allocated under this scheme. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj should have better allocation 
and utilization under this scheme and also Ministry of Panchayati Raj should approach 
Ministry of Finance for higher allocation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 "As rightly observed by the Committee, Media & Publicity Scheme 
assumes greater significance in creating awareness about the role and 
functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) among the masses, as well as to 
formulate new innovative programmes and to improve the existing ones through 
sharing of experiences etc. in the field of local self-government, and also to bring 
about a huge transformation in participative democracy so that PRIs especially 
Gram Panchayats become well-aware, well-informed & well-equipped and 
improve their performance & service-delivery mechanism ensuring accountability 
& transparency etc. MoPR attaches great importance to IEC activities, which 
assume added significance in the context of the role of Panchayats in 
implementation of almost all Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) and direct 
transfer of grants to Gram Panchayats as recommended by Fourteenth Finance 
Commission (FFC). Although it is a significant challenge reaching the desired/ 
prime target audience, it is being strategized that the allocated funds be utilized 
effectively and judiciously to reach out the last mile. 
 
 The Committee was informed that the first issue of comprehensive 
magazine by the Ministry “Gramodaya Sankalp” was released during the National 
Panchayati Raj Day held on 24th April, 2017 at Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh. Major 
contents of the magazine have been embedded with the QR codes to enable 
readers to watch related audio-visual videos.  More than two lakh copies of the 
magazine have been dispatched to all tier of Panchayats and Panchayat 
Secretaries of Gram Panchayats. The official YouTube channel of the Ministry has 

16 
 
been launched on 24 April 2017, through which inspirational and training films or 
documentary on key issues relating to Panchayati Raj can be seen. Mobile Apps 
have been developed by the Ministry for accessing “Gramodaya Sankalp” 
magazine and the YouTube channel to harness the increasing uses of 
smartphones in rural areas. 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee as regards approaching the 
Ministry of Finance for higher allocation under Media & Publicity Scheme for its 
better, effective and result-oriented utilization has been noted. The higher 
allocation will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance at RE stage after 
substantial utilization of allocated budget."  
 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/1/2017-Parl  dated 14 June,  2017] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
 The Committee observe that Action Research and Research Studies Schemes 
that provide an in depth analysis for long term issues, assess impact and 
documentation in Panchayati Raj are carried out. The Committee, are constrained to 
note that there has been substantial decrease in BE allocation for the year 2017-18 at 
Rs. 4.00 crore as compared to BE for the year 2016-2017 which was at Rs. 15.00 crore. 
The Committee have been informed that  in the year 2016-17, an allocation of Rs. 15.00 
crore (BE) was done in anticipation to build/strengthen the research capacity of State 
Institute of Rural Developments (SIRDs) and Panchayati Raj Training Institutions. 
However, the Committee are not convinced with the reasoning given by the Ministry and 
observe that the actual utilization was at only Rs. 1.38 crore in the year      2016-17. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should be more prudent in 
making their budget estimates and utilize the funds allocated fully and judiciously. The 
Committee also hope with regard to non-completion of research studies, the Ministry 
would keep a vigilant eye and ensure that the research studies are completed and 
made use for better implementation of various schemes of Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
The Committee also strongly feel that the Ministry showed frame policies based on 

17 
 
actual position at the ground level and should ensure delivery of basic services to the 
rural masses.  
Reply of the Government 
"Under the scheme of “Action Research & Research Studies (AR&RS)”, the 
allocation was reduced to Rs. 2.50 crore at R.E. stage keeping in view the 
committed liability under the scheme. This amount of Rs. 2.50 crore was utilized 
completely.  
 The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee to expedite the various 
studies being undertaken by the Ministry are noted. The matter is being pursued 
with the various research institutes to get the on- going studies completed 
expeditiously for sharing the findings with the States and other stakeholders. 
 To make the scheme more result oriented, a parallel exercise has also 
been undertaken to identify the new themes for launching the Action Research & 
Research Studies during the current financial year to meet the emerging 
requirements. 
 In the current year Rs. 4.00 crore has been allocated for the purpose and 
it is planned to utilize the entire allocated funds." 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/1/2017-Parl  dated 14 June,  2017] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
 The Committee note that under the scheme the Ministry incentivizes best 
performing Panchayats through awards and also documents their best practices starting 
in 2011-12 and these this initiatives have been continued under RGPSA and from the 
year 2016-17 the scheme has been revamped and  proposed to be a part of RGSA. The 
allocation under BE for 2016-17 was at  Rs. 38.00 crore, RE was at Rs. 33.00 crore and 
BE for 2017-18 is at Rs. 34.00 crore. The actual expenditure under this scheme upto 
03.02.2017 has been Rs. 29.03 crore. The Committee desire that substantial funds has 
been allocated to the scheme are optimally and fully utilized for giving boost to the best 
performing Panchayats and also to encourage Panchayats to improve their functioning 
to get the awards being given under this scheme. The Committee hope that Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj would be fair and consistent in choosing the best performing 
Panchayats in the Country and the awarding of the Panchayats should be highlighted in 

18 
 
Media specially among the rural masses so that more and more Panchayats are 
encouraged to give their best in their functioning. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 " Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) is making conscious efforts towards 
strengthening of Panchayats and motivating them through awards wherein due 
recognition is given to the best performing Panchayats and States/UTs of the 
country. This way, this Ministry has taken a holistic approach towards creating an 
overall system of good governance by which deserving Panchayats and 
States/UTs gets recognition while setting a model for others to follow. The best 
performing Panchayats are thus awarded on 24th of April every year on the 
occasion of National Panchayati Raj Day (NPRD).  
 
 Detailed Questionnaires for Awards have been developed by MoPR by 
utilizing various criteria/indicators to measure accountability system and 
transparent functioning of Panchayats. The nomination of Panchayats for awards 
is done by assessing and evaluating the information provided by the Panchayats 
on the basis of detailed marking scheme at various levels like Block Level 
Committee, District Level Committee, State Panchayat Performance Appraisal 
Committee and State Field Verification Teams. The nominations from States/UTs 
are invited online to reduce the time in the overall process. 
 
 Field verification of nominated Panchayats is also conducted through 
independent agencies (National Level Field Verification Agencies) engaged for 
this purpose by MoPR which are entrusted to validate the Panchayats nominated 
by the State Government/UT Administration for awards. A National Screening 
Committee for Panchayat Awards constituted in MoPR makes final selection of 
Panchayats for awards. 
 
 The entire RE 2016-17 allocation of Rs.33.00 crore under the 
Incentivization of Panchayats scheme has been utilized. The award money 
released for the awardee Panchayats is to be utilized for public purposes 
especially livelihood support, assets creation, civic amenities creation & 
maintenance and bridging the gaps in the funds received from Union/State 
Governments for various projects. The money so released is monitored through 
utilization certificates received from the concerned State Governments/UT 
Administrations. 
 
 This year NPRD was held on 24th April, 2017 at Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh. 
This was widely publicized at national level and well attended by the 
representatives from various Panchayats across the country apart from the ones 
selected for the Panchayat Awards. The celebration of the occasion was aimed to 
highlight the important role of Panchayats in overall governance and 
development. A total of 209 Panchayats across 25 States were awarded under 
various categories of Panchayat Awards. A wide coverage of the event including 

19 
 
the awards was done by the Media so that the Panchayats are made aware about 
the awards given by the Ministry."  
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/1/2017-Parl  dated 14 June,  2017] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
 
 The Committee observed that e-Panchayat is one of the Mission Mode Projects 
(MMP) under Digital India Programme. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj further informed 
the Committee that under the programme, a suite of core common software applications 
has been developed to address various aspects of Panchayat functioning including 
budgeting, planning, accounting, monitoring, social audit and delivery of citizen 
services. The Committee were also informed about the web based application PRIA-
Soft which facilitates the compliance of States with Model Accounting System (MAS) as 
well as it enables the State to financially manage the PRIs in a better manner. However, 
the Committee are very unhappy to note that there is no network connectivity in major 
rural areas of the country. The Committee also note that by mid-next year 1.50 lakh 
Gram Panchayats will be connected digitally. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that Ministry of Panchayati Raj would take effective and expeditious steps 
to increase the connectivity coverage so that the e-Panchayat is enabled in every 
village of every State particularly in the North and Eastern States of the country. 
Reply of the Government 
"In order to expedite the rollout of e-Panchayat, the availability of broadband 
connectivity at Panchayat level is a pre-requisite and the Department of 
Telecommunications(DoT) is in the process of modifying the implementation 
strategy of BharatNet to expedite the rollout of BharatNet to connect all the Gram 
Panchayats in the country (including North-East) by March, 2019. MoPR is 
regularly pursuing this matter with DoT." 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/1/2017-Parl  dated 14 June,  2017] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that Capacity Building Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan 
(CBPSA) will focus on capacity building of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) for 
convergent action to deliver basic services and achievement of development goals. The 
Committee further note that comprehensive efforts will be made to support and enhance 
the capacity building and training facilities for all stakeholders with particular thrust on 
the aspect of Gram Panchayat development Programme. The Committee also note that 
an enhanced BE for the year 2017-18 of Rs. 691.90  crore has been allocated for this 
scheme. Further, as regards plan being envisaged by the Ministry for utilization of the 
enhanced allocation, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj emphasised that additional thrust 
would be placed on training support of Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP), 
training infrastructure etc. However, the Committee are disappointed to note that there 
is severe lack of trained manpower in Panchayats and the training and awareness 
programme are not bearing desirable results. The Committee also note that the Elected 
Representatives(ERs) are not aware of their rights and privileges and this becomes a 
major hurdle in effective delivery of citizen services through PRIs. The Committee are 
also not satisfied with the reply given by Ministry of Panchayati Raj with regard to 
various steps being taken by them to impart training programme to the PRIs. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Ministry of Panchayati Raj should take 
steps for effective capacity building of PRIs in the country specially in the poor and 
backward regions of the country. The Committee also hope that Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj would make judicious and full utilization of the enhanced budgetary allocation of Rs. 
691.90 crore in the current financial year and train maximum number of PRIs in the 
country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 "The restructuring of the scheme as RGSA is currently underway and the 
Committee under the Chairmanship of the Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog has 
recently submitted its recommendations. The Committee was entrusted with the 
task of making the capacity building programme for PRIs more comprehensive 
and responsive in a manner that adequate trained manpower would be available 
and ERs are duly made aware of their rights and duties for effective delivery of 
citizen services through PRIs.  It is expected that this will lead to more effective 
training programmes to attain the desired results.  

21 
 
 
 The concept of GPDP would also be accordingly aligned with activities of 
capacity building and training. The issue of trained manpower will be taken care 
of appropriately, and in this regard National Institute of Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR) Hyderabad is being involved in a substantial and 
comprehensive manner, for assisting in the field, for creating a pool of master 
trainers for ensuring effective capacity building and training of PRIs. Judicious 
and full utilisation of the available budgetary provisions of this Scheme in a 
targeted and effective manner is the goal of this Ministry. 
 All out efforts are sincerely being made by the Ministry for expeditious and 
full utilization of Rs. 691.90 crore for capacity building of Panchayats in different 
parts of the country. Every month CEC meetings are being held and states are 
being encouraged to submit comprehensive annual action plan in accordance 
with scheme."       
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/1/2017-Parl  dated 14 June,  2017] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
 The Committee note that a scheme for providing ATM services in Panchayat 
Bhawans which was being conceptualized during 2016-17 will now be taken up in the 
year 2017-18 as a sub-scheme under the RGSA scheme of Ministry of Panchayati Raj, 
for which an inter-ministerial Committee has already been constituted. The allocated 
fund under BE for the year 2017-18 is Rs. 10.00 crore. The Committee therefore, hope 
that this year the conceptualization of ATM services will be finalized and the amount 
allocated will also be utilized unlike last financial year. The Committee were also 
informed that no special provision is made in the budget for allocation of funds 
specifically for Construction and Repair of Gram Panchayat Bhawans. In this context, 
the Committee were further informed that based on the proposals submitted by the 
States, funds are allocated to the States by the Ministry out of the available budget. The 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj also submitted that States such as Andhra Pradesh, 
Telegana etc. are utilizing of MGNREGA for construction of Gram Panchayats Bhawans 
(GPB) and that there is no need for depending on one financial source only for the 
purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
alongwith Ministry of Rural Development can create a convergence plan with related 
schemes so that there is no hurdle in construction of Gram Panchayat Bhawans (GPB). 
The Committee also feel that Gram Panchayat Bhawans play a very important role in 
delivering various services to the citizens specially under Digital India Programme. The 
Committee also hope that Ministry of Panchayati Raj would make all out efforts and 
impress upon the States to work out time table for expeditious construction of GPBs 
across overall in country. 
Reply of the Government 

22 
 
"A pilot of the ‘ATM services in Panchayat Bhawans’ is planned to be undertaken 
once the same is approved under restructured RGSA, which is under process for 
formulation. 
 
 As regards the issue of construction of Gram Panchayat buildings, it is 
stated that as per information available with this Ministry there are around 48000 
Gram Panchayats which do not have buildings. With a view to mitigate this 
problem, the Panchayati Raj Departments of States have been requested for 
issuing appropriate instructions to the concerned authorities of PRIs at all levels 
for construction of buildings at Gram Panchayat level utilizing inter alia the funds 
available under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme (MGNREGS). The guidelines of that scheme under Chapter 7, para 
7.1.3 of the existing scheme provide for funds for construction of Gram 
Panchayat buildings. Ministry’s letter to States No. K-11022/2/2017-CB dated 
2nd May, 2017 for convergence with other schemes like MGNRES is enclosed 
as Annexure."      
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/1/2017-Parl  dated 14 June,  2017] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 1) 
 
 The Committee observed that Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) is a 
newly restructured scheme and finalization of scheme is still pending. The Committee 
have been informed by Ministry of Panchayati Raj that it has been decided to continue 
the financial assistance to States for capacity building and training activities of PRIs and 
funds to the sum of Rs. 544 crore (approx.) have so far been released to 22 States (as 
on 2/01/2017). Under this scheme there are 4 components namely (i) Mission mode 
project in e-panchayats (ii) Incentivization of Pachayats (iii) ATM services in Panchayat 
Bhawans and  (iv) Capacity Building Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (PSA) with 
allocation of BE for the year 2017-18 of Rs. 17.00 crore, Rs. 34.00 crore, Rs. 10.00 
crore and Rs. 691.90 crore respectively. The Committee feel that restructuring process 
of RGSA should be completed within a specific time-frame. In this regard the Committee 
were also informed that proposed RGSA restructuring is being done to address the 
current challenges faced by the rural local bodies and increased flow of funds to Gram 
Panchayats particularly through FFC. Also, the committee constituted under 
Chairmanship of Vice-Chairman of NITI Aayog will finalise the report in a month and 
half. The Committee, therefore, hope that the committee so constituted will be able to 
complete the report within the specific time frame and the Ministry will restructure RGSA 
as soon as possible for its effective implementation on the grounds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
"It is stated that during the year 2016-17 against the RE provisions of Rs. 
592.95 crore, funds were utilised to the tune of Rs. 592.94 crore. Out of 
this, funds to the tune of Rs. 586.42 crore were released to 25 States and 
one Union Territory under the scheme. As already submitted above in 
response to Recommendation No. 3 of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Finance has permitted this Ministry to utilize the funds under BE 2017-18 
for this scheme for activities related to Capacity building and training and 
some other components as indicated in the above mentioned response to 
Recommendation No. 3. The Committee has submitted its report on 26th 

26 
 
May, 2017. Formulation of restructured scheme is under process. Efforts 
will be made by this Ministry to obtain the approval of the scheme at the 
earliest."  
[O.M. No. H-11013/1/2017-Parl  dated 14 June,  2017] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                              DR.  P. VENUGOPAL 
28 December, 2017                                  Chairperson, 
07 Pausha, 1939 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Rural Development   

27 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2017-2018) 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY,   
07 DECEMBER, 2017 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room. 'B,' 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
Dr. P. Venugopal  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
2. Shri Sisir Adhikari 
3. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
5. Shrimati Mausam Noor 
6. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
7. Smt. Renuka Butta 
8. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
9. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
10. Shri Ajay Misra (Teni) 
11. Shri Chintaman Wanaga 
 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
13. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo 
14. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
15. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
16. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri. Shilpi Chatterjee  - Director 
2. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) 
1. Shri Prasant Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Alka Upadhyaya - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi - Joint Secretary 
Government of Meghalaya 
 
1.  Shri  Y. Tsering  -  Chief Secretary  
2.  Smt. I.R. Sangma  - Secretary 
 

28 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee to the 
sitting convened to consider and adopt two draft Reports viz. XXX  XXX XXX XXX  
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 34th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2017-18)' of the Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj  XXX     XXX      XXX       XXX. 
3. The Committee took up for consideration two draft Reports and after 
deliberations adopted the same without any modifications. The Committee also 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the reports and present the same to Parliament.   
 
 
 
4.    XXX     XXX      XXX       XXX  XXX     XXX      XXX        
 
5. XXX     XXX      XXX       XXX  XXX     XXX      XXX        
 
6.  XXX     XXX      XXX       XXX  XXX     XXX      XXX        
 
7. XXX     XXX      XXX       XXX  XXX     XXX       XXX  
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Report. 
 
  

29 
 
APPENDIX – II 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2017-18) OF THE MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations:     10 
       
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted     
  by the Government :  
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 
         
Total:          09 
Percentage:                   90 %      
      
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies : NIL      
            
Total:          00 
Percentage:                     0 %    
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of    
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee :   
      
Serial No. NIL 
 
Total:          0 
Percentage:                   0 %         
   
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the  
  Government are still awaited : 6       
  
Total:          01 
Percentage:                  10 %       
 
  
 
 