 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                    (2014-2015) 
 
          
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
          
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Third Report (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
12 

TWELFTH REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 (2014-2015) 
 
              
       (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Third Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 August, 2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 August, 2015 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 


CRD No. 109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
© 2015 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha ( Fifteenth 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-2015) ......................................   (ii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................   (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................  1  
  
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................   9 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply .............................................................................   18 
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee .....................................................   20 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited .....    22 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on     
10 August, 2015 ……………………………………  24 
 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the  
recommendations contained in the Third Report of the  
Committee (16th Lok Sabha)......................................... 25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(2014-2015) 
 
          Dr. P. Venugopal  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri Kirti Azad 
4. Shri Harish Chandra Chavan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Manshankar Ninama 
8. Shrimati Mausam Noor 
9. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey 
10. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
11. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
12. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
13. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
14. Shrimati Butta Renuka  
15. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
16. Shri Naramalli Sivaprasad  
17. Shri Balka Suman 
18. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
19. Shri Ajay Misra Teni 
20. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
21. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Munquad Ali 
23. Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi 
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay@ 
25. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
26. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
27. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev** 
28. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho$ 
29. Shri A. K. Selvaraj 
30. Shrimati Kanak Lata Singh 
31. Shri Ashwani Kumar# 
 ____________________________________________________________________ 
  * Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 07.10.2014. 
  @  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 13.05.2015. 
  ** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 25.09.2014 vice Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya. 
 $ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.11.2014 vice Shri Jairam Ramesh 
 # Nominated w.e.f. 16. 07.2015 
(ii) 

 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R. C. Tiwari   - Director 
3. Smt. B. Visala    - Additional Director 
4. Shri Ravi Kant Prasad Sinha  - Committee Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2014 -2015) 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the 
Twelfth Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in  
the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2014 -15) (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  
2.  The Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on                           
19 December, 2014. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in 
the Report were received on 11 March, 2015. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 10 August, 2015. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Third Report of the Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        DR. P. VENUGOPAL 
10 August, 2015               Chairperson, 
        19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (201 4-15) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-15) 
of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
 
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 19 December, 2014 and was 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date.  The Report contained 17 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of al l the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government.  These have been 
examined and categorised as follows: - 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 11 and 14. 
Total:07 
Chapter-II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
Serial Nos.6, 7 and 17.  
Total: 03 
Chapter-III 
(iii)  Observation/Recommendation in respect of which r eplies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Serial No. 8, 9, 10, 12 and 15. 
Total:05 
Chapter-IV  
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Serial No.13 and 16 
Total:02 
Chapter-V 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of recommendations for 
which only interim replies have been given by the Government included in 
Chapter V of this Report and replies to recommendations made in the Chapter  - I 
of this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Proper evaluation of works of Panchayats 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.9) 
6. With regard to  evaluation of work  of Panchayats, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee further observe that the major items of expenditure under the 
scheme are the positioning of personnel at th e gram panchayat level for the 
administrative and technical support to States, the construction and repair of 
gram panchayat bhavans, the support for creation of new training infrastructure 
and human resources for training etc.  As informed to the Committe e,  with the 
launching of Swachch Bharat Abhiyaan (SBA) targeted to continue presently till 
2019, there would be a plethora of activities related to this for being undertaken 
that would necessitate increased funds for construction of toilet equipped Gram  
Panchayat Ghars besides providing financial assistance to the States for 
engaging technical and administrative staff in Panchayats.  According to the 
Ministry, all these factor would progressively accelerate the demand for 
budgetary provisions.  The Committee observe that staff is to be recruited by the 
State Governments as per their own recruitment rules, norms and procedures.  
However, sanctions are issued by the Ministry to the States with supporting 
grants.  The Ministry issued sanction for 55753 account ants and data entry 
operators in 2013-14.  The Committee are of the opinion that adequate technical 
and administrative manpower is the pre -requisite for timely and successful 
completion of all the activities under RGPSA and therefore, the Ministry being the 
nodal body must regularly obtain from the States the requisite data about their 
requirement and accordingly issue quick sanctions for recruitment and 
deployment of adequate staff.  The Ministry should also ensure that adequate 
number of technical personn el is engaged by the States to professionally 
manage the projects. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should thoroughly examine the functioning and administration of Panchayats 
throughout the country, their requirements of funds and tech nical and 
administrative manpower and their remunerations, progress of the various 
activities under the scheme with a view to have proper evaluation of the different 
works under the scheme and to provide them adequate support within the 
mandate of RGPSA scheme.”   
   

3 
 
 
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under : 
 
“The Ministry has positively responded to the Annual Plan proposals of 
concerned States for providing them the administrative and technical staff as per 
the guidelines of the schem e of RGPSA and provided the financial assistance to 
the States with the approval of the CEC of RGPSA. Financial assistance for 
positioning 148032 personnel including 10817 technical staff at block 
level/cluster of Gram Panchayat has been sanctioned.  The p rogress about the 
recruitment/deployment of staff etc. is being monitored.  The implementation of 
the scheme and other activities undertaken by the States have been got 
assessed through teams deputed in field.  An online Management Information 
System (MIS)  was developed for RGPSA which included monitoring of the 
training sanctioned and conducted.   The performance of the State for utilisation 
of funds and undertaking the activities was also gone into at the regional review 
meetings taken with the Secretarie s/Representatives of States.  For providing in 
depth technical expertise for capacity building and training, a meeting was also 
held with the representatives of SIRDs and States for ensuring extensive and 
intensive exchange of views and formulating an effe ctive strategy for ensuring 
meaningful and effective utilisation of funds provided for the capacity building and 
training of Elected Representative and functionaries of Panchayats. With a view 
the have an intensive capacity of Panchayats on sanitation the Ministry has set a 
National Resource Group (NRG) to train the State teams who will lead the 
process of capacity building of Panchayat in the States. A regional workshop to 
orient State teams for building the capacities of Panchayats on sanitation has 
been held in February 2015.  An MIS was developed for the Panchayat 
Sashaktikaran Puraskar which captures the performance matrices in respect of 
functioning of panchayat, functioning of standing committees, functioning of gram 
sabhas, financial management and budgeting, planning and implementation  and 
sectoral interventions. This has been customised by States to suit their contexts. 
It has provision for online entry by the panchayat and would enable the States to 
identify and monitor „on watch‟ panchayats where performance is below par.” 
  
8. The Committee during examination of Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj for the year 2014 -15 had observed that Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat 
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) was aimed at strengthening the Panchayati Raj 
system across the country by  providing administrative and technical support to 
States, construction and repair of Gram Panchayat Bhawans, creation of new 
training infrastructure, positioning of adequate personnel at Gram Panchayat 
level etc.  For the purpose of providing all these supports to the States , sufficient 
data base about the working and the re quirements of Panchayats throughout the 
country is needed.  The Committee had therefore recommended the Ministry to 
thoroughly examine the functioning and administration of Panchayats throughout 

4 
 
the country, their requirements of funds and technical and administrative 
manpower and their remunerations, progress of the various activities under the 
scheme with a view to have proper evaluation of the different  works under the 
scheme and to provide them adequate support within the mandate of RGPSA 
scheme.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry has stated about the various  
measures taken by them with regard to the implementation of scheme of RGPSA.  
The Minis try have, however, not indicated as to whether they have started the 
requisite examination of the functioning of the Panchayats as had been 
recommended by the Committee.   The Committee, therefore, re iterate their 
recommendation for thorough study of the fu nctioning of Panchayats throughout 
the country so that effective planning could be made by the Department in future 
in this regard. 
 
B. Regular Panchayat elections – establishing Central Panchayat Election 
Commission and providing adequate manpower to Panchayats 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.10) 
9. With regard to regular Panchayat elections and providing adequate manpower to 
Panchayats, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee was informed that one of the essential conditions for accessing 
any funds under RGPSA is to conduct regular elections of panchayats local 
bodies in non -Part IX areas under the superintendence and control of the State 
Election Commission.  The Committee desire that elections of Panchayat/local 
bodies should be  held regularly by the States in due time in fair and transparent 
manner. The Committee also desire that the feasibility of having an independent 
body like a Central Panchayat Election Commission for conducting the 
Panchayat Elections in the States in free  and fair manner may be explored.  The 
Committee also observe that Panchayat Secretary is a crucial functionary for 
running the Panchayat administration and therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the positions of the Panchayat Secretaries in the Panchayats 
should not be kept vacant and effort should be made to fill the vacant positions 
immediately.  The different positions in the Panchayat functionaries should also 
be given a fixed tenure to give stability and continuity in the functioning.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under : 
 
“Article 243K of the Indian Constitution mandates that the superintendence , 
direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, 
all elections to the Panchaya ts shall be vested in a State Election Commission 
consisting of a State Election Commissioner to be appointed by the Governor. 
The election to the Panchayats are held under the supervision of the State 
Election Commission of the concerned States/UTs as per  the provisions of 
relevant Statutes/Acts.  As per information available with this Ministry, the 
elections to the Panchayats across the country are generally being held.  The 
Constitutional provisions in this regard have to be followed. 
As regards the issu e of providing Panchayat Secretary to every Panchayat, this 
is undertaken by the State Governments. However, given the importance of 
providing appropriate manpower at the Gram Panchayat level, under the RGPSA 
provides administrative and technical staff at the Gram Panchayat level as per 
the annual plans prepared by the States.   An advisory has been issued to 
States/UTs for providing a requisite staff to each Gram Panchayat.   
 The staff sanctioned so far under RGPSA are as under: 
(i) Accountant/Data Entry Operator  -  110048 
(ii) Panchayat Sahayak/Panchayat Development Officer (PDO)  - 26291 
(iii) Junior Engineers -  10817 
(iv) Others  -  876” 
  
11. Taking into account the need for regular elections of Panchayats  
throughout the country , the Committee had recommended the Govern ment to 
explore the feasibility of  having an independent body like a Central Panchayat 
Election Commission for conducting the Panchayat elections in the States in free 
and fair manner.   Further, in view of the crucial role of Panchayat Secretary in 
running the Panchayat institution, t he Committee had also recommended  not to 
keep such positions vacant and fill them immediately.  In their action taken reply, 
the Ministry has merely informed to the Committee the fact that elections of 
Panchayats are conducted  by State Election Commission  under Article 243 K of 
the Constitution of India .  The Committee while advising the Government for 
exploring the possibility of an independent election body for Panchayats was well 
aware of the Constitutional provisions and the  idea was to explore as to whether 
any better alternate mechanism could be put in place.  The Ministry has, however, 
not taken the recommendation of the Committee in right perspective.  The 
Committee therefore express  their displeasure over such casual repl y of the 
Ministry to an  important recommendation of the Committee. The Committee 
reiterate their recommendation that the feasibility of having an independent body 
like a Central Panchayat Election Commission for conducting the Panchayat 

6 
 
elections in the States in free and fair manner must be explored by the Ministry in 
consultation with all concerned incl uding Ministry of Law & Justice and apprise 
the Committee of the steps taken  in this regard within three months ’ time.  The 
Committee would also like the Ministry to ensure that States deploy requisite staff 
including Panchayat Secretary to all Panchayats in a time -bound manner 
preferably within next three months. 
 
C. Constitution of District Planning Committees (DPCs) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.11) 
12. With regard to  constitution of District Planning Committees (DPCs), the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
“Under RGPSA, one of the conditions required to be fulfilled by the States for 
accessing any fund is the constitution of District Plann ing Committees(DPCs) in 
all districts and issuing of guidelines/rules to make them functional.  With regard 
to the constitution of the DPCs, the Committee feel that if the MPs and MLAs are 
included in the DPCs, it will bring in the system the better planni ng, coordination 
and supervision of the concerned districts and if required, suitable provisions in 
this regard may be made in the guidelines for such inclusion.  The Committee 
therefore, recommend that provision should be made for inclusion of MPs and 
MLAs in the constitution of the District Planning Committees for better functioning 
of these committees.” 
 
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under : 
 
“The Constitution contains provisions regarding the formation and membership of 
District Planning Committees (DPCs). Article 243ZD  provides that the 
Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the 
composition of the District Planning Committees (DPCs) and the manner in which 
the seats in such Committees shall be fille d. Not less than four fifths of the 
members are to be from amongst the elected members of the Panchayat at the 
district level and of the Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio 
between the population in the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district.” 
 
14. The Committee during examination of the subject had observed that if MPs 
and MLAs are included in the DPCs , it would bring in the system the better 
planning, coordination and supervision of the concerned Districts and, therefore,  
the Committee had recommended that provision should be made for inclusion of 
MPs and MLAs in the constitution of DPCs and if necessary, suitable provisions 

7 
 
in this regard should be made in the guidelines for such inclusion.  In the action 
taken reply, the Ministry has simply mentioned the provisions of the Constitution 
of India.  The Committee are not happy with this routine type of submission by 
the Ministry as no step has been taken by the Department to explore as to how 
the recommendations of the Commit tee could be translated into action.   The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire the Ministry to 
examine the issue from all perspectives to implement the recommendation of the 
Committee. 
 
 
D. Working of E-Panchayats 
 
 Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.13) 
15.  With regard to the working of e-Panchayats, the Committee had recommended 
as under:- 
"The Committee note that e-Panchayat has been identified as one of the Mission 
Mode Projects under National e-governance programme. This project is aimed at 
supporting all the State Governments for enabling Panchayats to make effective 
use of Information Technology (IT) in the process of planning at grass roots level, 
bring out transparency in the working of the PRIs and also help in in creased 
accountability of these institutions.  As informed to the Committee, 10 common 
core applications had been developed for use by the States/UTs.  Further, 12506 
computers were procured at the gram Panchayat level in 10 States.  The 
Committee are of t he view that computerization of the working of Gram 
Panchayats and provision of internet connectivity are pre -requisites for achieving 
the objectives of e -panchayat. The Committee however feel that power shortage 
in rural areas is a major constraint in mak ing the working of e -panchayat 
successful.  Due to power shortage, the Panchayats are not even to able to 
regularly update their data on the website much less to use the system for 
effective administration.  The Committee therefore recommend that the Minis try 
should play a pro -active role in making the e -Panchayat system a success by 
providing all necessary infrastructure to PRIs.  The Ministry should also explore 
on priority basis the alternate means of power supply including use of Solar 
energy for running the offices of Panchayats in all the States/UTs to make them a 
vibrant, productive, responsible and accountable institutions."  
 
16. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
 
"Under RGPSA, the Ministry provided financial assistance  to States for procuring 
computers for Gram Panchayats.  So far, financial assistance has been provided 
to States / UTs for procurement of 51,271 computers since operationalistion of 
the scheme. Under RGPSA, the Ministry also provided funds for repairs of 
Panchayat buildings, which includes provision of electricity connections." 
 

8 
 
17. Noting that shortage of power  in rural areas  was a major  constraint in 
making the working of e-panchayat successful, the Committee had recommended 
the Ministry to play a pro-active role in making the e-Panchayat system a success 
by providing all necessary infrastructure to PRIs and also to explore on priority 
basis alternative means of power supply including use of solar power  for running 
the offices of Panchayats in all the States/UTs to make them a vibrant, productive, 
responsible and accountable institutions . The Committee are dismayed to note 
that the Ministry has not paid any heed to the ir recommendation as nothing has 
been mentioned in this regard in the action taken reply of the Government . The 
Committee therefore strongly reiterate their recommendation  and desire the 
Ministry to initiate steps in this regard and apprise the Committee abou t the 
action taken within a period of three months.  
 
E. Media and Publicity 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.16) 
18.  With regard to media and publicity, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee was informed that „Media and Publicity‟ scheme is a Central 
Sector Plan Scheme approved in 2007 -08 with the objective of dissemination of 
information through the print and electronic media regarding PRIs and their role 
and responsibility in various Government schemes.  The Scheme is funded 
100% by the Govt. of India.  The Committee note that against the allocation of 
Rs. 15 crore in 2013-14, Rs. 14.42 crore had been utilized and the allocation for 
the year 2014-15 has been increased to Rs. 20 crore which is about Rs. 5 crores 
more than the allocation made for last financial year 2013 -14. The Committee 
feel that awareness amon g people is pre -requisite for successful functioning of 
programmes meant for general public and therefore, local people need to be 
made aware of various programmes, schemes and the mandate of Panchayati 
Raj Institutions to enable them to get full advantage  of the system.  The 
Committee therefore recommend that the allocation for the current year 2014 -15 
would be fully and optimally utilized for creating awareness amongst the rural 
population all over the country through means the electronic and print media at 
national and local levels regarding the various schemes and programmes being 
implemented by the Government." 
 
19. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"Under the Media and Publicity Scheme in 2014 -15, several training films as well 
as films on best performing Panchayats have been commissioned. There has 
however, been a cut of Rs. 10 crores at the RE stage. Further, as there is 
pressing demand from States under RGPSA, the funds under the scheme have 

9 
 
been reduced further. In vie w of the aforesaid position, funds to the tune of 
Rs.4.40 crore are being reappropriated from Media & Publicity Scheme to 
RGPSA during the current fiscal year 2014 –15. Several training films to assist 
States in capacity building have been sanctioned and ar e being improved on. 
The process of finalising Rashtriya Gaurav Gram Sabha Puraskar (National 
Award) is on . Besides, c omprehensive mass awareness generation campaign 
was carried out during the famous Palkhi Sohala –2014 in Maharashtra, and this 
Ministry‟s t ableau on the theme “Model Gram Panchayat” was exhibited in the 
Republic Day Parade–2015."    
20. During examination of Demands for Grants (2014 -15), the Committee had 
observed that awareness among people is pre -requisite for successful 
functioning of prog rammes meant for general public and therefore, local people 
need to be made aware of various programmes, schemes and the mandate of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions to enable them to get full advantage of the system.  
The Committee  had, therefore, stressed for full and optimum utilization of  the  
budgetary allocations for creating awareness amongst the rural population all 
over the country through means  of the electronic and print media at national and 
local levels regarding the various schemes and programmes be ing implemented 
by the Government.  The Committee observe from the action taken reply of the 
Ministry that  contrary to the recommendation of the Committee, not only there 
has been  a cut of Rs.10 crore at RE stage but also there had been                             
re-appropriation of Rs.4.40 crore from media and publicity scheme.  The 
Committee express serious displeasure over the callous attitude of the Ministry in 
this regard and strongly reiterate their recommendations to give full focus on 
wider publicity of all schemes and programmes of Panchayati Raj Institutions 
throughout the country through print and electronic media. 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATION WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.2) 
 The Ministry of P anchayati Raj came into existence on 27 th May, 2004.  The 
vision of the Ministry is to make Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) an effective, efficient 
and transparent vehicle for local governance, social change and public service delivery 
mechanism for mee ting the aspirations of the local population.  The Committee note 
that the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (Demand No. 71) were 
presented to Lok Sabha on 17 July, 2014.  Under Demand No. 71, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj has been allo cated a sum of Rs. 7000.70 crore for the financial year 
2014-15 with Plan component of Rs. 7000 crore and Non -Plan component of Rs. 0.70 
crore. The Committee observe that the allocated outlay for the financial year 2014 -15  is 
Rs. 200 crore less than the b udgetary allocation of the previous year viz 2013 -14 but it 
is Rs. 3500 crore higher than  R.E of the previous financial year.  Taking into account 
the magnitude of the various programmes of the Ministry, the Committee are 
constrained to note that the allo cation of funds of Rs. 7000 crore for the financial year 
2014-15 does not appear to be adequate for effective implementation of the various 
projects  and also for achieving the desired level of progress in these projects during the 
current fiscal. Since th e budgetary allocations for the year 2014 -15 are on the lower 
side,  the Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should pursue 
with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for considering higher budgetary 
allocations of funds for  these schemes at RE stage so that non -availability of funds 
could not be a hindrance in effective implementation of the various schemes of the 
Ministry which are meant for strengthening the Panchayati Raj Institutions in the entire 
country. The Committee hope that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 7000 crore and any 
additional allocation which could be made for the Ministry during the current fiscal will 
be fully utilized by them in implementation of various schemes and programmes 
launched for strengthening the Panchayati Raj Institutions all over the country.  
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 Keeping in view the position of unspent balances and liquidation of Utilization 
Certificates, the Ministry of Finance was requested for providing Rs.7000.70 at RE 
stage. However, an amount of Rs. 3400.00 crore was provided at RE stage for 2014-15  
which was almost fully utilized. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
 
 

11 
 
  
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.3) 
 The committee note that the total allocated outla y for the Twelfth Five Year Plan 
(2012-17) is Rs. 40853 crore. The Committee are dismayed to observe that the funds 
allocated to the  Ministry at BE stage had been substantially reduced at RE stage during 
the first two years of the Twelfth Five Year Plan p eriod.  To the surprise of the 
Committee, the allocation for Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF) Scheme which is 
very essential for development of backward regions of the country, was substantially 
reduced from Rs.6500 crore at BE stage to Rs.2800 crore at R E stage during the year 
2013-14.  Such reduction must have impacted adversely the progress of the works 
under this Scheme.  The Committee are not convinced with the reasons for such 
reduction being the lack of capacities of the States in timely submission/ non submission 
of plan proposals and the discrepancies in the requisite documents.  The Committee 
feel that the Ministry, in such situations, could have taken a pro -active role in 
persuading the States for timely submission of the proposals which could hav e averted 
such huge reduction in the allocation of funds for such an important Scheme.  The 
Committee further observe that the allocation for BRGF Scheme for the current financial 
year is Rs. 5900 crore and as such only an amount of Rs.1100 crore is left f or the other 
schemes one of them being Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyaan (RGPSA) 
which will definitely be affected due to less availability of funds during the year.  This 
aspect needs immediate attention of the Ministry. The Committee re -emphasise the 
need for speedy development of rural areas and to achieve the desired result, adequate 
allocation of funds under different schemes is required.    The Committee also expect 
the Ministry to make earnest efforts for optimum utilization of the budget ary allocations 
by strengthening the capacities of the States and also by regular monitoring of the flow 
of funds on different projects during the year.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 For both BRGF and RGPSA, States were advised to submit proposals at the 
earliest. In the first month of April itself, all the States were advised by this Ministry, to 
submit proposals for BRGF and RGPSA, as early as possible and within June 2014 for 
expeditious sanctions.  
 For optimum utilization of the budgetary allocations for  BRGF and RGPSA, the 
Ministry continued to vigorously pursue matters through  numerous interactions at various 
levels with elected representatives, programme managers, State   personnel,  SIRDs etc.  
To speed up the submission of proposals, and implementat ion of the programmes, 
regional workshops were organized in four States viz., Hyderabad on 28 th May 2014, 
Guwahati on 29th May 2014, Pune on 30th May 2014 and New Delhi on 27th May 2014.  A 
meeting was held on 24 th November 2014 in New Delhi to review the status of 
BRGF/RGPSA with the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of the various State 
Governments which was chaired by Secretary, Panchayati Raj. In January and February 
2015, regional review meetings were held again.  
 Comprehensive Advisories/ D.O letters were also issued to the States from time to 
time for ensuring expeditious implementation and effective utilization of BRGF funds.   
 The RE 2014-15 allocation for BRGF stands reduced to Rs. 2837 crore. Out of this 
Rs. 2819.26 crore has been released and t he proposal(s) for release of the remaining 
amount are in the pipeline. (position as on 28.2.2015).  

12 
 
 
 For RGPSA, the budgetary provision of Rs. 1050.00 crore provided in 2014 -15 
was reduced to Rs. 527.00 crore at RE stage. The expenditure under RGPSA as o n 
28.2.15 is Rs 494.64 Cr which is 93.86% of the RE. 
 Regarding the steep cuts at the RE stage, the Hon‟ble Minister Panchayati Raj 
wrote to Hon‟ble Finance Minister on 05.12.2014 for providing an additional provision of 
Rs. 2200.00 crore for BRGF and an a dditional amount of Rs. 375.00 crore  for the 
scheme of RGPSA for the remaining period of financial year of 2014-15.   
 It may be noted that both BRGF and RGPSA have been transferred to the States 
for 2015-16. There is no allocation for BRGF, while there i s a small allocation of Rs. 60 
crores for National activities under RGPSA.  
    [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.4) 
 The Committee note that the total allocated outlay for the Twelfth five Year Plan 
(2012-17) is Rs. 40853 crore.  However, the Committee while observing the trend in 
reduction of outlay at RE stages and the expenditure being even less than the REs 
during the first two years of the Twelfth Five Year plan viz 2012 -13 and 2013 -14, are 
apprehensive about the full utilization of the total funds earmarked in Twelfth Five Year 
Plan in the remaining years of the Plan period.  Admittedly, the utilization of the 
budgetary allocations depend on timely submission of the plans by the States/UTs and 
effective implementation of the projects by them.  Unfortunately, some States have 
been found wanting in this regard.  The Committee are of the view that to overcome this 
hurdle, earnest efforts are needed to be made to strengthen the capacities of the 
Panchayati Raj institutions by providing them all the necessary support and guidance on 
regular basis.  The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry should develop a 
mechanism for providing the States/UTs all the required support and guidance not only 
for timely submission of plan proposals by them but also for their effective 
implementation in these States/UTs.  The Committee hope that the Ministry will pursue 
vigorously with all the States/UTs for ensuring consistent flow of expenditure throughout 
the year on various projects being executed by them with the allocated funds for the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan and also for achieving the targets fixed for the Plan period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry had renewed its efforts to obtain plans on time fo r 2015 -16. The 
Minister of Panchayati Raj on 21 st November, 2014 has written to the State Chief 
Ministers for submission of the BRGF Annual Plans for the next financial year at the 
beginning of the financial year itself to enable early release of funds and  availability of 
adequate time with the Implementing Entities for their utilization (Copy at Annex -I). Prior 
to this Secretary, Panchayati Raj has written to Chief Secretaries of all States on this 
issue on 10 th November, 2014. The various review meetings taken to speed up 
implementation of the schemes have been mentioned above.  
 In addition, for speedier processing and release of funds under BRGF, with effect 
from this financial year (2014 -15), proposals are being processed in e -office in the 
Ministry. Further, an online software Application has been developed and is being rolled 
out to facilitate online receipt of proposals, efficient processing and timely release of 
funds to States. In addition to the steps indicated in reply to Recommendation Sl. No. 2 

13 
 
above, support and guidance through various means, as indicated below, is provided to 
the States for timely submission of plan proposals and effective implementation of the 
BRGF Programme :  
 
(i) PlanPlus: To facilitate preparation of inclusive and participati ve decentralized 
plan, Ministry has conceptualised “PlanPlus” - one of the software applications 
under the e-Panchayat MMP.  
(ii) National Asset Directory: MoPR has been propagating the use of National Asset 
Directory (NAD), another  software applications under  the e -Panchayat MMP, 
amongst the States. The NAD Application acts as a repository of various assets 
created/controlled/maintained by Panchayats/ULBs/Line Departments.  
(iii) ActionSoft: This is another e -Panchayat MMP Application which works in 
collaboration with PlanPlus and captures the work execution flow, facilitates 
decentralized reporting of progress of work execution, converges and keeps 
track of the flow of funds from different sources during implementation, 
converges the rural and urban plan units  to report the physical and financial 
progress of works and brings about total transparency in the reporting of physical 
and financial progress.  
(iv) Integrated District Plans : The Ministry is promoting integrated district planning in 
the States/UTs. Dur ing 2014 -15, this effort would be piloted in two districts in 
each of the States/UTs. A national workshop was organised in Gujarat in 
September, 2014, which served to provide a platform to the States/UTs for 
sharing experiences and best practices in distri ct planning and formulating 
roadmap for integrated district planning. 
(v) Modal Accounting System: The Panchayats have been advised to adopt the 
Model Accounting System through maintenance of Eight Formats devised in 
consultation with the C&AG. Further, to ena ble display of Panchayat‟s 
expenditure details in public domain, States are advised to use  PRIASoft  an 
application under the e-Panchayat MMP. 
(vi) Voluntary disclosure: The States have been advised that the Annual Action 
Plan is to be discussed /ratified in t he Gram Sabha and Voluntary disclosure of 
activities undertaken under BRGF Programme  is to be made before the Gram 
Sabha. 
(vii) Progress Report:  States are to submit physical and financial progress report of 
the works done under BRGF during each financial year.  
(viii) Board Display:  Boards  are to be displayed at work sites indicating name of the 
schemes and source of funds of the said work. 
(ix) Audit Report:  Regular physical and financial audit of the works under the 
scheme needs to be carried out at the end of each f inancial year, in each district. 
The audit is to be done either by Local Fund Auditors or by Chartered 
Accountants listed in the panel of the State Govt. or AGs of the State. 
(x) Social Audit:  Verification through Social Audit is to be done by Gram or Ward 
Sabhas in rural areas and Area Sabhas and Ward Committees in urban areas.  
(xi) Review committee at District level: At the district level a Review Committee, 
constituted by the District Planning Committee needs to examine the peer review 
reports prepared by Panchayats. 
(xii) Technical Support Institutions (TSIs): Institutions having expertise in technical 
and developmental issues have been empanelled as TSIs by the Ministry to help 
the States in preparation of District Perspective Plans/ Annual Plans. 

14 
 
 
 
 Under RGPSA, th e Ministry has taken many steps, including those included 
below to assist States for strengthening of PRIs and effective implementation of the 
scheme: 
 
(i) The National Capability Framework 2014 was prepared after extensive 
consultation with States to provide a framework for States to expand the 
outreach of the training of Elected Representatives and Panchayat 
functionaries and to improve its quality.  
(ii) To support States in their capacity building efforts, Handbooks/Manuals 
for training of PRIs have been develop ed and shared with State 
Governments on the subjects of Sanitation, Drinking Water and 
Governance in Panchayats. These are to be translated and modified by 
States as per their need.  
(iii) An advisory was issued to States on integration of activities under RGPSA  
with those to be undertaken under the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan.  For this 
purpose Action Plan for Sanitation prepared by this Ministry targeting 
strengthening governance capabilities of PRIs for the Abhiyan has also 
been shared with States.  
(iv) In order to have  an intensive capacity of Panchayats on sanitation the 
Ministry has set up a National Resource Group (NRG) to train the State 
teams who will lead the process of capacity building of Panchayat in the 
States.  An orientation programme for northeastern states  for building the 
capacities of Panchayats for sanitation was held at Guwhati in Februrary 
2015.  
(v) A two -day conference on Capacity Building & Training was held with 
States and SIRDs with a view to understanding and discussing the issues 
on preparedness of SIRDs for conduct of training, training strategies, 
sharing training methodologies.   
 
 An online Management Information System (MIS) was developed for RGPSA 
which included monitoring of the trainings sanctioned and conducted. 
     [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.5) 
 The Committee observe from the information submitted by the Ministry that the 
unspent balances as on 31.03.2014 had been to the extent of Rs.5580.267 crore and 
the status of outstanding u tilization certificate on the same date had been to the extent 
of Rs. 729.947 crore.  Out of total unspent balances of Rs.5580.267 crore, Rs.4798.67 
crore unspent balance was under Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF) Scheme alone 
which reflects a very poor s tate of affairs in the areas of development of backward 
regions in the country.  The Committee observe that while there is an urgent need for 
development of backward regions on priority basis, the accumulation of unspent 
balances over the years on this imp ortant scheme sends an alarming signal indicating 
the apathy of the functionaries in spending the allocated funds in the past.  The 
Committee, therefore, while expressing their concern over non -utilization of funds in 
different schemes particularly under B RGF, hope that at least from now onwards, the 
Ministry will tighten all its processes and also issue suitable advisories to the project 

15 
 
implementation authorities to ensure full utilization of funds during the financial year.  
The non -submission of utiliza tion certificates by the respective States/UTs is also a 
matter of serious concern for the Committee as further processes are often held up for 
want of such certificates.  The Committee, therefore, desire that all the functionaries 
concerned with the utili zation of funds and implementation of projects should be 
regularly advised for timely submission of utilization certificates. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BRGF is a process oriented and demand driven programme. Unspent balance is 
reflected as the States are u sually reporting expenditure against the previous releases 
only at the time of furnishing proposals for next release. The releases made in a 
particular financial year are also included in the unspent balances since the Utilization 
Certificates for the same  become due in the next financial year only although 
expenditure would have been incurred. The Ministry in its regular follow -ups/ review 
meetings with the States is emphasising upon timely submission of utilization 
certificates. This aspect was also highl ighted in the letter written by Minister of 
Panchayati Raj on 21 st November, 2014 to the State Chief Ministers (Annex -I). 
Moreover, during the regional review meetings and national review meetings (details in 
reply to Recommendation Sl. No. 3 above), the m atter of unspent balances are 
reviewed and States are advised to reduce the unspent balances. 
     [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.6) 
 The Committee observe that the Backward Regions Grant Fund(BRGF)  scheme 
is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme which is funded 100% by the Government of India.  
The aim of the scheme is to focus developmental programmes for backward areas with 
a view to accelerate development and to reduce regional imbalances.  The Committee 
was informed that BRGF scheme is implemented in 272 selected backward districts in 
various States. The Committee note that out of the total allocation of Rs.29306 crore for 
BRGF scheme for the Twelfth Plan, the allocation at BE stage for the years 2012 -13 
and 2013 -14 were Rs.5050 crore and Rs.6500 crore respectively which was 
subsequently reduced at RE stage to Rs.3734 crore and Rs. 2800 crore in the year 
2012-13 and 2013-14.  The failure of the States in timely submission of Plans and lack 
of capacity are stated to be the main reasons for such reduction at RE stage.  The 
Committee are not convinced with such routine explanations of the Ministry on such an 
important issue.  Since the scheme is 100% financed by the Government of India, it was 
imperative on the part of the Ministry to get all the works of the scheme executed timely 
by optimum utilization of the allocated funds during the year by devising a suitable 
mechanism for regular monitoring with the States.  The BRGF is a project exclusively 
meant for th e development of the backward regions of the country.  The Committee 
strongly feel that the Ministry should have taken due and proper care to ensure that the 
States being the implementing agencies are not found lagging behind in execution of 
the works which are fully funded by the Govt. of India.  The Committee are of the strong 
view that the Backward Districts require a lot of assistance in terms of funds and 
capacity building under the BRGF scheme and therefore, the Ministry cannot absolve 
itself from the responsibility simply by releasing of funds to the States and thereafter just 
waiting for the non-utilization thereof at the end of the year.  The Committee feel that all 
the implementing agencies need to be fully equipped with the requisite capacity and 

16 
 
skills for planning of the projects and execution thereof.  The Committee therefore 
recommend that rigorous efforts should be made by the Ministry to effectively assist the 
Districts and States in building up their capacities to do proper ground work at th e grass 
root level and to frame proper plans in time for optimum utilization of funds.  To meet 
this objective, the Ministry should ensure that the trained administrative and technical 
manpower are provided in adequate number for capacity building so that the scheme is 
effectively implemented for development of the backward areas. The Committee also 
recommend that regional training centres may be set up to enable all the stakeholders 
in the Panchayati Raj system and concerned officials to get proper and ade quate 
training to perform their functions effectively and efficiently. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Funds under the BRGF Programme are untied in nature and provide financial 
resources for supplementing and converging existing development inflows into identified 
districts and bridging the critical gaps in local infrastructure and other development 
requirements that are not being adequately met through other sources of funding.  Each 
Local Body (LB), i.e. Panchayat or Municipality, within the backward district c oncerned 
is the unit for planning under the BRGF Programme. Plans prepared by each LB are 
consolidated into the District Plan and approved by the District Planning Committee 
(DPC), constituted in accordance with Article 243ZD of the Constitution. 
 MoPR‟s N ational Capacity Building Framework 2014 (NCBF -2014) envisages 
strengthening of institutional arrangements, including the infrastructure as well as 
extending software support for capacity building of Elected Representatives, Panchayat 
functionaries and oth er stakeholders of Panchayats/Municipalities. This framework is 
being implemented by the States (Panchayati Raj being a State subject). Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj provides financial assistance under the Capacity Building (CB) 
component of the BRGF Programm e to the States as per the Annual Action Plans 
received from them.  
  BRGF guidelines provide for utilisation of five percent of the development grant 
allocated to the district towards provision of adequate functionaries for the Panchayats 
for planning and  implementation. The various efforts of the Ministry to strengthen 
Panchayat level planning have been stated above. In addition, the Ministry organized a 
National level workshop on Integrated District Planning on 25 -26 September 2014 at 
Gujarat for officials of States and Districts.  
 Development of infrastructure for capacity building and training is also one 
activity permissible under the scheme of RGPSA. Support for faculty is also provided for 
establishing resource centres at the State and district levels. The scheme was launched 
in full swing with effect from 2013 -14.  So far financial assistance has been provided by 
States/UTs for establishing 22 State Panchayat Resource Centres, 188 District 
Panchayat Resource Centres and 869 Block Panchayat Resource Centres. 
     [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.12) 
9.  The Committee in aforesaid para of the Report had recommended as under: 
 
 "The Committee note that incentivisation of States/UTs is a compo nent of 
RGPSA scheme to encourage States to empower Panchayati Raj Institutions  
adequately and to put in place the concept of accountability.  The Committee was 
informed that the system of Panchayat assessment has to take into account the 
State specific s ituation. As informed, on the basis of the model indicators, 
questionnaire and marking scheme developed by Ministry of Panchayati Raj, 
States will devise their own context specific version.  The Committee was also 
informed that during 2013-14, 22 States participated to select the best performing 
Panchayats and an amount of Rs.37.80 crore was released as incentive grant to 
194 best performing Panchayats in these States.  The Committee desire that 
effective measures should be taken by the Ministry to assist a nd encourage all 
the States to participate in the scheme to empower the PRIs." 
 
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
 
 "The Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR), in collaboration with State 
Governments, has framed parameters to analyse the functioning of Panchayati 
Raj Institutions (PRIs). The best practices followed in some of these award 
winning PRIs have also been documented. The online application for entries has 
been brought into operation to increase the number of Panchayat s brought into 
the evaluation process and to increase the transparency of assessment. 15 
states have used the online application for entry and scrutiny. In the current year 
the State of Manipur has additionally joined the PSP for identifying the best 
performing Panchayats of the State." 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.15) 
 The Committee note that with regard to dealing with the complaints of corruption 
at Gram Panchayat level, an online Management Information System (MIS) has been 
developed which is currently undergoing trials and will enable monitoring of the specific 
deliverables including utilization of funds.  The Committee feel that a lot is needed to be 
done to have a clean, fair, transparent, accountable and powerful PRIs in the country. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the matter regarding devolution of functions, 
funds and functionaries to the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) should be seriously 
taken up and vigorously pursued with the States for strengthening the Panchayati raj  
institutions.  The Committee also recommend that there should be an effective 
mechanism for complaint processing, grievance redressal, initiation of stringent 
measures for prevention of corruption, regular uploading of information on website with 
a view t o ensuring accountability in the functioning and fixation of responsibility on the 
functionaries.   
Reply of the Government 
 
There are two MIS which have been developed under RGPSA – one to track 
performance under the State Plans and the other to provide a  performance assessment 
format which can be contextualized by the States to be used both for identification of 

18 
 
best performing Panchayats as well as on watch Panchayats. The online application for 
entries has been brought into operation to increase the num ber of panchayats brought 
into the evaluation process and to increase the transparency of assessment.  
 Complaints with regard to misuse of power by Panchayats etc., are referred to 
the State Governments since the decision making authority in respect of th e functioning 
of Panchayati Raj vests with the concerned State Government as per the Constitution. 
Under Sansad Adrash Gram Yojna (SAGY), States have been requested to develop 
panchayat level Citizens‟ Charters and grievance redressal mechanisms and to 
capacitate the Panchayats on the same. 
 Furthermore, under e-Panchayat, a suite of Core Common Software Applications 
has been developed to address various aspects of Panchayats‟ functioning including 
planning, budgeting, implementation, accounting, monitoring , social audit and delivery 
of citizen services like issue of certificates, licences, etc. Ministry has also provided a 
Central Helpdesk for logging, tracking and addressing day -to-day queries/issues related 
to the accounting and planning applications namely PRIASoft & PlanPlus. The helpdesk 
operates 7 days a week (Monday - Sunday), from 8:00 am - 8:00 pm (12 hours) and is 
available through the Toll Free Number - 1800117200.  The helpdesk has currently 
been operationalized in four languages - English, Hindi,  Marathi and Tamil. Going 
forward, the Ministry plans to provide support for all PES Applications in other regional 
languages too. 
     [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 

19 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2. 7) 
 The Committee note that restructuring of the BRGF programme seeks to address 
intra-district inequalities to ensure that backward sub -districts units within the States 
receive adequate financial support.  The Ministry prepared a draft EFC memorandum 
for restructuring of the District component of the BRGF programme and circulated to 
Planning Commission, Department of Expenditure and the Ministry of Rural 
Development for comments.  The comments received are under examination and 
certain observations from the Department of expenditure are to be addressed.  The 
Committee also note that implementation of BRGF in eight States of the country was 
evaluated by a World Bank mission and the State Governments were requested to take 
necessary corrective action.  The Committee desire that the observations of Department 
of Expenditure regarding the proposed restructuring of BRGF programme should be 
addressed without any delay, and conveyed to the  D/o Expenditure after obtaining the 
necessary approval so that the proposed restructuring of BRGF programme is 
expedited to ensure that backward sub-districts units within the States receive adequate 
financial support.  The Committee also expect that nece ssary follow up action will be 
taken by all concerned with regard to the report of the World Bank on evaluation of 
BRGF programme. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The proposal on the restructuring of district component of BRGF Programme was 
revised in view of the  comments received from the D/o Expenditure. The 
recommendations contained in the Report of the World Bank were examined in the 
Ministry and the actions taken by MoPR were as under: 
(a) The allocation of district component under BRGF was enhanced from Rs.21623  
crores (actual expenditure) under the 11 th Five Year Plan (2007 -12) to 
Rs.29,306.00 crores (outlay) under the 12th  Five Year Plan (2012-17). 
(b) To ensure strong targeting of funds towards the vulnerable areas and groups, 
particularly the SCs/STs, allocation criteria was revised with effect from 2011 -12, 
whereby the funds were released to the State Governments separately for the 
Special Component Plan for Scheduled Caste (SCPSC) and Scheduled Tribe 
Sub Plan (STSP). 
(c) To ensure sufficient fund availability, requ irement of minimum spending was 
reduced from 70% to 60% for claiming of 2nd instalment by the districts. 
 However, from 2015-16, the scheme has been transferred to States and there is 
no allocation at the Central level.  
   [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.8) 
 The Committee observe that the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan 
(RGPSA) aims to strengthen the Panchayati Raj system across the country.  The 
activities under RGPSA scheme incl ude administrative and technical support, 
construction and repair of Gram Panchayat buildings, capacity building and training, e -
enablement of Panchayats, Panchayat processes for Panchayat with inadequate 
resource base etc.  The Committee note that budgeta ry allocation of Rs.50 crore was 
made for the scheme during the year 2012 -13 and the Ministry incurred expenditure of 
Rs.42.92 crore.  According to the Ministry, the implementation of the scheme came in 
full swing from the financial year 2013 -14 for which a budgetary allocation of Rs.655 
crore was made and against that the Ministry incurred the actual expenditure of 
Rs.629.58 crore.  The Committee was informed that the Planning Commission had 
provided budgetary support of Rs.6437 crore for the Twelfth Five Year plan for the 
scheme which has subsequently been increased to Rs.11270 crore.  The Committee 
note that during the first three years of 12 th Plan, budgetary allocations of Rs. 1755 
crore have been made which is approximately 16% of the total budgetary s upport of 
Rs.11270 crore for the Plan period.  Going by the trend of budgetary allocations and 
expenditure, the Committee express their serious apprehension about the full utilization 
of the balance funds of Rs. 9515 crore in the remaining two years‟ perio d of the 12 th 
Plan. The Committee, therefore, desire that the various programmes under RGPSA be 
redesigned in such a manner that the allocations for the scheme in 12 th Plan period are 
fully utilized. The Committee expect that with the redesigning of the ac tivities by the  
Ministry, budgetary support for the Twelfth Five Year plan will be fully and optimally 
utilized by the implementing agencies for the various activities under RGPSA which will 
strengthen the Panchayati Raj Institutions across the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Since operationalization of RGPSA, Annual plans to the tune of a total of Rs. 
3485.55 crore have been sanctioned to the States/UTs. The scheme involves multi -
dimensional activities such as positioning of administrative and technical  manpower, 
construction of infrastructures such as Gram Panchayat Bhawans, institutional structure 
for training viz. State Panchayat Resource Centres (SPRCs), District Panchayats 
Resource Centres (DPRCs) and Block Panchayat Resource Centres (BPRCs) etc. 
These activities require clearances of the competent authorities, availability of lands and 
proper processes have to be followed. Due to Parliamentary elections during 2014, the 
activities slowed down. However, from the progress report received from differen t 
States and the follow up in review meetings, it is learnt that the activities have been 
picking up. 
 However, during the year 2014 -15, the BE 2014 -15 of Rs. 1055.00 crore for the 
scheme was reduced to Rs. 527.00 crore at RE stage.  Taking into considerat ion the 
fact that the activities under the scheme would be picking up in the subsequent years 
and also in the wake of launching of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, this Ministry had sought 

21 
 
Plan at allocation of Rs. 1550.00 crore for the year 2015 -16.  However, the scheme has 
now been transferred to the States to be taken up with their own resources.  
[O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.18) 
 
 The Committee during examination of the Demands for Grants have observed 
that there is no proper system of conducting physical verification and monitoring of 
actual infrastructure work executed and also to monitor the utilization of funds.  
Although the Ministry has been holding review meetings and video conferences to 
monitor utilization, the Committee do not find the system very effective to bring the 
desired results. The Committee desire that the monitoring system should be 
strengthened and a mechanism should be developed for ensuring transparency and 
accountability and fixat ion of responsibility in case of delay or non implementation of 
projects. The Committee have also observed that non -submission of plans or slow pace 
of expenditure had been the major reasons for non -utilization of allocated funds by the 
States. The Committ ee are of the opinion that it happens due to absence of nodal 
officers of the Government at different levels of implementation of programmes.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that with a view to have a constant 
monitoring over the flow of expe nditure and implementation of various projects and 
schemes, Nodal Officers should be appointed by the Central Government at different 
levels for not only conducting concurrent physical verification of the status of 
implementation of various programmes but also to keep a close watch over the 
utilization of funds by the States.  Such nodal officer should be mandated to have 
effective coordination with the State Governments and to directly report all the 
developments to the Central Government so that timely re medial/corrective measures 
could be taken. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 All possible measures have been/are being taken for monitoring the status of 
expenditure, physical achievements, utilization of funds etc. with regard to the 
implementation of the Minist ries schemes.  The progress of implementation of the 
schemes has been closely looked into and in depth discussions with officers of the 
State Government have been held by the officers of Ministry at review meeting. Within 
the Ministry, coordination of spec ific States Annual Plans and related matters has been 
entrusted to the specific Divisional Heads handling the different schemes. Additional 
Secretary, MoPR is the Mission Leader (i.e. Nodal Officer) for the implementation of e -
Panchayat MMP.  Further, the Ministry had formulated a scheme for engaging National 
Level Monitors (NLM‟s) for BRGF and RGPSA.  However, the same would need to be 
restructured given the budget cuts in 2015 -16. Furthermore, as per the Union Budget 
proposals for 2015-16, e-Panchayat will now be taken up under Digital India programme 
of DeitY. 
 [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 

22 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.9) 
 
  The Committee further observe that the major items of expenditure under the 
scheme are the positioning of personnel at the gram panchayat level for the 
administrative and technical support to States, the construction and repair of gram 
panchayat bhavans, the support for creation of new training infrastructure and human 
resources for training etc.  As informed to the Committee,  with the launching of 
Swachch Bharat Abhiyaan (SBA) targeted to continue presently till 2019, there would be 
a plethora o f activities related to this for being undertaken that would necessitate 
increased funds for construction of toilet equipped Gram  Panchayat Ghars besides 
providing financial assistance to the States for engaging technical and administrative 
staff in Pancha yats.  According to the Ministry, all these factor would progressively 
accelerate the demand for budgetary provisions.  The Committee observe that staff is to 
be recruited by the State Governments as per their own recruitment rules, norms and 
procedures.  However, sanctions are issued by the Ministry to the States with 
supporting grants.  The Ministry issued sanction for 55753 accountants and data entry 
operators in 2013 -14.  The Committee are of the opinion that adequate technical and 
administrative manpower is the pre -requisite for timely and successful completion of all 
the activities under RGPSA and therefore, the Ministry being the nodal body must 
regularly obtain from the States the requisite data about their requirement and 
accordingly issue quick san ctions for recruitment and deployment of adequate staff.  
The Ministry should also ensure that adequate number of technical personnel is 
engaged by the States to professionally manage the projects. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry shou ld thoroughly examine the functioning and 
administration of Panchayats throughout the country, their requirements of funds and 
technical and administrative manpower and their remunerations, progress of the various 
activities under the scheme with a view to  have proper evaluation of the different works 
under the scheme and to provide them adequate support within the mandate of RGPSA 
scheme.   
Reply of the Government 
  
  The Ministry has positively responded to the Annual Plan proposals of concerned 
States for providing them the administrative and technical staff as per the guidelines of 
the scheme of RGPSA and provided the financial assistance to the States with the 
approval of the CEC of RGPSA. Financial assistance for positioning 148032 personnel 
including 10817 technical staff at block level/cluster of Gram Panchayat has been 
sanctioned.  The progress about the recruitment/deployment of staff etc. is being 
monitored.  The implementation of the scheme and other activities undertaken by the 
States have been got assessed through teams deputed in field.  An online Management 
Information System (MIS) was developed for RGPSA which included monitoring of the 
training sanctioned and conducted.   The performance of the State for utilisation of 
funds and undertaking t he activities was also gone into at the regional review meetings 

23 
 
taken with the Secretaries/Representatives of States.  For providing in depth technical 
expertise for capacity building and training, a meeting was also held with the 
representatives of SIRDs  and States for ensuring extensive and intensive exchange of 
views and formulating an effective strategy for ensuring meaningful and effective 
utilisation of funds provided for the capacity building and training of Elected 
Representative and functionaries of Panchayats. With a view the have an intensive 
capacity of Panchayats on sanitation the Ministry has set a National Resource Group 
(NRG) to train the State teams who will lead the process of capacity building of 
Panchayat in the States. A regional worksh op to orient State teams for building the 
capacities of Panchayats on sanitation has been held in February 2015.  
 An MIS was developed for the Panchayat Sashaktikaran Puraskar which 
captures the performance matrices in respect of functioning of panchayat,  functioning of 
standing committees, functioning of gram sabhas, financial management and budgeting, 
planning and implementation  and sectoral interventions. This has been customised by 
States to suit their contexts. It has provision for online entry by the panchayat and would 
enable the States to identify and monitor „on watch‟ panchayats where performance is 
below par. 
    [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see para 8 in Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.10) 
  The Committee was informed that one of the essential conditions for accessing 
any funds under RGPSA is to conduct regular elections of panchayats local bodies in 
non-Part IX areas under the superintendence and control of the State E lection 
Commission.  The Committee desire that elections of Panchayat/local bodies should be 
held regularly by the States in due time in fair and transparent manner. The Committee 
also desire that the feasibility of having an independent body like a Centra l Panchayat 
Election Commission for conducting the Panchayat Elections in the States in free and 
fair manner may be explored.  The Committee also observe that Panchayat Secretary is 
a crucial functionary for running the Panchayat administration and therefo re, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the positions of the Panchayat Secretaries in the 
Panchayats should not be kept vacant and effort should be made to fill the vacant 
positions immediately.  The different positions in the Panchayat functionaries sho uld 
also be given a fixed tenure to give stability and continuity in the functioning. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Article 243K of the Indian Constitution mandates that the superintendence , 
direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and  the conduct of, all 
elections to the Panchayats shall be vested in a State Election Commission consisting 
of a State Election Commissioner to be appointed by the Governor. The election to the 

24 
 
Panchayats are held under the supervision of the State Election  Commission of the 
concerned States/UTs as per the provisions of relevant Statutes/Acts.  As per 
information available with this Ministry, the elections to the Panchayats across the 
country are generally being held.  The Constitutional provisions in this regard have to be 
followed.  
 As regards the issue of providing Panchayat Secretary to every Panchayat, this 
is undertaken by the State Governments. However, given the importance of providing 
appropriate manpower at the Gram Panchayat level, under the RGPSA  provides 
administrative and technical staff at the Gram Panchayat level as per the annual plans 
prepared by the States.   An advisory has been issued to States/UTs for providing a 
requisite staff to each Gram Panchayat.   
 The staff sanctioned so far under RGPSA are as under: 
 
(i) Accountant/Data Entry Operator  -  110048 
(ii) Panchayat Sahayak/Panchayat Development Officer (PDO)  - 26291 
(iii) Junior Engineers -  10817 
(iv) Others  -  876 
     [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see para 11 in Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.11) 
  
  Under RGPSA, one of the conditions required to be fulfilled by the States for 
accessing any fund is the constitution of District Planning Committees(DPCs) in all 
districts and  issuing of guidelines/rules to make them functional.  With regard to the 
constitution of the DPCs, the Committee feel that if the MPs and MLAs are included in 
the DPCs, it will bring in the system the better planning, coordination and supervision of 
the concerned districts and if required, suitable provisions in this regard may be made in 
the guidelines for such inclusion.  The Committee therefore, recommend that provision 
should be made for inclusion of MPs and MLAs in the constitution of the District 
Planning Committees for better functioning of these committees. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Constitution contains provisions regarding the formation and membership of 
District Planning Committees (DPCs). Article 243ZD  provides that the Legislature of a 
State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the composition of the District 
Planning Committees (DPCs) and the manner in which the seats in such Committees 
shall be filled. Not less than four fifths of the members are to be from amongst the 
elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and of the Municipalities in the 

25 
 
district in proportion to the ratio between the population in the rural areas and of the 
urban areas in the district.  
     [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see para 14 in Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.13) 
 The Committee note that e -Panchayat has been identified as one of the Mission 
Mode Projects under National e -governance programme. This project is aimed at 
supporting all the State Governments for enabling Panchayats to make effective use of 
Information Technology (IT) in the process of planning at grass roots level, bring out 
transparency in the working of the PRIs and also help in increased accountabilit y of 
these institutions.  As informed to the Committee, 10 common core applications had 
been developed for use by the States/UTs.  Further, 12506 computers were procured at 
the gram Panchayat level in 10 States.  The Committee are of the view that 
computerization of the working of Gram Panchayats and provision of internet 
connectivity are pre -requisites for achieving the objectives of e -panchayat. The 
Committee however feel that power shortage in rural areas is a major constraint in 
making the working of e-panchayat successful.  Due to power shortage, the Panchayats 
are not even to able to regularly update their data on the website much less to use the 
system for effective administration.  The Committee therefore recommend that the 
Ministry should play a pro -active role in making the e -Panchayat system a success by 
providing all necessary infrastructure to PRIs.  The Ministry should also explore on 
priority basis the alternate means of power supply including use of Solar energy for 
running the offices of Panc hayats in all the States/UTs to make them a vibrant, 
productive, responsible and accountable institutions.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under RGPSA, the Ministry provided financial assistance to States for procuring 
computers for Gram Panchayats.  So far, fi nancial assistance has been provided to 
States / UTs for procurement of 51,271 computers since operationalistion of the 
scheme. Under RGPSA, the Ministry also provided funds for repairs of Panchayat 
buildings, which includes provision of electricity connections.  
     [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see para 17 in Chapter I) 
 
 
 

26 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.16) 
 The Committee was informed that „Media and Publicity‟ scheme is a Central 
Sector Pl an Scheme approved in 2007 -08 with the objective of dissemination of 
information through the print and electronic media regarding PRIs and their role and 
responsibility in various Government schemes.  The Scheme is funded 100% by the 
Govt. of India.  The C ommittee note that against the allocation of Rs. 15 crore in 2013 -
14, Rs. 14.42 crore had been utilized and the allocation for the year 2014 -15 has been 
increased to Rs. 20 crore which is about Rs. 5 crores more than the allocation made for 
last financial year 2013-14. The Committee feel that awareness among people is pre -
requisite for successful functioning of programmes meant for general public and 
therefore, local people need to be made aware of various programmes, schemes and 
the mandate of Panchayati R aj Institutions to enable them to get full advantage of the 
system.  The Committee therefore recommend that the allocation for the current year 
2014-15 would be fully and optimally utilized for creating awareness amongst the rural 
population all over the country through means the electronic and print media at national 
and local levels regarding the various schemes and programmes being implemented by 
the Government. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Under the Media and Publicity Scheme in 2014 -15, several training f ilms as well 
as films on best performing Panchayats have been commissioned. There has however, 
been a cut of Rs. 10 crores at the RE stage. Further, as there is pressing demand from 
States under RGPSA, the funds under the scheme have been reduced further. In view 
of the aforesaid position, funds to the tune of Rs.4.40 crore are being reappropriated 
from Media & Publicity Scheme to RGPSA during the current fiscal year 2014 –15. 
Several training films to assist States in capacity building have been sanctioned and are 
being improved on. The process of finalising Rashtriya Gaurav Gram Sabha Puraskar 
(National Award) is on. Besides, comprehensive mass awareness generation campaign 
was carried out during the famous Palkhi Sohala –2014 in Maharashtra, and this 
Ministry‟s tableau on the theme “Model Gram Panchayat” was exhibited in the Republic 
Day Parade–2015.    
     [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see para 20 in Chapter I) 
 

27 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES  
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.14) 
 The Committee note that States are encouraged to empower Panchayats.  
Performance of States is measured through a devolution index prepared by an 
independent national level agency.  As informed, t he Gram Sabhas have also not been 
able to function effectively as an institution providing basis forum for people‟s 
participation, transparency and accountability. The States have not effectively done the 
devolutions of 3Fs (Functions, Finances and Functionaries) at the three tiers of different 
levels and as a result, the Panchayats could not be strengthened. The Committee note 
that while 2 studies on strengthening of Panchayats are completed, 01 study to assess  
the actual status of devolution to the PRIs is in progress.  While re -emphasising the 
necessity of effective devolution of 3Fs for making the PRIs successful and meaningful, 
the Committee desire that the study reports on strengthening of Panchayats may be  
studied and necessary measures may be taken for strengthening of PRIs. The study 
under process to assess the actual devolution of powers to PRIs may also be 
expedited.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
  MoPR has assessed the extent of devolution of powers and  authority to PRIs by 
States through an independent study, which ranked States on a Panchayat Devolution 
Index (PDI). Study for 2013 -14 was conducted by the Indian Institute of Public 
Administration (IIPA). States were ranked on the cumulative as well as i ncremental PDI 
in this study. The study for 2013 -14 has been published and  is available in the website 
of MoPR.  For 2014 -15 the devolution study has been entrusted to Tata Institute of 
social Sciences, Mumbai. The objectives are to  
 
 Assess actual outcom e of activity mapping covering transfer of functions , 
institutions, functionaries and finances to PRIs 
 
 Look into the implementation of major Centrally sponsored Schemes 
 
 Look into the segregation of functions across various tiers of panchayati raj 
 
 Arrive at indicative ranking on the status of devolution based on field studies. 
  
 The performance of States in respect of devolution to each tier will also be 
assessed. Once the study is completed the web based application that has been 
developed will be made available for sharing information on the Status of devolution.  

28 
 
 Besides this, under the scheme of RGPSA the progress of the States on 
identified performance parameters pertaining to devolution, policy framework, 
budgeting, e governance etc is being track ed, for which expert committee reports are 
also received. These have been incorporated into the appraisal process, and the States 
set themselves performance targets. However, with effect from 2015 -16, these plans 
will be directly implemented by the States.  It is expected that they would be taking 
necessary action on the recommendations in their context as necessary. 
     [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.17) 
 The Committee note that the Action Researc h and Research Studies Scheme is 
a central sector plan which is used as a tool for better policy formation.  This Scheme is 
100% financed by the Government of India.  Under the scheme, financial support is 
provided to Academic Institutions/ NGOs/ Research Organisations / Registered 
Societies / Non Profit Organisations /SIRDs having specialized experience in research 
and evaluation in the areas of Panchayati Raj.  The budgetary allocation for this scheme 
for the year 2014 -15 is Rs. 3 crore.  As informed, out  of 4 study projects sanctioned in 
2013-14, only 1 study have been completed and 3 are still underway. The Committee 
observe that the research studies and their findings could be useful only when such 
studies are completed on time.  The Committee, therefor e, recommend that the 
remaining 3 research studies sanctioned during 2013 -14 should be expedited so that 
the findings of the studies could be utilized for in -depth analysis of the issues relating to 
Panchayati Raj Institutions across the country. The Committee also recommend that the 
timelines set for completion of research studies should be strictly adhered to.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Out of the 4 projects sanctioned during the financial year 2013 -14, two study 
projects have already been completed and t he reports have been shared with the 
concerned State Governments, further draft report for the third study project has been 
received and for the fourth country wide study project sanctioned to ten agencies titled 
“To Assess the Actual Status of Devolution to the PRIs”, State Reports have been 
received from the agencies and work on the National Report is underway. 
     [O.M. No.H-11013/1/2015-Parl. dated 18.03.2015] 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;      DR. P. VENUGOPAL, 
10 August, 2015                        Chairperson, 
19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Rural Development 

29 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY,  
THE 10 AUGUST, 2015 
 
 The Committee sat from 1530  hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
                Dr. P. Venugopal      -  Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Kirti Azad 
3. Shri Harish Chandra Chavan 
4. Shri Manshankar Ninama 
5. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
6. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
7. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
8. Smt. Butta Renuka 
9. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
10. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
11. Shri Ajay Misra Teni 
12. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi 
15. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
16. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
17. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
18. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
19. Shri A. K. Selvaraj 
20. Smt. Kanak Lata Singh 
21. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri R.C.Tiwari   -  Director 
 3. Smt. B. Visala   - Additional Director 
 

30 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, 
the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
(i) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(ii) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Third Report on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj; 
 
(iv) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(v) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(vi) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
 
  
3. After detailed discuss ions, the Committee adopted the Reports without any modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Reports and present the same to the 
Parliament.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
--------- 

31 
 
APPENDIX - II 
[Vide  para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD  REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations:     17 
       
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted     
  by the Government :  
  Serial Nos. 1, 2,  3, 4, 5, 11 and 14      
   
Total:          07 
Percentage:         41.17 %
            
III. Recommendations which the Committee do  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies :       
  Serial Nos. 6, 7 and 17         
Total:          03 
  Percentage:         17.64%
     
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of   
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee :         
Serial Nos. 8, 9, 10,12 and 15. 
Total:          05 
Percentage:                  29.41 %
            
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies   
of the Government are still awaited :       
  Serial Nos. 13 and 16 
Total:          02 
Percentage:                  11.76%
       
 
  