STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                    (2014-2015) 
 
          
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
         MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
         (DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Second Report 
Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  (2014-15) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Land Resources). 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
11 

ELEVENTH REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2014-2015) 
 
                
       (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
   (DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Second Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Land Resources). 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 August, 2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 August, 2015 
 
 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 NEW DELHI 
 August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
  


 
CRD No. 108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
© 2015 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-2015) ......................................   (ii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................   (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................   1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................   8 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply .............................................................................   11  
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee .....................................................   12 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited .....    14 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on          
10 August, 2015 ……………………………………………… 17 
 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Second Report of the 
Committee (16th Lok Sabha)............................................. 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i)  

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(2014-2015) 
 
          Dr. P. Venugopal  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri Kirti Azad 
4. Shri Harish Chandra Chavan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Manshankar Ninama 
8. Shrimati Mausam Noor 
9. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey 
10. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
11. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
12. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
13. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
14. Shrimati Butta Renuka  
15. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
16. Shri Naramalli Sivaprasad  
17. Shri Balka Suman 
18. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
19. Shri Ajay Misra Teni 
20. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
21. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Munquad Ali 
23. Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi 
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay@ 
25. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
26. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
27. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev** 
28. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho$ 
29. Shri A. K. Selvaraj 
30. Shrimati Kanak Lata Singh 
31. Shri Ashwani Kumar# 
 ____________________________________________________________________ 
  * Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 07.10.2014. 
  @  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 13.05.2015. 
  ** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 25.09.2014 vice Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya. 
 $ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.11.2014 vice Shri Jairam Ramesh 
 # Nominated w.e.f. 16. 07.2015 
(ii) 

Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R. C. Tiwari   - Director 
3. Smt. B. Visala    - Additional Director 
4. Shri Ravi Kant Prasad Sinha  - Committee Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2014 -
2015) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present the Eleventh Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development (2014-15) (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014 -15) of the 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources).  
2.  The Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 19 
December, 2014. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained 
in the Report were received on 02 July, 2015. 
3. The replies of the Gov ernment were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 10th August, 2015. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Committee (Sixtee nth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         DR. P. VENUGOPAL, 
10 August, 2015               Chairperson, 
            19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (201 4-15) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Second Report ( Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Land Resources). 
 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 19 December, 2014 
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date.  The Report 
contained 10 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government.  These have 
been examined and categorised as follows: - 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 7 and 8. 
Total:5 
Chapter-II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
Serial No. Nil.  
Total: Nil 
Chapter-III 
(iii)  Observation/Recommendation in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Serial No. 2 and 9. 
Total:02 
Chapter-IV  
 
(iv) 
  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. 5, 6 and 10. 
Total:03 
Chapter-V 
 

2 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of recommendations for 
which only interim replies have been given by the Government included in 
Chapter V of this Report and replies to recommendations made in the Chapter  - I 
of this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Appointment of Nodal Officers to ensure Accountability.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.4) 
 
6.  With regard to the unspent balances lying in both the flagship schemes of the 
Department, the Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 “The Committee regret to note huge unspent balan ces lying in both the 
flagship schemes of the Department viz Integrated Watershed Management 
Programme (IWMP) and National Land Records Modernization Programme 
(NLRMP) as on 31 March, 2014. The unspent balances under IWMP stood at Rs. 
2189.98 crore whereas  under NLRMP it is to the tune of 710.7 crore. The 
Committee are apprised various reasons for the unspent balances under IWMP 
which mainly include long project duration of 4 -7 years, delay in setting up of 
State Level Nodal Agencies (SLNAs), delay in selec tion of Watershed 
Development Teams (WDTs), capacity building and preparation of Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) and the enhanced cost norm. Whereas the reasons for the 
unspent balances under NLRMP include difficulties in implementing the 
component pertaining to survey and re-survey, lack of trained manpower with the 
States to use modern survey techniques, shortage of vendors to take up the 
technical activities and engagement of officials of Revenue Administration and 
other officials concerned with the implem entation of the programme to other 
works. Taking into account various steps taken by the Department to fully utilize 
the funds which inter-alia include preparation of month- wise annual plans by the 
States, clearance of proposal by the month of May, quarte rly review meetings, 
Regional review meetings, concurrent third party monitoring and evaluation 
system and better utilization of technology, the Committee, however, are of the 
considered view that without proper system of accountability and responsibility,  
the efforts of the Department would not yield the desired results. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to appoint Nodal Officers at various levels 
in the States to ensure that the funds released by the Central Government are 
fully utilized in a time bound manner so the physical and financial targets are 
met.” 

3 
 
7.  The DoLR in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“IWMP is being implemented through dedicated institutions with multi -disciplinary 
professional support at the State, District and Project levels. At the State level, the State 
Level Nodal Agency (SLNA) is responsible for the overall supervision of the programme. 
The Department is emphasizing on expediting the implementation by utilising allocated 
funds in various fora like Steering Committee meetings, Regional Review Meetings, 
Quarterly Review meetings, Video Conferences and field visits.   
 Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of the State Department of Land Revenue are 
the Nodal Officers for the activities relating to comput erization of land records, setting 
up modern records rooms, digitization of maps etc. The Survey and Settlement 
Commissioners of the States function as the nodal officers to implement the activities 
concerning survey and re -survey of the land. For the acti vities relating to the 
computerization of registration, the Inspector General of Registration or the Pr. 
Secretary in -charge of registration department functions as the Nodal Officer. The 
Department has written to all the State Governments to review implem entation of the of 
the programme at the level of the State Chief Secretaries by convening meetings of the 
State Level Review & Monitoring Committee of  NLRMP. These steps are in addition to 
the regional review meetings convened by the Department and steps taken by the 
department in arranging training for the State functionaries to overcome the problem of 
technology deficit, allowing flexibility to the States in exchange of funds for different 
components as per their requirements. It may be mentioned that th e utilization of funds 
has picked up and its stands at Rs. 442.88 crore as of now." 
 
 
 
8.  Taking note of the huge unspent balances in both the flagship schemes of 
the Department viz Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) and 
National Land Record s Modernisation Programme (NLRMP), t he Committee had 
recommended the DoLR to appoint Nodal Officers at various levels in the states  
so that accountability and responsibility is fixed at each level to get the desired 
results and also to ensure that the fund s released are fully utilised in a time 
bound manner . The action taken reply furnished by the Department has merely 
stated the facts  that State level Nodal agency is responsible for the overall 
supervision of the Integrated Watershed Management Programme ( IWMP). It has 
been further stated that the Survey and S ettlement Commissioners of the States 

4 
 
function as the Nodal Officers to implement the activities concerning survey and 
re-survey of the land, the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of the State 
Department of Land Revenue are the Nodal Off icers for the activities relating to 
computerization of land records, setting up of modern record rooms, digitization 
of maps etc . and  the Inspector General of Registration functions as the Nodal 
Officer for the activiti es relating to computerization of registration.  The 
Committee regret to note that the reply of the Department is silent  about the 
appointment of Nodal Officers at each level to ensure fixation of  accountability 
and responsibility. The Committee  observe tha t de spite having all the nodal 
agencies at State level, the problem of utilization of funds  within the sanction 
period remained unsolved year after year and, therefore, a  strong need is felt to 
have a better and effective monitoring of utilization of funds by the Nodal Officers 
appointed by the Ministry.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation and  expect the Government to implement the same at the 
earliest for achieving the desired results.  
 
 
 
B. Setting up of National Institute of Land and Management (NILAM) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.12) 
 
9.  With regard to the setting up of NILAM for training and capacity building , the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee are apprised that to ensure training, research and 
development in land administration and land information management system, 
the Department proposed to set up a National Institute of Land and Management 
at the Central level. The Committee in their 33 rd , 38th and 48th Reports of 15th Lok 
Sabha, had also urged to expedite setting up of NILAM as it would go a long way 
in capacity building and smooth implementation of the programme. The 
Committee are perturbed to note that the proposal of setting up of NILAM has 
been turned down by the Department of Expenditure and the Department of Land 

5 
 
Resources is now exploring the possibility of setting up of NILAM through PPP 
mode. The Department of Land Resources has not furnished the reasons for 
turning down of the proposal to the Committee. The Committee would therefore, 
like to be apprised of the reasons put forth by the Department of Expenditure for 
turning down the proposal. Since the matter of setting up of NILAM has been 
considerably delayed, the Committee strongly recommend the Department to 
expedite the process of set ting up of NILAM so that trained and skilled man 
powerbase is created for NLRMP. The Committee would also like to be apprised 
of the steps taken by the Department in this regard at the earliest.”  
 
 
 
 
10. The DoLR in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  
 
 “The Department has prepared a draft concept Note for setting up the NILAM 
and is exploring the possibility of its setting up on PPP mode. In the meantime to 
strengthen training infrastructure the Department has sanctioned NLRMP cells for the 
States for training of the State functionaries implementing NLRMP and is also arranging 
training through NIC for the master trainers."  
 
 
 
11.  Recognizing the value of training, research and development in Land 
administration and Land Information Managemen t System, the Committee had 
recommended to expedite the process of setting up of the N ational Institute of 
Land and Management  (NILAM).  The Committee were  earlier informed that t he 
Department of Expenditure had turned down the proposal of the DoLR regarding 
setting up of  NILAM. The Committee had desired the DoLR to inform them the 
reasons given by the Department of Expenditure for turning down the proposal of 
setting up of NILAM. The Committee note that i nstead of informing the reasons, 
the Department has stated that they are exploring the possibility of setting up of 
the NILAM on PPP mode. While appreciating the  initiative of the Department to  
set up the institute  in PPP mode for capacity building, the Committee would also 
like to be apprised of the reason s earlier put forth by the D epartment of 

6 
 
Expenditure for turning down the proposal  and also expect the Department to 
expedite the process of setting up of NILAM so that trained and skilled manpower 
base is created for National Land Records Medernisation Programme (NLRMP). 
 
C. Restructuring of National Land Records Modernisation Programme 
(NLRMP) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para Nos. 2.8 and 2.9) 
 
12. With regard to restructuring and timely completion of NLRMP, the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
 
 "The C ommittee note that the schemes for Computerization of Land Records 
(CLR) and Strengthening of Revenue Administration & updating of Land Records (SRA 
& ULR) were merged into a single scheme in the shape of National Land Records 
Modernization Programme in 20 08-09 with the objective to build an integrated land 
information management with up to date and real time records. The Committee are 
apprised that major components of the NLRMP are computerization of land records 
including mutations, digitization of maps, integration of textual and spatial data, 
survey/re-survey, settlement records including creation of original cadastral records, 
computerization of registration, development of core geospatial information system and 
capacity building. The Committee are appr ised that the target of NLRMP was proposed 
to cover all the Districts of the country by the end of Twelfth Five Year Plan i.e. by the 
end of2017. The committee, however express their dissatisfaction over slow and tardy 
pace of implementation of the programme as only 449 districts of the country have been 
partially covered and remaining 218 Districts are yet to be covered. 
 
 The Committee are further apprised that survey and re -survey is a major 
component of the programme which is lagging behind in many Stat es due to the 
apprehension that legal disputes may arise out of survey/ re-survey. The Committee are 
also apprised of various measures taken in this regard viz revising rates of survey, re -
survey and digitizing of Field measurement Books (FMBs) on demands of the States. 
The Committee also note that to deal with the technology related difficulties faced by the 
States, training has been arranged at different national institutes, such as National 
Remote Sensing Center, Survey of India and National informatics Center. The 
Committee note with satisfaction that States like Gujarat, Haryana, Bihar, Odisha, 
Madhya Pradesh, etc have initiated steps to implement the work of survey and re -
survey in their respective States. During evidence, the Secretary, DoLR also info rmed 
that to address the component of survey and resurvey, the scheme is being restructured 
on a large scale. The Committee would like the Department to expedite finalization of 
the restructured scheme at the earliest to give a fillip to the pace of implem entation of 
NLRMP." 
 
 

7 
 
13. The DoLR in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 "At the time of inception of the programme in 2008 an amount of Rs. 5656 crores 
was approved for the total programme out of which Rs. 3098 crores was envisaged as 
the Central Share. In the 12th Five Year Plan only Rs. 1000 crores was allocated. Till the 
end of 2014 -15 a total amount ofRs. 1131.07 crores has been released to the States. 
The implementation of programme is facing a number of challenges like low priority to 
the land revenue and survey and settlement departments, the lack of trained manpower 
to implement high technology components. In the face of all these constraints under 
provisioning of resources will affect the pace of implementation of the programme and 
the programme is likely to spill over beyond 12th Plan.   
The Department has constituted a working group to revamp the programme. The 
Department will finalise the restructured programme on the recommendations of the 
working group."   
 
 
 
14. During examination of the Demands for Grants of the Department of Land 
Resources for the y ear 2014 -15, the Committee had expressed their 
dissatisfaction over slow and tardy pace  of implementation of the  National Land 
Records Modernization Programme (NLRMP)  as only 449 dis tricts of the country 
had been partially covered and the remaining 218 districts were yet to be covered.  
As per the target of NLRMP, all the districts of the country are to be covered by 
the end of Twelfth Five Year Plan i.e. by 2017.  Taking into account  the 
Department’s proposal for restructuring the scheme on a large scale, the 
Committee had recommended the Department to expedite finalization of 
restructured scheme at the earliest to give a fillip to the pace of implementation of 
NLRMP.  In their action  taken reply , the Department  have stated tha t the 
constraints like low priority accorded to the programme by the States and lack of 
trained manpower would affect the timely completion of the programme  which is 
likely to spill over beyond Twelfth Five Year Plan. To address these issues , the 
Department have constituted a working group to revamp the programme  and the 
restructured programme will be finalized on the recommendation of this group . 
The Committee ur ge the Department to  persuade the working group to submit 
their recommendations at the earliest so that restructuring of the programme 
could be finalized to achieve the objectives of NLRMP. 
 

8 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATION WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.3) 
 The Committee while scrutinizing the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) of the 
Department find that there has been a sharp decline of about 34.95 percent in the 
allocation, during current fiscal 2014 -15 as compared to the previous one. The Plan 
Budgetary Estim ate which stood at Rs. 5765 crore during 2013 -14 was slashed to 
Rs.3750 crore during current fiscal. The Committee also note that during the year 2013 -
14 a cut of Rs. 3265 crore i.e. about 56.63 percent of the BE was imposed on the 
Department at the Revise d Estimate (RE) stage. The Committee are apprised that 
reason for sharp decline in allocation at RE stage is high unspent balances lying with 
the States due to slow pace of expenditure. The Committee disagree with the view of 
the Department that the reduce d allocation during 2014 -15 will not drastically hamper 
the set targets. The Committee while stressing the need for timely utilization of allocated 
funds to avoid any cut at RE stage strongly recommend the Department to sincerely put 
indefatigable efforts in co -ordination with the State Governments to fully absorb the 
allocated funds so that cut at RE is not made and physical targets are achieved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As recommended by the Committee, the Department has been making sincere 
efforts for coordination with the States for better utilisation of the allocated funds under 
IWMP in a time bound manner. The unspent balance as on 1.4.2014 was Rs.2189.98 
crore. Against the total available funds of Rs. 4728.46 crore during 2014 -15 (unspent 
balance as on 1.4.2014 plus releases made during 2014 -15 (as on 28.2.2015)  Rs. 
3167.11 crore have been utilised which is 67% of the available funds. The unspent 
balance as on 1.4.2015 is Rs. 1561.35 crore which is 28% less than the previous year. 
 The Department has  held Regional Review Meetings with the States, organized 
workshop on 16 February, 2015 on best practices of the States in implementing the 
NLRMP, and addressed letters to the Chief Secretaries of the States to hold the 
States/UTs level monitoring and revi ew committee meeting for regular review of the 
progress of the programme. The RE for NLRMP during 2014 -15 was finalized by the 
Ministry of Finance at Rs. 181 crores. The cut at RE stage was imposed despite the fact 
that the Department had achieved an expen diture level of 57% by the end of 30 th 
September 2014. The expenditure up to 30.09.2014 i.e. the end of the first half of 2014 -
15 was Rs.143.38 crores out of the total BE allocation of Rs.250 crore for the year 
2014-15.  
       O.M. No. Z-16013/1/2014-GC (Vol.III)                                       
 
 

9 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.5) 
 
 The Committee note that Integrated Watershed Management Programme(IWMP) 
was launched during 2009 -10 by amalgamating the previous programmes  of DDP, 
DPAP and IWDP . The Committee are apprised that some of the salient  features of the 
programme are enhanced cost norms, funding pattern of 90:10among the Centre and 
States, cluster approach, dedicated institutions, release of  funds in two installments, 
livelihood orientation and scientific inputs. Noting that  IWMP project takes over a period 
of 4 to 7 years for completion from the date of  sanction, the Committee are of the 
opinion that performance of the project would  depend on actual completion of projects 
the results of  which will start emanating  by the end of March 2015. The Committee 
therefore, strongly recommend the  Department to take sincere efforts to ensure timely 
completion of projects and  apprise the Committee of the outcomes of the completed 
projects. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
As recommended by the Committee, an impact assessment study will be 
conducted after the completion report of the IWMP projects is received in the 
Department.   
O.M. No. Z-16013/1/2014-GC (Vol.III)                                      
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.6) 
 
The Committee are apprised that IWMP guidelines are prepared by the  „National 
Rainfed Area Authority‟ under the aegis of Planning Commission and not by Department 
of Land Resources. Since IWMP is a flagship programm e of  the Department, the 
Committee are of the considered view that the formulation of  Guideline should vest with 
the Department of Land Resources. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Cabinet has approved the proposal of the Department of Land Resources in 
January 2015 and has vested it with the authority to formulate the Guidelines for IWMP 
instead of NRAA. 
     O.M. No. Z-16013/1/2014-GC (Vol.III) 
                                      
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.10) 
 The Committee find that the total  cost of implementing NLRMP was computed to 
be Rs. 5656 crore at the time of initiation of the programme out of  which the 
Government of India share was estimated at Rs 3098 crore. However  ,till the end of 
Eleventh Five Year Plan only Rs.645 crore were rele ased by the  Centre and only 
Rs.1000 crore have been allocated for the Twelfth Five Year Plan.The justification given 
by the Department that allocation of funds falling short of actual requirement of Rs. 3098 
core by the Centre would lead the target to cover all Districts, spill over to the Thirteenth 
Five Year Plan is unacceptable to the  Committee in view of the fact that till 31.03.2014 
the Department had unspent  balances to the tune of Rs.710.07 crore with them. The 

10 
 
Committee recommend the Department to make all out efforts to expedite the utilization 
of funds in a time  bound manner so that targets are achieved by the end of the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan and the ultimate goal of NLRMP to usher in a system of conclusive-titling 
in the country is achieved. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
The programme is facing many challenges which are responsible for slow 
implementation of the programme. Some of these include:  
 Lack of political and administrative will to take up survey and re-survey components. 
 The Departments impl ementing the programme in the States namely Land Revenue 
Department, Survey and Settlement Department and Registration Department do not 
get high priority as a result there is low priority in the States to NLRMP. From 2015-16 
onwards the financing of the p rogramme is proposed to be changed in a manner that 
the States would be required to allocate higher share from their resources. Hence 
achievements under the programme will be determined by the priority to be accorded 
by the States to the programme.  
 Lack o f trained manpower to use modern technologies for different components 
including survey/resurvey. 
 Availability of required high speed bandwidth for connectivity of land record offices and 
integration of registration and land record offices. 
 Lack of availability of technically capable private vendors for digitization of land records 
and survey. 
 
While the department will make its best efforts for achievement of the targets, the 
above constraints coupled with under provisioning by the Centre will affect achie vement 
of targets by the end of 2016-17.     
 O.M. No. Z-16013/1/2014-GC (Vol.III)                                   
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.11) 
 The Committee note that Capacity Building of the staff involved in the  
implementation of programme is required on a large scale. The Committee are informed 
that out of 32 NLRMP Cells sanctioned in various States/UTs only 25 are  functional and 
the matter is being pursued for early start of activities in the 7cells. The Committee are 
apprised that t he Department has targeted to set up a  cell in each of the States based 
on the demand of the State Government and 2cells are being sanctioned in States with 
the population of more than 5 crore. The Committee are of the opinion that as setting up 
of NLRMP c ells would help create  a plethora of trained and skilled personnel for the 
programme, the Department should make efforts to persuade the State Governments to 
come up with the proposal of setting up NLRMP Cells. 
.     
 Reply of the Government 
 
The suggestio n of the Committee to encourage States to submit proposals for 
setting up NLRMP cells will be kept in view at the time of seeking proposals from the 
States. 
O.M. No. Z-16013/1/2014-GC (Vol.III)                                      
    

11 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nil 

12 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.4) 
 
The Committee regret to note huge unspent balances lying in both the flagship schemes 
of the Department viz Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) and 
National Land Records Modernization Programme (NLRMP) as on 31 March, 2014. The 
unspent balances under IWMP stood at Rs. 2189.98 crore whereas under NLRMP it is 
to the tune of 710.7 crore. The Committee are apprised various reasons for the unspent 
balances under IWMP which mainly include long project duration of 4 -7 years, delay in 
setting up of Stat e Level Nodal Agencies (SLNAs), delay in selection of Watershed 
Development Teams (WDTs), capacity building and preparation of Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) and the enhanced cost norm. Whereas the reasons for the unspent 
balances under NLRMP include difficulties in implementing the component pertaining to 
survey and re -survey, lack of trained manpower with the States to use modern survey 
techniques, shortage of vendors to take up the technical activities and engagement of 
officials of Revenue Administration  and other officials concerned with the 
implementation of the programme to other works. Taking into account various steps 
taken by the Department to fully utilize the funds which inter-alia include preparation of 
month- wise annual plans by the States, cle arance of proposal by the month of May, 
quarterly review meetings, Regional review meetings, concurrent third party monitoring 
and evaluation system and better utilization of technology, the Committee, however, are 
of the considered view that without prope r system of accountability and responsibility, 
the efforts of the Department would not yield the desired results. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to appoint Nodal Officers at various levels in the 
States to ensure that the funds released  by the Central Government are fully utilized in 
a time bound manner so the physical and financial targets are met. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
IWMP is being implemented through dedicated institutions with multi -disciplinary 
professional support at the State, District and Project levels. At the State level, the State 
Level Nodal Agency (SLNA) is responsible for the overall supervision of the programme. 
The Department is emphasizing on expediting the implementation by utilising allocated 
funds in various fora like Steering Committee meetings, Regional Review Meetings, 
Quarterly Review meetings, Video Conferences and field visits.   
 Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of the State Department of Land Revenue are 
the Nodal Officers for the activities relating to c omputerization of land records, setting 
up modern records rooms, digitization of maps etc. The Survey and Settlement 
Commissioners of the States function as the nodal officers to implement the activities 
concerning survey and re -survey of the land. For the  activities relating to the 
computerization of registration, the Inspector General of Registration or the Pr. 

13 
 
Secretary in -charge of registration department functions as the Nodal Officer. The 
Department has written to all the State Governments to review i mplementation of the of 
the programme at the level of the State Chief Secretaries by convening meetings of the 
State Level Review & Monitoring Committee of  NLRMP. These steps are in addition to 
the regional review meetings convened by the Department and s teps taken by the 
department in arranging training for the State functionaries to overcome the problem of 
technology deficit, allowing flexibility to the States in exchange of funds for different 
components as per their requirements. It may be mentioned th at the utilization of funds 
has picked up and its stands at Rs. 442.88 crore as of now. 
 
O.M. No. Z-16013/1/2014-GC (Vol.III)           
 
                       Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.12) 
The Committee are apprised that to ensure training, research and development in land 
administration and land information management system, the Department proposed to 
set up a National Institute of Land and Management at the Central level. The Committee 
in their 33rd , 38th and 48th Reports of 15th Lok Sabha, had also urged to expedite setting 
up of NILAM as it would go a long way  in capacity building and smooth implementation 
of the programme. The Committee are perturbed to n ote that the proposal of setting up 
of NILAM has been turned down by the Department of Expenditure and the Department 
of Land Resources is now exploring the possibility of setting up of NILAM through PPP 
mode. The Department of Land Resources has not furni shed the reasons for turning 
down of the proposal to the Committee. The Committee would therefore,  like to be 
apprised of the reasons put forth by the Department of Expenditure for turning down the 
proposal. Since the matter of setting up of NILAM has been  considerably delayed, the 
Committee strongly recommend the Department to expedite the process of setting up of 
NILAM so that trained and skilled man powerbase is created for NLRMP. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Dep artment in this 
regard at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department has prepared a draft concept Note for setting up the NILAM and 
is exploring the possibility of its setting up on PPP mode. In the meantime to strengthen 
training infrastructur e the Department has sanctioned NLRMP cells for the States for 
training of the State functionaries implementing NLRMP and is also arranging training 
through NIC for the master trainers.  
O.M. No. Z-16013/1/2014-GC (Vol.III)                                  
                        
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 

14 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.7) 
 
 The Committee find monitoring of the progress of works under the watershed 
projects through the Review meetings, Management Information System (MIS), 
utilization certificates, Audited system of Accounts, etc. as unsatisfactory. The 
Department has also admitted that there is a need to strengthen the existing monitoring 
mechanism. The Committee however appreciate new initiatives taken by the 
Department to monitor the projects which include appointing third party monitoring and 
evaluating agency, using „Bhuwan‟ po rtal of the National Remote Sensing Centre 
(NRSC) to upload the real time images of the existing structures of the projects, dividing 
the entire country in 8agro -climatic regions for effective implementation of the 
programme, introducing64 parameters for j udging the projects after the completion, etc. 
The Committee are also apprised that so far, only 15 States have appointed monitoring 
and evaluation agency. The Committee, therefore, desire that necessary action should 
be taken by the Government to appoint independent monitoring and evaluation 
agencies in all the remaining States without further loss of time. The action taken by the 
Government in this regard may also be apprised to the Committee. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
As recommended by the Committee, De partment has been insisting that the 
States appoint independent concurrent monitoring & evaluating agencies. As a result, 
22 States have already appointed independent concurrent monitoring & evaluating 
agencies. The remaining States are in the process of a ppointing independent 
monitoring and evaluating agencies. 
        O.M. No. Z-16013/1/2014-GC (Vol.III) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para Nos. 2.8 and 2.9) 
 The Committee note that the schemes for Computerization of Land Records 
(CLR) and Strengthening of  Revenue Administration & updating of Land Records (SRA 
& ULR) were merged into a single scheme in the shape of National Land Records 
Modernization Programme in 2008 -09 with the objective to build an integrated land 
information management with up to date a nd real time records. The Committee are 
apprised that major components of the NLRMP are computerization of land records 
including mutations, digitization of maps, integration of textual and spatial data, 
survey/re-survey, settlement records including creat ion of original cadastral records, 
computerization of registration, development of core geospatial information system and 
capacity building. The Committee are apprised that the target of NLRMP was proposed 
to cover all the Districts of the country by the e nd of Twelfth Five Year Plan i.e. by the 
end of2017. The committee, however express their dissatisfaction over slow and tardy 
pace of implementation of the programme as only 449 districts of the country have been 
partially covered and remaining 218 Districts are yet to be covered. 

15 
 
 
 The Committee are further apprised that survey and re -survey is a major 
component of the programme which is lagging behind in many States due to the 
apprehension that legal disputes may arise out of survey/ re-survey. The Committee are 
also apprised of various measures taken in this regard viz revising rates of survey, re -
survey and digitizing of Field measurement Books (FMBs) on demands of the States. 
The Committee also note that to deal with the technology related difficulties faced by the 
States, training has been arranged at different national institutes, such as National 
Remote Sensing Center, Survey of India and National informatics Center. The 
Committee note with satisfaction that States like Gujarat, Haryana, Bihar, Odisha , 
Madhya Pradesh, etc have initiated steps to implement the work of survey and re -
survey in their respective States. During evidence, the Secretary, DoLR also informed 
that to address the component of survey and resurvey, the scheme is being restructured 
on a large scale. The Committee would like the Department to expedite finalization of 
the restructured scheme at the earliest to give a fillip to the pace of implementation of 
NLRMP. 
 Reply of the Government 
 
At the time of inception of the programme in 200 8 an amount of Rs. 5656 crores was 
approved for the total programme out of which Rs. 3098 crores was envisaged as the 
Central Share. In the 12 th Five Year Plan only Rs. 1000 crores was allocated. Till the 
end of 2014 -15 a total amount ofRs. 1131.07 crores has been released to the States. 
The implementation of programme is facing a number of challenges like low priority to 
the land revenue and survey and settlement departments, the lack of trained manpower 
to implement high technology components. In the face  of all these constraints under 
provisioning of resources will affect the pace of implementation of the programme and 
the programme is likely to spill over beyond 12th Plan.   
The Department has constituted a working group to revamp the programme. The 
Department will finalise the restructured programme on the recommendations of the 
working group.   
O.M. No. Z-16013/1/2014-GC (Vol.III)                                     
                      
  Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.13) 
 The Committee are apprised that the Department has been monitoring the 
NLRMP through Project Sanctioning and Monitoring Committees, Regional Review 
Meetings interfacing with the States and getting feedback on the implementation of the 
programme. The Department has however, admitted that this mechanism as well as the 
Management Information System (MIS) which is an online platform of the DoLR 
developed to track the programme also need improvem ent to be effective. The 
Committee note with concern that there is no mechanism available with the Department 
to verify whether the data entered online corresponds to the ground reality as the 
responsibility regarding data entered online lies with the Stat es/UTs concerned. The 
Committee are further apprised that the Department is in process of developing third 

16 
 
party monitoring system for NLRMP. The Committee are surprised to note that despite 
knowing the inadequacies of the existing monitoring mechanism, no  substantive steps 
have been taken by the Department to make alteration in the extant mechanism to 
make it more effective. The Committee therefore, recommend the Department to 
develop third party monitoring mechanism at the earliest and appoint Nodal Offic ers at 
various levels in the State for effective monitoring of the implementation of the 
Programmes and utilization of funds as this will not only help in identifying the flaws of 
the scheme but will also facilitate concurrent physical verification of online data entered. 
.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department will set a third party monitoring system as suggested by 
the Committee.  
       O.M. No. Z-16013/1/2014-GC (Vol.III)                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        DR. P. VENUGOPAL 
10 August, 2015               Chairperson, 
        19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Rural Development 

17 
 
Appendix- I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY,  
THE 10 AUGUST, 2015 
 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
                Dr. P. Venugopal      -  Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Kirti Azad 
3. Shri Harish Chandra Chavan 
4. Shri Manshankar Ninama 
5. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
6. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
7.  Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
8. Smt. Butta Renuka 
9. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
10. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
11. Shri Ajay Misra Teni 
12. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi 
15. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
16. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
17. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
18. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
19. Shri A. K. Selvaraj 
20. Smt. Kanak Lata Singh 
21. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.C.Tiwari   -  Director 
3. Smt. B. Visala   - Additional Director 
 

18 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, 
the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
(i) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Second Report on Demands for Grants (2014 -15) of the Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development); 
 
(iii) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(iv) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(v) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(vi) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
 
3. After detailed discussions, the Committee adopted the Reports without any modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Reports and present the same to the 
Parliament.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
--------- 

19 
 
APPENDIX – II 
[Vide  para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT (16TH LOK 
SABHA)OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations:     10 
       
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted     
  by the Government :  
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 7 and 8 
         
Total:          5 
Percentage:         50 %      
      
III. Recommendations which the Committee do  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies :  NIL    
            
Total:          00 
Percentage:         00 %    
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of   
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee :         
 
Serial Nos. 2 and 9. 
Total:          02 
Percentage:         20 %         
   
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies   
of the Government are still awaited :       
  Serial Nos. 5, 6, and 10. 
Total:          03 
Percentage:         30 %       
 
  