STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                         (2014-2015) 
      
 
        SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
 
   
 
 
'THE REGISTRATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013' 
  
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI
 
9  


NINTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2014-2015) 
      
SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
 
 
 
'THE REGISTRATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013' 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08.05.2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.05.2015 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937(Saka) 


 
 
CRD No. 106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
 
© 2015 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by _____________  
 

i 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Page 
Nos. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15) (iv) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
REPORT 
  
A. Background 1 
B. Clause 1 of the Bill : Section 1 - Short Title and Commencement  8 
 Clause 2 of the Bill : Section 2 – Definitions  10 
 Clause 3 of the Bill : Section 3 – Inspector General of 
Registration 
16 
 Clause 4 of the Bill : Section 6 – Registrars and Sub-Registrars 18 
 Clause 5 of the Bill : Section 8 – Inspectors of Registration 
Offices 
21 
 Clause 6 of the Bill : Section 10 – Absence of Registrar or 
vacancy in his office 
22 
 Clause 7 of the Bill : Section 17 – Documents of which 
registration is compulsory 
24 
 Clause 8 of the Bill : Section 18 – Documents of which 
registration is optional 
34 
 Clause 9 of the Bill : Insertion of new section 18A (Refusal of 
registration of certain documents) 
38 
 Clause 10 of the Bill :  Omission of Section 28 – Place of 
registering documents relating to land 
42 
 Clause 11 of the Bill : Section 29 – Place for registering other 
documents 
47 
 Clause 12 of the Bill : Section 32 - Substitution of new section for 
section 32 regarding persons to present documents for 
registration  
 
50 
  

ii 
 
 Clause 13 of the Bill : Section 32A – Substitution of new section 
for section 32A regarding Compulsory affixing of photograph etc. 
52 
 Clause 14 of the Bill : Section 33 – Power of Attorney 
recongnisable for purposes of section 32 
56 
 Clause 15 of the Bill : Section 35 – Procedure on admission and 
denial of execution respectively 
59 
 Clause 16 of the Bill : Section 52 – Duties of registering officers 
when document presented 
63 
 Clause 17 of the Bill : Section 57 – Registering officers to allow 
inspection of certain books and indexes, and to give certified 
copies of entries 
65 
 Clause 18 of the Bill : Section 60 – Certificate of registration 67 
 Clause 19 of the Bill : Section 61 – Endorsements and certificate 
to be copied and document returned 
69 
 Clause 20 of the Bill : Section 64 – Procedure where document 
relates to land in several sub-districts 
71 
 Clause 21 of the Bill : Section 65 – Procedure where document 
relates to land in several districts 
73 
 Clause 22 of the Bill : Section 66 – Procedure after registration of 
documents relating to land 
75 
 Clause 23 of the Bill : Section 69 – Power of Inspector-General to 
superintend registration offices and make rules 
77 
 Clause 24 of the Bill : Section 80 – Fees payable on presentation 82 
 Clause 25 of the Bill : Section 82 – Penalty for making false 
statements, delivering false copies or translations, false 
personation and abetment 
85 
 Clause 26 of the Bill : Insertion of a new section 82A after section 
82 of the principal Act. 
87 

iii 
 
 Clause 27 of the Bill : Section 89 – Copies of certain orders, 
certificates and instruments to be sent to r egistering officers and 
filed 
89 
 Clause 28 of the Bill : Insertion of a new section 89A after 
section 89 of the Registration Act, 1908 (Power of State 
Government to make rules). 
93 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
1. Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee held on  
12 February, 2015 
95 
2. Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee held on  
27 February, 2015 
97 
3. Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee held on  
16 April, 2015 
99 
4. Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting of the Committee held on  
16 April, 2015 
101 
5. Minutes of the Twenty First Sitting of the Committee held on  
07 May, 2015 
103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(2014-2015) 
 
          Dr. P. Venugopal  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri Kirti Azad 
4. Shri Harish Chandra Chavan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Manshankar Ninama 
8. Shrimati Mausam Noor 
9. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey 
10. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
11. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
12. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
13. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
14. Shrimati Butta Renuka  
15. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
16. Shri Naramalli Sivaprasad  
17. Shri Balka Suman 
18. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
19. Shri Ajay Misra Teni 
20. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
21. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Munquad Ali 
23. Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi 
24. Vacant@ 
25. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
26. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
27. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev** 
28. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho$ 
29. Shri A. K. Selvaraj 
30. Shrimati Kanak Lata Singh 
31. Vacant#   
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.C. Tiwari   - Director 
3. Smt. B. Visala   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
 
  * Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 07.10.2014. 
  ** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 25.09.2014 vice Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya. 
 @ Vacancy caused on account of resignation of Shri Srinjoy Bose from membership of Rajya Sabha    
  w.e.f. 05.02.2015. 
 $ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.11.2014 vice Shri Jairam Ramesh  
 # Vacancy caused due to retirement of Prof. Saif-Ud-Din Soz on 10.02.2015 
 
   

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of Standing Committee on Rural Development (201 4-15) 
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf present 
this Ninth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on „the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013‟ relating 
to the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources).  
 
2. „The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013‟  was  introduced in Rajya Sabha on 8 
August, 2013 and was referred by the Speaker, Lok  Sabha in consultation with the 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2013-14) on 
14  August, 2013 for examination and report  thereon. However, due to dissolution  of 
the 15 th Lok Sabha, the  examination of the Bill could not be c ompleted. Consequent 
upon the constitution of 16th Lok Sabha, the Bill was re-referred by Speaker, Lok  Sabha 
to the Standing  Committee  on  Rural  Development (2014 -15)  on 16 September, 2014  
for examination and report. 
  
3. Considering wide r ramifications of the Bill, the Committee invited 
memoranda/suggestions regarding 'the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 ' from 
individuals, organizations, stake -holders etc. through print and electronic media. The 
Committee also invited suggestions on various provisions of the Bill from all the 
States/UTs.  The Committee had briefing meeting with the representatives of 
Department of Land Resources, (Ministry of Rural Development) on 12 February, 2015. 
The Committee thereafter heard the views of some individuals and organizations from 
amongst the public in its sitting held on 27 February, 2015.  A local on the spot study 
visit to the Registration Office, Kapashera at Delhi was undertaken by the Committee on 
15 April, 2015 to have better insight in the functioning of the Registration Office. The 
Committee also took the evidence of the representatives of State Governments of West  
Bengal, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and the Government of NCT of 
Delhi in connection with the examination of the Bill on 16 April, 2015.  The Committee 
further took evidence of the representatives of the Department of Land Resources, 

vi 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development ) and also the representatives of Ministry of Law & 
Justice on 16 April, 2015 on the proposed amendments in the Registration Act, 1908.   
 
4. The Committee at their sitting held on 7  May, 2015 considered and adopted the 
Draft Report . The Committee were immensely benefitted by the 
suggestions/contribution made by the Members of the Committee for which I express 
my sincere thanks to them. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Department of Land Re sources (Ministry of Rural Development ) and the Legislative 
Department, Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice) who tendered their 
evidence before the Committee.  The Committee also wish to express their thanks to 
the representatives of var ious State Governments and other organizations/individuals 
who furnished written information/views as well as to those who appeared before the 
Committee and  expressed their views which were of great help to the Committee in 
formulating its opinions on various issues.   
 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation of the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee.  
 
7. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations/recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI;             Dr. P. Venugopal 
7  May, 2015                                         Chairperson, 
17 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
A. Background 
 
 The Registration Act, 1908 is a Central Act which was enacted to consolidate the 
laws relating to the registration of documents.  The provisions relating to the registration 
of documents were earlier scattered about in seven enactments  and therefore,  the 
Registration Act, 1908 collated these provisions and incorporated them into one single 
Act.  It is a significant piece of procedural legislation that provides for the registration of 
certain documents.  
2. The "Registration of deeds and  documents" is a concurrent subject under the 
Constitution of India.  This item has been mentioned against entry no. 6 in the List III  
(Concurrent List ) of the Schedule VII  of the Constitution .  The administration of the 
Registration Act, 1908 was transferred to the Department of Land Resources , Ministry 
of Rural Development, Govt. of India in the year 2006. 
3. The Registration Act, 1908  is an Act which was enacted more than 100 years 
ago and a lot of technological and administrative changes have oc curred since then.   
Most important developments in the recent past have been computerization of land 
records and registration offices in the country, integration of textual and spatial data, 
issuance of digitally signed documents, integration of Land Recor ds and Registration 
Offices, automatic generation of mutation notices, blocking of particular survey numbers 
from further transactions, capturing and storage of the biometrics of the executants, and 
establishment of centralized data bases  (State Data Centres) and online payments 

2 
 
(Payment Gateways) etc.   These developments necessitated certain changes in the 
provisions of the existing Act. 
4.  The Government therefore appointed a Committee of Inspector s General of 
Registration (IGRs) under t he Chairmanship of the Secretary, Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of Rural Development on 7th June, 2011  to examine the 
Registration Act, 1908 and to suggest amendments thereto. After detailed deliberations, 
the Committee of Inspector s General of Registration (IGRs) suggested certain 
amendments to the Registration Act, 1908. 
5. The draft amendments put on the website of the D epartment of Land Resources, 
Ministry of Rural Development were also sent by the Ministry to the States /UTs for their 
comments. The Government in consultation with the State Governments finalized 
amendments to The Registration Act, 1908 and the Cabinet approved the Registration 
(Amendment) Bill, 2013 on 04 June, 2013 
6.   During the Fifteenth Lok Sabha, ‗ The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013‘  was  
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 8 August, 2013 and was referred by the Speaker, Lok  
Sabha in consultation with the Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Standing Committee on 
Rural Development (2013 -14) on 14 th  August, 2013  for examination and report  
thereon. However, due to dissolution of the 15 th Lok Sabha, the  examination of the Bill 
could not be completed. Consequent upon the constitution of 16 th Lok Sabha, the Bill 
was re -referred by Speaker, Lok Sabha to the Standing  Committee on Rural 
Development (2014-15) on 16th September, 2014 for examination and report. 

3 
 
7.  The Committee invited memoranda/suggestions regarding the Registration 
(Amendment) Bill, 2013 from individuals, organizations, stake -holders etc. through prin t 
and electronic media. The Committee also invited suggestions on various provisions of 
the Bill from all the States/UTs.  The Committee had briefing meeting with the officers of 
Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development on 12 February, 2 015. 
The Committee thereafter heard the views of some individuals and organizations from 
amongst the public in its sitting held on 27 February, 2015 .  A local on the spot study 
visit to the Registration Office, Kapashera at Delhi was undertaken by the Committee on 
15 April, 2015 to have better insight of the functioning of the Registration Office.  The 
Committee also took the evidence of the representatives of State Governments of West 
Bengal, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and  the Government  of NCT of  
Delhi in connection with the examination of the Bill  on 16 April, 2015 .  The Committee 
further took evidence  of the representatives of the Department of Land Resources, 
Ministry of Rural Development and also the representatives of Ministry of La w & Justice 
on 16 April, 2015 on the proposed amendments in the Registration Act, 1908.   
8. The Secretary, Department of Land Resources  during the evidence before the 
Committee highlighted the need of amendment in the Act as under:- 
 ―The NLRMP has actually encouraged the computerization of land records 
and computerization of registration process, but the Registration Act does not 
give cognizance to registered documents. Therefore, there is a need for 
amendment.  BÉÖEU +ÉÉè® ºÉÆ¶ÉÉävÉxÉ |É{ÉÉäVÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉä MÉªÉä lÉä, VÉèºÉä ÉÊBÉE ãÉ½BÉEÉÒ BÉEä AbÉì{¶ÉxÉ BÉEÉ ®ÉÊVÉº]Åä¶ÉxÉ xÉcÉÓ cÉäiÉÉ cè, 
BÉEä´ÉãÉ ãÉ½BÉEä BÉEä AbÉì{¶ÉxÉ BÉEä ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå ÉÊãÉJÉÉ MÉªÉÉ lÉÉ* ãÉÉäMÉÉå xÉä BÉEcÉ cè ÉÊBÉE VÉ¤É BÉE<Ç º]ä]ÂºÉ àÉå BÉEà{ªÉÚ]®ÉÒBÉE®hÉ cÉä MÉªÉÉ 
cè iÉÉä BÉEcÉÓ ºÉä £ÉÉÒ =xÉBÉEÉ ®ÉÊVÉº]Åä¶ÉxÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ VÉÉxÉÉ SÉÉÉÊcA* BÉÖEU AºÉ.+ÉÉ®.+ÉÉäVÉ. BÉEä {ÉÉºÉ ªÉc {ÉÉ´É® xÉcÉÓ cè ÉÊB ÉE +ÉMÉ® 
ºÉ®BÉEÉ®ÉÒ |ÉÉì{É]ÉÔ BÉEÉä ]ÅÉÆºÉ{ÉE® ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ VÉÉ ®cÉ cè iÉÉä =ºÉä ®ÉäBÉE ºÉBÉEä* =ºÉBÉEÉä ªÉc +ÉÉÊvÉBÉEÉ® ÉÊàÉãÉxÉÉ SÉÉÉ ÊcA ÉÊBÉE the 
properties, which cannot be transferred, he has a right to refuse to register those 
properties and facilitate the online electronic mode of registration, including the 
biometrics of executants, etc. ¤ÉcÖiÉ ºÉÉ®ä ®ÉVªÉ <xÉ ºÉ¤É SÉÉÒVÉÉå BÉEä É ÊãÉA +É£ÉÉÒ iÉèªÉÉ® xÉcÉÓ cé, BÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉE ´ÉcÉÆ 
BÉEà{ªÉÚ]®ÉÒBÉE®hÉ xÉcÉÓ cÖ+ÉÉ cè*  

4 
 
9.  The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 proposes to amend  various sections of 
‗The Registration Act, 1908 ‘ and also proposes to insert new sections in the Act to deal  
with specific situations.  The Bill proposes the following major amendments in the Act :- 
i. Amendment in section 2 relating to definitions; and substitution of clause 7 
in the section to define the ―lease‖ comprehensively. 
ii. Insertion of sub-section (3) in section 3 of the Act empowering the State 
Government for making appointments  of officers for registration and also 
specifying the duties of such officers. 
iii. Amendment in section 6 for omitting the expression ―whether public 
officers or not‖. 
iv. Amendment in section 8 relating to Inspectors of Registration Offices. 
v. Substitution of section 10 of the Act relating to absence of Registrar or 
vacancy in his office. 
vi. Substitution of  clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 17 of the Act to 
make the registration compulsory irrespective of the leases of immovable 
property for any term. However, in case the lease is for a term less than 
one year, the State Government may specify the amounts of annual rent, 
etc., which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees per month. 
vii. Insertion of new clauses from (f) to (k) after clause (e) in sub-section (1) of 
section 17 bringing different type s of instruments under the ambit of 
compulsory registration. 
viii. Substitution of section 18 of the Act to provide that the Wi lls, authority to  
adopt by a Will and any document notified by the State Government, may 
be registered at the option of the parties. 
ix. Insertion of a new section 18A which prohibits the registration of certain  
documents relating to ( a) transaction which is p rohibited by any existing 
Central or State Act for the time being in force; ( b) transfer of property by 
way of agreement for sale, sale, etc., in respect of any immovable 
property owned by the Central or State Government or any authority or 
undertaking; executed by any person other than those statutorily 
empowered to do so; (c) transfer of property by way of agreement for sale, 

5 
 
sale, etc., which is attached permanently by any competent authority; and 
(d) any document which is likely to affect the accrued interest in 
immovable properties of the Central or State Government, local bodies, 
etc., and other properties as may be notified by the State Government. 
x. Omitting of section 28 of the Act which were related to place of registering 
documents relating to land.  
xi. Amendment in section 29 of the Act relating to place for registering other  
documents.  
xii. Substitution of  section 32 of the Act  relating to persons to present 
documents for registration. 
xiii. Substitution of section 32A so as to provide that every person  
presenting any document at the proper registration office shall affix in the 
document a passport size colour photograph and get photographed by a 
digital camera and affix thumb impression in the document. 
xiv. Amendment in section 33  of the Act relating to power of a ttorney 
recognizable for purposes of section 32. 
xv. Amendment in section 35 relating to procedure on admission and denial of 
execution respectively. 
xvi. Insertion of a proviso in section 52 of the Act  relating to ―duties of 
registering officers and document presented‖.  
xvii. Amendment in section 57 of the Act relating to "registering officers to allow 
inspection of certain books and indexes and to give certified copies of 
entries." 
xviii. Amendment in section 60 relating to certificate of registration. 
xix. Amendment in sect ion 61 relating to endorsements and certificate to be 
copied and document returned. 
xx. Amendment in section 64 relating to procedure where documents relates 
to land in several sub-districts. 
xxi. Amendment in section 65 relating to procedure where documents relate s 
to land in several districts. 

6 
 
xxii. Amendment in section 69 relating to power of Inspector General to 
superintend registration offices and make rules. 
xxiii. Insertion of the new sections 80A and 80B so as to make the provisions 
for the recovery of deficit registration fee and refund of excess fee. 
xxiv. Insertion of sub-section 2 in section 82 of the Act relating to cancellation of 
documents. 
xxv. Insertion of a new section 82A  relating to punishment for failure to send a 
copy of order under section 89. 
xxvi. Amendment in section 89 of the Act providing that all banks and financial 
institutions granting loans on the basis of equitable mortgage, may send 
the copy of the same online to the registering officer within the local limits 
of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of the pro perty so mortgaged is 
situated. 
xxvii. Insertion of a new section 89A empowering the State to make rules to 
carry out the provisions of ‗The Registration Act‘. 
10.  The Committee note that the  amendments proposed by the Government in 
the Registration Act, 1908 through the Registration ( Amendment) Bill, 2013 are 
intended to take cognizance of various technological updations and  also to meet 
the various administrative requirements for which the necessities have been felt 
by the people as well as by the administeri ng agencies .  The Committee 
appreciate the initiative of the Government to come forward with amendments in 
a century old legislation which had become unavoidable due to the recent  
developments in the computerization of land records  as well as the  registration 
processes in different registration offices and also the necessity of usage of the 
biometrics and electronic data to prevent the fraudulent practices .  The 
Committee find that certain sections have been proposed to be amended to fine 
tune them with the present day requirements and some new sections have been 

7 
 
proposed to be inserted in the Act to deal with the peculiar situations and 
address the specific problems.  The Committee are hopeful that these 
amendments would help in introducing new tech niques in registration  process 
and would also make the registration process faster, transparent and accurate .  
This would  also not only facilitate the citizens  in availing the technologically 
advanced services but will also give avenues to the States for generating more 
revenues.  The Committee expect that the new mechanism would gradually help 
in building centralized land records database which will not only reduce the 
disputes but will also prevent fraudulent transactions of immovable property. 
11. The Committee's examination of the Bill brought to light certain key issues 
pertaining to the specific amendment proposals of the bill which have been dealt 
with in the subsequent sections of this Report. The Committee recommend 
consideration of the Bill, subject to the observations made/modifications 
suggested in this Report.  
 
  

8 
 
 
B. Clause 1 of the Bill : Section 1 - Short Title and Commencement 
1.1 The existing provision of Section 1 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
(1) This Act may be called The Registration Act, 1908. 
(2)  It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir: Provided that  the State Government may exclude any 
districts or tracts of country from its operation. 
(3)  It shall come into force on the first day of January, 1909. 
 
1.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to  amend the Section 1 (Short 
Title and Commencement) of the existing Act as under:   
(1) This Act may be called the Registration (Amendment) Act, 2013. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different 
dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
 
1.3 This clause seeks to provide the short title and commencement of the proposed 
legislation. 
 
1.4 The Government of Kerala furnished their written submission about the proposed 
amendment as under: 
"At present, by virtue of the said proviso, the State Government is empowered to 
exclude areas comprised in Special Economic Zone,  Tribal areas, defense areas 
etc. From the operation of the Act considering the necessity and in public 
interest. The proposed amendment intends to take away the said power of the 
State Government and hence the proposed amendment cannot be agreed to" 
 
1.5 The Committee observe that the  proposed amendment in the  existing 
Section 1 of the Act  gives liberty to the Central Government to bring the Act in 
force on such date which may be fixed by notification in the official Gazette and 
also to make different provisions of the amended Act enforceable from different 

9 
 
dates.  It is however observed that apprehensions have been expressed that the 
proposed amendment will take away the power of the State Government for 
excluding certain areas from the jurisdiction of the Act. The Committee‟s analysis 
reveal that the subject matter of the Act is a Concurrent Subject under the 
Constitution of India (entry 6 of the list III – Concurrent List of the Schedule VII)  
and, therefore , the specific need and requirement of a particular State could be 
taken care of by the State l egislation provided it is  in harmony with provisions of 
the Central legislation.  The Committee however desire  that such apprehensions 
should be examined by the Ministry before giving finality to this Clause. 

10 
 
Clause 2 of the Bill : Section 2 – Definitions  
 
2.1 The existing provision of Section 2 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
  In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- 
(1) "addition" means the place of residence, and the profession, trade, 
rank and title, (if any) of a person describe d, and, in the case of an Indian, 
his father's name, or where he is usually described as the son of his 
mother, then his mother's name; 
(2) "book" includes a portion of a book and also any number of sheets 
connected together with a view of forming a book or portion of a book; 
(3) "district" and "sub-district" respectively means a district and sub -district 
formed under this Act; 
(4) "District Cou rt" includes the High Court in its ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction; 
(5) "endorsement" and "endorsed" include and apply to an entry in writing 
by a registering officer on a rider or covering slip to any document 
tendered for registration under this Act; 
(6) "immovable property" includes land, buildings, hereditary allowances, 
rights to ways, lights, ferries, fisheries or any other benefit to arise out of 
land, and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything 
which is attached to the earth, but not standing timber, growing crops nor 
grass; 
(6A) "India" means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir; 
(7) "lease" includes a counterpart, kabuliyat, an undertaking to cultivate or 
occupy, and an agreement to lease; 
(8) "minor" means a person who, according to the personal law to which 
he is subject, has not attained majority; 
(9) "movable property" includes standing timber, growing crops and grass, 
fruit upon and juice in trees, and property of every other descriptio n, 
except immovable property; and 

11 
 
(10) "representative" includes the guardian of a minor and the committee 
or other legal curator of a lunatic or idiot. 
 
2.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to amend the Section 2  
(Definitions) of the existing Act as under:  
  
  Clause 2 of the Bill 
(i) in clause ( 1), the words and brackets ―rank and title (if any)‖ shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) in clause (2), after the words ―or portion of a book‖ occurring at the end, 
the words, brackets, letter and figures ―and includes electronic records as 
defined in clause ( t) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000‖ shall be inserted; 
(iii) for clause (7), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-  
‗(7) ―lease‖ means a lease of immova ble property and also 
includes– 
(a) a patta; 
(b) a kabuliyat or undertaking in writing to cultivate or occupy, or  
pay rent for immovable property; 
(c) any instrument by which tolls of any description are let; 
(d) any writing on an application for a lease, where premium or  
average annual rent, money advanced, payment in lieu of rent, 
intended to signify that the application is granted;  
(e) an agreement to lease stating an annual rent or premium or 
both or such amount in lieu of rent as notified by the State 
Government; 
(f) any instrument by which mining lease is granted in respect of  
minor minerals as defined in clause ( e) of section 3 of the Mines 
and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957;‘; 
  

12 
 
(iv) after clause (9), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:– 
 
‗(9A) ―notification‖ means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette and the expression ―notify‖ sh all be construed 
accordingly;‘; 
(v) after clause (10), the following clause shall be inserted, namely-: 
 
―(11) the words and expre ssions related to electronic registration 
used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in the 
Information Technology  Act, 2000 shall have the meanings, 
respectively, assigned to them in that Act.‖. 
 
2.3 This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Regist ration Act, 1908 relating to 
―definitions‖.  It is also proposed in the Bill to substitute clause (7) of section 2 of the Act 
relating to the definition of the term of ―lease‖ so as to define the same 
comprehensively. 
 
2.4 On Section 2 in Clause (2) of the Act, the Government of Odisha in a written note 
furnished to the Committee suggested that the following should be inserted at the end:-              
"and the information storage devices like floppy  disk, hard disk or compact disk 
or any other electronic devices;" 
 
2.5 On the same issue of Section 2 of the Act, the Government of Uttar Pradesh in a 
written communication stated as under:-                          
"This amendment is being proposed with the view to implement and strengthen 
the process of Computerized registration and ensure transparency hence 
acceptable. Through this amendment the definition of lease has been widened 
hence acceptable. Also the system of rank and title is proposed to be removed 
which is acceptable." 
 
2.6 On Section 2 sub Clause  (1), the Government of Kerala  in a written note 
suggested as under:-                                 
"Addition" means the place of residence; and the profession, trade, of a person 
described and in the case of an Indian his father's name or where he is usually 
described as the son of his mother then his mother's name and in the case of 
married woman, her husband's name." 
  

13 
 
2.7 On Section 2 sub Clause ( 2), the Government of Kerala  in a written note 
suggested as under:- 
"The proposed amendment intends to make the definition of the term 'book' more 
comprehensive and wider so as to partake within its purview the electronic forms 
and records also considering the pace in the development of information 
technology. Hence the amendment is agreeable." 
 
2.8 The Government of Kerala in a written note suggested as under :-   
             
"For the word 'patta' the word 'pattam' may be substituted. In Kerala the word 
'pattam' is commonly used. This tenure was originally in the nature of a lease, 
without any proprietary or trans ferable right of occupancy for the holder. 'patta' 
means a certificate prepared and issued by tehsildar for conferring the absolute 
property right to any person. It cannot be included in the definition of lease, 
because the absolute property right is given  to any person wide a 'patta' and it is 
entirely different from a lease. Since the transfer of movable property does not 
include in the definition of the term 'lease' under the Transfer of Property Act, 
1882, the amendment suggested as item no. 2 (7)(g) ma y be excluded from the 
definition of the term 'lease' under the Registration Act, 1908. "  
 
2.9 The Government of West Bengal  on Section 2 clause (5) of the Act stated as 
under:-                      
"The words and expressions defined in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 may be 
included together with the words and expressions used in the Information 
Technology Act, 2000" 
 
2.10 The Committee received suggestions from the public  regarding Clause 2 Section 
2 of the Act as under:-                   
"The term ‗lease‘ as defined  under the Registration Act, 1908 (―Act‖) includes an 
agreement to lease.  Sub -clause (e) of revised Clause 7, as provided under 
Clause 2(iii) of the Bill also includes an agreement to lease under the definition of 
lease.  For sake of convenience, sub -clause (e) of the revised Clause 7 is 
reproduced below:- 
‗(e) an agreement to lease stating an annual rent or premium or both or such 
amount in lieu of rent as notified by the State Government." 
 
2.11 The Committee observe that section 2 of „The Registration Act, 1908‟ 
related to the definition of various terms used in the Act.  The clause 2 of the 
Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to amend  the definition of some 

14 
 
existing terms and also  to insert some new  terms to bring them within the ambit 
of definition.  The Committee observe that among other terms, the term “India” 
has also been defined in sub -section (6A) of section 2 of the Act.  The Committee 
observe that the term “India” denote  the sovereign character  of the nation  and  
therefore its meaning and interpretation should be derived from the basic law of 
the land i.e. Constitution of India and thus, there is no need to define it in each 
and every legislation separately. .  The Committee therefore recommend that        
sub-section(6A) of section 2 of the Act should be deleted. 
 
2.12 The Committee note that the word “Indian” has been used in sub-section(1) 
of Section 2 of the „The Registration Act, 1908‟. The Committee observe in the 
present day context, the use of such term in the legislation i s not required.  The 
The Committee therefore recommend that the words “in the case of an Indian” in 
sub-section(1) of section 2 of the Act should be deleted. 
 
2.13 The Committee observe that sub-section (7) has been s ubstituted making 
the definition of the term 'lease' wider and comprehensive.  During examination of 
the Bill, the Committee received suggestions from various quarters relating to 
various connotations of the definition of the term  'lease' taking into account the 
local terminol ogy and usage.  The Committee therefore while endorsing the 
amendment suggested in the Bill desire that the Government should 
comprehensively take care of the localized terms used in different parts of the 
country for the term „lease‟ and accordingly make a suitable mention in the 
proposed amendment. 
 
2.14 The Committee observe that insertion of the words “and includes 
electronic records” in clause (2) of section 2 makes the definition of the book 
wider and takes into account the technological development.  The Committee 
hope that this definition of “Book” will now bring within its ambit all electronic 
forms like CD, DVD, Pen Drive, Flooppy , Hard Disk, etc.  and there fore, it is 
desirable that for removal of all doubts in future, if necessary, the definition of the 

15 
 
“Book” at this stage  may be made more clear by specifically mentioning these 
terms. 
 
2.15 The Committee appreciate the insertion of new clause (11) in section 2  
whereby the words and expression related to electronic registration will derive 
their meaning from the Information Technology Act, 2000.   The Committee 
observe that this step was necessary to deal with the various finer nuances of the 
technological terms.  With these observations, the Committee endorse the 
amendments. 
 
2.16 The Committee observe that the Registration Act mainly deals with the 
registration of documents and its related procedures and formalities.  The 
Registration Office and the post of Registrar and Sub -Registrar are the crucial 
functionaries in the system.  The Committee however observe that surprisingly 
none of  the term s “Registrar”, “Sub -Registrar”, “Registration Office” has been 
defined in the Registration Act.  The Committee, therefore, recom mend that the 
Government should use this opportunity to define these terms also in the 
amendment Bill.  

16 
 
Clause 3 of the Bill : Section 3 – Inspector General of Registration 
 
3.1 The existing provision of Section 3 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
(1) The State Government shall appoint an officer to be the Inspector -
General of Registration for the territories subject to such government: 
PROVIDED that the State Government may, instead of making 
such appointment, direct that all or any of the powers and duties 
hereinafter conferred and imposed upon the Inspector -General 
shall be exercised and performed by such officer or officers, and 
within such local limits, as the State Government appoints in this 
behalf. 
(2) Any Inspector-General may hold simultaneously any other office under 
the Government. 
 
3.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to insert the following sub -
section after sub-section (2): 
 ―(3) The State Government may appoint one or more Additional Inspector  
General of Registration, Joint Inspector-General of Registration, Deputy 
Inspector General of Registration and Assistant Inspector -General of 
Registration for the territories and may specify the duti es of such officers and 
authorize them to exercise all or any powers and duties of the Inspector-General 
of Registration.‖ 
 
3.3 This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the Act relating to ―Inspector General of 
Registration‖.  It proposes to insert a new sub -section (3) which provides that the State 
Government may appoint one or more Additional In spector General of Registration, 
Joint Inspector General of Registration, Deputy Inspector General of Registration and 
Assistant Inspector General of Registration for the territories and may specify the duties 
of such officers and authorize them to exercis e all or any powers and duties of the 
Inspector General of Registration. This has been necessitated due to the fact that 
various posts in the registration department have been created in the recent past in 
view of the increasing workload of the department. 
 

17 
 
3.4 The Committee observe that a new sub -section (3) has been added in 
section 3 of the Act to enable the  States to make appointments at different leve ls 
in the Registration Offices and the immediate reason for making such enabling 
provision in the Act is stated to be creation of various posts in the recent past in 
registration department in view of the heavy work -load.  The Committee feel that 
proper cadre need to be formed based on  the actual requirement s of staff in 
Registration Offices.  For this purpose, a work study could be undertaken to find 
out the actual requirement s of strength at various levels  and also  for 
determination of the  hierarchical pattern.  The Committee also observe that 
before initiating any recruitment process, it should be mandatory for the 
States/Department to frame proper recruitment rules specifying the eligibility 
conditions for making recruitment /appointment at various l evels in the cadre.   
The Committee hope that these observations will be suitably incorporated in the 
Act. 
 

18 
 
Clause 4 of the Bill : Section 6 – Registrars and Sub-Registrars 
 
4.1 The existing provision of Section 6 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
 
―The State Government may appoint such persons, whether public officers or 
not, as it thinks proper, to be Registrars of the several districts, and to be Sub -
Registrars of the several sub-districts, formed as aforesaid, respectively.‖ 
 
4.2 The Registration (A mendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to amend the Section 6 of the 
existing Act as under: 
―In section 6 of the principal Act , the words ―whether public officers or not‖ shall 
be omitted.‖ 
 
4.3 This clause seeks to amend section 6 of the Act, relating to ―Registrars and Sub -
Registrars‖, so as to omit the expression ―whether public officers or not‖ in the said 
section. 
 
4.4 During the course of evidence the representatives of the Government of Punjab 
on the proposed amendment to Section 6 of the Act stated as under:-       
 
―In that context, the existing provision says that the State Government may 
appoint such persons whether public officer or not as it thinks proper to be 
Registrars of several Districts and to be Sub -Registrar of several sub -districts. 
Now, the proposal by way of amendment is to delete the words ―whether public 
officers or not‖.  After deletion the Section would read as ―The State Government 
may appoint such persons as it thinks  proper to be Registrar or Sub -Registrar.‖  
Once the words ―public officers or not‖ are deleted, one interpretation is that it 
leaves the field open to the State Government to appoint any person including a 
juridical person, a legal entity like a corporate  body as Sub -Registrar.  So, the 
only clarification is whether it is the intent of the Legislature or the Parliament to 
open the field wider by making this amendment............" 
 
4.5 Further on the issue of appointing Sub-Registrars, the representatives of 
Government of Punjab explained as under:-         
"Our view is that in addition to State cadre of Sub -Registrars and Revenue 
Officers, the State Government may also have the option of appointing persons 
from outside the Government cadre. For example, a publi c sector undertaking 
may be assigned this task........." 

19 
 
4.6 During the course of evidence o n enquiring about any criteria practiced for 
appointment of Non-Government officials as Registrars and Sub -Registrars, the 
representative of DoLR replied as under:-                  
"With respect to appointment of non-Government officials as Registrars and Sub-
registrars, policy decision is to be taken by Ministry.  There is no legal provision 
involved in this matter." 
 
4.7 The Committee received public opinion in this regard as under:-  
"Section 6 of the  Act provides that the State Government may appoint any 
person, as Registrar or Sub -Registrar, as it thinks proper, whether such persons 
are public officers or not, Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to omit the language, 
‗whether public officers or not‘. The deletion maintains the existing position 
under the Act, which is to allow the State Government to appoint any person as 
Register or Sub -Registrar, whether or not such person is a public officer or not.  
Since, the Registrar enjo ys various executive powers under the Act and the Bill, 
including the power to refuse registration; it should not be allowed to be carried 
out by a private person.  Further, there are checks and balances to ensure 
transparency and non -profit motive of a pu blic servant.  Therefore, if a private 
individual is empowered with such crucial Government functions, it may lead to 
profiteering the favoritism, with no corresponding check and balance.  Therefore, 
only public officer should be appointed as Registrar and Sub-Registrar." 
4.8 In this context, the DoLR in a written note clarified as under:- 
"The issue raised is that the term ―whether public officers or not should not be 
removed from section 6 of the Act. Rules for recruitment of Sub -Registrars are 
in force in mo st of the States. Thus no private individual can be recruited 
without following the procedure laid done in rules. Therefore, this suggestion is 
not justifiable." 
 
4.9 The Committee observe that clause 4 of the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 
2013 seeks to delete the words “whether public officers or not ” from section 6 of 
the Act which by implication will mean that Government will be at liberty to 
appoint any person with any qualification to the post of Registrar and                  
Sub-Registrar.  The Com mittee do not approve such vague clause to exist in the 
Act  as it will lead to ambiguous situation leading various and conflicting 
interpretation in future.   Therefore, the Committee is of the strong view that the 
post of Registr ar and Sub -Registrar should be filled only  from amongst those 
persons who fulfill the eligibility conditions as laid down in the recruitment rules 
framed in this regard  by the Department/States. The Committee therefore desire 

20 
 
that this recommendation of the Committee should be appropriately incorporated 
in section 6 of the Act. 

21 
 
Clause 5 of the Bill : Section 8 – Inspectors of Registration Offices 
 
5.1 The existing provision of Section 8 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
 
 (1) The State Government may also appoint officers, to be called Inspectors of 
Registration offices, and may prescribe the duties of such officers. 
 (2) Every such Inspector shall be subordinate to the Inspector-General. 
 
5.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 20 13 proposes to amend section 8 of the 
principal Act as under : 
"(a)in sub -section (1), for the words ―officers, to be called  Inspector s of 
Registration-offices‖, the words ―officers to be designated as Inspectors  of  
Registration-offices from time to time‘‘ shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub -section (2),  for the word ―Inspector -General‘‘, the word ‗‗Inspector -
General of Registration‘‘ shall be substituted." 
 
5.3 This clause seeks to amend section 8 of the Act, relating to "Inspectors of 
Registration Offices', so as to substitute the words "officers to be called Inspectors of 
Registration offices", with the words "officers to be designated as Inspectors of 
Registration Offices from time to time" in sub-section (1) of the said section: 
 
5.4 The Committee note that clause 5 of the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 
2013 seeks to amend section 8 of the Act  which relates to appointment of 
Inspectors of Registration Offices.  The Committee endorse the amendment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

22 
 
Clause 6 of the Bill : Section 10 – Absence of Registrar or vacancy in his office 
 
6.1 The existing provision of Section 10 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
 
(1) When any Registrar, other than the Registrar of a district including a 
Presidency-town, is absent otherwise than on duty in his district, or when his 
office is temporarily vacant, any person whom the Inspector -General appoints in 
this behalf, or, in defau lt of such appointment, the Judge of the District Court 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Registrar's office is situate, shall be 
the Registrar during such absence or until the State Government fills up the 
vacancy. 
(2) When the Registrar o f a district including a Presidency -town is absent 
otherwise than on duty in his district, or when his office is temporarily vacant, any 
person whom the Inspector-General appoints in this behalf shall be the Registrar 
during such absence, or until the State Government fills up the vacancy. 
 
6.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to amend the Section 10 
(Absence of Registrar or vacancy in his office) of the existing Act as under: 
 
For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:–– 
  
―10. When any Registrar is absent otherwise than on duty in his district, or when 
his office is temporarily vacant, any public officer whom the Inspector -General 
appoints in this behalf, shall be the Registrar during such absence or u ntil the 
State Government fills up the vacancy.‖ 
 
6.3 This clause seeks to substitute section 10 of the Act relating to "Absence of 
Registrar or vacancy in his office" so as to provide that when any Registrar is absent 
otherwise than on duty in his district, or when his office is temporarily vacant, any public 
officer whom the Inspector - General appoints in this behalf, shall be the Registrar 
during such absence or until the State Government fills up the vacancy.  
 
  

23 
 
6.4 The Government of Kerala in this regard submitted as under:-    
 
"The proposed amendment is intended to simplify the provisions and to empower 
the Inspector General of Registration to fill up the temporary vacancy of any 
Registrar considering the administrative exigency so as to ensure the smooth 
functioning of the office and the amendment is agreeable" 
 
6.5 The Committee no te that clause 6 of the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 
2013 seeks to amend section 10 of the Act which relates to making arrangements 
in situations of absence of  Registrar or  vacancy in his office .  The Committee  
endorse th is amendment but at the same time  express their view that similar 
provisions must be made for the absence of Sub-Registrars also. 

24 
 
Clause 7 of the Bill : Section 17 – Documents of which registration is compulsory 
 
7.1 The existing provision of Section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
(1) The following documents shall be registered, if the property to which they 
relate is situate in a district in which, and if they have been executed on or after 
the date on which, Act No. XVI of 1864, or the Indian Registration Act, 1866, or 
the Indian Registration Act, 1871, or the Indian Registration Act, 1877 or this Act 
came or comes into force, namely:- 
(a) instruments of gift of immovable property; 
(b) other non-testamentary instruments which purport or operate to create, 
declare, assign, limit or ext inguish, whether in present or in future, any 
right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent, of the value of one 
hundred rupees, and upwards, to or in immovable property; 
(c) non -testamentary instruments which acknowledge the receipt or 
payment of  any consideration on account of the creation, declaration, 
assignment, limitation or extinction of any such right, title or interest; and 
(d) leases of immovable property from year to year, or for any term 
exceeding one year, or reserving a yearly rent; 
(e) non-testamentary instruments transferring or assigning any decree or 
order of a court or any award when such decree or order or award 
purports or operates to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether 
in present or in future, any right, title  or interest, whether vested or 
contingent, of the value of one hundred rupees and upward s, to or in 
immovable property: 
  
Provided that the State Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, exempt from the operation of this sub-section any lease executed in any 
district, or part of a district, the terms granted by which do not exceed five years 
and the annual rent reserved by which do not exceed fifty rupees. 
 (1A). The documents  containing contracts to transfer for consideration, 
any immovable property for the purpose of section 53A of the Transfer of 

25 
 
Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882) shall be registered if they have been 
executed on or after the commencement of the Registration and Other 
Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2001  and if such document s are not 
registered on or after such commencement, then, they shall have no effect 
for the purposes of the section 53A. 
 
  (2) Nothing in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) applies to- 
 (i) any composition deed; or 
(ii) any instrument relating to shares in a joint Stock Company, 
notwithstanding that the assets of such company consist in whole 
or in part of immovable property; or 
(iii) any debenture issued by any such company and not creating, 
declaring, assigning, limiting or extinguishing any righ t, title or 
interest, to or in immovable property except insofar as it entitles the 
holder to the security afforded by a registered instrument whereby 
the company has mortgaged, conveyed or otherwise transferred 
the whole or part of its immovable property or any interest therein to 
trustees upon trust for the benefit of the holders of such 
debentures; or 
(iv) any endorsement upon or transfer of any debenture issued by 
any such company; or 
(v) any document other than the document specified in sub-section 
1A not itself creating, declaring, assigning, limiting or extinguishing 
any right, title or interest of the value of one hundred rupees and 
upwards to or in immovable property, but merely creating a right to 
obtain another document which will, when executed, create, 
declare, assign, limit or extinguish any such right, title or interest; or 
(vi) any decree or order of a court except a decree or order 
expressed to be made on a compromise and comprising 
immovable property other than that which is the subject -matter of 
the suit or proceeding; or 

26 
 
(vii) any grant of immovable property by government; or 
(viii) any instrument of partition made by a revenue-officer; or 
(ix) any order granting a loan or instrument of collateral security 
granted under the Land Improvement  Act, 1871, or the Land 
Improvement Loans Act, 1883; or 
(x) any order granting a loan under the Agriculturists Loans Act, 
1884, or instrument for securing the repayment of a loan made 
under that Act; or 
(xa) any order made under the Charitable Endowments A ct, 1890, 
(6 of 1890) vesting any property in a Treasurer of Charitable 
Endowments or divesting any such treasurer of any property; or 
(xi) any endorsement on a mortgage -deed acknowledging the 
payment of the whole or any part of the mortgage -money, and any 
other receipt for payment of money due under a mortgage when the 
receipt does not purport to extinguish the mortgage; or 
(xii) any certificate of sale granted to the purchaser of any property 
sold by public auction by a civil or revenue-officer. 
Explanation: A document purporting or operating to effect a 
contract for the sale of immovable property shall not be deemed to 
require or ever to have required registration by reason only of the 
fact that such document contains a recital of the payment of any 
earnest money or of the whole or any part of the purchase money. 
 
(3) Authorities to adopt a son, executed after the 1st day of January, 1872, 
and not conferred by a will, shall also be registered. 
 
7.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to amend the Section 17 
(documents of which registration is compulsory) of the existing Act as under: 
 
In Section 17 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), - 

27 
 
(i) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:– 
―(d) leases of immovable property for any term: 
Provided that in case where the lease is for a term less than one 
year, the State Government may, by notification, specify the 
amounts of annual rent, money advance, payment in lieu of rent or 
premium which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees per 
month;‖ 
 
(ii) after clause (e) and before the proviso thereof, the following clauses 
shall be inserted, namely:–– 
 
―(f) any document which purports or operates to effect any contract 
for sale of any immovable property including developer‘s or 
promoter‘s agreement by whatever name called for development of 
any property or construction of structure;  
 
(g) agreement relating to the deposit of title deeds, where such 
deposit ha s been made by way of security for the repayment of a 
loan or an existing or futur e debt, except where it is filed under 
section 89; 
 
(h) sale certificate issued by any competent officer or authority 
under any Central Act or State Act for the time being in force; 
 
(i) power of attorney authorising transfer of immovable property with 
or without consideration; 
 
(j) instruments in respect of amalgamation, reconstruction, merger 
and demerge r of companies and transfer of immovable property at 
the time of formatio n of companies pursuant to any order made by 
the High Court under the Companies Act, 1956; 
 
(k) instrument s which purport or operate to create, declare, 
assign, limit, extinguish any right, title or interest whether vested or 
contingent in immovable property pursuant to any decree or order or 
any award made by a court.‖; 
 

28 
 
(iii)  in sub-section (2), clause (xii) and the Explanation there under shall 
be omitted; 
(iv) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- 
―(3) Authorities to adopt a son or a daughter and not conferred by a 
Will, shall also be registered.‖. 
 
7.3 Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section 17 of the principal Act relating to 
'documents of which registration is compulsory'. It proposes to substitute clause (d) of 
sub-section (1) of the said section so as to provide that registration is compulsory in 
matters relating to leases of immovable property for any term.  However, in case where 
the lease is for a term less than one year, the State Government may, by notification, 
specify the amounts of annual rent, money advance, payment in lieu of rent or premium 
which shall not be less thant fifty thousand rupee s per month.  It also proposes to 
provide that registration is compulsory in matters relating to  (i) any document which 
purports or operates to effect any contract for sale of any immovable property including 
developer‘s or prmoter‘s agreement by whatever  name called for development of any 
property or construction of structure; (ii) agreement relating to deposit of title deeds, 
where such deposit has been made by way of security for the repayment of a loan or an 
existing or for future debt, except whre it is filed under section 89; (iii) sale certificate 
issued by any competent officer or authority under the Central Act or State Act for the 
time being in force; (iv) Power of Attorney authorizing transfer of immovable property 
with or without consideration; (v) instruments in respect of amalgamation, 
reconstruction, merger and de-merger of companies and transfer of immovable property 
at the time of formation of companies pursuant to any order made by the High Court 
under the Companies Act, 1956; (vi) instrume nts which purports or operates to create, 
declare, assign, limit, extinguish any right, title or interest whether vested or contingent 
in immovable property pursuant to any decree or order or any award made by a court.  
It also proposed to substitute sub -section (3) of the said section so as to provide that 
Authorities to adopt a son or a daughter and not conferred by a will, shall also be 
registered. 
 
 

29 
 
7.4 The Government of Kerala has submitted their suggestions as under:- 
          
"The proposed amendments is  agreed to with the suggestion that all partnership 
deeds and Gahan/Release of Gahan may also be specifically included in Section 
17 as compulsorily registerable documents." 
 
7.5 The Government of Madhya Pradesh  has submitted their comments on 17(1)(e) 
as under:-     
"Every lease of immovable property, agreement to sale, development and 
construction agreements, agreement relating to deposit of title deeds, sale 
certificate, power of attorney, instruments of amalgamation, reconstruction, 
merger and de -merger of companies and transfer of immovable property 
pursuant to order made by the High Court and decree or order or award made by 
a court have been made compulsorily registrable." 
 
7.6 During the course of evidence for the proposed amendment in Section 17 about 
documents for which registration is compulsory, the Government of Tamil Nadu stated 
as under:-                
".........Then, next is amendment proposed in clause 7, where document 
registration is made compulsory. It is 17 (i). It is Power of Attorney which is 
executed outside the country. Currently in our State that is exempted because 
there the authentication is done before the Embassy official and the document is 
sent to the other person and that person presents before the sub -registrar who 
adjudicates and ac cepts the document. Now, when it is made compulsory, the 
person from abroad has to come physically every time when he executes the 
documents. It creates practical difficulty in the execution of the documents for 
that person. So, we request that, that exemp tion should continue, which is 
available for the person who executes the Power of Attorney who is residing 
abroad." 
 
7.7 During the course of evidence on the issue of execution of power of attorney, the 
representatives of Government of Tamil Nadu stated as under:-   
"............. supposing somebody after executing a power of attorney cancels the 
power of attorney, then what happens.  That is the line of discussion.  For 
cancellation of power of attorney, both the members have to physically appear 
before the su b registrar.  That is a provision in Tamil Nadu as of now.  For 
execution, both have to come.  For cancellation also, both the parties have to 

30 
 
physically appear before the sub registrar office in Tamil Nadu.  Regarding the 
doubt expressed by the hon. Member , we have power of attorney which is being 
registered outside Tamil Nadu.  After all, registering abroad is not an issue.  Now, 
outside Tamil Nadu the provision we have is this.  It is a Tamil Nadu State 
amendment: provided that every document may be prese nted for registration in 
the office of the sub registrar within whose jurisdiction the principal ordinarily 
resides.  So, suppose somebody is a resident of Delhi and he has a property in 
Tamil Nadu, he can execute the power of attorney document in sub regi strar 
office of Delhi. " 
 
7.8 On the issue of Power  of Attorney, representatives of the Government of NCT of 
Delhi stated as under:-                       
"................Power of attorney now is compulsorily registrable. What we suggest is 
that, if the power  of attorney is registered in a foreign country, I mean if it is a 
case of power of attorney by a person living in a foreign country, he should get it 
authenticated in our embassy.  That embassy should officially forward it to the 
sub registrar office concerned.  It will be an authentic way of doing the things." 
 
7.9 During the course of evidence on the issue of amendment in Section 17              
sub-section (iv)(3) of the Act, the representatives of Government of Uttar Pradesh 
stated as under :-            
           
""àÉcÉänªÉ, ªÉc +ÉàÉåbàÉå] cÉä MÉªÉÉ cè* {ÉÖjÉ BÉEä ºÉÉlÉ {ÉÖjÉÉÒ BÉEÉä £ÉÉÒ ¶ÉÉÉÊàÉãÉ BÉE® ÉÊnªÉÉ MÉªÉÉ cè* <ºÉàÉå ABÉE ãÉÉ<xÉ  
+ÉÉè® Ab cÉä VÉÉA - ‗An instrument recorded adoption of a child executed shall also be 
registered." 
àÉcÉänªÉ, nÉä |ÉÉäºÉÉÒVÉºÉÇ cé, ABÉE, +ÉìlÉÉÉÊ®]ÉÒ ]Ú AbÉ{] cè +ÉÉè® nÚºÉ®É, AbÉì{¶ÉxÉ BÉEÉÒ ®ÉÊVÉº]Åä¶ÉxÉ cÉäxÉÉÒ cè* <ºÉÉÊãÉA 
càÉ ºÉäBÉD¶ÉxÉ 17(3) BÉEä ºÉ¤ºÉ]ÉÒ]áÉÚ] BÉE®BÉEä =ºÉàÉå {ÉÖjÉ +ÉÉè® {ÉÖjÉÉÒ BÉEÉä Ab BÉE® ®cä cé* +É£ÉÉÒ ªÉc |É{ÉÉäVÉãÉ cè 
:“Authority to adopt a son or a daughter executed after the 1 st day of January, 
1872 and conferred by a will. ” 
ªÉcÉÆ {É® +ÉÉBÉE® ´ÉiÉÇàÉÉxÉ +ÉàÉåbàÉå] âóBÉE VÉÉiÉÉ cè* càÉÉ®É +ÉàÉåbàÉå] ªÉcÉÒ Ab BÉE®xÉä BÉEä ÉÊãÉA BÉEciÉÉ cè ÉÊBÉE ‘and 
an instrument recording adoption of a chil d.’ +ÉMÉ® ªÉä ´ÉbÂºÉÇ <ºÉàÉå Ab cÉä VÉÉAÆ iÉÉä =ºÉºÉä 
AbÉì{¶ÉxÉ BÉEÉÒ ®ÉÊVÉº]Åä¶ÉxÉ +ÉÉè® +ÉlÉÉìÉÊ®]ÉÒ ]Ú AbÉì{] BÉEÉÒ ®ÉÊVÉº]Åä¶ÉxÉ, nÉäxÉÉå cÉÒ cÉä VÉÉAMÉÉ* 
 
7.10 On being enquired about the various provisions in Section 17 of the Act during 
the course of evidence the Secretary, DoLR stated on the issue of adoption as under:-  
"............. The registration of adoption of girl child should be made registerable. 
The penal provision as far as I know is this. If it is not registered, the document is 
not recognis ed and then the penal provision would be redundant in a way 
because the document itself will not be considered a registered document........." 
 

31 
 
7.11 During the course of evidence on the issue of registration of immovable property 
the representatives of Ministry of Law & Justice replied as under:  
".........  It says that: ―No document required by Section 17 to be registered, shall 
affect any immovable property comprised therein, confer any power to adopt, be 
received as evidence of any transaction unless it is r egistered‖.  In case it is not 
registered these are the affects; the immovable property shall not be taken effect 
and it will not confer any power to adopt and it will not give any evidentiary value.  
These are the affects of non -registration.  So, I do no t think penal provision is 
required in this regard.  However, the Committee may suggest it " 
 
7.12 The suggestions received by the Committee from the public are as under:-   
"The Proviso to Section 17(1) of the Act deals with the power of the State 
Government to exempt any lease, the term granted by which do not exceed five 
years and the annual rent  reserved by which do not exceed fifty rupees. A plain 
reading of the proviso suggests that it pertains to lease arrangement, which is 
now specifically covered unde r Clause (d) of Section 17 (1) as provided in the 
Bill. 
The Registration (Amendment) Bill should also provide for Compulsory 
Registration of all the Rent Deeds/Agreements also as has been being provided 
for the Registration for the Leases of Immovable prop erty for any term.  For the 
hassle free Registration of all Lease Agreements/Rent Agreements complete 
work be delegated to e -Sampark/Jan Sampark Centres in cities like Chandigarh 
with all prescribed Charges paid through at the e-sampark etc. itself." 
7.13 The Department of Land Resources in this connection stated as under:- 
"(1) Registration of lease deed is already compulsory under section 17 of the 
Registration Act. Lease deed for a period of less than one year with monthly rent 
Rs. 50000/- can be notified for compulsory registration by States. 
(2) Registration fee is fixed by State Government under section 78 of the Act. 
Therefore, the Central Government cannot fix the registration fees for the whole 
country." 
7.14 The Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural  Development in a written 
note in this connection further stated as under:- 
"(1) Today students are staying in hostels and need a residence proof for 
opening a bank account, to take a SIM card. A registered lease deed for a 
period of less than one year is an affordable proof of residence. Therefore, it 
is necessary to provide for registration of leases for a period of less than one 
year. 
(2) The number of lease deeds for a short period is too high. In order to cope up 
with the new volume of work, the State Government needs time to develop 

32 
 
infrastructure facilities. Therefore, the States have been given the power to issue 
notification to begin registration of such leases." 
 
7.15 The Committee observe that clause 7 of the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 
2013 seeks to amend section 17 of the Registration Act , 1908.  This section deals 
with the categories of documents whose registration is compulsory .  The 
significant amendment suggested is making registration compulsory for the 
leases of immovable property for any term with the proviso that when the term of 
lease is less than one year , the State Government may notify the amount which 
shall not be less than Rs. 50,000/ - per month.   During examination of the Bill, 
Committee received a number of suggestions on this iss ue.  The Committee‟s 
analysis reveal that while compulsory registration of lease will on one side 
generate revenue to the Government but on the other side will increase the 
workload of the registration offices as a large number of leases are  regularly  
executed.  The Committee further observe that fixing uniformally the amount of 
Rs.50,000/- per month as a minimum amount of rent, premium etc.  as a criterion 
for making the lease  compulsory regist erable will also be not logical as the 
amount of rent, premium  etc. is not uniform across the States The Commi ttee 
therefore while endorsing the amendment to bring “leases of immovable for any 
term” under the category of compulsory registration, recommend that the 
criterion of exemption   should be left with the States to decide. 
 
7.16 The Committee further observe that  registration of  power of attorney 
authorizing transfer of immovable property with or without consideration has also 
been made compulsory in the proposed amendment.  The Committee endorse the 
amendment. 
 
7.17 The Committee observe that sub-section (3) of section 17 have been 
substituted whereby registration of authorities to adopt a son or a daughter has 
been made compulsory.  The Committee observe that  the registration of not only 
the “authorities” but also of  the “adoption deed ” should be made  compulsory.  

33 
 
The Committee therefore recommend that sub -section (3) of section 17 should be 
suitably modified to incorporate the recommendation of the Committee.  
 

34 
 
Clause 8 of the Bill : Section 18 – Documents of which registration is optional 
 
8.1 The existing provision of Section 18 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
 
―Any of the following documents may be registered under this Act, namely:- 
(a) instruments (other than instruments of gift and wills) which purpor t or 
operate to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether in present 
or in future, any right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent, of a 
value less than one hundred rupees, to or in immovable property; 
(b) instruments acknowledging t he receipt or payment of any 
consideration on account of the creation, declaration, assignment, 
limitation or extinction of any such right, title or interest; 
(c) leases of immovable property for any term not exceeding one year, 
and leases exempted under section 17; 
(cc) instruments transferring or assigning any decree or order of a court or 
any award when such decree or order or award purports or operates to 
create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether in present or in future, 
any right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent, of a value less 
than one hundred rupees, to or in immovable property; 
(d) instruments (other than wills) which purport or operate to create, 
declare, assign, limit or extinguish any right, title or interest to or in 
movable property; 
(e) wills; and 
(f) all other documents not required by section 17 to be registered. 
8.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 20 13 seeks to amend the Section 18  
(documents of which registration is optional) of the existing Act as under: 
 For section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely :- 
 ―18. The following documents may be registered under this Act, namely:–– 
  (a) Wills, authority to adopt by a Will; 
  (b) any document notified by the State Government.‖ 
 
8.3 This clause seeks to substitute section 18 of the Act relating to ―documents of 
which registration is optional‖ so as to provide that the wills, authority to adopt by a will 
and any document notified by the State Government may be registered at the option of 
the parties. 
 
8.4 On the issue of optional registration of will, one public witness  in his written 
submission suggested as under:  

35 
 
 
"It is suggested that WILL which is very important has been kept optional for 
registration in respect of movabl e/immovable property as per section 18 of the 
registration act 1908  should be made compulsorily registered to registered WILL 
should be given upper hand as in many cases two wills appear by the same 
person and legal litigation starts." 
 
8.5 The Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) responded 
to the above suggestion as follows:  
"Will is a document by which title to a property pass to a person after the death of 
the testator of the Will. Therefore, registration of Will has been optional and a Will 
can be registered by any registering officer. The suggestion of making wills 
compulsorily registrable is not acceptable." 
 
8.6 On the proposed substitution, the State Government of Kerala in a   written note 
furnished to the Committee, submitted as under: 
"The proposed amendment intends to simplify the provisions of section 18 and 
confers power upon the State Government to notify the documents the 
registration of which is optional. Thus as per the proposed amendment, the State 
Government is empowered to notify any instrument which purport or operate to 
create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish any right, title or interest to or in 
moveable property as document, the registration of which is optional and hence 
agreeable." 
 
8.7 The State Government of West Bengal in a written note submitted as under:  
 
"The revised sub-section (b) may be modified in the following manner: 
Any document registration of which is not compulsory under section 17 of the Act 
and also not prohibited under the Act or by any notification of the State 
Government." 
 
8.8 During the course of evidence, a representative of State Government of West 
Bengal further stated as under: 
 
"Then, coming to Section 18, it is written –Documents of which registration is optional, 
kindly see to it . {ÉcãÉä ºÉäBÉD¶ÉxÉ 17 àÉå ABÉE ãÉÉ<xÉ lÉÉ ÉÊBÉE VÉÉä BÉÖEU ºÉäBÉD¶ÉxÉ 17 àÉå xÉcÉÓ cÉäMÉÉ, ´Éc ºÉäBÉD¶ÉxÉ 
18 àÉå cÉäMÉÉ*  
Sir, Section 18 (f), in the end, says ‗all other documents not required by section 17 to be 
registered.’ ªÉc ãÉÉ<xÉ ªÉcÉÆ ®cxÉÉÒ SÉÉÉÊcA* ºÉäBÉD¶ÉxÉ 18 àÉå +ÉàÉåbàÉå] BÉEä ¤ÉÉn ªÉc ãÉÉ<xÉ xÉcÉÓ ®cxÉä ºÉä ®ÉVªÉ 
+ÉÉè® BÉEäxp ºÉ®BÉEÉ® BÉEä ÉÊãÉA ªÉc ÉÊbBÉDãÉäªÉ® BÉE®xÉÉ àÉÖÉÎ¶BÉEãÉ cÉä VÉÉAMÉÉ ÉÊBÉE ÉÊBÉEiÉxÉä bÉìBÉDªÉÖàÉå]ÂºÉ cÉåMÉä* B ÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉE c® 

36 
 
®ÉäWÉ xÉªÉä -xÉªÉä b ÉìBÉDªÉÖàÉå]ÂºÉ +ÉÉ ®cä cé* <ºÉBÉEÉä BÉEèºÉä º{ÉäÉÊºÉ{ÉEÉ<Ç ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ VÉÉAMÉÉ ÉÊBÉE ºÉäBÉD¶ÉxÉ 18 àÉå ªÉä -ªÉä 
bÉìBÉDªÉÖàÉå]ÂÂºÉ cÉåMÉä? <ºÉBÉEÉä ®ÉVªÉ ºÉ®BÉEÉ® £ÉÉÒ xÉcÉÓ BÉE® ºÉBÉEiÉÉÒ cè +ÉÉè® BÉEäxp ºÉ®BÉEÉ® £ÉÉÒ xÉcÉÓ BÉE® ºÉBÉEiÉÉÒ cè* 
I have one more point, which I want to make. In the existing Section 51 of the 
Registration Act, there are mentions of sub-section (d) and (f) of section 18. So, this (d ) 
and (f) will no longer be there. So, this has to be removed in section 51 because we 
have reduced section." 
 
8.9  The Committee observe that the existing provision of section 18 of the Act  
gives details of those documents for which registration at present is optional but 
the amendment proposed in the  Bill suggest optional registration of documents 
falling only in two categories – one relating to the Wills and authority to adopt by 
a will and the other relating to any document notified by the State Government.   
The Committee observe that suggestions have been received for making 
compulsory registration of W ill as unregistered Will give rise to a lot of dispute s 
on death of testator .  The Committee therefore, recommend that the Government 
may examine the possibility of placing the “Will" under the category of 
compulsory registration.  
 
8.10 The Committee further o bserve that  the proposed amendment cast 
responsibility on the State Governments to notify from time to time the categories 
of documents whose registration is optional .  The Committee feel that  such 
situation may create confusion in future as not only the decision of one State may 
differ from that of another State  but also it may create an atmosphere of 
uncertainty about the documents falling in the category of  optional registration.  
The Committee therefore,  recommend that the Government should  prepare an 
exhaustive list of the documents whose registration is proposed to be optional  
and simultaneously  provision may be made for the States to notify documents 
other than those listed which they consider for optional registration. 
 
8.11 The Committee further ob serve that the existing sub-section (f) of section 
18 of the Act gives wider coverage of documents under optional registration  as it 
says, 'all other documents not required under Section 17 to be registered'.  
However, the  proposed amendment  excludes such wider  categories of 
documents and therefore, suggestions have been received to keep this clause 

37 
 
alive in the amended legislation.  The Committee therefore recommend                            
the Government to consider this aspect before finalizing t he amendment of 
section 18. 
 
8.12 The Committee also observe that certain  consequential changes will be 
required in other sections of the Act if the amendments proposed in the Bill are 
carried forward.  It is observed that sub-Section (3) of the existing Section 51 
mentions sub-Sections (d) and (f) of the existing Section 18  and therefore, if the 
proposed amendment to Section 18 is carried out, consequential changes would 
be required in Section 51 of the principal Act. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should take care of making consequential 
changes in other sections of the principal Act due to the proposed amendment in 
section 18.  

38 
 
Clause 9 of the Bill :  Insertion of new section 18A (Refusal of registration of 
certain documents) 
 
9.1 Clause 9 of the Bill proposes to insert the following section after section 18 of the 
principal Act as under:  
" 18A. The following classes of documents shall be refused for registration,  
namely: 
(a) the document relating to transaction, which is prohibited by any 
existing Central Act or State Act for the time being in force; 
 
(b) the document relating to transfer of property by way of agreement for  
sale, sale, gift, exchange or lease or otherwise in respect of any  
immovable property owned by the C entral Government or State 
Government or any Authority or undertaki ng of the Central Government or 
State Government or any Authority or undertaking constituted or 
established under any Central Act or State Ac t, for the time being in force, 
executed by any person other than those statutorily empowered to do so; 
 
(c) the document relating to transfer of property by way of agreement for  
sale, sale, gift, exchange or permanent alienation or lease or otherwise 
pertaining to any immovable property which is attach ed permanently or 
provisionally by any competent authority under any Central Act or State 
Act for the time being in force or any court or Tribunal; 
 
(d) any document or class of documents which are likely to affect 
adversely the accrued interest in immovab le properties of the Central 
Government, State Governments, local  bodies, educational, cultural, 
religious or charitable institutions including Waqf Boards, Bhoodan Yagan 
and other properties as may be notified by the State Government: 
   
 Provided that no thing in this clause shall apply in respect of any 
document or class of documents for which sanction in this regard has  
been issued by the competent authority under any l aw for the time being 
in force." 
 
9.2 This clause seeks to insert a new section 18A relating to ―refusal of registration of 
certain documents‖ .  The said section proposes to provide  that (a)  the document 
relating to transaction, which is prohibited by any existing Central Act or State Act for 
the time being in force;  (b) the document relatin g to transfer of property by way of 
agreement for sale , sale, gift, exchange or lease or otherwise in respect of any  
immovable property owned by the Central Government or State Government or any 

39 
 
Authority or undertaki ng of the Central Government or State Government or any 
Authority or undertaking constituted or established under any Central Act or State Ac t, 
for the time being in force, executed by any person other than those statutorily 
empowered to do so;   (c) the document relating to transfer of p roperty by way of 
agreement for sale, sale, gift, exchange or permanent alienation or lease or otherwise 
pertaining to any immovable property which is attached permanently or provisionally by 
any competent authority under any Central Act or State Act for the time being in force or 
any court or Tribunal;  (d) any document or class of documents which are likely to affect 
adversely the accrued interest in immovable properties of the Central Government, 
State Governments, local bodies, educational, cultural, religious or charitable institutions 
including Waqf Boards, Bhoodan Yagan and other properties as may be n otified by the 
State Government are prohibited for registration. 
 
9.3 On the rationale of the proposed insertion of a new section 18A, the State 
Government of Tamil Nadu in a written note informed as under: 
 "It may be stated that the proposed amendment provides for refusal of 
 registration of documents relating to transaction of properties belonging to 
 Central Government or State Government. Though it is im perative to protect the 
 interests of the properties owned by the Central Government or State 
 Government, it is very much essential that the details of properties belonging to 
 the Central and State Governments are provided to the Registration Department 
 so that the registering officers would be aware of such properties and they would 
 refuse the registration of documents relating to such properties. If no such details 
 are provided and the proposed amendment is implemented, then situations may 
 arise wherein the registering officers are unaware of the properties belonging to 
 the Government and they may register the documents relating to those 
 properties and unknowingly they would violate the provisions of the Act. This 
 amendment may be accepted and it may also be necessary to ensure that the 
 properties held by them are made available to the concerned Sub -Registrar 
 Office." 
 
9.4 In this regard, the State Government of West Bengal in a written note submitted 
to the Committee, stated as under:   
 "The following sub-section may be added: 
 
(e) the document relating to transaction of  any property, whether movable or 
immovable, transfer of which is prohi bited by the Central or State Government in 
order to protect greater public interest." 

40 
 
 
9.5 During the course of evidence, a representative of State Government of Tamil 
Nadu stated as under:  
 
"Then the next point is the amendment proposed in clause 9, section 18(a) to 
provide for refusal of certain documents. If it is an unauthorized transaction  with 
respect to the Central and the State Government property, the sub -registrar can 
refuse it. There is no problem regarding that. We agree to that proposal. The only 
thing is if the list of Government properties could be made available to the sub -
registrar in some form, that will make the process easy for the sub -registrar. 
Otherwise, he may not have the knowledge as to which is a Government 
property and which is not a Government property. It also talks about educational 
institutions, public undertakings  and a lot of other authorities under the 
Government of India as well as under the State Governments." 
 
9.6 The Secretary, Department of Land Resources, during the course of evidence 
explained as under: 
 "This is a suggestion which came from the State Governme nts whether 
government property should be notified and list made available. The States are 
empowered to do it because land is a State subject and registration is a Central 
subject. So, the States should be in a position to come up with a view on this 
matter." 
 
9.7 The Committee observe that t he Bill proposes to insert a new Section 18A 
to enable the Registrar and Sub-Registrar to refuse registration of certain classes 
of documents. The  documents which could be refused for registration relate to 
the transaction of properties belonging to Central Government or State 
Government and also those which are prohibited by any Central or State Act . The 
suggestions have been received that unless the details of properties belonging to 
Central and State Governments are available in the public domain, the purpose of 
insertion of new section 18A will not be served because the documents relating 
to the properties prohibited for registration could be registered  unintentionally by 
the Registrar or Sub -Registrar. Although it is a fact that  land is a State subject 
and the States, as mentioned by the department, are  empowered to notify such 
properties, the fact remains that the Central Government has to take initiative in 
this regard and persuade the States as well a s other Governmental Authorities to 
identify their properties properly and put them in public domain so that the 

41 
 
Registration Office  could use that information for denying registration of 
governmental properties.  The Committee while appreciating the initi ative of the 
Government to insert new section 18A to prevent fraudulent registration of 
governmental properties, recommend the Government to take necessary steps 
for identifying the governmenta l properties and placing the details of such 
properties in public domain.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

42 
 
Clause 10 of the Bill :  Omission of Section 28  – Place of registering documents 
relating to land 
 
10.1 The existing provision of Section 28 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
―Place for registering documents relating to land - 
Save as in this Part otherwise provided, every document mentioned in section 
17, sub-section (1), clauses (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e), section 17, sub -section (2), 
insofar as such document affects immovable property, and section 18, clauses 
(a), (b) (c) an d (cc), shall be presented for registration in the office of a Sub -
Registrar within whose sub -district the whole or some portion of the property to 
which such document relates is situate.‖ 
 
10.2 Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to provide for omission of Section 28 relating to ―place 
for registering documents relating to land‖ of the principal Act. 
 
10.3 Objecting to the amendments proposed, the State Government of Tamil Nadu in a 
written note furnished to the Committee stated as under:  
"Omission of section 28 can be ena bled only when web -based registration or real time 
registration are possible. Otherwise, it will lead to lot of frauds as well as loss of revenue to 
the States. Hence Section 28 may be retained. Further, to arrest frauds relating to lands 
under the Nationa l Land Records Modernisation Programme, it is proposed to link the 
revenue and registration records. If anywhere registration is introduced in the absence of 
linking of registration records of one State with the registration records of another State, 
registrations will take place without verifying the ownership of the property in revenue 
records which will provide room for fraudulent registration. If jurisdiction is extended to 
anywhere in India, there is scope for large scale fraudulent registration as wel l as evasion 
of stamp duty. Section 28, as far as in its applicability to this State, provides for every 
document relating to immovable property shall be presented for registration in the office of 
a Sub -Registrar within whose sub -district the whole or som e portion of the property to 
which such documents relates is situate in the state of Tamil Nadu and any document 
registered outside the State in contravention of these provisions shall be deemed to be 
null and void. If the section 28 is omitted as proposed , then it will lead to a situation where 
registration of documents relating to immovable properties situated in Tamil Nadu can be 
registered in any of the registration office in the Country. It is also not clear how the details 
of the registration of a doc ument in a Sub -Registrar Office other than the office in which 
the jurisdiction of the property lies would be communicated to the concerned Sub -
Registrar Office. Moreover, it has been proposed to refuse the registration of properties 
belonging to Central Government and State Government Departments/Organisations. It is 
also not clear how this provision could be implemented if it is permitted to register 
documents relating to immovable properties in any registration office in the Country. 
Further, the stamp d uty and registration fee rates in respect of various types of 
instruments vary across the States and if registration of document anywhere in the 
Country is permitted, it would give an option to the Public to register in a State where the 
stamp duty and reg istration fee is low. This would deprive the legitimate revenue due to 
the State. Even though the Statement of Objects and Reasons states that the purpose of 

43 
 
omitting the section 28 and deleting certain words from section 29 is to provide that the 
immovable property can be registered only in the State in which it is actually located, it is 
felt that omitting this Section will lead to a situation wherein registration of a document 
relating to property situated anywhere could be registered anywhere across the  country 
also. Even if the proposal of allowing registration anywhere within the State is permitted, it 
would pave way for fraudulent registrations. Hence this amendment is strongly objected to 
and it is informed that the Section 28 may be retained and the  Central Act may be suitably 
amended as available in Section 28 (a) and (b) of Tamil Nadu." 
 
10.4 Expressing concern with regard to the removal of section 28, the State Government of 
Madhya Pradesh submitted as under:  
"The removal of this Section implies that a document can be presented in any sub -
registrar office, irrespective of the location of the property in question. Since the office 
where the document is presented is also the office where it shall be subsequently 
registered, the removal of this Section ac tually means that a document may be registered 
anywhere. In any case, the enquiry before registering officer under Section 34 and 35 can 
be irrevocably proved only on the basis of biometrics identification. Thus, it is not 
advisable to remove the Section till all offices are enabled with Aadhar authentication." 
 
10.5 Regarding the amendments to Section 28 of the Act, one public witness in a written note 
submitted as under:  
 
"Such modification to Section 29, together with deletion of Section 28 will allow parties to 
present documents for registration before such Sub -Registrars, who do not have any 
territorial jurisdiction over the property in question.  This step may ease the process of 
registration by making it convenient for the parties to register a document a t the place of 
their choice.  However, on the other hand it may lead to surge in fraudulent transactions.  
At the same time, it will be almost impossible for a third person to verify the title of a 
property, as he may not be aware of the exact place to ins pect and procure the copy of 
the relevant title deed.  For instance, an owner may sell a property by registering a sale 
deed in one Sub -Registrar‘s jurisdiction and may sell the same property again by 
registering another sale deed in another Sub-Registrar‘s jurisdiction.  There is no central 
repository that maintains records of transactions with respect to immovable property.  
Therefore, in absence of any effective safeguards against such potential risks, it may not 
be advisable to omit Section 28 in its entirety. 
 
This brings us to another crucial question that whether existing Section 28 requires any 
modification.  As per Section 28, it has to be presented in the office of the Registrar, 
within whose sub -district the whole or part of the property  to which such document 
relates is situated.  The expression ―some portion of the property‖ has been interpreted 
to mean any portion and not necessarily substantial portion.   The interpretation has 
again given rise to the mischief, as parties include fictitious, non-existing or insignificant 
item of property in the deed to enable registration in the office of their choice.  Therefore, 
we suggest not to omit existing Section 28 of the Act but to modify it in the following 
manner: 
 
―28. Place for registering documents relating to land – Save as in this Part 
otherwise provided, every document mentioned in section 17, sub -section (1), 

44 
 
clauses (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e), Section 17, sub -section (2), insofar as such 
document affects immo vable property, and section 18 , clauses (a), (b), 31 (C) 
and (cc), shall be presented  for registration in the office of a Sub-Registrar within 
whose  sub -district the property to which such document relates is situate.  If a 
document affects immovable pr operty situated in the sub -districts of more than 
one Sub-Registrar, such document shall be registered in office of each such Sub-
Registrar, where any portion of the immovable property is situate.‖ 
 
10.6 The Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) in a written reply on 
the above suggestion stated as under:   
 
"Section 28 has been proposed to be omitted. Under section 29, a document can be 
registered in the office of sub -registrar where the document has been executed or 
anywhere within the St ate the property State, the executants desire it to be registered. 
This proposed amendment will help e -registration. In the State of Andhra Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Rajasthan such experiment of anywhere registration within the district has 
been conducted successfully." 
 
10.7 During the course of evidence, a representative of State Government of Tamil Nadu 
stated as under:  
 
"The next point is very important one, which is amendment proposed in clauses 10 and 
11, relating to sections 28 and 29.  Currently section 28 has two portions.  Portion (a) 
says that immovable property will be registered only within the jurisdiction of the sub -
registrar office.  Our Tamil Nadu (b) provision says that  if it is registered anywhere else 
in the country, it is null and void. That is the provision we have because a lot of people 
would go to the neighbouring State, Kerala,  and buy a small property in Kerala and big 
property in Kerala and register it in Kerala. They were doing a lot of stamp duty evasion. 
To avoid that, this amendment w as introduced in the State of Tamil Nadu in the year 
1997. Now, in the proposed amendment, that section 28 is proposed to be omitted fully. 
We wish that section 28 should continue as it is. Now, in the proposal section 28 is 
omitted. In section 29, which t alks about registration with respect to other documents, 
that is the title of section 29, which means the land document can be registered 
anywhere in the country. That is the meaning we try to understand though the Statement 
of Objects and Reasons says it is registration anywhere within the State. But once you 
remove section 28 and only section 29 is there which talks about registration of other 
documents, then what do we do with the land document? It can be registered anywhere. 
That is the meaning we get. We can interpret as if it can be registered anywhere. Maybe 
the intention of the amendment is to treat section 29 as the only section. It includes land 
also. It can be registered where it is executed or where either party wishes to present. 
So, suppose som ebody executes it physically elsewhere, then he can go to that sub -
registrar office and register it in the neighbouring State. This will lead to a huge loss of 
revenue as well as fraudulent registrations may happen in a big way. Moreover, in an IT 
developed State like Tamil Nadu also, our level of computerization of registration 
activities as well as land documents is not that advanced enough to switch to a system 
where ‗anywhere registration‘ can take place within the system within the State. Even 
within the State we are not yet ready to do ‗anywhere registration‘. So, it will lead to a lot 
of confusion even within the State, even if we try to make it ‗anywhere registration‘ within 
the State.  

45 
 
We wish that these amendments can include the provisions which is there in Tamil 
Nadu. In Tamil Nadu, we say that if it is registered outside Tamil Nadu, then it is null and 
void. That is the explicit provision that we have made in our section 28 (b). If that also 
could be examined to be included at the national level  and if the Committee feels that it 
is good enough, then it can be considered." 
 
10.8 During the course of evidence, a representative of  the Government of  Uttar Pradesh 
stated as under:  
  
"+É£ÉÉÒ ºÉäBÉD¶ÉxÉ 28 BÉEÉä +ÉÉäÉÊàÉ] BÉE®xÉä BÉEÉÒ ¤ÉÉiÉ cÉä ®cÉÒ cè, < ºÉBÉEä ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå càÉÉ®É ºÉÉÎ¤àÉ¶ÉxÉ cè ÉÊBÉE <ºÉä A¤ÉÉìÉÊãÉ¶É xÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ 
VÉÉA* <ºÉä A¤ÉÉìÉÊãÉ¶É BÉE®xÉä ºÉä º]ä] àÉå BÉE<Ç {É®ä¶ÉÉÉÊxÉªÉÉÆ cÉä ºÉBÉEiÉÉÒ cé* +ÉMÉ® BÉÖEU ®ÉVªÉ <ºÉBÉEÉä A¤ÉÉìÉÊãÉ¶É BÉ E®xÉä BÉEÉÒ 
ÉÎºlÉÉÊiÉ àÉå cé +ÉÉè® AxÉÉÒBcäªÉ® ®ÉÊVÉº]Åä¶ ÉxÉ BÉE®xÉä BÉEÉÒ {ÉÉäVÉÉÒ¶ÉxÉ àÉå cé iÉÉä <ºÉàÉå ABÉE AäºÉÉ |ÉÉìÉÊ´ÉVÉxÉ bÉãÉBÉE® ®ÉVªÉÉå BÉEÉä 
Aà{ÉÉ´ÉbÇ BÉE® ºÉBÉEiÉä cé ÉÊBÉE +ÉMÉ® ´Éä =ÉÊSÉiÉ ºÉàÉZÉå iÉÉä +É{ÉxÉä ªÉcÉÆ <ºÉä ãÉÉMÉÚ BÉE® ºÉBÉEiÉä cé*  A¤ÉÉìÉÊãÉ¶É BÉE® xÉä BÉEä ¤ÉÉn 
+ÉMÉ® càÉ AxÉÉÒBcäªÉ® ®ÉÊVÉº]Åä¶ÉxÉ BÉE®xÉä BÉEÉÒ ÉÎºlÉÉÊiÉ àÉå xÉcÉÓ cé iÉÉä càÉå {É®ä¶ÉÉxÉÉÒ cÉäMÉÉÒ* nä¶É BÉEä BÉÖEU ®ÉVªÉ <iÉxÉä Aà{ÉÉ´ÉbÇ 
cé, BÉEÆ{ÉÉÒ]å] cé, =xcÉåxÉä +É{ÉxÉÉÒ ]äBÉDxÉÉäãÉÉìVÉÉÒ ¤ÉfÃÉ ãÉÉÒ cè iÉÉä =xÉBÉEÉä <ºÉBÉEä ÉÊãÉA UÚ] nä ºÉBÉEiÉä cé ÉÊBÉE ´Éä <ºÉBÉEä ÉÊãÉA ÉÊxÉªÉàÉ 
¤ÉxÉÉ ºÉBÉEiÉä cé*  
 
10.9 A representative of the Government of West Bengal during the course of evidence 
stated as under:  
"Now, I come to Sections 28 and 29 . <ºÉ {É® BÉEÉ{ÉEÉÒ SÉSÉÉÇ cÖ<Ç cè* +ÉÉ{É ºÉäBÉD¶ÉxÉ 29 näÉÊJÉA , the only 
problem is that the heading is misleading, and the heading says: ―place for registering 
other documents‖.  Section 28 deals with land.  Section 29 deals with the place for 
registering not other documents.  If we want to amend it, we have to write it as ―place for 
registering documents‖ and also the actual contents should be redrafted.  In that case, 
Section 28 can be removed.  Otherwise, we have to keep Section 28 again. It talks 
about place for registering not other documents.  Under Section 29, it will be all 
documents because Section 28 will not be there." 
 
10.10 In this regard, the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)  
submitted as under:- 
  
"From 1908 onwards documents of transfer of property are being registered by the 
registering officer of the place where the property is situate. With advancement of 
information technology, States want to use web -based registration of documents. The 
object is that there should be fewer footfalls of registrants at sub -registrar offices. The 
rate of registration fe es for transfer of immovable property is the same throughout the 
State. Now, the public has the option to get the documents registered either at the place 
where the property is situate or within the State where both parties to the document 
desire to get it registered. The places where there is no electricity, the documents will be 
registered by pasting the copy in the record and returning the original document to the 
party after registration." 
 
10.11 The Committee observe that the existing provision under Section 28 of the 
Registration Act, 1908 provides for registering documents relating to land in the 

46 
 
office of a Sub -Registrar within whose sub -district the whole or some portion of 
the property to which such document relates is situate.  The Bill seeks to omit the 
above Section 28 of the Act which  by implication will mean that the provisions of 
section 29 of the principal Act which deal with the place of registering other 
documents will automatically come into operation whi ch would enable the parties 
to get the documents registered  anywhere in the country.  During examination of 
the Bill, th e Committee received various  suggestions. The Committee‟s analysis 
however reveal that  the demographic composition  in the country , statu s of  
availability of infrastructure and the typical topography of locations throughout 
the country clearly indicate that  some more time  is still needed  to go into the 
concept of “anywhere registration in the country”  because  introduction of any 
new concept without well preparedness on the ground level will , in all likelihood, 
create problems to the genuine  people on one hand and give rise to fraudulent 
registration on the other hand.  The Committee also observe that even the 
present position in the Act allowing  registration within the State also causes 
problems in verification of the title and encumbrance of the property  and 
therefore a strong view emerges that registration of document should be 
confined within the revenue districts.  The Com mittee therefore strongly 
recommend that section  28 of the principal Act need to be retained  with the 
modification that the documents will be registered in the same revenue district in 
whose territorial jurisdiction the property situates.   The Committee fu rther 
recommend that if a document affects immovable property situated in different 
districts, such document should be registered separately in each of such 
districts. 

47 
 
Clause 11 of the Bill : Section 29 – Place for registering other documents 
 
11.1 The existing provision of Section 29 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
 
(1) Every document not being a document referred to in section 28  or a 
copy of a decree or order , may be presented for registration either in the 
office of the Sub -Registrar in  whose sub -district the document was 
executed, or in the office of any other Sub -Registrar under the State 
Government at which all the persons executing and claiming under the 
document desire the same to be registered. 
(2) A copy of a decree or order may b e presented for registration in the 
office of the Sub -Registrar in whose sub -district the original decree or 
order was made or, where the decree or order does not affect immovable 
property, in the office of any other Sub -Registrar under the State 
Government at which all the persons claiming under the decree or order 
desire the copy to be registered. 
 
11.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 20 13 seeks to amend the Section 29 (place 
for registering other documents) of the existing Act as under: 
  
In section 29 of the principal Act,– 
(a) in sub-section (1), the words and figures ―not being a document referred 
to in section 28 or a copy of a decree or order,‖ shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), the words ―where the decree or order does not affect 
immovable property,‖ shall be omitted. 
 
11.3 This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the Act to provide for anywhere 
registration in the State, It is proposed in the Bill  to amend sub -section (1) of the said 
section so as to omit the words and figures ―not being a document referred to in section 
28 or a copy of a decree or order‖ .  It is further proposed to amend sub -section of the 
said section so as to omit the words ―where the decree or order does not affect 
immovable property‖. 
 

48 
 
 
11.4 In their written submission furnished to the Committee regarding the proposed 
amendment to Section 29, the State Government of Odisha submitted as under: 
 
"The heading 'Place for registering other documents' should be amended as 'Place for 
registering documents'." 
 
11.5 Regarding the option for implementation of anywhere registration, the State Government 
of Uttar Pradesh in a written submission stated as under:  
 
"It is pertinent to note that amendment in section 28 & 30 have already been done through 
UP amendment Act No. 27 of 1994 effective from 01-10-1994. Through this amendment it 
has been laid out that transfer deeds of immovable property related to a particular sub 
district shall be registered in the office of sub registrar in whose jurisdiction the property 
lies. As such the provision for registration of immovable property within the state itself has 
already been incorporated in the state amendment. The option for implementation of 
Anywhere registration within the state should rest with the state government till the 
completion o f online registration process & availability of online data. For attaining the 
objectives proposed through amendment in this section it is also advisable that section 30 
of the Act should accordingly be amended." 
 
11.6 The State Government of West Bengal furnished the following suggestions regarding the 
proposed amendment to section 29:  
 
" There is no relation between the place of execution and place of registration in case of 
document relating to land. Hence, the words, ―relating to immovable property‖ after t he 
words ―Every document‖ may be added and also the words  ―document was  executed‖ 
may be replaced by the words ―whole or some portion of the property to which suc h 
documents relates is situate. The word ―same‖ may be added after ―or in the office of any 
other Sub-Registrar under the‖ and before ―State Government‖. At the end ―and where the 
document does not affect immovable property, in the office of any Sub -Registrar under 
any State Government at which all the persons claiming under the decree or order d esire 
the copy to be registered‖ may be added.  It may be better to delete the words ―or the 
original decree or order was made‖ so that the document is registered only in the State 
where the immovable property situates.   In cases where the decree or order d oes not 
affect immovable property, delete the word ―other‖ before Sub -Registrar and also replace 
the word ―the‖ by ―any‖ before State Government." 
 
11.7 The Committee observe that the proposed deletion of Section 28 and 
modification of Section 29 may lead to a lot of fraudulent registrations unless 
registration records of all Sub-Registrar Offices throughout the country are linked 
online. The Committee also find that this could lead to evasion of revenue as 
stamp duty and registration fee rates vary across the S tates which would give an 

49 
 
option to the public to register in a place where the fees are lowest. The 
Department of Land Resources have informed that the proposed amendment 
would help e-registration and that the States of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and 
Rajasthan have successfully conducted the experiment of anywhere registration 
within the district. The Committee do appreciate that some States might have 
achieved certain degree of success in technological advancement which 
facilitated the registration process in wider areas but at the same time, Committee 
express its serious apprehension that the Government h as to see the wider 
ramifications of any such proposal.  The Committee are of the view that omission 
of Section 28 and modification of Section 29 would not yield the desired result 
without developing proper infrastructure to enable all the offices of Registrar and 
Sub-Registrar to go for computerized registration process with online uploading 
of data on public portal.  The Committee, therefore, recommend  that the States 
may be persuaded to develop appropriate infrastructure facilities and complete 
the computerized land record data base with the technological  upgradation of all 
registration offices so that the concept of anywhere registration could be 
materialized in near future.  The Committee therefore desire that  the  suggestions 
given by the Committee for modifications in section 28 of the principal Act may 
suitably be incorporated. 
 
 
 
  

50 
 
Clause 12 of the Bill : Section 32 - Substitution of  new section for section 32 
regarding persons to present documents for registration  
 
12.1 The existing provision of Section 32 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
 
―Except in the cases mentioned in sections 31, 88 and 89, every document to be 
registered under this Act, whether such registration be compulsory or optional, 
shall be presented at the proper registration office,- 
(a) by some person executing or claiming under the same, or, in the case 
of a copy of a decree or order, claiming under the decree or order, or 
 
(b) by the representative or assignee of such a person, or 
 
(c) by the agent of such a person, representative or assign, duly 
authorised by power-of-attorney executed and authenticated in manner 
hereinafter mentioned.‖ 
 
12.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 20 13 proposes to  substitute Section 32  as 
under: 
 For section 32 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
 namely:– 
―32. Except in the cases mentioned in sections 31, 88 and 89, or when the 
document i s presented by electronic means, every document to be registered 
under this Act, whether such registration be compulsory or optional, shall be 
presented at the proper registration office, in the manner as may be prescribed,– 
 
(a) by the person executing or  claiming under the same, or, in the case of 
a copy of a decree or order, by a person claiming under the decree or 
order; or 
(b) by the representative or assignee of such person; or  
(c) by the agent of such person, representative or assignee, duly 
authorised by the power of attorney executed and authenticated in the 
manner hereinafter mentioned.‖ 
 
12.3 This clause seeks to facilitate electronic registration by substituting a new section 
for the existing section 32 of the Act relating to ―persons to present docu ments for 
registration‖ so as to provide that e xcept in the cases mentioned in sections 31, 88 and 
89, or when the document is presented by electronic means, every document to be 
registered under this Act, whether such registration be compulsory or optiona l, shall be 

51 
 
presented at the proper registration office, in th e manner as may be prescribed  (a) by 
the person executing or claiming under the same, or, in the case of a copy of a decree 
or order, by a person claiming under the decree or order; or  (b) by the representative or 
assignee of such person; or (c) by the agent of such person, representative or assignee, 
duly authorised by the power of attorney executed and authenticated in the manner 
hereinafter mentioned. 
 
12.4 Agreeing with the proposed amendment, t he State Government of Kerala in a 
written note submitted as under:  
"The proposed provisions will certainly facilitate the increased use of electronic 
means for registration in this era of computerisation which will help the people 
save time and will prov ide more convenience. Moreover, it will help to prevent 
corruption, reduce the interruption of middle men and will ensure transparency 
in the procedure and hence agreeable."  
 
12.5 Expressing apprehensions on the issue of documents presented by electronic 
means, the State Government of Madhya Pradesh stated as under: 
"Identity of executants in case of documents presented electronically can be 
proved irrevocably only by biometrics identification, so this Section also should 
remain the same till such date as biometrics identification  is enabled 
everywhere." 
 
12.6 The Committee observe that t he Bill proposes to  substitute Section 32  
whereby a provision is made for  presentation of documents by electronic  means 
for registration. The Committee note that the proposed provision would facilitate 
the increased use of electronic means for registration which in turn would reduce 
corruption and ensure transparency in the pr ocedure. The Committee, however, 
observe that the identity and genuineness of the executants in case of electronic 
registration can be  ascertained and proved only through biometric identification 
and other similar mechani sm without which  the possibility of  fraudulent 
registrations cannot be ruled out . The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department of Land Resources to impress upon the States to allow electronic 
registration only when all Sub -Registrar Offices are  well-equipped with the 
facilities of not only for online registration but also for  fool-proof identification of 
genuineness of executants. 

52 
 
Clause 13 of the Bill : Section 32A – Substitution of new section for section 32A 
regarding Compulsory affixing of photograph etc. 
 
13.1 The existing provision of Section 32 A of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as 
under: 
―Every person presenting any document at the proper registration office 
under Section 32 shall affix his passport size photograph and fingerprints 
to the document: 
Provided that where such document relates to the transfer of ownership of 
immovable property, the passport size photograph and fingerprints of each 
buyer and seller of such property mentioned in the document shall also be 
affixed to the document." 
 
13.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 proposes to substitute the following  in 
place of the existing section  32A :  
 
For section 32A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:––  
―32A. (1) Every person presenting any document at the proper registration 
office under section 32 shall affix in the document his passport size colour 
photograph and get photographed by digital camera and affix thumb impression 
by manual or by biometri c device in the document and both executants and 
claimant shall sign in the document, if such document falls in the following 
category, namely:––  
 
(a) agreemen t to sell immovabl e property includin g develope r ‘s or 
promoter‘s agreement by whatever name called, for development of any 
property or construction of structure; 
(b) conveyance; 
  (c) exchange;  
  (d) gift; 
  (e) lease including transfer of lease by way of assignment and surrender 
  of lease; 
  (f) mortgage;  
  (g) partition; 
  (h) settlement; 
   (i) trust; 
  (j) power of attorney. 
 
 (2) The passport size photograph and thumb impression of each executant and 
 claimant shall also be affixed to the document referred to in sub-section (1). 

53 
 
 (3) The State Government shall notify the order for taking photographs of 
 identifying witnesses before the registering officer.‖ 
 
13.3 This clause seeks to facilitate capturing of bio -metrics by substituting a new 
section for section 32A relating to ―compulsory affixing photographs etc.‖ sub-section (1) 
of the said section provides that every person presenting any document at the  proper 
registration office under section 32 shall affix in the document his passport size colour 
photograph and get photographed by digital camera and affix thumb impression by 
manual or by biometric device in the document and both executants and claimant shall 
sign in the document, if such document falls in the following category, namely (a) 
agreement to sell immovable property includin g develope r ‘s or promoter‘s agreement 
by whatever name called, for development of any property or construction of structure; (b) 
conveyance; (c) exchange; ( d) gift;  (e) lease including transfer of lease by way of 
assignment and surrender of lease; (f) mortgage; (g) partition; (h) settlement; (i) trust; (j) 
power of attorney.  Sub-section (2) of the said section provides that t he passport size 
photograph and thumb impression of each executant and claimant shall also be affixed 
to the document referred to in sub -section ( 1).  Sub-section(3) of the said section 
provides that t he State Government  shall notify the order for taking photographs of 
identifying witnesses before the registering officer. 
 
13.4 On the issue of affixation of colour photos and the need to qualify doc uments, 
one public witness in a written note submitted as under:  
 
"The proposed  requirements as being proposed under section 32A (1), are 
already prevalent in most of the States with regard to affixation of photos etc., by 
the parties to the document. But, the photograph being affixed is in black & white 
and not colour photos.  Furth er, photo taken via biometric device in the Sub -
Registrar‘s office is black-&-white.  These beings so, why insist on colour photo?  
It should be colour or black -&-white photo?  But such should be recently taken 
and not having any imprints on it. Further, there is no need to qualify the 
documents which requires such affixation etc.  It should be made applicable for 
―any document presented for registration‖. 
 
13.5 The Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) in a written 
reply on the above suggestion stated as under:  

54 
 
 
"Under the proviso to section 32A, all documents in which ownership of property 
is transferred, photograph and execution by both parties have been made 
compulsory. It has been suggested that there is no need to qualify the 
documents; it should be made applicable to any document presented for 
registration. The list mentioned in amendment to section 32A contains almost all 
documents generally presented for registration. This is being followed in all 
States." 
 
13.6 Agreeing with the  amendment suggested in section 32A, State Government of 
Kerala in a written note stated as under:  
 
"The proposed provisions will help the registering officer to identify the 
executants claimants relating to each document presented for registration. The 
provisions will help to deter the misuse of immovable property by unscrupulous 
elements including terrorist outfits and hence agreeable." 
 
13.7 Expressing concerns regarding limiting the documents on which the photograph 
and thumb impression has to be affixed, S tate Government of Tamil Nadu stated as 
under:  
 
"It may be stated that at present section 32A provides for affixing the photograph 
and thumb impression of the person presenting the document and in respect of 
documents relating to transfer of ownership of immovable property, the 
photograph and thumb impression of the person claiming under the document 
shall also be affixed. The existing section 32 A does not limit the types of 
documents on which photograph and thumb impression has to be affixed 
whereas the proposed section limits the same. One important document, which is 
chiefly employed in getting loans from financial institutions (i.e.) Agreement 
relating to Deposit of Title Deeds, does not find place in the types of documents 
on which photograph and thum b impression has to be affixed. This may lead to 
fraudulent transactions. Hence it is considered that instead of limiting the 
documents on which the photograph and thumb impression has to be affixed, it 
may be made compulsory in respect of all documents re gistered as available 
now so that the photograph and thumb impression are obtained on all types of 
documents that are registered." 
 
13.8 During the course of evidence, a representative of the State Government of 
Tamil Nadu stated as under:  
"Then my next point is amendment proposed in clause 13. This is to amend 
section 32 (a), to provide for thumb impression as well as photograph in certain 
types of documents. In Tamil Nadu currently we are insisting on photograph, and 

55 
 
thumb impression on all documents.  So, it  cannot be restricted to only a certain 
types of documents alone. It can be made compulsory for all types of documents 
as it is being done in Tamil Nadu.  Thumb impression with photograph is 
recommended for certain types of documents. Now, in Tamil Nadu we are insisting 
it for all types of documents. Anybody who wants to register any document in sub -
registrar‘s office, his photograph and thumb impression we are taking. So, it can be 
made applicable to all documents." 
 
13.9 The Representative of  the Government of  Gujarat during evidence stated as 
under: 
"Sir, I have only one suggestion.  Clause 13 A, Section 32 A, photograph by digital 
mechanism etc. is a good suggestion. But it should be with ‗identifier‘; that is what I 
would suggest. MÉÖVÉ®ÉiÉ àÉå ´É­ÉÇ 2001 ºÉä ªÉc |ÉÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ cè* It is for transfer of ownership of 
immovable property only .  àÉMÉ® =ºÉBÉEä VÉÉä +ÉÉ<båÉÊ]{ÉEÉªÉ® cé, =xÉBÉEä £ÉÉÒ {ÉEÉä]ÉäOÉÉ{ÉE AÉÊ{ÉEÉÏBÉDºÉMÉ +ÉÉè® ÉË{ÉEMÉ® 
ÉË|É] ÉÊãÉªÉÉ VÉÉA, iÉÉä +ÉSUÉ ®cäMÉÉ* BÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉE  BÉE<Ç ¤ÉÉ® MÉ´ÉÉc £ÉÉÒ MÉãÉiÉ +ÉÉ VÉÉiÉä cé* ®ÉÊVÉº]ÅÉ® +ÉÉìÉÊ{ÉEºÉ BÉEä +ÉMÉãÉ -¤ÉMÉãÉ àÉå 
PÉÚàÉxÉä ´ÉÉãÉä BÉEÉä £ÉÉÒ MÉ´ÉÉc BÉEä °ô{É àÉå <ºiÉäàÉÉãÉ BÉE® ÉÊãÉªÉÉ VÉÉiÉÉ cè*" 
 
13.10 The Committee observe that Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new 
Section for the existing Section 32A and the amended provision makes it 
necessary for  affixing colour passport photograph and thumb impression on 
certain documents that have been listed in the new Section. The Committee 
observe that it has become necessary to apply maximum safeguards to  stop the 
fraudulent registrations and therefore appreciate the Government for specifying 
various new measures in the amended section  for ensuring the genuineness of 
the executants.  During examination of the Bill, opinion s received from different 
quarters clearly indicated that affixing colour photographs, photographing by a 
digital camera and taking thumb impressions of executants should not be limited 
to only some documents but it s hould be made compulsory for registratio n of all 
documents. The Committee, therefore, recommend that affixation of photographs, 
photographing by digital camera  and taking thumb impressions  of executants  
should be made compulsory for registration of  all documents. The Committee 
also recommend that these photographs, thumb impression and signature of the 
executants may be obtained in the presence of the witnesses whose photographs 
and biometrics may also be taken on record in similar manner.  

56 
 
Clause 14 of the Bill : Section 33 – Power of Attorney recognizable for purposes 
of section 32 
 
14.1 The existing provision of Section 33 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
 
(1) For the purposes of section 32, the following powers -of-attorney shall alone 
be recognised, namely:- 
(a) if the principal at the time of executing the power -of-attorney resides in 
any  part of India in which this Act is for the time being in force, a power -
of-attorney  executed before and authenticated by the Registrar or Sub -
Registrar within  whose district or sub-district the principal resides; 
(b) if the principal at the time aforesaid resides in any part of India in which 
this  Act is not in force, a power -of-attorney executed before and 
authenticated by any Magistrate; 
(c) if the principal at the time aforesaid does not reside in India, a power -
of-attorney executed before and authenticated by Notary Public, or any 
court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul or vice -consul, or representative 
of the Central Government: 
Provided that the following persons shall not be required to attend at any 
registration-office or court for the purpose of executing any such power -of-
attorney as is mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of this section, namely- 
(i) persons who by reason of bodily inf irmity are unable without risk 
or serious inconvenience so to attend; 
   (ii) persons who are in jail under civil or criminal process; and 
   (iii) persons exempt by law from personal appearance in court. 
Explanation: In this sub -section "India" means Indi a, as defined in 
clause (28) of section 3 o f the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 
1897) 
(2) In the case of every such person the Registrar or Sub -Registrar or 
Magistrate, as the case may be, if satisfied that the power -of-attorney has 
been voluntarily exec uted by the person purporting to be the principal, 

57 
 
may attest the same without requiring his personal attendance at the office 
or court aforesaid. 
(3) To obtain evidence as to the voluntary nature of the execution, the 
Registrar or Sub -Registrar or Magistr ate may either himself go to the 
house of the person purporting to be the principal, or to the jail in which he 
is confined, and examine him, or issue a commission for his examination. 
(4) Any power-of-attorney mentioned in this section may be proved by th e 
production of it without further proof when it purports on the face of it to 
have been executed before and authenticated by the person or court 
hereinbefore mentioned in that behalf. 
 
14.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 proposes to  amend the existing section 
33 of the Act as under :  
 
In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4),– 
 (a) for the words ―may be proved‖, the words ―shall be proved‖ shall be 
 substituted; 
 (b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:– 
―Provided that a proof to the effect that the person executing the 
power of attorney is alive shall be produced.‖ 
 
14.3 This clause seeks to amend section 33 of the Act relating to ―power of attorney 
recognizable for purposes of section 32‖.  It is proposed in the Bill to amend sub-section 
4 of the said section so as to substitute the words  ―may be proved‖ with the words ―shall 
be proved‖ .  It is also proposed to insert a proviso in the said sub -section so as to 
provide that a proof to the effect that the person executing the power of attorney is alive 
shall be produced. 
 
14.4 Regarding the proposed amendment to section 33, one public witness  in a 
written note furnished to the Committee stated as under:  
 
"Proof to the effect that the person executing the power of atto rney is alive shall 
be produced.  It is necessary to name the document and to specify the issuing 
authorities for proving that the principal is alive or this will lead to lot of confusion.  

58 
 
Each sub -registrar will name his own document as proof and there wi ll be no 
uniformity. Further, the question will be again regarding the principals staying 
abroad.  It is also necessary to specify that such proof should be either original or 
computer print from scanned copy thereof." 
 
14.5 The Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development in a written 
reply to the above suggestion stated as under:  
 
"This suggestion has been complied with and proof that the person executing 
power of attorney is alive been provided in the amendm ent proviso to section 33 
(4) of the Act." 
 
14.6 The Committee observe that Clause 14 of the Bill proposes to amend sub -
section (4) of Section 33 of the Registration Act, 1908 by substituting the words 
"may be proved" with "shall be proved" and inserting the proviso "Provided that 
a proof to the effect that the person executing the power of attorney is alive shall 
be produced." The Committee  while endorsing the amendment, desire that the 
Government should explore the possibility of naming the document which co uld 
be produced by the executants as a proof in compliance of the requirement under 
the proviso suggested in the section 33 of the Bill. 

59 
 
Clause 15 of the Bill : Section 35 – Procedure on admission and denial of 
execution respectively 
 
15.1 The existing provision of Section 35 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
(1) (a) If all the persons executing the document appear personally before the 
registering officer and are personally known to him, or if he be otherwise satisfied 
that they are the persons they represent themselves to be, and if they all admit 
the execution of the document, or  
(b) if in the case of any person appearing by a representative, assign or 
agent, such representative, assign or agent admits the execution, or  
(c) if the person executing the document is dead, and his representative or 
assign appears before the registering officer and admits the execution,  
the registering officer shall register the document as directed in 
Sections 58 to 61, inclusive.  
(2) The registering officer may, in order to satisfy himself that the persons 
appearing before him are the persons they represent themselves to be, or for any 
other purpose contemplated by this Act, examine anyone present in his office.  
(3) (a) If any person  by whom the document purports to be executed denies 
 its execution, or  
 (b) if any such person appears to the registering officer to be a minor, an 
 idiot or a lunatic, or  
 (c) if any person by whom the document purports to be executed is dead, 
 and his representative or assign denies its execution,  
the registering officer shall refuse to register the document as to the 
person so denying, appearing or dead:  
Provided that, where such officer is a Registrar, he shall follow the 
procedure prescribed in Part XII: 

60 
 
Provided fu rther that the State Government  may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare that any Sub -Registrar named in the notification 
shall, in respect of documents the execution of which is denied, be 
deemed to be a Registrar for the p urposes of this sub-Section and of Part 
XII. 
15.2 The Registrati on (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks  to amend Section 35 of the 
principal Act as under:  
 In Section 35 of the principal Act,–– 
―(i) in sub-Section (1), in clause (a), after the words ―appear personally‖, 
the word s ―or through electronic means, as the case may be‖ shall be 
inserted; 
 
(ii) in sub-Section (3),— 
 
(a) in clause (c), the word ―or‖ shall be inserted at the end; 
 
 (b) after clause (c), and before the words ―registering officer shall 
refuse‖, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:– 
 
―(d) on such circumstances and such documents as may be 
prescribed,‖.‖ 
 
15.3 This clause seeks to amend section 35 of the Act relating to ―procedure on 
admission and denial of execution respectively‖.  It is proposed in the Bill to amend 
clause (a) of sub -section (1) of the said section so as to insert the words ―or through 
electronic means, as the case may be‖  after the words ―appear personally‖.  It is further 
proposed to amend sub -section 3 of the said sect ion so as to insert clause (d) which 
provides that the registering officer shall refuse to register on such circumstances and 
such documents as may be prescribed.  
 
15.4 Government of Uttar Pradesh  is of the view that the proposed amendment 
seeks to make the process of computerized registration more effective and 
transparent and hence are in agreement to the proposed amendment.  
 

61 
 
15.5 Government of Kerala  are of the opinion that insertion of new clause (d) i s 
intended to check fraudulent transfers of immovable property without having any title 
and possession by persons who have already transferred or permanently alienated 
that property to some others than the new purchaser.  The insertion of new clause (e) 
would enable the registering officer to detect and prevent impersonation.  Insertion of 
new clause 'd' and 'e' after clause 'e' of Sub Section (3) of Section 35 is agreed to with 
the suggestion that the words and colon 'the Registering Officer shall refuse t o register 
the document as to the person so denying, appearing or dead.' shall be inserted after 
the proposed clause (e) and before the first proviso in Sub -Section (3) of Section 35 of 
the Act. 
 
15.6 Governments of Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh  are in agreement to the 
proposed amendment.  
 
15.7 In a Memoranda submitted to the Committee it was suggested that allowing the 
person executing document to appear through electronic means is a welcome move 
as it makes the registration process more convenient b ut proper safeguard should be 
put in place. 
 
15.8 About the safeguard for appearing through electronic means the  Department of 
Land Resources  has clarified that power has been granted to the State Governments 
to prescribe rules for refusal of registration of e -documents and the details can be 
worked out according to the specific situation in the Stat es.  
 
15.9 The Committee observe that Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to amend section 
35 of the Act which relates to the procedure on admission and denial of 
execution.  The amendment suggested in the Bill allow the use of electronic 
means as an option for the executants in place of their personal appearance 
before the registering officer.  The Committee appreciate that in the changed 
technological scenario, it is a desirable  step to use the electronic means  as it 
could be more convenient to the executants and will also reduce the time in the 

62 
 
registration process.  The Committee  however desire that appropriate safeguard 
mechanism need to be developed so that no unscrupulous el ement take 
advantage of the new system. 

63 
 
Clause 16 of the Bill : Section 52 – Duties of registering officers when document 
presented 
16.1 The existing provision of Section 52 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
 ―(1)   (a) the day, hour and place of presentation, the photographs and finger
 prints affixed under Section 32 -A and the signature of every person 
 presenting a document for registration, shall be endorsed on every such 
 document at the time of presenting it;  
 (b) a receipt for such document shall be given by the registering officer to 
the person presenting the same; and  
 (c) subject to the provisions contained in Section 62, every document 
admitted to registration shall without unnecessary delay be copied in t he 
book appropriate there for according to the order of its admission.  
(2)  All such books shall be authenticated at such intervals and in such 
manner as is from time to time prescribed by the Inspector-General.‖ 
 
16.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to amend Section 52 of the 
principal Act reads as under:  
In Section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-Section (1), after clause (c), the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
  ―Provided that when a document is registered through the electronic 
means, the rules made by the State Government shall be followed in this 
regard.‖ 
 
16.3 This clause seeks to facilitate electronic registration by amending section 52 of 
the Act relating to ―duties of registering officers when documents presented‖.  It is 
proposed in the Bill to amend clause (c) of sub -section (1) of the said section so as to  
provide that when a document is registered through the electronic means, the rules 
made by the State Government shall be followed in this regard. 
 
16.4 Government of Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are in agreement 
with the proposed amendment.  
  
16.5 Government of Kerala has agreed with the modification that "In Section 52, in 
sub-Section (1) in clause (a), for the words, figures and letter "the photographs and 

64 
 
finger-prints affixed under Section 32A" the words, figures and letter "the photograph 
and thumb impression affixed under Section 32A shall be substituted."  
 
16.6 Government of Odisha in their written note suggested the following: - 
"In Section 52 of the principal Act in sub -section (1) in Clause (c) after the 
4words "book appropriated therefor" the words "or stored in electronic or other 
storage device" shall be inserted.  
 
16.7 The Committee observe that  section 52  of the principal Act makes 
provision for duties of registering officers when documents are presented 
before him for registration.   The proposed amendment in section 52 makes a 
proviso that when a document is registered through the electronic means, the 
rules made by the State Government shall be followed .  In this connection, 
suggestions have been received that  the words “or stored  in electronic or other 
storage device” should also be inserted in clause (c) of sub -section (1) of 
section 52.  The Committee  therefore recommend that the suggestion about the 
insertion of the above clause appropriately in the section 52 may be considered  
by the Government.  

65 
 
Clause 17 of the Bill : Section 57 – Registering officers to allow inspection of 
certain books and indexes, and to give certified copies of entries 
 
17.1 The existing provision of Section 57 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
(1) Subject to the previous payment of the fees payable in that behalf, the 
Books Nos. 1 and 2 and the Indexes relating to Book No.1 shall be at all 
time open to inspection by any person applying to inspect the same; and, 
subject to the provisions of Section 62, copies of entries in such books 
shall be given to all persons applying for such copies.  
(2) Subject to the same provisions, copies of entries in Book No.3 and in 
the Index relating thereto shall be given to persons executing the 
documents to which suc h entries relate, or to their agents, and after the 
death of the executants (but not before) to any person applying for such 
copies.  
(3) Subject to the same provisions, copies of entries in Book No.4 and in 
the Index relating thereto shall be given to any  person executing or 
claiming under the documents to which such entries respectively refer, or 
to his agent or representative.  
(4) The requisite search under this Section for entries in Book Nos. 3 and 
4 shall be made only by the registering officer.  
(5) All copies given under this Section shall be signed and sealed by the 
registering officer, and shall be admissible for the purpose of proving the 
contents of the original documents. 
17.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seek s to amend Section 57 of the 
principal Act as under:  
In Section 57 of the principal Act,––  
―(a) in sub-Section (1),  for the  words and figures ―Books Nos. 1 and 2‖, 
 the words and figures ―Books Nos. 1, 2 and 4‖ shall be substituted; 
 (b) sub-Section (3) shall be omitted;  

66 
 
(c) in sub-Section (4), for the  words and figures ―Books Nos. 3 and 4‖, 
the words and figure  ―Book No. 3‖ shall be substituted." 
17.3 This clause seeks to ensure transparency by amending section  57 of the Act 
relating to ―registering officers to allow inspection of certain books and indexes  and to 
give certified copies of entries‖.  It is proposed in the Bill to amend the said section so 
as to provide that the Book 4 relating to miscellaneous regist er is proposed to be 
made open to inspection by the public  to ensure greater transparency.  
 
17.4 Governments of Uttar Pradesh , Kerala, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are in 
agreement to the proposed amendment.  
 
17.5 The Committee note that section 57 of the principal Act deal with the 
inspection of certain books and indexes and also about providing certified copies 
of entries.  The clause 17 of the Bill seeks an amendment to allow inspection of 
Book 4 also.   The Committee appreciate the proposed amendment as it will give 
greater transparency in the process and public will have wider access to the 
documents in the registration office. 

67 
 
Clause 18 of the Bill : Section 60 – Certificate of registration 
 
18.1 The existing provision of Section 60 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
“(1) After such of the provisions of Sections 34,35,58 and 59 as apply to 
any document presented for registration have been complied with, the 
registering officer shall endorse thereon a certificate containing the word 
"registered", together with the number an d page of the book in which the 
document has been copied.  
(2) Such certificate shall be signed, sealed and dated by the registering 
officer, and shall then be admissible for the purpose of proving that the 
document has been duly registered in manner provi ded by this Act, and 
that the facts mentioned in the endorsements referred to in Section 59 
have occurred as therein mentioned.‖ 
18.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seek s to amend Section 60 of the 
principal Act as under:  
"In Section 60 of the principal Act, in sub-Section (1), after the words ―the document 
has been copied‖, the words ―or the true copy of the document has been filed‖ 
shall be inserted.‖ 
 
18.3 This clause seeks to amend section 60 of the Act relating to ―certificate of 
registration‖. It is proposed in the Bill to amend sub -section(1) of the said section so 
as to insert the words ―or the true copy of the document has been filed‖ after the words 
―documents has been copied‖.  
 
18.4 Governments of Uttar Pradesh , Kerala, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are in 
agreement to the proposed amendment.  
 
18.5 Government of Odisha  in their written note submitted to the Committee stated  
as under:- 
"In Section 60 of the Principal Act in sub -section (1) after the words "registered" 
"or where t he document in stored in an electronic or other devices the 
certificate shall contain the word "registered" with document Number, year, 
Book No. and date" shall be inserted at the end."  
 
18.6 The Committee note that section 60 of „The Registration Act, 1908‟ deal 
with the provision of certificate of registration.   Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to 

68 
 
amend section 62 by adding the words “or the true copy of the document has 
been filed”  at the end of the sub -section (1) of section 60.  The Committee 
observe that some suggestions in this regard  have been received about making 
a mention of the document which is stored in electronic or other devices.  The 
Committee therefore recommend that the se suggestions may be considered for 
making suitable  amendments in the section alongwith those proposed in the 
Bill. 
 

69 
 
Clause 19 of the Bill : Section 61 – Endorsements and certificate to be copied and 
document returned 
 
19.1 The existing provision of Section 61 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
“(1) The endorsements and certificate referred to and mentioned in 
Sections 59 and 60 shall thereupon be copied into the margin of the 
Register-book, and the copy of the map or plan (if any) mentioned in 
Section 21 shall be filed in Book No.1.  
(2) The registration of the document shall thereupon be deemed complete, 
and the document shall then be returned to the person who presented the 
same for registration, or to such other person (if any) as he has nominated 
in writing in that behalf on the receipt mentioned in Section 52.‖ 
19.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seek s to amend Section 61 of the 
principal Act as under:  
In Section 61 of the principal Act,– 
(a) for sub-Section  (1), the followin g sub-Section s shall be 
substituted, namely:—   
―(1) The endorsements and certificate referred to and mentioned 
in Sections 59 and 60 shall thereupon be copied into the true copy of 
the document presented along with the document, and the true copy 
of the map or plan, if any, mentioned in Section 21 shall be filed 
along with the true copy of the document in Book No. 1. 
 
(1A) The endorsement sheet and the signature sheet generated 
through the electronic means shall be scanned along with the 
document and numbered accordingly: 
Provided that in the office of the registering officer notified by the State 
Government as a computerised office, the copying of the items shall be 
done by using the electronic devices.‖ 
 
19.3 This clause seeks to amend section 61 of the Act relating to the ― endorsements 
and certificate to be copied and document returned‖.  It is proposed in the Bill to amend 
the said section so as to provide for keeping the copies of endorsements, certificate and 
map or plan in the Register-book and Book No.1 by electronic means. 
 
19.4 Governments of Uttar Pradesh , Kerala, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are in 
agreement to the proposed amendment.  

70 
 
19.5 The Government of West Bengal has in a written note submitted that the 
endorsement and signature sheets may not require scanning. It may be tagged 
automatically to the scanned copy of the  document. 
 
19.6 The Committee observe that the section 61 of „T he Registration Act, 1908 ‟ 
relate to the endorsement and certificate to be copied and return of documents.  
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub -section (1) which will  enable the 
registration office to take care of the  endorsement sheets and signature sheet 
generated through the electronic means and also copying of the items by using 
the electronic devices.   The Committee appreciate the proposed amendment and 
endorse the same.   

71 
 
Clause 20 of the Bill : Section 64 – Procedure where document relates to land in 
several sub-districts 
 
20.1 The existing provision of Section 64 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
"Every Sub Registrar on registering a non -testamentary document relating 
to immovable property not wholly situate in his own sub -district shall make 
a memorandum thereof and of the endorsement and certificate (if any) 
thereon, and send the same to every other Sub -Registrar subordinate to 
the same Registrar as himself in whose sub -district any part of such 
property is situate, and such Sub -Registrar shall file the memorandum in 
his Book No. 1." 
 
20.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seek s to amend Section 64 of the 
principal Act as under:  
 
"In Section 64 of the principal Act, after the words and brackets ―endorsement 
and certificate (if any) thereon,‖, the words ―either hard copy or in electronic 
form, as the case may be,‖ shall be inserted." 
 
20.3 This clause seeks to amend section 64 of the Act relating to ―procedure where 
document relates to land in several sub -districts‖.  It is proposed in te Bill to amend the 
said section so as to provide for making of memorandum, endorsement and certificates 
in electronic form by the sub -registrar when such documents relate to land in several 
sub-districts. 
 
20.4 Governments of Uttar Pradesh , Kerala, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are in 
agreement to the proposed amendment.  
 
20.5 The Government of West Bengal in their written note submitted that after 
introduction of the concept of any where registration, sending documents either in 
electronic form or in hard copy will be a herculean task. Further, in a centralized 
registration system, all registration data are kept in the central server, not in the office 
of the registering officer hence, applicability of this Section may be relaxed.  

72 
 
20.6 The Committee observe that section 64 of „The Registration Act, 1908‟ 
deals with the procedure where documents relates to land in several sub -
districts.  The Clause 20 of the Bill seeks an amendment in section 64 to include 
the copy generated in electronic form.  The Committee however observe that the  
Committee have already emphasized the necessity of registration of the 
documents in e ach of the districts separately if the property situates in more 
than one district  and therefore, have recommended earlier in this Report in this 
regard.  The Committee  however endorse the amendment in section 64 subject 
to their observations made above. 
 

73 
 
Clause 21 of the Bill : Section 65 – Procedure where document relates to land in 
several districts 
21.1 The existing provision of Section 65 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
(1) Every Sub -Registrar on registering a non -testamentary document 
relating to immovable property situate in more districts than one shall also 
forward a copy thereof and of the endorsement and certificate (if any) 
thereon, together with a copy of the map or plan (if an y) mentioned in 
Section 21, to the Registrar of every district in which any part of such 
property is situate other than the district in which his own sub -district is 
situate.  
(2) The Registrar on receiving the same shall file in his Book No.1 the 
copy of the document and the copy of the map or plan (if any), and shall 
forward a memorandum of the document to each of the Sub -Registrars 
subordinate to him within whose sub -district any part of such property is 
situate; and every Sub -Registrar receiving such me morandum shall file it 
in his Book No. 1. 
21.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seek s to amend Section 65 of the 
principal Act as under:  
 
"In Section 65 of the principal Act, in sub-Section (1), after the words and brackets 
―endorsement and certificate (if any) thereon,‖, the words ―either hard copy or in 
electronic form, as the case may be,‖ shall be inserted.‖ 
 
21.3 This clause seeks to amend section 65 of the Act relating to ―procedure where 
document relates to land in several districts‖.  It is proposed in the Bill to amend the 
said section so as to provide for forwarding copies of documents , endorsement and 
certificate in electronic form by the sub -registrar when such document s relate to land in 
several districts. 
 
21.4 Governments of Uttar Pradesh , Kerala, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are in 
agreement to the proposed amendment.  
 

74 
 
21.5 The Government of West Bengal in their written note submitted that after 
introduction of the concept of any where registration, sending documents either in 
electronic form or in hard copy will be a herculean task. Further, in a centralized 
registration system, all registration data are kept in the central server, not in the office 
of the registering officer hence, applicability of this Section may be relaxed.  
 
21.6 The Committee observe tha t section 65 of „The Registration Act, 1908‟ 
deals with the procedure where documents relates to land in several districts.  
The Clause 2 1 of the Bill seeks an amendment in section 6 5 to include the copy 
generated in electronic form.  The Committee have al ready emphasized the 
necessity of registration of the documents in each of the districts separately if 
the property situates in more than one district and therefore, have 
recommended earlier in this Report in this regard.  The Committee however 
endorse the amendment in section 6 5 subject to their observations made above.  

75 
 
Clause 22 of the Bill : Section 66 – Procedure after registration of documents 
relating to land 
22.1 The existing provision of Section 66 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
(1) On registering any non -testamentary document relating to 
immovable property, the Registrar shall forward a memorandum of such 
document to each Sub -Registrar subordinate to himself in whose sub -
district any part of the property is situate. 
(2) The Registrar shall also forward a copy of such document, together 
with a copy of the map or plan (if any) mentioned in section 21, to every 
other Registrar in whose district any part of such property is situate. 
(3)  Such Registrar on receiving any such copy shall fil e it in his Book 
No.1, and shall also send a memorandum of the copy to each of the Sub -
Registrars subordinate to him within whose sub -district any part of the 
property is situate. 
(4)  Every Sub-Registrar receiving any memorandum under this section 
shall file it in his Book No.1. 
22.2 The Registrat ion (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks  to amend Section 66 of the 
principal Act as under:- 
―In section 66 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), after the words and   
brackets "together with a copy of the map or plan (if any)", the words 
"either hard copy or in electronic form, as the case may be," shall be 
inserted.‖ 
22.3 This clause seeks to amend section 66 of the Act relating to ―procedure after 
registration of documents relating to land‖.  It is proposed in the Bill to ame nd the said 
section so  as to provide for forwarding of copies of memorandum of documents 
electronically by the Registrar to his subordinate sub -registrar, if such documents are 
registered by the Registrar himself. 
 
22.4 Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Kerala and Gujarat are in agreement to the 
proposed amendment.  

76 
 
22.5 Government of West Bengal in a written note has submitted that after 
introduction of the concept of any where registration, sending of documents either in 
electronic form or in hard copy will be a herculean task. Further in a centralized 
registration system, all registration data are kept in the central server, not in the office of 
the registering officer. Hence, applicability of this section may be relaxed. 
 
22.6 On the justification of the proposed insertion of words, the DoLR in a background 
note, stated, as under: 
"This clause seeks to amend section 66 of the Act relating to "procedure after 
registration of documents relating to land". It is proposed to amend the sai d 
section so as to provide for forwarding copies of documents, endorsement and 
certificate in electronic form by the sub -registrar when documents relate to land 
in several districts." 
 
22.7 The Committee observe that section 6 6 of „The Registration Act, 1908‟ 
deals with the procedure to be followed after registration of documents relating 
to land.  The Clause 2 2 of the Bill seeks an amendment in section 6 6 to include 
the copy generated in electronic form.  The Committee have already emphasized 
the necessity of registration of the documents in each of the districts separately 
if the property situates in more than one district and therefore, have 
recommended earlier in this Report in this regard.  The Committee however 
endorse the amendment in section 6 6 subject to their observations made above.  
 

77 
 
Clause 23 of the Bill : Section 69 – Power of Inspector -General to superintend 
registration offices and make rules 
 
23.1 The existing provision of Section 69 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
(1) The Inspector-General shall exercise a general superintendence over all the 
registration-offices in the territories under the State Government, and shall have 
power from time to time to make rules consistent with this Act- 
(a) providing for the safe custody of books, papers and documents; 
(aa) providing the manner in which and the safeguards subject to which 
the books may be kept in computer floppies or diskettes or in any other 
electronic form under sub-section(1) of section 16A; 
(b) declaring what l anguage shall be deemed to be commonly used in 
each district; 
(c) declaring what territorial divisions shall be recognised under section 
21; 
(d) regulating the amount of fines imposed under sections 25 and 34, 
respectively; 
(e) regulating the exercise of t he discretion reposed in the registering 
officer by section 63; 
(f) regulating the form in which registering officers are to make 
memoranda of documents, 
(g) regulating the authentication by Registrars and Sub -Registrars of the 
books kept in their respective offices under sections 51; 
(gg) regulating the manner in which the instruments referred to in sub -
section (2) of section 88 may be presented for registration; 
(h) declaring the particulars to be contained in Indexes Nos. I, II, III and IV, 
respectively; 

78 
 
(i) declaring the holidays that shall be observed in the registration offices; 
and 
(j) generally, regulating the proceedings of the Registrars and Sub -
Registrars. 
(2) The rules so made shall be submitted to the State Government for approval, 
and, after th ey have been approved, they shall be pu blished in the Official 
Gazette, and on publication shall have effect as if enacted in this Act. 
 
23.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seek s to amend Section 69 of the 
Principal Act as under:-  
In section 69 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),– 
(a) clause (i) shall be omitted;  
(b) after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–  
―(k) regulating the procedure for presentation of various types of 
documents, appearance of executants for admis sion of execution, 
endorsements, and the manner of fixing signature and seal of 
registering officer, mode of payment of registration fees and other 
fees and such other processes when the document is presented for 
registration by electronic means;  
(l) regulating the procedure of registration;  
(m) providing the manner in which and the safeguards subject to 
which the books may be kept in computer floppies or diskettes or in 
any other electronic form under sub-section (1) of section 16A;  
(n) regulating the p rocedure for taking of photograph of identifying 
witnesses to a document presented before a registering officer;  
(o) providing for online registration of documents and enquiry 
before the registering officer when the document is presented 
before the regist ering officer by electronic means at any office of 
the registering officer; 
(p) providing for scanning the documents for their safety in 
electronic form; 

79 
 
(q) providing for sending of memoranda of documents registered in 
electronic form;  
(r) regulating the  manner in which the instruments referred to in 
sub-section (2) of section 88 may be presented for registration;  
(s) regulating the manner of recopying of books, indexes or portions 
thereof.‖ 
23.3 This clause seeks to amend section 69 of the Act relating to ―p rocedure after 
registration of documents relating to land‖.  It is proposed in the Bill to amend the said 
section so as to provide for powers of Inspector General to superintend registration 
offices and make rules. 
 
23.4 Government of Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat are in agreement to the proposed 
amendment. 
 
23.5 Government of Kerala while agreeing to the proposed amendment stated that the 
said amendment is to enable the computerization of the registration process to ensure 
more transparency and to enlarge the powers of the Inspector-General of Registration. 
The public will also get easy access to the service. 
 
23.6 Government of Tamil Nadu in a written note expressed views regarding retention 
of Section 69 (i) i.e. declaring the holidays that shall be observed in the registration 
offices, which are as under:-  
"It may be stated that holidays are observed in different States based on 
the religious and other needs. Accordingly, the State Government declares the 
list of holidays that are to be observed in the State and invariably the Inspector -
General of Registration declares those days to be observed as holidays in the 
registration offices. If the proposed amendment is enacted it would deprive the 
Inspector-General of R egistration from declaring the holidays for the registration 
offices in this State. Hence, it is considered that the present provision 
empowering the Inspector -General of Registration to declare the holidays to be 
observed in the registration offices shall remain." 
 
23.7 On the aforesaid issue of omission of Section 69(i),  the representative of 
Government of Tamil Nadu , while tendering evidence before the Committee stated as 
under:  

80 
 
 "….Section 69 of the Act gives powers to IG (Registration) to make rules 
for v arious activities. In that we already had the power to declare holidays 
because local holidays vary from place to place and the IG knows the local 
situation better. Now, the power to declare holidays by the IG has been taken 
away through this section. So, if that section is retained giving the power to IG to 
declare what are the appropriate local holidays, that would be good.   Section 
69(i) is about declaring the holidays that shall be observed in the registration 
offices. This is the existing provision. Th is is proposed to be omitted now. That 
can be retained. The IG can declare local holidays.   ……But, in our State, 
Collectors have got the powers to declare holidays in their respective districts 
when there is some local function or something like that to fa cilitate the public to 
conduct the function. So, such offices are declared to be observing holidays by 
the respective Collectors. The power is also with the IG to regulate the 
registration to be done being stopped in those districts. So, we want this power to 
be retained."   
 
23.8 Government of West Bengal in their written note submitted that this may be kept 
in changed form of Registration Offices shall remain open on any Government notify 
holiday looking at the volume of registrable documents. 
 
23.9 On the issue of verification of identify documents/cards of executants, one of the  
public witnesses  in a  memorandum submitted to the Committee suggested that only 
Aadhaar Card Xerox is to be added. In this context, the DoLR in a note submitted to the 
Committee stated as under:   
"Under section 69 of the Act, it has been proposed to grant power to the 
Inspector-General of Registration to frame rules for registration/e -registration of 
documents and for verification of identify documents/cards of executants. This 
will protect forged registration of documents. In the rules, the use of aadhar 
cards and other cards for identification of executants shall be considered.‖ 
 
23.10  The Committee observe that section 69 of „The Registration Act, 
1908‟ deals with the Power of Inspector-General to superintend registration 
offices and make rules.  The Clause 23 of the Bill seeks an amendment in section 
69 which will in effect take away the power of Inspectors -General to declare the 
holidays in the registration offices and also wi ll confer additional power to them 
to make rules for regulating the procedure of registration of various types  of 
documents etc.  With regard to declaration of holidays, apprehensions have 

81 
 
been expressed by the States that in case the powers are not vested  with the 
Inspectors-General, the local needs of the people may get ignored. The 
Committee however observe that it would be appropriate if the holidays 
declared by the respective States are observed by the registration offices also 
and therefore, the Commi ttee endorse the deletion of sub -section (1)(i) of 
section 69. 
 
23.11   The Committee further observe that the proposed amendment in 
section 69 further empowers the Inspectors -General to make rules for regulating 
the procedure of presentation of various ty pes of documents , appearance of 
executants, mode of payment of registration and other fees, procedure of 
registration, providing safeguards for keeping the books in computer floppies or 
in other electronic form,  regulating the procedure for taking of photo graph, 
online registration of documents, scanning the documents etc. The Committee 
observe that suggestion has been received  that aadhar card and other cards  
should be used for  identification of executants and wi tnesses. The Committee 
find it a valid suggestion. The Committee therefore recommend that aadhar 
card, PAN  card, Voter Identity Card etc. should be used for the purpose of 
identification of executants and witnesses. The Committee also hope that 
Inspectors-General will make  appropriate rules f or regulating the  various 
procedures as outlined in the new clause (k) proposed to be inserted in Section 
69 and these rules will make the process smooth and enhance the quality of 
public services. 
 

82 
 
Clause 24 of the Bill : Section 80 – Fees payable on presentation 
 
24.1 The existing provision of Section 80 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
"All fees for the registration of documents under this Act shall be payable 
on the presentation of such documents" 
24.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to insert  new sections 80A and 
80B after the existing Section 80 of the principal Act reads as under :- 
After section 80 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
―80A.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 80, after the 
registration of a document, if it is found that the fee payable under 
this Act, in relation to that document has not been paid, or has been 
insufficiently paid, such fee for the deficit, as the case may be, on a 
certificate of the registering  officer, be recovered from the person 
who presented such document: 
  
 Provided that no such certificate shall be issued unless an inquiry is 
made and such person is given an opportunity of being heard: 
  
 Provided further that no such inquiry shall be commenced after the 
expiry of such period, after the date of the registration of the 
document, as may be specified by the State Government. 
 
(2) The certificate of the registering officer issued under sub -section 
(1) shall, subject to appeal under sub-section (3), be final. 
(3) Any person aggrieved, by certificate of the registering officer 
under sub-section (1), may prefer an appeal to the Registrar if it is a 
certificate of the Sub -Registrar, or to the Inspector -General of 
Registration if it is a certificate of the Registrar, and all such appeals 
shall be preferred within such time and be heard and disposed of in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
 
80B.  (1) Where the Registrar finds that the amount of fee charged and 
paid is in  excess of that which is legally chargeable and payable under 
this Act, he may, upon an application in writing or otherwise, refund the 
excess amount of fee so charged and paid. 
(2) An application for the refund of registration fee, referred to in 
sub- section (1), shall be made within a period of six months from the date 
of registration: 

83 
 
Provided that after the expiry of the period of six months from the date of 
registration, the State Government may entertain the application up to a 
period of one year, and direct the Registrar to refund the excess amount of 
fee so charged and paid within the period of s ix months from such 
direction.‖ 
 
24.3 This clause seeks to insert new sections 80A and 80B relating to ―recovery of  
deficit registration fee‖  and ―refund of excess fee‖ respectively.  Th e said new clauses 
are proposed to provide for the provisions relating to recovery of deficit registration fee, 
if insufficiently paid at the time of registration or had not been paid and also making 
provision for refund of fee, if received in excess. 
 
24.4 On insertion of new sections 80A and 80B to the Principal Act, the Secretary, 
DoLR during the briefing meeting stated as under: 
"The present Act has no provision for recovery of deficit registration fees or 
refund of the excess registration fees collected by the Registering Officer.  
Amendment to provide for recovery of the deficit registration fees as arrears of 
land revenue and refund of the excess registration fees within the specified time 
periods." 
 
24.5 In this context, Government of Odisha while proposing the addition in Clause 24 
of the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 submitted as under:- 
"Clause 24, Section 80, Sub -section (2) after Section 80A(1) may be added with 
the following:- 
(2) The fee payable under Sub -section (1) may be recovered as an arrear 
of land revenue."  
24.6 Government of Kerala  are in agreement to the proposed amendment with the 
following suggestion which is as under: 
"The proposed amendment suggested by the Central Government is agreed to 
with the suggestion that sui table provisions to the effect that an enquiry shall be 
held and the person against whom such recovery is proposed be given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard before issuance of such certificate may 
also be incorporated in the proposed Section 80-A" 
24.7 Government of Uttar Pradesh , however, informed that the proposed amendment 
has already been done through UP Amendment Act No. 48 of 1975 effective from 

84 
 
01.11.1975. Through this amendment the provisions for recovery of deficit registration 
fees as arrears of  land revenue and refund of excess registration fees charged have 
been made in the State. 
 
24.8 The Committee observe that amendment of section 80  of the Registration 
Act, 1908 relates to the fee s payable on presentation of documents for 
registration.  The Regi stration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to add sections 80A 
and 80B as two new sections to regulate the recovery of the deficit fee and also to 
refund of the excess fee paid at the time of registration.  The Committee 
appreciate the insertion of these new sections which on one side will give legal 
right to the Government to recover the deficit fee and on the other side will help 
the executants to get the balance fee refunded to them in case excess fee was 
paid at the time of registration.  The Committee endorse the amendment. 
  

85 
 
Clause 25 of the Bill : Section 82 – Penalty for making false statements, delivering 
false copies or translations, false personation and abetment 
25.1 The existing provision of Section 82 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
―Whoever - 
(a) intentionally makes any false statement, whether on oath or not, and 
whether it has been recorded or not, before any officer acting in execution 
of this Act, in any proceeding or enquiry under this Act; or 
(b)  intentionally delivers to a reg istering officer, in any proceeding 
under section 19 or section 21, a false copy or translation of a document, 
or a false copy of map or plan; or 
(c)  falsely personates another, and in such assumed character 
presents any documents, or makes any admission or statement, or causes 
any summons or commission to be issued, or does any other act in any 
proceeding or enquiry under this Act; or 
(d)  abets anything made punishable by this Act,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to seven years, or with fine, or with both.‖ 
 
25.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to amend section 82 of the 
principal Act  as under :- 
Section 82 of the principal Act sh all be numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof 
and after sub -section (1), as so numbered, the following sub -section shall be 
inserted, namely :– 
―(2) In addition to the punishment specified under sub -section (1), 
documents referred to in clauses (b ) and (c) of sub -section (1) shall be 
liable for cancellation in such manner and procedure as may be prescribed 
by the State Government." 
 
25.3 This clause seeks to amend section 82 of the Act relating to ―penalty for making 
false statements , delivering false copies or translations, false personation and 
abetment.  It is proposed in the Bill to amend the said section so as to provide for 
cancellation of documents, if intentionally delivered, false copies or translation and false 
personation. 
 
25.4 On the insertion of new sub -section (2) in Section 82 of the principal Act, 
Government of Uttar Pradesh  in their written note stated that the purpose of this 
amendment is to curb impersonation and fraudulent registration and the proposal is 
acceptable to them. 

86 
 
25.5 Government Madhya Pradesh is in agreement to the proposed amendment 
under Section 82(1). As regards insertion of new Section 82(2) after Section 82 of the 
principal Act, they stated that the State Government has agreed to the new provision 
but has requested that rules shall have to be framed for cancellation of such 
documents. 
 
25.6 On amendments in Section 82 of the Principal Act, the Committee also received  
written suggestion from the public  which states as under:- 
"Documents once registered cannot easily be cancelled and especially 
unilaterally at the behest of one party to the document or even by the State 
Government. There could be great inconvenience, would not be in public interest 
and would work counter to the purpose in the event of collusive forces at work. 
There are prescribed penalties or provisions for impounding of documents for 
insufficient stamp duty, enquiries, police assisted investigations for land 
grabbing, fraud investigation, forgery, legal process for fraudulent transactions, 
impersonations and the like. That would have to a C ourt decided issue. The 
Courts may decide appropriate course of action including the fate of the 
registered document and should not be left to the Executive (Registration 
Department) in the clauses as framed herein by cancellation." 
 
25.7 On insertion of sub se ction (2) of the Section 82 of the Principal Act, the 
Committee received suggestions in writing from the public as under:- 
"The procedures should be uniform for the entire country. If such power is given 
to the State Government for prescribing the procedur e then the procedure may 
vary from State to State." 
25.8 The Committee observe that section 82 of the Registration Act, 1908 relates 
to penalty for making false statements, delivering false copies or translations, 
false personation and abetment .  The amendment proposed in the Bill suggest 
that in addition to the punishment prescribed in the section 82, the documents 
shall also be liable for cancellation.   The Committee appreciate the proposed 
amendment as it will be a deterrent for those who indulge in fraudulen t practices.  
The Committee therefore endorse the amendment.   

87 
 
Clause 26 of the Bill : Insertion of a new section 82 A after section 82 of the 
principal Act. 
 
26.1 The Registration (Amendment) Bill,2013 seeks to insert the following section after 
the existing section 82 of the principal Act : 
"82A. Every officer who fails to send a copy of the order within one month under 
section 89 to the registering officer shall be punishable with a fine which may 
extend to rupees twenty five thousand." 
 
26.2 This clause seeks to insert a new section 82A relating to ―punishment for officers 
who fail to send copy of the order within one month under section 89.  The proposed new 
section provides for punishment for officers who fail to send copies of the order within 
one month under section 89. 
 
26.3 Insertion of new Section 82 A in Section 82 of the principal Act is also acceptable 
to the Government of Uttar Pradesh. 
 
26.4 On insertion of a new section 82A regarding punishment for failure to send a 
copy of order under Section 89, the Government of Madhya Pradesh  stated that the 
State Government's Section 82A has to be re -numbered as 82B and 82B have to be 
repealed because of Central amendment.  
 
26.5 On the reduction of penalty under section 82A from Rs. 25,000/- to Rs. 15,000/-, 
the DoLR in their written reply submitted to the Committee as under: 
"In the proposal of amendment in Section 82A of the Registration Act, 
1908, it is "p unishable with a fine which may extend up to rupees twenty five 
thousand". The amount of penalty is on a graduated scale with; a minimum of      
Rs. 100/ - and maximum of Rs. 25000/ - depending on various factors viz.              
(1) Period of delay in sending the copy which may start from one day to one year, 
(2) knowingly not sending a copy or (3) copy not sent by mistake.  
 
 
26.6 The Committee observe that clause 26 of the Registration  (Amendment) 
Bill, 2013 seeks to insert a new section 82A after section 82 of the principal act.  

88 
 
The proposed section make such officers punishable who fail to send a copy of 
the order within one month under section 89 to the registering officer.   The 
Committee appreciate the proposed amendment as it will  definitely inculculate 
the sense of responsibility and accountability on the part of officers who are 
required to send the copy of the order to the registering officers.   The Committee 
therefore endorse the amendment. 
 
 
 

89 
 
Clause 27 of the Bill : Section 89 – Copies of certain orders, certificates and 
instruments to be sent to registering officers and filed 
 
27.1 The existing provision of Section 89 of the Registration Act, 1908 reads as under: 
(1)  Every officer granting a loan under the Land Improvement Loans 
Act, 1883 (19 of 1883) , shall send a copy of his order to the registering 
officer within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of 
the land to be improved or of the land to be granted as collateral sec urity, 
is situate, and such registering officer shall file the copy in his Book No. 1.  
(2)  Every Court granting a certificate of sale of immovable property 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908), shall send a copy of 
such certificate to the registering officer within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the whole or any part of the immovable property comprised in 
such certificate is situate , and such officer shall file the copy in his Book 
No.1.  
(3)  Every officer granting a loan under the  Agriculturists' Loans Act, 
1884 (12 of 1884) , shall send a copy of any instrument whereby 
immovable property is mortgaged for the purpose of securing the 
repayment of the loan, and if any such property is mortgaged for the same 
purpose in the order granti ng the loan, a copy also of that order, to the 
registering officer within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or 
any part of the property so mortgaged is situate, and such registering 
officer shall file the copy or copies, as the case may be, in his Book No. 1.  
(4)  Every Revenue Officer granting a certificate of the sale to the 
purchaser of immovable property sold by public auction shall send a copy 
of the certificate to the registering officer within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction th e whole or any part of the property comprised in the 
certificate is situate, and such officer shall file the copy in his Book No. 1." 

90 
 
27.2 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013  seeks to amend Section 89 of the 
principal Act as under:- 
 In section 89 of the principal Act,–– 
(a)  in sub-section (1), after the words and figure ―Book No.1‖, the words 
―or get it scanned‖ shall be inserted; 
 (b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted; 
(c)  in sub-section (3), after the words and figure ―Book No.1‖, the words 
―or get it scanned‖ shall be inserted; 
 (d)  sub-section (4) shall be omitted; 
(e)  after sub -section ( 4), the following sub -section shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
―(5)  All banks and financial institutions, granting loans on 
the basis of equitable mortgage whereby imm ovable property is 
mortgaged by deposit of title deeds for the purpose of securing 
repayment of the loan, may send the copy of the same online to the 
registering officer within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
whole or any part of the  property s o mortgaged is situated  either 
directly or through an agency appointed by the Central Government 
or the State Government and such registering officer shall keep the 
copy or copies in computer diskettes or in any electronic form, as 
the case may be, in his Book No.1.‖. 
 
27.3 This clause seeks to amend section 89 of the Act relating to ―copies of certain 
orders, certificates and instruments to be sent to registering officers and filed‖.  It is 
proposed in the Bill to amend the said section so as to provide for forwarding copies by 
the banks and financial institutions , granting loans on the basis of equitable mortgage 
whereby immovable property is mortgaged by deposit of title deeds for the purpose of 
securing repayment of the loan, online to the registering officer 
 
27.4 Government of Kerala furnished clause -wise comments on the above 
amendments, which are as under: 
(i) Section 89(2)  - The State Government has not agreed to the 
proposal of Central Government to delete sub -section (2) from 
section 89 of the principal Act with the reasons that if the certificate of 

91 
 
sale of immovable property granted by the Court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 are not properly filed in the Book No. 1 of the 
Registering Office where the property is situated, there wo uld be no 
record of transfer of title, ownership and possession of such 
properties in the concerned registering offices. As such the proposal 
for deletion of sub -section (2) of section 89 of the Act cannot be 
agreed to. 
(ii) Section 89(4) – The proposal of Central Government to delete sub -
section (4) from section 89 of the Act is agreed to with the reasons 
that the proposal to delete sub -section (4) from section 89 of the 
principal Act is consequential to the amendment proposed to section 
17 wherein sale certificate issued by a competent officer or authority 
under any recovery Act of the Central or State Government is 
proposed as a compulsorily registerable document and hence 
agreeable.  
(iii) Section 89(5) - As regards, the proposal of the Central Government 
for insertion of new sub -section (5) of section 89 of the Act is agreed 
to with the suggestion that the said sub -section may be renumbered 
since sub -section (5) inserted by the Kerala Amendment Act 7 of 
1968 already exists in the Statute Book. 
 
27.5 The Government of Kerala also submitted suggestion stating that section 89 of 
the Act may be amended for making it incumbent upon the authorized officer of the 
secured creditor to send a copy of the notice issued bef ore taking possession of the 
immovable property of borrower for realizing secured assets under the Securitization 
and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 
(Act 54 of 2002) for filing in Book No. 1, as it would e nable the Registrar Offices to have 
accurate records regarding title and possession of such immovable properties. 
 
27.6 On insertion of sub section 4 of section 89 of the Registration Act, 1908, the 
Committee received a suggestion in the form of Memorandum which stated as under:- 

92 
 
"The banks and financial institutions SHALL send the copy, this is to 
prevent fraud and multiple document registrations on same property by 
same owner to different parties especially in POA cases. Multiple loans 
being availed on same property by same person from different lenders is 
another issue. The Books in the Registration Department should keep 
entries and show these transactions elsewhere in whichever Books they 
are meant to be registered so that anyone who applies for an 
Encumbrance Certificate can be aware of the Status. It is for this reaso n 
equitable mortgage should also be reflected in the records if it involves the 
public interface lending institutions, banks, and so on." 
 
27.7 The Secretary, DoLR during the briefing meeting on the aspect stated as under:- 
"Section 89 (2) & (4) of the Act prov ides for filing of the certificates of sale 
of immovable property granted by the Courts and the Revenue Officers.  
Certificates of sale are to be compulsorily registered by the Registering 
Officer. This is to facilitate build up of better land records datab ase and 
improve land governance."  
 
27.8 The Committee observe that section 89 of the Registration Act, 1908 related 
to forwarding of copies of certain orders, certificates and instruments to the 
registering officers.  The important amendment in the section is insertion of new 
sub-section (5) which makes  cast responsibility on the lending agencies namely, 
banks and financial institutions for sending the copies of the title deeds online to 
the registering officers.  The Committee however observe that the sub -section (5) 
use the words “may send the copy” which gives an impression that it is optional 
for the financial institutions to send or not to send the copy of the title deeds.  
The Committee therefore recommend that the words “shall send the copy” 
should be used in the proposed sub-section (5) in section 89 of the Act.   With 
these observations the Committee endorse the amendment. 

93 
 
Clause 28 of the Bill : Insertion of a new section 89A after section 89 of the 
Registration Act, 1908 (Power of State Government to make rules). 
 
28.1 The Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to insert a new section 89A after 
the existing section 89 of the principal Act as under:- 
 ―89A. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of  the following matters, 
namely:- 
(a) the manner of presentation of every document to the registration 
office under section 32; 
 
(b) such circumstances  and such documents  under clause ( d) of 
sub- section (3) of section 35; 
 
(c) the time within which and the manner of hearing and disposing 
of appeals under sub-section (3) of section 80A; 
 
(d) the manner of cancellation and the procedure to be adopted 
under sub-section (2) of section 82; and 
 
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed 
 
(3)  Every rule made under this Act by the State Government shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.‖ 
 
28.2 This clause seeks to insert a new section 89A in the Act after the existing section 
89.  The new section proposes to deal with the ―power of State Government to make 
rules‖.  It is therefore proposed in the Bill to insert the new section which empowers the 
State Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the legislation. 
 
28.3 Government of Odisha  on the proposed amendment of Section 89 stated as 
under:- 
In the principal Act in Section 89 in sub -sections (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) 
the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:- 

94 
 
"or shall get the same scanned, stored and pres erved on the electronic or 
other devise, as the case may be." 
 
28.4 Government of Kerala furnished comments on the above amendments as under: 
"The Government of Kerala is not agreed to with the reasons that the 
section 89 of the Act does not prescribe any time limit for sending copies of 
orders certificates etc. by the Court or the Revenue officer etc. to the 
registering officer. Mandatory filing of notice is not required by the said 
section. Hence, implementing the provisions of the proposed section 89 A is 
not practicable. Hence, the proposal for inserting new section 89A in the Act 
cannot be agreed to. Moreover Section 89 A inserted by the Kerala 
Amendment Act 7 of 1968 prescribing the rule making power of the State 
Government regarding filing of true copies o f documents alread y exists in 
the Act." 
 
28.5 The Committee observe that the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks 
to insert new section 89A after the existing section 89 in the Registration Act, 
1908.  The proposed new section 89A confer powers to State Governments to 
make rules to carry out the provisions of the Registration Act.  These rules may 
make provisions for different aspects of registration.  The provisions of the 
proposed new section 89A make it clear that every rule made by the State 
Government in this regard shall be laid before the S tate Legislature.   The 
Committee appreciate the insertion of new section 89A.  The Committee however 
feel that there is no time limit prescribed for the State Government to make rules 
in this regard and therefore it is apprehended that the State Governments may 
take their own time for framing the rules.  The Committee therefore recommend 
that the Government should prescribe some time period for the State 
Governments to frame the rules after the commencement of the amended Act.  
With this observation the Committee endorse the amendment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   NEW DELHI;                     Dr. P. Venugopal 
7  May, 2015                                          Chairperson, 
17 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Rural Development 

95 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD 
ON THURSDAY, THE 12 FEBRUARY, 2015 
 The Committee sat from 150 0 hrs. to 1605 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi 
PRESENT 
 Dr. P. Venugopal - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
3. Shri Jugal Kishore 
4. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
5. Shrimati Butta Renuka  
6. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
7. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi  
9. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
10. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
11. Shrimati Kanak Lata Singh  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar  -  Joint Secretary 
2.   Shri. R.C. Tiwari   -  Director 
3. Smt. B. Visala   - Additional Director 
   
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES   
(MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)    
1.  Smt. Vandana Kumari Jena  - Secretary  
2.  Smt. Seema Bahuguna - Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor 
3.  Shri Prabhat Kumar Sarangi - Joint Secretary  
4.  Shri Sandeep Dave - Joint Secretary 
5.  Shri Surinder Singh - Economic Adviser  
6.  Shri K. Unnikrishnan - Director Administration 
7.  Shri B.B  Patel  - Director  

96 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcome d the M embers of the Committee  convened to have  
briefing by  the representatives of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) in 
connection with examination of the 'the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013'.  
[Witnesses were then called in] 
3. After welcoming the witnesses, the Chairperson read out Direction 55(1) regarding confidentiality of 
the proceedings.  After permission from the Chairperson, the Secretary, Department of Land Resources 
made a power point presentation on various issues rela ting to amendments to 'the Registration Act, 1908' 
inter-alia covering the background, legal position, recent developments viz computerization of land records, 
Integration of textual and spatial data, issuance of  digitally signed documents, integration of  Land Records 
and Registration Offices, online payments, etc. leading to 'the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013', 
compulsory registration in the cases where transaction of immovable property occurs through Power of 
Attorney (PoA), refusal of registration  of documents relating to transactions prohibited by Central/State 
Acts,  anywhere registration in the State/UT, facilitation of electronic registration of documents, 
refund/recovery of Registration fees, etc.  
 
4. The members sought clarifications on vari ous issues pertaining to refund and recovery of 
registration fees, determination of Circle rate, compulsory registration of leases of Rs.50,000, single 
window approval for all the process relating to registration, place of registration of property, positio n with 
regard to the States in which the registration process has not been computerized, undervaluation of 
property at the time of Registration, Stamp Duty evasion and amendment to the Stamp Duty Act, etc. The 
clarifications sought were responded to by the  witnesses. On those queries, on which the information was 
not readily available, the Department was directed to furnish written replies to the Secretariat. The 
Committee also agreed to the suggestion of the Ministry to undertake visit to the Registration Office for 
better understanding of the process. 
 
[Witnesses then withdrew] 
 
   A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

97 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
FRIDAY, THE 27 FEBRUARY, 2015 
 
 The Committee sat from 1540 hrs. to 1710 hrs. in Committee Room No. 'B', 
(PHA) Ground Floor, Parliament  House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 Dr. P. Venugopal   - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
12. Shri Kirti Azad 
13. Shri Harish Chandra Chavan 
14. Shri Manshankar Ninama  
15. Smt. Mausam Noor 
16. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey 
17. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
18. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
19. Smt. Butta Renuka 
20. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
21. Shri Balka Suman 
22. Shri Ajay Misra Teni 
23. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
RAJYA SABHA 
24. Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi 
25. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
26. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
27. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
28. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
29. Shri Kanak Lata Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.C. Tiwari   - Director 
3. Smt. B. Visala   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

98 
 
Non-Official Witnesses 
 
a.  Representatives of Sarthak Advocate & Solicitors 
 1.  i.  Shri Abhishek Nath Tripathi 
  ii.  Ms. Mani Gupta 
  iii. Ms. Sampurna Nayak 
b.  Representatives of New Mahavir Nagar Welfare Association 
 2. i.  Shri A. E. Chandrasekhar 
  ii. Dr. Prem Sagar  
  iii.Shri S. P. Singh Anand  
c.  Individual Witnesses 
 3. Shri Munavar Hussain M 
 4. Shri Arun Mohan Patra 
 5. Shri Subhash Chandra Agrawal 
 6. Shri Ram Babu Aggrawal 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee to the sitting 
convened to take evidence of the non -official organization and witness on 'the Registration 
(Amendment) Bill, 2013'.  
 
[Witnesses were then called in] 
 
3. After welcoming the witnesses, the Chairperson read out Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. Thereafter, the 
Committee heard all the witnesses one by one. The issues highlig hted by the witnesses inter-
alia included lowering of Registration fees, removing discretionary quota in land allotment, 
bringing 'agreement to lease' in the purview of definition of lease, registration of Power of 
Attorney (PoA), issue of payment of regis tration fees in case of registration of lease, deletion of 
Section 28 of the original Act, issuing single passbook containing record of all lands and 
immovable property, opening of a Cell to issue 'No Objection Certificate' in case of transaction 
of land, etc. The members sought clarifications on various issues which were replied to by the 
witnesses.  
 
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
 
4.  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

99 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY,  
THE 16 APRIL, 2015 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs. in Committee Room No. „G -074‟, Ground Floor, 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
                Dr. P. Venugopal      -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
30. Shri Kirti Azad 
31. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
32. Shri Jugal Kishore 
33. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey 
34. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
35. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
36. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
37. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
38. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
Rajya Sabha 
39. Shri Gulam Rasool Balwayi 
40. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
41. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
42. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
43. Smt. Kanak Lata Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri R.C.Tiwari   -  Director 
 3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Representatives of State Government of Punjab 
 
1.  Shri Karan  Avtar Singh - Financial Commissioner Revenue 
 
Representatives of State Government of Tamil Nadu 
 
1.  Shri S. K. Prabakar - Commercial Tax Department 
2.  Shri S. Murugaia - Inspector General of Registration 
3.  Shri S.S. Poovlingna - Secretary, Law Department 
 
Representatives of NCT of Delhi 
1.  Shri Ashwani Kumar - Inspector General Registration 
2.  Shri S. Murugaia - Special Inspector General of Registration 
3.  Shri Kannan - Collector Stamp Headquarter 

100 
 
Representatives of State Government of Uttar Pradesh 
1.  Shri Ajay Kumar Singh - Inspector General Registration 
2.  Smt. Sangeeta Singh - Additional Inspector General Registration  
3.  Shri Radha Narayan Shukla - Additional Inspector General Registration 
4.  Shri Arvind Singh Chandel - Deputy Inspector General Registration 
Representatives of State Government of West Bengal 
1.  Shri Biswajit Gangopadhyay - Secretary, Finance (Revenue) Department and 
Inspector General of Registration & Commissioner of 
Stamp Revenue 
2.  Shri Abhijit Das - Deputy Inspector General of Registration (Revenue) 
3.  Shri Anup Kumar Mondal - Additional District Sub-Registrar  
Representatives of State Government of Gujarat 
1.  Shri R. M. Machhar - Deputy Inspector General of Registration 
2.  Shri M. D. Makwana - Inspector of Registration 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for taking evidence of the representatives of the State Governments of Punjab, Tamil Nadu, NCT of Delhi, 
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Gujarat on various provisions of 'the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013.  
[The representatives of State Governments of Punjab, Tamil Nadu, NCT of Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and 
Gujarat were then called in] 
3. After welcoming the witnesses, the Chairperson r ead out Directions 55(1) of 'the Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding the confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee heard the 
representatives of the State Governments one by one on various provisions of Bill..  The maj or issue highlighted 
before the Committee by the representative of the State Government of Punjab inter-alia included appointment of 
persons whether public officer as Registrar  or Sub -Registrar under Section 6 of the Principal Act.  The major issues 
highlighted by the representatives of Government of Tamil Nadu inter-alia included Clause9 Section 18(a) regarding 
refusal of registration of certain documents, Clause 10 and 11 relating to Sections 28 and 29 of 'the Registration Act, 
1908' relating to place of  registration , Clause 24 which takes away the power of IGR to declare holidays. Major 
issues put forth by the representatives of NCT of Delhi inter alia included drafting of Section 29 of the  Registration 
Act to  stop revenue leakage from the State by wa y of registration. Afterwards, the representatives of Government of 
Uttar Pradesh inter alia suggested not to omit Section 28 of the Principal Act.. Lastly, the representatives of West 
Bengal in their submission inter alia pointed some amendments to Sections 28, 29 and 57 of the Act. Thereafter, the 
Members sought clarifications which were responded to by the witnesses.  
[Witnesses then withdrew] 
4.  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 

101 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY,  
THE 16 APRIL, 2015 
 
 The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1540 hrs. in Committee Room No. „G -074‟, Ground Floor, 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
                Dr. P. Venugopal      -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
44. Shri Kirti Azad 
45. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
46. Shri Jugal Kishore 
47. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey 
48. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
49. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
50. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
51. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
52. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
Rajya Sabha 
53. Shri Gulam Rasool Balwayi 
54. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
55. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
56. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
57. Smt. Kanak Lata Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.C.Tiwari   -  Director 
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) 
1.  Smt. Vandana Kumari Jena  - Secretary  
2.  Shri K. P. Krishnan - Additional Secretary 
3.  Shri Prabhat Sarangi - Joint Secretary 
4.  Shri Surinder Singh - Economic Adviser 
5.  Shri K. Unnikrishnan  - Director 
6.  Shri B.B. Patel - Director 
         

102 
 
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice) 
1.  Shri Ramayan Yadav - Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser 
2.  Shri O. Venkateswarlu - Deputy Legal Adviser 
Representatives of the Legislative Department (Ministry of Law & Justice) 
1.  Dr. G. Narayana Raju - Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri R. Sreenivas - Deputy Legislative Counsel 
3.  Shri R. S. Jayakrishnan - Assistant Legislative Counsel 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and apprised them that the sitting 
had been convened to take evidence of the representatives of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural 
Development), Legislative Department and the Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice) on the 
various issues relating to the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and consideration and adoption of draft Report on 
Demands for Grants (2015-16) in respect of Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation. 
[The witnesses were then called in] 
3. After welcoming the witnesses, the Chairperson read out Direction 55(1) regarding confidentiality of the 
proceedings and briefly reflected on issues which came up during various sittings held in connection with the 
examination of the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013.  The main issues discussed inter-alia included appointment 
of non-government officials as Registrar or Sub -Registrar, Notifying Government properly restriction on registration 
anywhere in the State, taking Photographs and biometrics of witne sses alongwith buyers and sellers, linkage with 
Aadhar, registration of adoption of girl child, for determination of circle rate and status of  computerization of  in the 
States/UTs.  The Members raised queries on various issues which were responded to by the witnesses. 
 
[The witnesses then withdrew] 
 
4.   XX  XX  XX  XX 
   XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
5.   XX  XX  XX.  
   XX  XX  XX 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
* Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately. 
 

103 
 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
THURSDAY, THE 07 MAY 2015 
 
 The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1020 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‗B‘, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
        Dr. P. Venugopal  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
58. Shri Harish Chandra Chavan 
59. Shri Jugal Kishore 
60. Shri Manshankar Ninama 
61. Shrimati Mausam Noor 
62. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
63. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
64. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
65. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
66. Shri Ajay Misra Teni 
67. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
68. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
13. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
14. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
15. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
16. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
17. Shri A. K. Selvaraj 
18. Shrimati Kanak Lata Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
5. Shri Abhijit Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
6. Shri R. C. Tiwari   - Director 
7. Smt. B. Visala    - Additional Director 
8. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
 

104 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the Draft Report on 'the 
Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013'.  After discussing the Draft Report in detail, the 
Committee adopted the report without modifications. 
  
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Draft 
Report and present the same to the House. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
------ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 