STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                    (2014-2015) 
 
          
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
         MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
             [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Forty- Fifth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Capacity Building of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)] 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
15 

 
FIFTEENTH  REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2014-2015) 
 
                
       (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
         MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
             [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Forty- Fifth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Capacity Building of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 August, 2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 August, 2015 
 
 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 NEW DELHI 
 August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 


 
CRD No. 112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
 
© 2015 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduc t of Business in Lok Sabha 
(________Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-2015) ......................................   (ii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................   (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ..........................................................................     01  
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ..........................................................     10 
 
CHAPTER III   Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies...........................................................................     23 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the  
Committee .......................................................................     27 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the  
Government are still awaited ..... ……………................    31 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development held on  10 August, 2015 …………………. 33 
 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Forty-fifth  
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee ................. 35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(2014-2015) 
 
          Dr. P. Venugopal  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri Kirti Azad 
4. Shri Harish Chandra Chavan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Manshankar Ninama 
8. Shrimati Mausam Noor 
9. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey 
10. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
11. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
12. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
13. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
14. Shrimati Butta Renuka  
15. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
16. Shri Naramalli Sivaprasad  
17. Shri Balka Suman 
18. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
19. Shri Ajay Misra Teni 
20. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
21. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Munquad Ali 
23. Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi 
24. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay@ 
25. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
26. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
27. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev** 
28. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho$ 
29. Shri A. K. Selvaraj 
30. Shrimati Kanak Lata Singh 
31. Sh. Ashwani Kumar# 
 ____________________________________________________________________ 
  * Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 07.10.2014. 
  @    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 13.05.2015 
  ** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 25.09.2014 vice Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya. 
  $ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.11.2014 vice Shri Jairam Ramesh 
  # Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 16.07.2015  
(ii) 

Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R. C. Tiwari   - Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairper son of the Standing Committee on Rural Development  
(2014-2015) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present the Fifteenth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Forty-fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on  Capacity Building of Panchayati Raj Institutions 
(PRIs).  
 
2.  The Forty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 14 August, 2013.  Replies of the Government to all the recommendation 
contained in the report were received on 12th August, 2014. 
 
3.  The action taken replies received from the Government were examined and the 
Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 10 August, 
2015. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Forty Fifth Report of the Committee 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         DR. P. VENUGOPAL 
10 August, 2015               Chairperson, 
        19  Shravana, 1937 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Comm ittee on Rural Development (201 4-15) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Forty Fifth Report ( Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Capacity Building of  
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)”. 
 
2. The Forty Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Capacity Building of Panchayati 
Raj Institutions (PRIs)” was presented to Lok Sabha on 14 August, 2013 and was laid 
on the Table of  Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 23 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government.  These have been 
examined and categorised as follows: - 
 
(i) 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos. 1, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 17, 19, 21 and 22  
Total: 13 
Chapter-II 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
 
Serial No. 12, 13, 16, 20 and 23  
Total: 05 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Serial Nos. 3, 5, 7 and 18  
Total: 04 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial No. 2 
Total:01 
Chapter-V 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that final repl ies in respect of recommendations for 
which only interim replies have been submitted  by the Government  and which 
have been  included in Chapter V of this Report may be furnished to the 
Committee expeditiously. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
 
A. Need for Capacity Building of Panchayats 
 [Recommendation Serial No. 2 (Para No. 2.2)] 
 
 
6. The Committee in aforesaid para of the Report had recommended as under:- 
 
“A glance at various schemes for Capacity Building of Pan chayats shows 
that the work for Capacity Building has been done by various Ministries 
like MoPR mainly under Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF) and 
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY), Ministry of Rural Development 
under MGNERGA and NLRM and also by newly c reated Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation under Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA).   
Besides, some other Central Ministries like Health, Education, etc. are 
also involved in Capacity Building work of Panchayats in a small measure 
in tune with their scheme s/programmes.    The Committee feel that in the 
process, funds are spent under various schemes without any composite 
and cohesive planning and in the process capability of Panchayats at 
ground level largely remain unchanged.  The Committee have been 
informed that within MoPR, process of merging of schemes for the 
purpose of Capacity Building of Panchayats in cohesive manner has 
started taking shape after launch of a new scheme named 'Rajiv Gandhi 
Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan(RGPSA)'. The Committee find t hat 
RGPSA provides for constitution of two bodies for overall policy direction, 
i.e. Empowered Central Steering Committee (ECSC) and the Empowered 
Central Executive Committee (ECEC). ECSC is chaired by the Minister of 
Panchayati Raj as Chairperson and has Ministers/State Ministers of Rural 
Development, Drinking Water and Sanitation, Education, Health, 
Agriculture, Social Justice and Welfare, Tribal Welfare, North East, 
Planning Commission, State Minister for Finance (Department of 
Expenditure), Ministers fr om well performing States as per devolution 
index, and five Elected Women Panchayats representatives form among 
best performing Panchayats as Members. ECEC is chaired by the 
Secretary MoPR as Chairperson, representative of Planning Commission, 
Secretary Ex penditure (Ministry of Finance), Secretaries of Agriculture, 
Rural Development, Drinking Water and Sanitation, Education, Health, 
Social Justice Welfare, Tribal Affairs, DONER, Additional Secretaries, 
Financial Adviser and Joint Secretaries of the Ministry  of Panchayati Raj, 
Director –General National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) 
Hyderabad and Secretaries responsible for Panchayati Raj of well 
performing States as per the devolution index as Members.   The 
Committee strongly recommend that a certai n percentage of funds for the 
schemes run by the Ministries of Rural Development, Drinking Water & 
Sanitation, Health etc. in rural areas should be made available to MoPR 

3 
 
so that capacity building of Panchayats is built in a systematic/planned 
manner.   Th is will bring all the funds related with Panchayats under 
different Ministries for capacity building of PRIs under one umbrella.   
Thereafter, similar process should be initiated at State level.  The 
Committee would await specific action taken in this regard.” 
 
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
 “12th FYR Plan outlay for MOPR was initially pegged at Rs.6,437 crore. 
Planning Commission  has then, transferred 1% of the annual budgetary 
allocation of the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation and Ministry of 
Rural Development i.e. Rs.5,110 crore to MOPR for newly launched Rajiv 
Gandhi Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA). The total allocation  for MOPR 
in the 12 Plan was enhanced to Rs.11,547 crore.  Further, the MoPR has 
forwarded the aforesaid recommendations of the Standing Committee to 
the Planning Commission for taking up the issue with the co ncerned 
Ministries/Departments.” 
  
8. The Committee while examining the subject had observed that the work for 
Capacity Building  was being  done by various Ministries  through their different 
Schemes but there had not been any  composite and cohesive planning  among 
different Departments and Ministries.  To bring all the funds related with 
Panchayats under different Ministries for Capacity Build ing of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions under one umbrella, the Committee had strongly recommended that a 
certain percentage of funds for the schemes run by the different Ministries and 
Departments in rural areas should be made available to M inistry of Panchayati 
Raj so that Capacity Building of Panchayats is built in a systematic/planned 
manner and similar process should be initiated at State level.  The Committee 
observe that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their Action Taken note has inter 
alia stated that the Ministry has forwarded the recommendation of the Committee 
to the Planning Commission for taking up the issue with the concerned 
Ministries/Departments.  The Committee feel that there is urgent need of 
strengthening of Panchayat Institutions in the cou ntry for  all inclusive socio-
economic development of rural areas and, therefore, a coordinated action plan  is 
required to be chalked out by the nodal ministry.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
therefore, should take pro-active steps and persuade all the con cerned Ministries 
and Departments, States and also the Niti Ayog  so that funds from different 
sources could be pooled together for  Capacity Building of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions.  The Committee expect the final reply in this regard from the Ministry 
at the earliest. 

4 
 
B. Devolution of powers and responsibilities 
 [Recommendation Serial No. 3 (Para No. 2.3)] 
 
9. The Committee in aforesaid para of the Report had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find that empowerment of Panchayats through greater 
devolution of powers and responsibilities on Panchayats in planning and 
monitoring of development schemes in line with Constitutional intent was 
emphasized in Eleventh Plan (2007 -2012) Document. Government 
pronouncements made from time to time including the rece nt one in 
Twelfth Plan (2012 -2017) document brought out by the Planning 
Commission,  wherein role of rural local self Government has been 
considered critical for rural transformation. According to the Twelfth Plan 
Document although States have taken up act ivity mapping, pattern of 
assignment of subjects and coverage of subjects widely differed among 
the States, barring those development programmes/schemes which 
expressly require the involvement of Panchayats, most others are 
implemented by the functionaries  of line department concerned. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that issue of the devolution of powers 
and responsibilities in the areas spelt out in Eleventh Schedule of the 
Constitution should be taken up by the MoPR with all the States at highest 
level in the Government. Similarly there should be national level 
Conferences/Seminars to emphasize empowerment of Panchayats.” 
 
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
 “Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has taken up the issue of devolution of 
powers to Panchayats with States in several ways. Firstly, States are 
incentivized, annually as per their ranking on a „Devolution Index‟.  Under 
RGPSA, States are encouraged to set targets related to devolution, which 
are reviewed in CEC meetings while sanctioning of plans.“ 
 
11. The Committee in the original Report had specifically recommended  
that issue of the devolution of powers and responsibilities in the areas 
spelt out in Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution should be taken up by 
the M inistry of Panchayati Raj with all the States at highest level in the 
Government and also that there should be national level 
Conferences/Seminars to emphasize empowerment of Panchayats .  The 
Committee observe that about the devolution of powers, the Mi nistry has 
stated that the issue has been taken up with the States in several ways.  
However, about the recommendation of the Committee for having national 
level Conference/Seminars, the Ministry has not indicated as to what action 
has been taken by them i n this regard.   Since Conferences/Seminars are 
effective fora for dissemination and sharing of information and experiences  

5 
 
and also for deliberations on skills and mechanisms for bringing qualitative 
changes in the functioning of Panchayati Raj Institution s, the Ministry 
should, therefore, use such fora for achieving desired results in the area of 
Capacity Building of PRIs.   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that national level conferences/seminars need to be organized  by the 
Ministry on regular basis. 
 
C. Massive Literacy Campaign 
 [Recommendation Serial No. 5 (Para No. 2.6)] 
 
12. The Committee in aforesaid para of the Report had recommended as under:- 
 
 “Another major impediment coming in the way of empowerment of 
Panchayats is low competency to  handle Panchayat work.  In this 
connection, during the course of evidence the Secretary (Panchayati Raj) 
stated before the Committee that the Ministry is looking for varying 
requirements as out of 28 lakh Panchayat representatives, about 36 percent 
are elected women representatives, 19 percent are Scheduled Castes and 
11 percent are Scheduled Tribes.  Admittedly many of these elected 
representatives are first timers and are largely unlettered and as such their 
functional literacy needs to be satisfied. The  Committee, therefore, 
recommend that for real capacity building of Panchayats a massive literacy 
campaign should be a part of training of elected representatives of 
Panchayats in the country.  For future, the Committee feel that there is need 
to examine w hether some minimum qualifications could be set for holding 
positions in PRIs.”         
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“The position about the overall efforts being made for giving boost up to the 
efforts of State for  capacity building and training of elected representatives 
and Panchayat functionaries in States has been submitted with reference to 
recommendation S. No. 1 made in Para 2.1 as referred to above.  It is also 
stated that while discussing the component of c apacity building and training 
of ERs and functionaries of Panchayats as reflected in their State Plans, 
Central Executive Committee (CEC) of RGPSA, which considers and 
approves such plans, has repeatedly highlighted the need of comprehensive 
literacy campa ign of the ERs and Panchayat functionaries.  Further, the 
National Capability Building Framework (NCBF) has been revised to 
emphasize the need for expanding the outreach of training.  A separate 
chapter on the training of SC, ST representatives and women 
representatives has been included.  States are being supported in 
formulating strategies to support such ERs.  On an average around 14 lakh 
elected representatives are trained annually.  In order to improve functional 
IT literacy at Panchayat level, M inistry of Panchayati Raj has made 
arrangements to provide basic computer training to elected representatives 
and PRI functionaries to create awareness and basic understanding on the 
usage of computers. National Institute of Electronics and Information 

6 
 
Technology (NIELIT), (previously DOEACC Society), has been engaged to 
impart these trainings in the States. The training is based on a simple 
syllabus including hands -on sessions for 36 hours over a six -day period. 
Twenty-one States and UTs have used this effort an d over 17,000 
functionaries, elected representatives have been trained till date, and further 
8,000 are scheduled to be trained.   Furthermore, in order to build the 
capacity of Panchayat functionaries in usage of various Panchayat 
Enterprise Suite (PE S) Applications developed under e-Panchayat MMP, a 
cascading mode of training i.e. ToT (Training of the Trainers) has been 
adopted to create Master Trainers at State, District and Panchayat levels to 
ensure that trainings reach till grass -root level. The multip lier effect of ToT 
model offers an opportunity for informed local input in shaping the content 
and for facilitation of training appropriate to local culture and context.” 
 
14. The Committee in their original Report had recommended that for real 
capacity building of Panchayats, a massive literacy campaign should be a part of 
training of elected representatives of Panchayats in the country.  The Committee 
had also desired that  for future,  there was  need to examine whether some 
minimum qualifications could be set for holding positions in PRIs.   The 
Committee observe that the action taken reply of the  Ministry i s silent on the 
Committee’s recommendation about the need for examining as to whether some 
minimum qualification could be set for holding positions in PR Is.  The Committee 
express their unhappiness over casual approach of the Ministry in responding to 
the observations and recommendations given in the  Report of the Committee.   
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and expect the Ministry 
to immediately set in motion the process of examining the possibility of 
prescribing some minimum qualification for holding the positions in Panchayati 
Raj Institutions. 
 
D. Schemes for Capacity Building of Panchayats 
 [Recommendation Serial No. 7 (Para No. 2.9)] 
 
15. The Committee in aforesaid para of the Report had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee have been informed that in order to have clarity in district 
planning Ramachandran Committee's recommendations containing elaborate 
guidelines were sent t o Planning Commission in 2005 by M inistry of Panchayati 
Raj and they also issued  the Guidelines on 25th June, 2009 to the State 
Governments  in this regard.   As a result Central Ministries have begun to 
introduce the role for PRIs, integrated planning et c. that has to be pursued 
during Twelfth Plan.    In this connection, the Committee find that Twelfth Plan 
Document also underlines the need of strengthening local institutions through 
various programmes like National Rural Livelihood Missions(NRLM), Integ rated 
Watershed Management Programme (IWMP),   MGNREGA etc. It has also 

7 
 
highlighted that „Government Institutions‟ charged with the responsibility of 
capacity building of Panchayats like NIRD, SIRDs, etc.  have not succeeded in 
their designed role and thus  need reform. From the perusal of the RGPSA 
programme the Committee find that twenty per cent of the RGPSA funds would 
be disbursed to the States on the basis of their performance in twelve areas 
including preparing and operationalising a frame work for bo ttom up grassroots 
planning and convergence through District Planning Committees (DPCs). In the 
light of the experience in the previous years, the Committee apprehend that 
many States may lag behind on the issue of convergence. The Committee,  
therefore, d esire that role of Panchayats be suitably defined in all Centrally 
Sponsored Programmes (CSPs) including those related to 29 subjects 
enumerated in Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution. Needless to emphasize 
that reform process in Government Institutions like NIRD, SIRDs, etc. should 
begin with right earnest for capacity building of Panchayats.” 
 
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“In the Ministry, under the BRGF Programme, release of funds is contingent 
upon preparation of the District Plans, duly consolidated by the District Planning 
Committees (DPCs) from the local plans prepared by the Panchayats, the 
Municipalities and the other Local Bodies. As already noted by the Committee 
the BRGF Programme has encouraged the Stat es to constitute the DPCs in the 
Districts. At the inception of the BRGF Programme in 2007, only 13 States had 
constituted the DPCs. All the remaining States have constituted the DPCs since 
then.  Under RGPSA, States are being supported in creating State P anchayat 
Resource Centres (SPRCs) in the SIRDs, to specifically address capacity 
building of Panchayats.  Further, Districts Panchayat Resource Centres 
(DPRCs) are also being established.  The establishment of these centres will 
take training to the grass roots and improve its outreach and quality.” 
  
17. The Committee had recommended that to avoid slow progress by the 
States on the issue of convergence,  the role of Panchayats should be suitably 
defined in all centrally sponsored programmes including those related to 29 
subjects enumerated in Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution .  The Committee 
had also recommended to start the reform process in Government institutions 
like NIRD, SIRDs etc. for capacity building of Panchayats.   The Committee 
observe that th e Ministry in their action taken note has not furnished any clear 
reply to these recommendations of the Committee.   Taking into account the need 
of convergence of programmes at grass root level for  effective results, the 
Committee reiterate their recommend ation for suitably defining the role of 
Panchayats and also starting the reform process  of the Institutions like NIRD, 
SIRDs etc. 
 
 

8 
 
E. Availability of infrastructure and ICT facilities 
 [Recommendation Serial No.18 (Para No. 2.21)] 
 
18. The Committee in aforesaid para of the Report had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find with dismay that Panchayats are facing major 
constraints in terms of construction of Panchayat Ghars in various States 
and this has been major hurdle in necessary capacity build -up of 
Panchayats.   The Committee find that several States are yet to provide 
Panchayat Ghars to Gram Panchayats. Major deficit States are Andhra 
Pradesh (21807/5639), Bihar (8463/3135), Haryana (6155/3155), Madhya 
Pradesh (23012/3634), Maharashtra (27920/518 3), Punjab (12800/7182) 
and Uttar Pradesh (51914/22930). The Committee attribute the prevailing 
inadequacy of infrastructure largely due to non-utilisation of funds by State 
Governments under BRGF.  They also find that for arranging Panchayat 
Ghars in deficient States Government has taken a number of steps. MoPR 
has advised the State Governments for construction of Panchayat Ghars 
in a time bound manner by combining the fund available under 
MGNREGA, BRGF and RGPSA Schemes besides States own resources. 
Further, the Central Government has decided to assist State 
Governments/UTs in providing a Panchayat Development Officer and 
Junior Engineer in priority Gram Panchayats using Administrative 
Expenditure Head of MGNREGA and have proposed 90:10 funding ratio 
between Centre and States to bring to the level of 50:50 in five years time 
for which comprehensive Guidelines have been issued.  Viewing the work 
done subsequent to 2009, the Committee find from the website of MoPR 
that as on 30.03.2011 only 3688  'Panchayat G hars' have been 
sanctioned in 19 States from 2006 -07 to 2011 -12 and    only 304 
'Resources Centres'  were sanctioned in four States Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Himachal Pradesh and Tripura  during the same period. The 
Committee fail to understand as to how t his small number of Panchayat 
Ghars/'Resource Centres' is going to reduce the huge deficiency of 
infrastructure of Panchayats across the States. The Committee, 
accordingly, would like the MoPR to pursue the matter with State 
Governments so as to ensure tha t all Panchayats have Panchayat Ghars 
by end of Twelfth Plan. 
 
19. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“Under RGPSA, funds are provided for Panchayat buildings where these 
do not exist. In 2013-14, 3,128 new GP buildings were sanctioned.” 
 
20. The Committee while examining the subject had observed that Panchayats 
were facing major constraints in terms of construction of Panchayat Ghars in 
various States and the same had been major hurdle in necessary capacity build 
up of Pancha yats.  The Committee had therefore, desired the Ministry to pursue 
the matter with the State Governments so as to ensure that all Panchayats have 

9 
 
Panchayat Ghars by the end of Twelfth Plan.   In their action taken note, the 
Ministry have simply replied that 3128 new GP buildings were sanctioned in 2013 -
14.  The Committee are not satisfied with this  reply of the Ministry as the steps 
taken by the Ministry  to pursue the matter with the State Governments have not 
been indicated. It clearly reflects that the issue has not been taken up by the 
Ministry with the degree of  seriousness which it deserves.  Since availability of 
infrastructure in terms of Panchayat Ghar is the basic requirement for effective 
functioning of PRIs, the Committee reiterate their recommenda tion for  chalking 
out a plan in coordination with all States to have Panchayat Ghar constructed for 
each Panchayat in the country by the end of Twelfth Plan. 

10 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Paragraph No. 2.1) 
 
      The Committee note with dismay that dream of 'Gram Swaraj' of Mahatma Gandhi 
and objective of 'Power to People' are yet to be achieved fully even after over six 
decades of independence and over two decades of enactment of Constitution (Seventy-
Third) Amendment Act in 1992 that envisioned empowerment of Panchayats as 
embodiment of Local Self Government across the country largely on account of 
absence of adequate capacity building of Panchayats over the years.   Adm ittedly with 
as many as 589 District Panchayats, 6323 Block Panchayats and over 2.41 lakh Gram 
Panchayats with over 28 lakh elected representatives and functionaries of which 10 
lakh are women, the task of their Capacity Building is quite gigantic particul arly with 
respect to the provisions of Article 243G of the Constitution that seeks to bestow 
powers and authority to Panchayats in relation to 29 subjects specified in Eleventh 
Schedule of the Constitution.  These subjects inter -alia are agriculture, land 
improvement, implementation of land reforms, minor irrigation, water management and 
watershed development, animal husbandry, dairying and poultry fisheries, social 
forestry and farm forestry, small scale industries including food processing industries, 
Khadi, Village and Cottage Industries,  rural housing, drinking water, roads, 
culverts/bridges, rural electrification including distribution of electricity, education, health 
and sanitation, public distribution system, etc.   The Committee  find that prior to  having 
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj as independent one in 2004, the issue of Capacity 
Building of Panchayats was not suitably addressed to by the Ministry of Rural 
Development under which the Department of the Panchayati Raj functioned. The 
Committee's examination has revealed that even after formation of the separate 
Ministry viz. the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 2004 that was primarily formed for 
focusing decentralization of power and empowerment of Panchayats, main objectives 
have not been achieved f ully.  The Committee are unhappy to note MoPR's candid 
admission before the Committee that although the efforts for providing training to 
Elected Representatives of Panchayats have been going on for past several years yet 
the training activities have not r eceived adequate focus and attention at State level and 
as such desired impact on empowerment of Panchayat has not been forthcoming.  Also 
that the Constitutional obligations as mandated under the 73rd amendment to the 
Constitution cannot be realized witho ut increasing the capacities of the Panchayats.   
The Committee feel that ways and means are to be found out by MoPR as well as State 
Governments for making up the deficiencies in Capacity Building of Panchayats for their 
desired empowerment for dischargin g the Constitutional mandate in the light of broad 
parameters of new programme of Rajeev Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan 
(RGPSA) launched by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj w.e.f March, 2013.  Needless to 
emphasise that with the more and more items o f work out of the list of 29 subjects 
under Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution proposed to be assigned to Panchayats by 
the State Governments, the capacity of Panchayats needs to be raised manifold.  

11 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) has been 
launched to strengthen Panchayats, including provision of administrative and 
technical expertise at Gram Panchayats and capacity building and training of elected 
representatives of PRIs and the Panchayat functionaries . This will lead to enhanced 
capacities and effectiveness of Panchayats and Gram Sabhas and also strengthen 
the institutional structure for knowledge creation and capacity building of 
Panchayats.  Under the scheme, the State Panchayat Resource Centre (SPRC s) 
are being established at State Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs) or any other 
State level institution, District Panchayat Resource Centre (DPRCs) may be 
strengthened in existing institutions or new centres established and Block level 
Satellite Res ource Centre may be established.  The scheme has been under 
implementation in full swing during the year 2013 -14. The central Executive 
Committee, RGPSA has sanctioned these activities in 2013 -14 as per State plan 
and is providing an impetus to this activi ty by concerning States to take up and 
enhanced Training and setting up of institutes for action to address the issue. 
 
The National Capability Building Framework (NCBF) provides a framework for 
regular training of Elected Representatives, officials and ot her stakeholders in the 
Panchayati Raj, to enable them to perform their functions effectively. States have 
been encouraged to expand the outreach of training as well as improve the quality of 
training.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj provides financial ass istance under the 
Capacity Building (CB) component of the BRGF Programme to the States as per the 
Annual Action Plans, duly approved by High Powered Committee (HPC).  
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Paragraph No.2.4) 
 
 The Committee‟s examination has revealed that a number of challenges and 
constraints like non -devolution of powers to Panchayats from State Legislatures on 
account of discretionary Constitutional provisions, non -empowerment of women in 
Panchayat on account of illiteracy,   absence of physical verification of Panchayat 
works and delay in releases of funds under Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF), 
slow pace of decentralized planning, etc. are coming in the way of desired level of 
capacity buildin g of Panchayats in the country. The Committee are apprehensive 
that in the light of these challenges and constraints, the goal of inclusive growth 
accompanied by demonstrative difference to the lives of poorest and most 
vulnerable citizens may not be achieved fully.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The BRGF entrusts the central role to Panchayats in the identified backward 
districts and Municipalities in urban areas in planning and implementation of the 
Programme. District Planning Committees (DPCs) at District l evel are constituted in 
accordance with Article 243 ZD of the Constitution to consolidate plans of the 
Panchayats and Municipalities into a District Plan. The BRGF Programme has 
encouraged the States to constitute the DPCs in the Districts. At the inceptio n of the 
BRGF Programme in 2007, only 13 States had constituted the DPCs. All the 

12 
 
remaining States have constituted the DPCs since then. The BRGF was evaluated 
twice and restructuring is on way. 
 
MOPR advocates greater devolution of powers by States as pro vided in 
Recommendation No.3, and also proposes capacity building in various ways, as 
stated in Recommendation No.1 of this report. These measures will lead to 
strengthened Panchayats to impact the lives of ordinary people. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Paragraph No.2.5) 
 
 For converting discretionary powers of State Legislatures to mandatory one for 
the purpose of necessary devolution of powers to Panchayats under XIth Schedule 
to the Constitution the MO PR has informed that it would require Constitutional 
amendment in respect of Article 246 (subject matter of laws made by Parliament and 
by State Legislatures) Seventh Schedule (containing three Lists viz Union List, State 
List and Concurrent List) and Arti cle243 (Definitions relating to Panchayats) of the 
Constitution and the same would not be in line with the spirit of federalism 
underlined in the Constitution. The Committee find that in view of the above legal 
position, the status quo on the issue of devo lution of Powers to Panchayats may 
continue indefinitely unless States are incentivised for devolution of powers. From 
the information made available to the Committee by MoPR it is observed that 
Andaman & Nicobar, Arunachal Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Ker ala, Sikkim, 
Tamilnadu have transferred some subjects to PRIs. However, the Committee have 
not been apprised about the actual empowerment of PRIs i.e. concomitant transfer 
of functionaries and finances. In this context the Committee also find that Ministry  of 
Panchayati Raj seeks to make some headway under new programme of Rajeev 
Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) being implemented during the 
Current Plan (2012 -2017) by allocating 20% of resources based on performance 
conditions that include dev olution requiring  the States to draw a road map for the 
purpose of availing Grants and giving incentives and responsibility to States to 
devolve powers and responsibility to Panchayats.   The Committee also find that 
though Panchayati Raj is a State subje ct, yet it is the primary responsibility of the 
Government of India, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to continue a purposeful 
dialogue with Ministries of Panchayati Raj in States and Union Territories for 
devolution of more power to Panchayats across the country.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The action taken by States on various „Performance Condition‟ of RGPSA which 
include devolution has been assessed by independent teams.  The findings of these 
teams are placed before the CEC of RGPSA when State plans are discussed. 
States have also been encouraged to set appropriate targets for devolution.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated :    12/8/2014] 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Paragraph No.2.7) 
 
The Committee also note that 'the Constitution (One Hundred a nd Tenth 
Amendment) Bill, 2009 that seeks to amend Article 243D of the Constitution by 
seeking reservation of women in the Panchayats in the total number of seats, offices 
of Chairpersons and in the seats reserved for the Scheduled Casted and Scheduled 
Tribes across three tiers should be raised from existing provisions  of „not less than 
one-third‟ to „not less than one -half‟ and also seeking similar reservation for women 
belonging to the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe categories in the offices of 
Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level upto „not less than one -half‟ was 
examined by the Committee (2009 -10) and is pending before the Parliament for 
consideration and passing.  The Committee feel that the proposed legislation be 
enacted at the earliest so that objectives of the legislation are achieved at the 
earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
This Bill was pending before the previous Lok Sabha. On the dissolution of 
the 15 th Lok Sabha, this Amendment Bill has lapsed.  The Ministry is now in the 
process of re-introducing this Bill after the proposed amendment is approved by the 
Government. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Paragraph No.2.10) 
 
 The Committee‟s examination has revealed that two prominent sc hemes viz 
Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF) and Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojna (RGSY) 
for Capacity Building and training of elected representatives and functionaries of 
Panchayats was reviewed during Mid Term Appraisal of Eleventh Plan out of which 
certain valuable suggestions came up for improving   both the schemes.  In the case 
of BRGF, the Committee find that inadequate Grant to Panchayats ranging between 
Rs. 2 lakhs to 3 lakhs, inability of PRIs to play a leading role in integrated planning 
on discretiona ry  Budget,  issue of convergence of Central/State Schemes of 
Districts/ Sub-district level etc., absence of Panchayat wise resource envelop under 
different schemes, faulty procedure for release of instalment  to Panchayats at 
District level etc. are some issues which need to be considered and sorted out by 
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Planning Commission.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Under the BRGF Capacity Building (C.B.) Component, MoPR releases funds 
to the State Governments against their Perspectiv e/ Annual Action Plan duly 
approved by High Powered Committee (HPC). Some funds under C.B. component 
go to the SIRD (through the State Government) and not to the panchayats. C.B. 
Funds under BRGF are required to be transferred to the Implementing Agencies 
within 15 days failing which penal interest is payable. BRGF C.B. Funds are 
calculated at the rate of Rs. 1 crore for each BRGF district in the States per annum.  
State Governments are responsible to execute the Annual Action Plan for Capacity 

14 
 
Building and  furnish the corresponding utilisation certificates (UC‟s), physical and 
financial progress reports and audit reports etc. in order to avail the next releases 
from MoPR under BRGF-CB component.  
The issue of inadequate grants to Panchayat is being addresse d by 
restructuring BRGF programme.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Paragraph No.2.11) 
 
The Committee also find that Mid Term Appraisal of Eleventh Plan relating to RGSY 
Scheme has also pointed out certain  important suggestions.   These inter -alia relate 
to inclusion of important components of National Capability Building Framework 
(NCBF) components like courses for Master Resource Persons, functional literacy, 
enhanced allocation for capacity building, per mitting capital expenditure for 
construction of Training Institutes, etc,.  The Committee have been informed by 
MoPR that issues of Master Resource Persons, infrastructure etc. have broadly 
been taken care of under the new comprehensive scheme viz. RGPSA.  The 
Committee would like the Government to have constant monitoring of RGPSA to 
ensure that its objectives are achieved in a time bound manner.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
RGPSA provides for establishment of resource institutions, training of 
resource persons and a wide variety of training programmes. RGPSA is monitored 
rigorously.  There is an annual monitoring mechanism through independent experts, 
and a Management Information System (MIS) has been established. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Paragraph No.2.12) 
 
 While reviewing the allocation releases and utilization of funds for Capacity 
Building of Panchayats, the Committee find with dismay that there is gross under -
utilisation of funds under BRGF during the last three-four years. For instance, during 
2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011 -12 against the annual entitlement of Rs. 250.00 crore 
for 250 BRGF Districts in different States the releases were as low as Rs. 190.64 
crore, Rs. 197.17 crore and  Rs. 106.58 crore respectively. Further the utilization of 
these funds in these years has been Rs. 158.43 crore, Rs. 139.08 crore and Rs. 
60.97 crore respectively.  Similarly during 2012 -13 against the annual entitlement of 
Rs. 272.00 crore for 272 BRGF Districts, the re leases were as low as Rs. 89.56 
crore against which the utilization was merely Rs. 0.83 crores.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The annual allocation of each district is Rs. 1.00 crore per annum under the 
Capacity Building component of BRGF. Accordingly, Rs. 2 72.00 crores had been 
earmarked for the 272 BRGF districts during 2012 -13. BRGF is a process oriented 
and demand driven programme implemented by the PRIs. There have been issues 
regarding off take of funds by the States due to late submission of proposals by 

15 
 
many States and also on account of the non - submission/ discrepancies in requisite 
documents like UCs, physical & financial reports and audit reports.    
This Ministry is doing regular follow up with the State Governments by means 
of review meetings, vi deo conferences and visits by Officers. The first review 
meeting was held with the Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of all BRGF States on 
11-06-2013. A video conference was held with the State Government of Madhya 
Pradesh on 23 -07-2013 wherein the progre ss of BRGF Programme was reviewed.  
On 02-08-2013, in a related meeting held with 12 States, timely claim of funds under 
BRGF Programme was emphasized. During the course of this year, officials from the 
Ministry also visited Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Assam, Rajasthan and 
Madhya Pradesh to motivate the States to submit the BRGF proposals in time. 
During a workshop held for computerization of Panchayats in the North East, the 
position of BRGF proposals was also discussed with the North Eastern States. A 
workshop was also held in Guwahati, Assam on 24th – 25th October, 2013 for the 8 
North Eastern Region States and also Jharkhand with the primary objective of 
building capacity of the PRI functionaries on proper devolution and utilization of 
funds under the  BRGF. On 20.12.2013 the implementation of various Programmes 
of MoPR including BRGF was reviewed in a meeting held, in New Delhi, presided 
over by the Minister of Panchayati Raj.   
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Paragraph No.2.13) 
 
 The Committee find from the Demands for Grants (2013 -2014) of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj that Rs. 272 crore have been allocated for capacity building and 
training component of BRGF for the year 2012 -2013 for 272 BRGF dist ricts in 
different States.   The Committee feel that increase in allocation will not result in 
actual Capacity Building of Panchayats unless these are released and utilized for the 
purpose.  The Government has outlined reasons  for low utilization of funds  viz. 
delay in release of funds to implementing agencies well beyond 15 days, utilization 
of releases are reported only when next instalment is claimed i.e. when 60% 
utilization is achieved.  The Committee feel that these reasons should be sorted out 
by th e MoPR through regular interactions with State Government implementing 
agencies with a view to enhance effective utilization of funds. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The annual allocation of each district is Rs. 1.00 crore per annum under the 
Capacity Building component of BRGF. Accordingly, Rs. 272.00 crores had been 
earmarked for the 272 BRGF districts during 2012 -13. BRGF is a process oriented 
and demand driven programme implemented by the PRIs. There have been issues 
regarding off take of funds by the States  due to late submission of proposals by 
many States and also on account of the non - submission/ discrepancies in requisite 
documents like UCs, physical & financial reports and audit reports.    
This Ministry is doing regular follow up with the State Govern ments by means 
of review meetings, video conferences and visits by Officers. The first review 
meeting was held with the Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of all BRGF States on 
11-06-2013. A video conference was held with the State Government of Madhya 
Pradesh on 23 -07-2013 wherein the progress of BRGF Programme was reviewed.  

16 
 
On 02-08-2013, in a related meeting held with 12 States, timely claim of funds under 
BRGF Programme was emphasized. During the course of this year, officials from the 
Ministry also vi sited Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Assam, Rajasthan and 
Madhya Pradesh to motivate the States to submit the BRGF proposals in time. 
During a workshop held for computerization of Panchayats in the North East, the 
position of BRGF proposals was also discus sed with the North Eastern States. A 
workshop was also held in Guwahati, Assam on 24th – 25th October, 2013 for the 8 
North Eastern Region States and also Jharkhand with the primary objective of 
building capacity of the PRI functionaries on proper devoluti on and utilization of 
funds under the BRGF. On 20.12.2013 the implementation of various Programmes 
of MoPR including BRGF was reviewed in a meeting held, in New Delhi, presided 
over by the Minister of Panchayati Raj.   
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dDated:    12/8/2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Paragraph No.2.14) 
 
 The State -wise analysis of utilization of BRGF funds for Capacity Building 
Component of Panchayats, has revealed that in big States like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar 
and Madhya Pradesh there are  large amount of BRGF funds that have remained 
unutilized during the last 3 -4 years.  For instance in Uttar Pradesh with as many as 
34 BRGF districts during 2010 -11, 2011-12 and 2012 -13 against the entitlement of 
Rs. 34.00 crore the releases were Rs. 28.07  crore, Rs. 12.21 crore and Rs 00.00 
crore respectively. Against this the utilization was as low as Rs 9.69 crore, Rs. 0.0 
crore and Rs. 0.0 crore respectively. Similarly in the case of Bihar with as many as 
36 BRGF districts, the release against the entit lement of Rs. 36.00 crore during the 
same period were Rs. 31.34 crore, Rs. 0.00 crore and Rs. 0.0 crore respectively. 
Also in the case of Madhya Pradesh with 24 BRGF districts the releases during the 
same period were Rs. 24.00 crore, Rs. 12.41 crore and Rs. 20.74 crore respectively.  
Whereas the utilization was Rs. 24.00 crore, Rs. 12.41 crore and Rs. 0.00 crore 
respectively.  The Committee, therefore, are unable to comprehend how these 
States would able to handle the additional  funds that would be made av ailable for 
Capacity Building of Panchayats during  2013 -2014 keeping in view their low rate of 
utilization so far.   The Committee therefore, would like the MoPR to examine this 
vital aspect of non-utilisation of funds and take remedial measures to gainfu lly utilize 
the allocated funds.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Funds under the Capacity Building component of BRGF are allocated to each 
State @ Rs. 1.00 crore per annum per BRGF district. For proper utilization, the 
funds under BRGF are released in two insta lments during a financial year and the 
essential condition for release of each instalment is 60% utilisation of all the earlier 
releases and furnishing of documents like Physical & Financial Progress Reports, 
Utilization Certificates, Audit Reports of Stat utory Auditors etc. by the State 
Governments. Non -receipt of proposals in time and non -submission of prescribed 
documents by the State Governments are the main reasons due to which the State 
Governments are unable to claim their full entitlements.   
 

17 
 
This Ministry is doing regular follow up wit the State Governments by means 
of review meetings, video conferences and visits by Officers. The first review 
meeting was held with the Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of all BRGF States on 
11-06-2013. A video con ference was held with the State Government of Madhya 
Pradesh on 23 -07-2013 wherein the progress of BRGF Programme was reviewed.  
On 2-08-2013, in a related meeting held with 12 States, timely claim of funds under 
BRGF Programme was emphasized. During the course of this year, officials from the 
Ministry also visited Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Assam, Rajasthan and 
Madhya Pradesh to motivate the States to submit the BRGF proposals in time. 
During a workshop held for computerization of Panchayats in the Nor th East, the 
position of BRGF proposals was also discussed with the North Eastern States .  A 
workshop was also held in Guwahati, Assam on 24th – 25th October, 2013 for the 8 
North Eastern Region States and Jharkhand with the primary objective of educating 
the PRI functionaries on proper devolution and utilization of funds under the BRGF. 
On 20.12.2013 the implementation of various Programmes of MoPR including BRGF 
was reviewed in a meeting held, in New Delhi, presided over by the Minister of 
Panchayati Raj.   
Utilisation of funds were also discussed in a workshop in February  2014 and Inter 
Ministerial workshop in June, 2014. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Paragraph No.2.17) 
 
 The Committee find that MoPR have projected four areas of Capacity Building of 
Panchayats viz. Devolution of 3 Fs, Availability of Staff, Availability of Infrastructure 
and ICT facilities and Training of elected representatives of Panchayats,  whereas 
the Planning Commission has viewed three pronged effort for bringing about desired 
Capacity Building of Panchayats viz. Provision of adequate human Resources, 
Infrastructure and Training and Sensitisation of Elected Members,  Functionaries of 
Panchayats and  Government Functionaries worki ng at District Block and Gram 
Panchayat level.  The Committee find that broadly the identified areas of MoPR and 
Planning commission broadly are common.   The Committee also find that issue of 
Capacity Building of Panchayats has received the attention of t he Planning 
Commission which has been reflected in Eleventh and Twelfth Plan Documents.  In 
this connection, the Committee also note that MoPR has already brought out a 
'Roadmap for Panchayats for 2011 -2017.   The Committee recommend that 
Government should  hold Annual reviews of implementation of 'Roadmap for 
Panchayats for 2011 -2017' so that corrective measures wherever necessary are 
taken while the implementing of the plan instead of waiting till 2017 to know the 
impact of the scheme.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
MoPR is in agreement with the recommendations of the Committee.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Paragraph No.2.18) 
 
 While reviewing the State -wise details of sanctioned vis -à-vis filled posts  of 
Secretary, Gram Panchayats, the Committee find that against 1.52 lakh sanctioned 
post, 1.12 lakh have been filled in a total of 2.41 lakh Gram Panchayats and 40,000 
posts are yet to be filled. The Committee are however, glad to note that some States 
like Kerala (978/978), Chhattisgarh (9734/9734), Himachal Pradesh (3243/3243), 
Orissa (6234/6234), Tamil Nadu (12618/12618), Sikkim (165/165), Rajasthan 
(9188/8522), Assam (1958/1897), have done brilliantly in equipping Gram 
Panchayats with manpower.  Howeve r, the States which have substantial vacancies 
are Uttar Pradesh (16432/12003), Andhra Pradesh (12395/10670), Maharashtra 
(17326/16655), Bihar (8463/5754),  Karnataka (5628/372),   Uttarakhand  (670/412)  
Manipur (409/37) etc. Information in respect of cer tain States has not been made or 
is not available. The Committee are convinced that with huge State -wise vacancies 
the functioning of Panchayats would be adversely affected.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend the MoPR to take up the matter with concerned 
States at the highest level for filling up sanctioned posts and also update the 'Not 
Reported‟ information from concerned States urgently. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
These recommendations have been considered carefully and the State is 
being requested to adopt a model composition of manpower for each Panchayat Raj 
Institution (PRI) preferably on the pattern of Panchayati Raj system in Maharashtra 
and Karnataka. They are also being requested to intimate action taken in this regard 
and intimate the position of staff being provided in panchayats as also the position of 
vacancies in a uniform manner in each State within period of six months.    
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Paragraph  No. 2.20) 
 
  In regard to equipping Panchayats with requisite manpower, the 
Committee find that it is only on 23rd October, 2009  the MoPR issued Guidelines on 
Manpower for Panchayats to the Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs inter -alia 
highlighting that even after 17 y ears of the Amendment to the Constitution in 1992, 
the PRIs are yet to come up as effective institutions of Self -Government largely due 
to inadequate capacity of Panchayats and calling upon mobalisation of resources for 
deployment of core staff of Panchaya ts through State resources, BRGF, 
MGNREGA, Finance Commission Awards etc.  This was subsequently reiterated on 
12th November, 2010 and also on 6th July, 2011. In this connection, the Committee 
find that new scheme viz, RGPSA also seeks to ensure that each Gram Panchayat 
(GP) has an appropriate building for holding meetings and office work and is 
expected to obtain funds from various sources, especially through schemes of 
Ministry of Rural Development. However, where funds are unavailable from other 
schemes GP buildings will be funded from RGPSA.    Considering the importance of 
the subject, the Committee recommend that more initiatives like holding regular 
meetings/conferences of the Minister of Panchayati Raj with State Ministers should 
be held more often s o that empowerment of panchayats takes at a faster pace as 

19 
 
also State Governments share their concerns/problems as also the initiatives. This 
will also help State Governments to learn from each other‟s experiences.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
MoPR continue to hold meetings/conference with the State Governments for 
implementation of programme effectively at the grass root level.  A meeting of 
Secretaries of Panchayti Raj Department of the States/UTs was held on 20.12.2013 
at New Delhi to review progress made on the implementation of various programme 
of Panchayati Raj. Also regional meeting with the State Governments were held at 
New Delhi, Hyderabad, PUne, Guwahati during 27 -30 May, 2014  to review the 
progress of works undertaken under programmes of MoPR. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl.  dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Paragraph No.2.22) 
 
 The Committee are unhappy to find that the resolve of the MoPR of making 
available the Information Technology to the doorstep of Panchayats made in 
December, 2004 with the object of providing transparency, better delivery of service, 
capacity building requirement etc. of Panchayats largely remains unfulfilled for want 
of allocation of funds by the Planning Commission.   The Committee are also 
annoyed with  the apathy of Planning Commission on this issue as MoPR has 
already quantified Rs. 6896.18 crore for this work that includes Rs. 5457.82 crore for 
Payout and Manpower requirements alone.   As against this the actual allocation 
was as low as Rs. 46.28 crore in 2010-11 and Rs. 40.00 crore  in 2011-12 and it has 
forced the MoPR to restrict their e -Panchayat activities to conduct studies, 
development and deployment of 12 'Common Applications'. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Since the initial project proposal of Rs . 6896.18 Crores for nation -wide rollout 
of e-Panchayat Mission Mode Project (MMP) was not accorded a formal approval by 
the Planning Commission, and in order not to lose valuable time to achieve the goal 
of transparency and accountability through e -enablement of PRIs, MoPR began 
implementing the e-Panchayat MMP with the limited funds available for the purpose. 
However, the Ministry recognized that since the infrastructure and capacity of 
Panchayats w.r.t. e -enablement varies across States/UTs, there was a need for 
States/UTs to undertake different activities to strengthen their Panchayati Raj 
infrastructure with reference to their specific requirements and context. Hence after 
several inter ministerial consultations to review the project implementation 
modalities, in the 12th Plan period, e -Panchayat Mission Mode Project has been 
dovetailed with the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) 
scheme of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR). Under RGPSA, States can select 
the most relevant activities  in their context from a menu of permissible activities, as 
part of their Perspective and Annual Plans. This decentralized approach has allowed 
the States to plan their e -Panchayat activities as per their specific context to 
gradually empower the PRIs in a holistic manner.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 

20 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Paragraph No.2.24) 
 
 The Committee find with dismay that training requirements of as many as 29 
lakhs elected representatives of Panchayats of which 10 lakhs are elected women 
representatives are inadequate. The MOPR admitted before the Committee that 
existing training infrastructure viz. 29 State Institute of Rural Development and 78 
Extension Training Centre ( ETCs) needs to be augmented manifold and ho ped that 
it would be addressed through RGPSA. From the State -wise details of number of 
elected representatives, the Committee are constrained to find that in States like 
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Bihar with as many as 7 lakhs,  3.94 lakhs and 
1.30 lakhs elected Panchayat representatives  respectively , the training 
infrastructure  available is thoroughly inadequate. For instance in Madhya Pradesh 
for 50 districts and 3.96 lakh elected representatives there is only one SIRD, 7 
Panchayat training Centres ( PTCs) and 6 Extension Training Centres (ETCs) in the 
State. Likewise in Bihar with 1.30 lakh elected representatives, there is 1 SIRD and 
only 3 ETCs are available. The Committee, therefore, feel that the MOPR should 
undertake a comprehensive study t o expand the network for training of elected 
representatives of Panchayats by an Expert Committee so that in States where 
training infrastructure is inadequate, the same may be upgraded to the required 
level.  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Under RGPSA, States  are being supported in expanding the network of 
institutions for training as well as for the actual training itself.  In 2013 -14, 21 State 
Panchayat Resource Centres and 136 District Panchayat Resource Centres have 
been sanctioned.    
The National Capability Building Framework (NCBF) provides a framework for 
regular training of Elected Representatives, officials and other stakeholders in the 
Panchayati Raj, to enable them to perform their functions effectively. This framework 
is being taken into account by  the States (Panchayati Raj being a State subject) 
while building the capacity of Elected Representatives and Functionaries of the 
Panchayats. Ministry of Panchayati Raj provides financial assistance under the 
Capacity Building (CB) component of the BRGF P rogramme to the States as per the 
Annual Action Plans received from them. Each State is required to identify nodal 
authorities, usually SIRDs, for preparation and implementation of a six years 
perspective capacity building plan, against which funds are rel eased to States, 
calculated at the rate of Rs. 1 crore per annum for each BRGF district. SIRDs 
undertake periodic review of the quality of training programmes through independent 
agencies. 
a) Extensive trainings are required to build the capacity at grass -root level which is an 
enormous challenge due to inadequate availability of necessary infrastructure. 
Therefore, a cascading mode of training i.e. Training of the Trainers (ToT), has 
been adopted to create Master Trainers at State, District and Panchayat leve ls to 
ensure that trainings reach till grass -root level to as many participants as possible. 
The multiplier effect of ToT model offers an opportunity for informed local input in 
shaping the content and for facilitation of training appropriate to local cult ure and 
context. 

21 
 
b) The Ministry is providing training on Panchayat Enterprise Suite (PES) 
Applications and has advised the States/UTs to use the faculty to create a cadre of 
Master Trainers at State level so that they can be used to train officials at Distri ct 
and Panchayat level. The Ministry plans to create two Master Trainers per 
Application from each district in addition to 2 -4 Master Trainers for each PES 
Application from State Panchayati Raj Department. Over 25,000 have been trained 
so far. To provide s ustained and up -to-date training to end users, User Manuals, 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) and audio assisted CBTs (Computer Based 
Tutorial) have been made available for all PES Applications. CBTs and User 
Manuals have been prepared in English and are available for viewing/playing online 
while the users are working on the softwares and these can also be downloaded 
and played/used in off -line mode. These CBTs serve as authenticated training 
material, including for assisting Master Trainers during State &  District level training 
programmes and can also be accessed by isolated users on demand. The CBTs 
can be used for providing continuous trainings to end users and thus are expected 
to expedite and improve the adoption of PES Applications. These CBTs are al so 
enabled for translation in local languages for better absorption at local level. 
c)  On-line discussion groups (google -groups) are being used for each Application 
wherein users can send their queries and seek answers from MoPR, National 
Informatics Centre (NIC) or even from other States. These groups have been 
extremely effective is sharing ideas and providing immediate solutions to end users. 
They also serve as a knowledge database. 
d)  The Ministry has also made arrangements to provide basic computer 
training to elected representatives and PRI functionaries to create awareness and 
basic understanding on the usage of computers. National Institute of Electronics 
and Information Technology (NIELIT), (previously DOEACC Society ), has been 
engaged to impart these t rainings at State level. The training is based on a simple 
syllabus coupled with hands-on sessions for 36 hours over a six day period. Twenty 
one States and UTs have used the facility so far and over 15,000 functionaries and 
elected members have been trained till date and further 10,000 are scheduled to be 
trained. 
The reply with reference to various aspects of training of elected 
representatives of Panchayats has been given above with reference to the 
recommendation S.No.1 of the Committee in Para 2.1.   B esides, it is also stated 
that the proposal is under consideration for formulating a revised National 
Capability Building Framework (NCBF) which will take care of various aspects 
related to the Capacity Building and Training. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Paragraph No.2.25) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to find that as per MOPR there is no system of 
evaluation of training imparted to large number of elected representatives of 
Panchayats in the country . The Committee were also informed by the MOPR that 
quality aspect needs continuous improvement. The Committee were also informed 
by the Member -Secretary, Planning Commission that there is no inter -relation 
between expenditure and quality of training impar ted. In this connection, during the 
course of evidence the Secretary MoPR agreed with the Committee to impart 

22 
 
training to elected representatives in local language. The Committee are also 
constrained  to note that most important training programme called N ational 
Capability Building Framework (NCBF) as brought out by MOPR and adopted for 
BRGF districts containing important features like stakeholders, requirement of 
resource persons to be trained for training the elected representatives of 
Panchayats, durati on  and course of training, remunerations, etc,. Has not been 
implemented in letter and spirit during the last 3 -4 years. The Committee have been 
informed by the MOPR that RGPSA scheme broadly addresses these issues. The 
Committee, would like the Ministry to ensure that RGPSA takes care of these vital 
aspects. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A detailed exercise have been undertaken to revise the National Capability 
Building Framework (NCBF).  The revised NCBF focuses on expansion of the 
outreach of training as well as the enhancement of its quality.  Best practices across 
States have been documented.  Further, with the establishment of resource centres 
under RPGSA, efforts are being made to improve the quality of training.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl.  dated:    12/8/2014] 

23 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Paragraph No.2.15) 
 
The Committee find that MOPR has been consistently seeking su bstantial 
increases in funds for capacity building requirements of Panchayats before the 
Planning Commission during the years  2010 -2011, 2011 -2012 and 2012 -2013 
broadly for six areas viz Panchayat Staff, Panchayat Ghars, Accounting, e 
Panchayats, Training & infrastructure and Institutionalising Decentralised Planning. 
Planning Commission admitted before the Committee about the receipt of enhanced 
demand from MOPR. During the course of examination of Demands for Grants 
(2012-2013) of MOPR the Committee were  informed that the total requirement of 
funds for RGPSA has been pooled together at Rs. 33,000 crore for Twelfth Plan.  
Against this huge requirement, the Planning Commission while according in principle 
approval to RGPSA has provided GBS of Rs. 11,547 cro re only  for Twelfth Five 
Year Plan for MOPR. Considering the objectives of the Scheme, the Committee, 
strongly recommend that the Planning Commission should reconsider the 
requirements of funds for MOPR with an open mind for current Plan. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 A provision of Rs. 455.00 crore was provided in the BE 2013 -14 for the RGPSA.  
Subsequently, additional of Rs. 200.00 crore was provided to RGPSA while 
presenting budget of the year by the Finance Minister.  The total plan allocation for 
RGPSA d uring 2013 -14 became Rs. 655.00 crore.  As against the projected 
requirement of Rs. 1500 crore for RGPSA for 2014-15, Rs. 1050 crore was allocated 
to RGPSA as BE for 2014-15. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Paragraph No.2.16) 
 
 While reviewing the progress on 'Devolution of Functions, Functionaries and 
Finances' from States to Panchayats under Article 243G read with subjects 
enumerated in Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution, the Committee are 
constrained to note that only few States of have done some work on this issue 
whereas in other  States it has not progressed much.  In this connection, the MoPR 
have candidly admitted before the Committee that Devolution of 3 Fs needs to be 
backed by grass root plan ning which is almost absent in all the States.  The MoPR 
has also pointed out that Devolution of powers to the Panchayats is the discretion of 
the State Governments.   Further the Committee find that Thirteenth Finance 
Commission has also observed that tra ditional theology that funds and functionaries 
would follow functions did not appear to have worked as number of States that have 
notified transfer of functions,  it has not been followed by transfer of funds and 
functionaries.   The Committee also find th at three advisories were issued by MoPR 
viz. on 9th April, 2009 on Panchayat Finances, on 23rd October, 2009 on manpower 

24 
 
to Panchayats and on 1st December, 2009 on Activity Mapping but the position has 
not changed much. The Committee find that the RGPSA pr opose for disbursement 
of twenty percent of RGPSA funds for five years to States based on their 
performance on twelve parameters. Since there has not been much progress on the 
issue of 'Devolution' of 3 Fs to Panchayats by reason of discretion available to  the 
State Governments, Committee would await impact of implementation of RGPSA 
which provides incentives for devolution of powers/functions to Panchayats. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
  MoPR continues to incentivize States as per main performance on the Devolution 
Index under RGSPA, States have been encouraged to set targets for devolution, 
and their performance has been reviewed by independent observers.  This 
performance is discussed in detail in the Central Executive Committee (CEC) 
meetings of RGPSA, as State plans are approved.   
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Paragraph No.2.19) 
 
 On perusal of the composition of stakeholders of Panchayati Raj as reflected in 
the 'National Capability Building Framewor k (NCBF),  the Committee find that 
besides Elected Panchayat Representatives and officials of the  Panchayats, a large 
number of officials like Junior Engineers, Anganwadis Workers,  Primary Health 
Workers, Self Help Groups etc. have been shown as Pressure  Groups with Gram 
Sabhas.  In this connection, the Committee find that MoPR has advised State 
Governments to provide the basic core functionaries to the Panchayats which 
includes the Secretary, an Accountant, a Data Entry Operator and a Social 
Mobiliser.   Keeping in view, the fact that 589 District Panchayats, 6323 Block 
Panchayats and 2.41 lakh Gram Panchayats are there across the country, the 
Committee feel that MoPR should list out a model composition of manpower for 
each PRI and steps should be taken to provide the same. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Under RGPSA, MoPR supports States in providing manpower at the Gram 
Panchayat level such as Panchayat Development Officers, accountants etc.  As the 
size of Gram Panchayats varies from State to State, the sta ffing structure also 
varies. In 2013-14, around 72,000 GP level personnel were sanctioned.  
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
 
 

25 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Paragraph No.2.23) 
 
 The Committee are also unhappy to find that computeriza tion has not reached 
the doorsteps of Gram Panchayats in most of the States. From the data made 
available to the Committee about the progress of computerization, the Committee 
find that the offices of Zila Parishads and Block Panchayats have been given 
computers however these have not been given to Panchayat offices. During the 
course of evidence the Secretary MoPR had expected that by December, 2013 or 
early 2014 broadband connectivity will be given to Panchayats. The Committee 
apprehend that with scant co verage of computers in village Panchayats the goal of 
giving broad band connectivity may not be realized. The Committee would like the 
Ministry to adhere to their stated schedule for providing broadband connection for 
Panchayats. The Committee would await conclusive action taken in this regard.    
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Under RGPSA, there is a provision for States to procure basic IT hardware (a 
computer, UPS and printer) in PRIs at the rate of Rs. 40,000 per Panchayat. Based 
on the proposal made by Stat e Govt. under their Annual RGPSA Plan, funds are 
being provided to States for purchase of computers at Gram Panchayat level. This 
approach is expected to fast -track the provision of computers at Gram Panchayat 
level during the 12 th plan period. Broadband connectivity at Panchayat level is being 
provided under the National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) project of Department of 
Telecommunications (DOT), Govt of India and not by this Ministry. The project aims 
to connect all the Gram Panchayats of the country w ith Optic Fibre Cables (OFC). 
This will provide high bandwidth broadband connectivity at Panchayat level that will 
assist in the full e -enablement of Panchayats. A pilot project for Government -to-
Citizen (G2C) services leveraging the National Optical Fibre  Network (NOFN) is 
being implemented by Dept. of Electronic and Information Technology (DeitY) in 59 
Gram Panchayats (GPs) of the identified pilot blocks viz. Arain in Ajmer district 
(Rajasthan), Parwada in Vishakhapatnam district (Andhra Pradesh) and Pani sagar 
in North Tripura district (Tripura). MoPR has advised these pilot States to make use 
of this opportunity to rollout the Panchayat Enterprise Suite (PES) Applications in 
these pilot GPs so that these can be added to the bouquet of services that are be ing 
showcased under this pilot project.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.23, Paragraph No.2.26) 
 
 In the context of adequacy of Thirteenth Finance Commission Grants to PRIs, 
the MoPR contended before the Comm ittee that Ministry had requested the 
Thirteenth Finance Commission to provide 4% of Divisible Pool to Panchayats for 
Capacity Building requirements like construction of Panchayat Ghars, providing 
Skelton staff etc. and 1% of Divisible Pool for Specific Gr ants for preparation data 
base, area planning etc.   As against this, Thirteenth Finance Commission has 
recommended a Basic Grant of 1.5% percent of previous years' Divisible Pool and a 
Performance Grant of 0.50% of Divisible Pool in first year and 1 percent in next three 
years.   The Committee find that MoPR has quantified the over -all capacity building 

26 
 
requirement of Rs. 1.12 lakh  crore  out of which Thirteenth Finance Commission 
has recommended Rs.63,050 crore for   five years to PRIs comprising of Rs.4 1,225 
crore as Basic Grant and Rs. 21,825  crore as Performance Grant as untied Grants.   
In this connection, the Committee feel that an amount of Rs. 3 lakh per Panchayat 
per annum recommended by Thirteenth Finance Commission is not sufficient 
enough taki ng into consideration the devaluation of rupee and inflation for overall 
Capacity Building requirements of Panchayats.    
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Finance Commission has recommended grant -in-aid to augment the 
Consolidated Funds of the States to supp lement the resources of the local bodies. 
Against the proposal of this Ministry for providing 5% of the divisible pool to PRIs, 
2.28% of the divisible pool (2009 -14) has been recommended by FC XIII for Local 
Bodies for the award period 2010 -2015. These gra nts are untied to expenditure 
conditions and it is for the individual Panchayats to decide on how best to utilize 
these funds. Since the divisible pool is a dynamic figure and is correlated to actual 
tax collection, hence, with any increase in actual tax c ollection the Divisible Pool as 
well as the share of local bodies also increases correspondingly. 
So far Rs. 32,943.35 crore have  been released to the states for Local Bodies (PRIs) 
during 2010 -11 to 2013 -14 under various components of the grants as on 
06.02.2014 as given below:    
                                                                                                     
                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statements showing the detail of grants released during the said period are enclosed at 
Annex I to IV.  
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated: 12/8/2014]
(Rs. in Crore) 
a. General Basic Grant 24,476.95 
b. Special Area Basic Grant 487.30 
c. General Performance Grant 7,871.15 
d. Special Area Performance 
Grant 
107.95 
 Total 32,943.35 

27 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Paragraph No.2.3) 
 
 The Committee find that empowerment of Panchayats through greater devolution 
of powers and responsibilities on Panchayats in planning and monitoring of 
development schemes in line with Constitutional intent was emphasized in Eleventh 
Plan (2007-2012) Document. Government pronouncements made from time to tim e 
including the recent one in Twelfth Plan (2012 -2017) document brought out by the 
Planning Commission,  wherein role of rural local self Government has been 
considered critical for rural transformation. According to the Twelfth Plan Document 
although States have taken up activity mapping, pattern of assignment of subjects 
and coverage of subjects widely differed among the States, barring those 
development programmes/schemes which expressly require the involvement of 
Panchayats, most others are implemented by the functionaries of line department 
concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommend that issue of the devolution of 
powers and responsibilities in the areas spelt out in Eleventh Schedule of the 
Constitution should be taken up by the MoPR with all the S tates at highest level in 
the Government. Similarly there should be national level Conferences/Seminars to 
emphasize empowerment of Panchayats. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has taken up the issue of devolution of 
powers to P anchayats with States in several ways. Firstly, States are incentivized, 
annually as per their ranking on a „Devolution Index‟.  Under RGPSA, States are 
encouraged to set targets related to devolution, which are reviewed in CEC 
meetings while sanctioning of plans.   
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl.  dated: 12/8/2014] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
[Please see Para 11 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Paragraph No.2.6) 
 
 Another major impediment coming in the way of empowerment of Panchay ats is 
low competency to handle Panchayat work.  In this connection, during the course of 
evidence the Secretary (Panchayati Raj) stated before the Committee that the 
Ministry is looking for varying requirements as out of 28 lakh Panchayat 
representatives, about 36 percent are elected women representatives, 19 percent 
are Scheduled Castes and 11 percent are Scheduled Tribes.  Admittedly many of 
these elected representatives are first timers and are largely unlettered and as such 
their functional literacy needs to be satisfied. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that for real capacity building of Panchayats a massive literacy campaign should be 
a part of training of elected representatives of Panchayats in the country.  For future, 
the Committee feel that th ere is need to examine whether some minimum 
qualifications could be set for holding positions in PRIs.     
    

28 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The position about the overall efforts being made for giving boost up to the efforts 
of State for capacity building and  training of elected representatives and Panchayat 
functionaries in States has been submitted with reference to recommendation S. No. 
1 made in Para 2.1 as referred to above.  It is also stated that while discussing the 
component of capacity building and t raining of ERs and functionaries of Panchayats 
as reflected in their State Plans, Central Executive Committee (CEC) of RGPSA, 
which considers and approves such plans, has repeatedly highlighted the need of 
comprehensive literacy campaign of the ERs and Pan chayat functionaries.  Further, 
the National Capability Building Framework (NCBF) has been revised to emphasize 
the need for expanding the outreach of training.  A separate chapter on the training 
of SC, ST representatives and women representatives has bee n included.  States 
are being supported in formulating strategies to support such ERs.  On an average 
around 14 lakh elected representatives are trained annually.     
 In order to improve functional IT literacy at Panchayat level, MoPR has made 
arrangements to provide basic computer training to elected representatives and PRI 
functionaries to create awareness and basic understanding on the usage of 
computers. National Institute of Electronics and Information Technology (NIELIT), 
(previously DOEACC Society),  has been engaged to impart these trainings in the 
States. The training is based on a simple syllabus including hands -on sessions for 
36 hours over a six -day period. Twenty -one States and UTs have used this effort 
and over 17,000 functionaries, elected rep resentatives have been trained till date, 
and further 8,000 are scheduled to be trained. 
 Furthermore, in order to build the capacity of Panchayat functionaries in usage of 
various Panchayat Enterprise Suite (PES) Applications developed under e -
Panchayat M MP, a cascading mode of training i.e. ToT (Training of the Trainers) 
has been adopted to create Master Trainers at State, District and Panchayat levels 
to ensure that trainings reach till grass -root level. The multiplier effect of ToT model 
offers an oppor tunity for informed local input in shaping the content and for 
facilitation of training appropriate to local culture and context. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl.  dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
[Please see Para 14 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7, Paragraph No.2.8) 
 
 Another issue that has attracted the attention of the Committee is slow pace of 
district planning.  The Committee find that under Article 243ZD of the Constitution, it 
is obligatory for   every State to constitute the District Planning Committees (DPCs) 
and every such Committee shall prepare Draft Development Plan in matters of 
common interest between Panchayats and Municipalities for integrated planning.   
The Committee find that although MoPR has been a ble to constitute DPCs in every 
State, it has not been able to make any headway on the issue of integrated and 
decentralized planning.    This has been mainly to the fact that on -line Departments 
are not communicating the resource envelop to Planning Units  for effective 
convergence of resources before the plan preparation.  For this MoPR has 

29 
 
suggested that capacity of Panchayats/ULRs is to be strengthened to prepare local 
plans and consolidate these at District level. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Under the BRG F Programme, release of funds is contingent upon 
preparation of the District Plans, duly consolidated by the District Planning 
Committees (DPCs) from the local plans prepared by the Panchayats, the 
Municipalities and the other Local Bodies. As already note d by the Committee the 
BRGF Programme has encouraged the States to constitute the DPCs in the 
Districts. At the inception of the BRGF Programme in 2007, only 13 States had 
constituted the DPCs. All the remaining States have constituted the DPCs since 
then. 
Under BRGF Capacity Building component, each State is nevertheless 
required to identify nodal agencies, including SIRDs for Perspective Capacity 
Building Plan of the State.  
Ministry of Panchayati Raj will strive through operationalization of Rajiv 
Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) to enhance and harness the 
capacity of Panchayats to prepare local plans and consolidate these at District level. 
In order to access RGPSA funds States have to fulfil some essential conditions 
which include constitution of District Planning Committees (DPCs) in all Districts and 
issuing guidelines / rules to make these functional. 20% of RGPSA funds are linked 
to steps taken by the States for implementation of various provisions of the 73 rd 
Amendment to the Constitut ion in specific areas which include preparation and 
operationalization of a framework for bottom -up grassroots planning and 
convergence through DPCs.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
[Please see Para 17 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Paragraph No.2.21) 
 
 The Committee find with dismay that Panchayats are facing major constraints in 
terms of construction of Panchayat Ghars in various States and this has been major 
hurdle in necessar y capacity build -up of Panchayats.   The Committee find that 
several States are yet to provide Panchayat Ghars to Gram Panchayats. Major 
deficit States are Andhra Pradesh (21807/5639), Bihar (8463/3135), Haryana 
(6155/3155), Madhya Pradesh (23012/3634), Ma harashtra (27920/5183), Punjab 
(12800/7182) and Uttar Pradesh (51914/22930). The Committee attribute the 
prevailing inadequacy of infrastructure largely due to non-utilisation of funds by State 
Governments under BRGF.  They also find that for arranging Pan chayat Ghars in 
deficient States Government has taken a number of steps. MoPR has advised the 
State Governments for construction of Panchayat Ghars in a time bound manner by 
combining the fund available under MGNREGA, BRGF and RGPSA Schemes 
besides States own resources. Further, the Central Government has decided to 
assist State Governments/UTs in providing a Panchayat Development Officer and 
Junior Engineer in priority Gram Panchayats using Administrative Expenditure Head 

30 
 
of MGNREGA and have proposed 90:10  funding ratio between Centre and States to 
bring to the level of 50:50 in five years time for which comprehensive Guidelines 
have been issued.  Viewing the work done subsequent to 2009, the Committee find 
from the website of MoPR that as on 30.03.2011 onl y 3688  'Panchayat Ghars' have 
been sanctioned in 19 States from 2006 -07 to 2011 -12 and    only 304 'Resources 
Centres'  were sanctioned in four States Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himachal 
Pradesh and Tripura  during the same period. The Committee fail to un derstand as 
to how this small number of Panchayat Ghars/'Resource Centres' is going to reduce 
the huge deficiency of infrastructure of Panchayats across the States. The 
Committee, accordingly, would like the MoPR to pursue the matter with State 
Governments so as to ensure that all Panchayats have Panchayat Ghars by end of 
Twelfth Plan. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Under RGPSA, funds are provided for Panchayat buildings where these do not 
exist. In 2013-14, 3,128 new GP buildings were sanctioned. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl.  dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
[Please see Para 20 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
 
 
  

31 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Paragraph No.2.2) 
 
 A glance at various schemes for Capacity Building of Panchayats shows that the 
work for Capacity Building has been done by various Ministries like MoPR mainly 
under Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF) and Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana 
(RGSY), Ministry of Rural Development under MGNERGA and NLRM and also by 
newly created Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation under Nirmal Bharat 
Abhiyan (NBA).   Besides, some other Central Ministries like Health, Education, etc. 
are also involved in Capacity Building work of Panchayats in a small measure in 
tune with their schemes/programmes.    The Committee feel that in the process, 
funds are spent under various schemes without any composite and cohesive 
planning and in the process capability of Panchayats a t ground level largely remain 
unchanged.  The Committee have been informed that within MoPR, process of 
merging of schemes for the purpose of Capacity Building of Panchayats in cohesive 
manner has started taking shape after launch of a new scheme named 'Rajiv Gandhi 
Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan(RGPSA)'. The Committee find that RGPSA 
provides for constitution of two bodies for overall policy direction, i.e. Empowered 
Central Steering Committee (ECSC) and the Empowered Central Executive 
Committee (ECEC). E CSC is chaired by the Minister of Panchayati Raj as 
Chairperson and has Ministers/State Ministers of Rural Development, Drinking 
Water and Sanitation, Education, Health, Agriculture, Social Justice and Welfare, 
Tribal Welfare, North East, Planning Commissi on, State Minister for Finance 
(Department of Expenditure), Ministers from well performing States as per 
devolution index, and five Elected Women Panchayats representatives form among 
best performing Panchayats as Members. ECEC is chaired by the Secretary MoPR 
as Chairperson, representative of Planning Commission, Secretary Expenditure 
(Ministry of Finance), Secretaries of Agriculture, Rural Development, Drinking Water 
and Sanitation, Education, Health, Social Justice Welfare, Tribal Affairs, DONER, 
Additional Secretaries, Financial Adviser and Joint Secretaries of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj, Director –General National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) 
Hyderabad and Secretaries responsible for Panchayati Raj of well performing States 
as per the devolution index as Members.   The Committee strongly recommend that 
a certain percentage of funds for the schemes run by the Ministries of Rural 
Development, Drinking Water & Sanitation, Health etc. in rural areas should be 
made available to MoPR so that capac ity building of Panchayats is built in a 
systematic/planned manner.   This will bring all the funds related with Panchayats 
under different Ministries for capacity building of PRIs under one umbrella.   
Thereafter, similar process should be initiated at St ate level.  The Committee would 
await specific action taken in this regard. 
 
 
 

32 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 12th FYR Plan outlay for MOPR was initially pegged at Rs.6,437 crore. Planning 
Commission  has then, transferred 1% of the annual budgetary allocation  of the 
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation and Ministry of Rural Development i.e. 
Rs.5,110 crore to MOPR for newly launched Rajiv Gandhi Sashaktikaran Abhiyan 
(RGPSA). The total allocation  for MOPR in the 12 Plan was enhanced to Rs.11,547 
crore.  Fur ther, the MoPR has forwarded the aforesaid recommendations of the 
Standing Committee to the Planning Commission for taking up the issue with the 
concerned Ministries/Departments.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/2/2014-Parl. dated:    12/8/2014] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
[Please see Para 8 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI :        DR. P. VENUGOPAL 
10  August, 2015                                  Chairperson 
  19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Rural Development 

33 
 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY,  
THE 10 AUGUST, 2015 
 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
                Dr. P. Venugopal      -  Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Kirti Azad 
3. Shri Harish Chandra Chavan 
4. Shri Manshankar Ninama 
5. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
6. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
7. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
8. Smt. Butta Renuka 
9. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
10. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
11. Shri Ajay Misra Teni 
12. Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi 
15. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
16. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
17. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
18. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
19. Shri A. K. Selvaraj 
20. Smt. Kanak Lata Singh 
21. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.C.Tiwari   -  Director 
3. Smt. B. Visala   - Additional Director 
 

34 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitti ng of the Committee. Thereafter, 
the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
(i) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(ii) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(iii) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(iv) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(v) XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(vi) Draft Report on Action Ta ken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Forty Fifth (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) Report on 'Capacity Building of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs)'; 
 
 
  
3. After detailed discussions, the Committee adopted the Reports without any modificati ons. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Reports and present the same to the 
Parliament.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

35 
 
APPENDIX - II 
[Vide Introduction of Report] 
  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY FIFTH 
REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 I. Total number of observations/recommendations:   23 
     
 II. Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the   
  Government :    
Serial Nos. 1, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 17, 19, 21 and 22     
      
Total:          13 
Percentage:         56.52%
            
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
  desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies :      
 
Serial No. 12, 13, 16, 20 and 23 
 
Total:          05 
Percentage:         21.74 %
    
    
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the    
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:     
Serial Nos. 3, 5, 7 and 18  
 
Total:          04 
Percentage:         17.39 %
            
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
  Government are still awaited :       
 
 
Serial No. 2   
 
Total:          01 
Percentage:         4.35% 
 