STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
 
                  
 
      
(201
6
-
201
7
)
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
 
   
SIX
TEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
 
(DEPARTMENT OF
 
LAND RESOURCES
)
 
 
  
 
WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT COMPONENT OF 
PRADHAN MANTRI 
KRISHI 
SINCHAYEE 
YOJANA (
WDC
-
PMK
SY)
 
ERSTWHILE IWMP
 
 
 
THIRTY
-
NINTH 
REPORT
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
39
 


THIRTY
-
NINTH 
REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
 
(201
6
-
201
7
)
 
 
(
SIX
TEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
 
(
DEPARTMENT OF
 
LAND RESOURCES
)
 
  
 
 
 
 
WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT COMPONENT OF PRADHAN MANTRI KRISHI 
SINCHAYEE YOJANA (
WDC
-
PMKSY) ERSTWHILE IWMP
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
19.07.2017
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
19.07.2017
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
July
, 
201
7
/
 
Ashadha
, 193
9
 
(Saka)
 
 
 
 


CRD No.  
136
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 201
6
 
BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth 
Edition) and Printed by __________________.
 
 
 

  
CONTENTS
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016
-
17)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)
 
 
REPORT
 
PART I
 
NARRATION ANALYSIS
 
I.   Introductory
 
1
 
2
 
II.  Watershed
 
III. Watershed Development Component of 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee
 
Yojana 
 
(PMKSY) Erstwhile IWMP
 
 
(A)  Objectives of WDC
-
PMKSY
 
4
 
 
4
 
 
 
(B)  Implementation of the Scheme
 
 
 
(C)  Role of States in the Scheme
 
 
 
 
   
  
Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
Preparation
 
 
 
(D)  Physical Performance of the Scheme
 
 
 
(E)  Financial Resources/Performance of the Scheme
 
 
 
 
(i)  Financial Progress
 
 
 
 
(ii) Future Plan 
vi
s
-
a
-
v
is 
Budget Allocation
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) Shortfall of Funds
 
IV.
 
Inspection/Monitoring of the Scheme
 
 
V.
 
C
hallenges 
being faced by the Scheme
 
VI.
 
Impetus to the Scheme by the Centre 
 
 
 
(A)  Neeranchal Project
 
 
 
 
(i) Objective
 
 
 
 
(ii) Scope
 
 
 
 
(iii) Implementation of Neeranchal Project
 
 
 
 
(iv) Involvement of Agencies
 
 
 
 
(v)Progress So Far
 
 
 
(B)  Creation of 
Portal/Mobile App
 
 
 
(C)  Use of Public Finance Management System (PFMS)
 
 
 
(D)  Convergence of Schemes
 
 
 
(E)  Monitoring & Evaluation
 
 
 
(F)  Skill Development
 
VII.
 
Completion Status
 
PART II
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
 
5
 
6
 
8
 
9
 
12
 
 
13
 
 
16
 
17
 
18
 
21
 
23
 
23
 
23
 
23
 
24
 
24
 
25
 
 
26
 
27
 
28
 
 
28
 
 
29
 
 
29
 
31
 
 
 
 

 
 
I.
 
 
APPENDICES
 
 
Minutes of the 
Fourth
 
Sitting of the Committee held on 
11 January, 2017
 
 
 
41
 
 
 
II.
 
Minutes of  the 
Eleventh
 
sitting of the Committee held on 
30 May, 2017
 
 
4
3
 
 
 
III.
 
Extract of Minutes of the 
Thirteenth
 
Sitting of the Committee held on 
11 July
, 2017
 
4
5
 
 
 
 
 
 

(i)
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
(201
6
-
201
7
)
 
 
        
 
 
Dr. P. Venugopal
 
 
--
 
Chairperson
 
MEMBERS
 
Lok  Sabha
 
2.
 
Shri Sisir 
Adhikari
 
3.
 
Shri Kirti Azad
 
4.
 
Shrimati Renuka Butta
 
5.
 
Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
 
6.
 
Shri Sanjay Dhotre
 
7.
 
Shri Biren Singh Engti
 
8.
 
Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak
 
9.
 
Shri Ajay Mis
h
ra (Teni)
 
10.
 
Shri Manshankar Ninama
 
11.
 
Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
 
12.
 
Shrimati Mausam Noor
 
13.
 
Shri Prahl
ad Singh Patel
 
14.
 
Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju
 
15.
 
Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss
 
16.
 
Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma
 
17.
 
Dr. Yashwant Singh
 
18.
 
Dr.
 
Naramalli Sivaprasad 
 
19.
 
Shri Balka Suman
 
20.
 
Shri Ladu Kishore Swain
 
21.
 
Shri Chintaman Wanaga
 
Rajya Sabha
 
22.
 
Shri Munquad Ali
 
23.
 
Shri D. Bandyopadhyay
 
 
24.
 
Shri 
Pratap Keshari Deb *
 
25.
 
Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo
 
26.
 
Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
 
27.
 
Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
 
28.
 
Shri A.
K. Selvaraj
 
29.
 
Shri Shiv 
Pratap Shukla
 
30.
 
Shri Rewati Raman Singh
 
31.
 
Shri 
Devender Goud T.
 
SECRETARIAT
 
1.
 
Shri  Abhijit Kumar
 
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri 
S. 
Chatterjee
 
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
3.
 
Smt 
B. Visala
 
 
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
4.
 
Smt. Emma C. Barwa
 
 
-
 
Deputy Secretary
 
5.
 
Shri 
Inam Ahmed 
 
 
 
-
 
Senior 
Committee Assistant
 
__________________________________________________________________
 
*
 
Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 
07.07.2017 vice Shri Bishnu Charan Das
 

 
(ii)
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (201
6
-
201
7
) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the 
Report on 
'
Watershed 
Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
(WDC
-
PMKSY) erstwhile IWMP
)
'
. 
 
 
2. 
 
The Committee had a briefing of the representatives of the Department of 
Land 
Resources
 
(Ministry of Rural Development) on 
11 January
,
 
201
7
. Thereafter, the
 
Committee 
took evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Land Resources 
(Ministry of 
Rural Development) at their sitting held on 
30 May
, 201
7
. 
 
3. 
 
The
 
Draft
 
Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on
 
11 July
, 
2017
. 
 
4
.
 
The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Department of 
Land Resources 
(Ministry of Rural Development) for placing before them the requisite 
material and their considered views in connection with the examination of the su
bject. 
 
5
. 
 
The Committee place on record their deep sense of appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
     
     
DR.  P. VENUGOPAL
 
 
 
  
July
, 
201
7
 
 
 
 
 
                   
                     
   
Chairperson,
 
 
  
 
Ashadha
, 
193
9
 
(Saka)                     
 
  
 
 
 
Standing Committee on Rural Development
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
PART – I  
 
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
 Department of Wasteland Development was created under the Ministry of Rural 
Development on 2nd July, 1992. The Ministry was renamed in March 1995 as the 
Ministry of Rural Areas and Employment with three departments namely Department of 
Rural Employment and Poverty Alleviation, Rural Development and Wasteland 
Development.            
 The Ministry was again renamed as the Ministry of Rural Development in 1999 
with three Departments i.e. Department of Rural Development, Department of Land 
Resources and Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation. The Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation has been made separate Ministry w.e.f. 13 July, 2011. 
  
 At present, the Ministry of Rural Development consists of two Departments, 
namely, Department of Rural Development and Department of Land Resources. 
              
 Department of Land Resources (DoLR) is mandated to all land based 
development programmes. Out of 329 million hectare of geographical area of the 
country, 140 million hectares is net sown area. Of this, about 66 million hectare (47%) is 
irrigated and the remaining 74 million ha. (53%) is rainfed. In order to address concerns 
of land degradation and wastelands and enhance productivity in rainfed areas, the 
DoLR is implementing area development programmes on watershed-basis.   
 
 Under the aegis of the erstwhile Planning Commission, the National Rainfed 
Area Authority (NRAA) framed the Common Guidelines, 2008 for watershed 
programmes for all Ministries / Departments. The provisions in the Common Guidelines 
and the observations of the Parthasarthy Committee necessitated modifications in the 
Watershed Schemes of the DoLR. Accordingly, during 2009-10, the Schemes of 
Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP), Desert Development Programme (DDP) and 
Integrated Wasteland Development Programme (IWDP) of the DoLR were integrated  

2 
 
and consolidated into a single modified programme called the Integrated Watershed 
Management Programme (IWMP). This programme is being implemented w.e.f. 
26.02.2009 as per the Common Guidelines for Watershed Development Projects, 2008 
(Revised in 2011) and a total of 8214 projects covering 39.07 million hectare with a total 
project cost of Rs 50,740 crore have been sanctioned in 28 States (except Goa) during 
2009-10 to 2014-15. During 2015-16 & 2016-17, no new projects were sanctioned. The 
programme is continued as one of the four components of Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) w.e.f. 01.07.2015. In addition, the department is also 
implementing World Bank Assisted Neeranchal National Watershed Management 
Project (Neeranchal) from 2015-16. The Neeranchal will primarily support the 
Watershed Development Component of PMKSY through technical assistance to 
improve incremental conservation outcomes and agricultural yields in a sustainable 
manner for farming communities in the Project States.     
 
 
II. WATERSHED 
 During the course of examination, DoLR, while explaining about the technical 
aspects of a watershed submitted before the Committee as under:- 
 A Watershed is a topographically delineated area that is drained by a stream 
system. Watershed area includes physical and hydrological natural resources as well as 
human resources. Management of a watershed thus entails the rational utilization of 
land and water resources for optimum production but with minimum hazard to natural 
and human resources. Therefore, watershed management is the process of guiding and 
organizing land use and use of other resources in a watershed to provide desired goods 
and services without adversely affecting soil and water resources. Embedded in this 
concept is the recognition of the interrelationships among land use, soil and water and 
the linkages between uplands and downstream areas. 
            
  

3 
 
A Typical Watershed 
Watershed is a Geo-Hydrological  
  unit  
which drains to a common point or  
  outlet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Watershed Development 
 Ideal for rainfed areas 
 Aims at Soil and Moisture Conservation 
 Put land use according to land capability 
 Reduce soil erosion and runoff 
 Improve biomass 
Watershed Classification (sq. km) 
 Basin       50,000 
 Catchment   5.000 
 Watershed   500 
 Sub watershed   50 
 Micro Watershed  5 (AISLUS) 

4 
 
 
III. WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT COMPONENT OF PRADHAN MANTRI KRISHI 
 SINCHAYEE YOJANA (WDC-PMKSY) ERSTWHILE IWMP 
 
 Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) has been launched in 2015-
16 by amalgamating ongoing Schemes of three Ministries viz. Accelerated Irrigation 
Benefit Programmed (AIBP) and PMKSY (WR) of the Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR, RD & GR); IWMP of the Ministry of 
Rural Development, DoLR and the Minor Irrigation component of On Farm Water 
Management (OFWM) of National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) of the 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and 
Farmers Welfare (DAC & FW). Total allocation for PMKSY during 2016-17 is Rs. 5767 
crore (BE), out of which Rs 1550 crore (BE) has been allocated for Watershed 
Development Component including Rs.55 crore for Neeranchal.  
 The IWMP, one of the flagship programmes of the Government of India had been 
under implementation since 2009-10 in all the States except Goa. From 2015-16, the 
IWMP is now amalgamated as Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri 
Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (WDC-PMKSY).        
 
A.  OBJECTIVES OF WDC-PMKSY 
 The primary objectives of Watershed Development Programme are harnessing, 
conserving and developing degraded natural resources such as soil, vegetative cover 
and ground water table; prevention of soil run-off; rain water harvesting and recharging 
of ground water table; increasing the productivity of crops; introduction of multi-cropping 
and diverse agro-based activities; promoting sustainable livelihoods and increasing the 
household incomes; etc.             
 Watershed Development principally aims for development of rainfed portions of 
net cultivated area and culturable wastelands. The major activities undertaken under the 
programme inter alia include preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), 
community mobilisation, institution and capacity building, entry point activities, ridge 
area treatment, drainage line treatment, soil and moisture conservation, rain water 

5 
 
harvesting, nursery raising, afforestation, horticulture, pasture development, livelihood 
activities for the asset-less persons and production system & micro enterprises for small 
and marginal farmers.         
 
B. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SCHEME  
Institutional set up for implementation of WDC-PMKSY (erstwhile IWMP)  
a) Ministry Level: DoLR has the necessary institutional mechanism in the form of 
Steering Committee Chaired by the Secretary, DoLR for effective and 
professional management of watershed projects. This Committee inter alia 
appraises and clears the project proposals of the States. The Steering 
Committee consists of members from the NITI Aayog, Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change, Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Ministry of Science and 
Technology, Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Department of 
Rural Development, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries, 
Department of Agricultural Research & Education, Central Ground Water Board, 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, Indira Gandhi National 
Open University, technical experts from different scientific institutions such as 
International Crop Research Institute for Semi-Arid Tropics, Central Research 
Institute for Dryland Agriculture, National Remote Sensing Centre, National 
Institute for Agriculture Extension Management, Voluntary Organizations and 
State Governments. 
b) State Level: A State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA) has been constituted 
with professional support. The SLNA is the dedicated institution for the 
implementation of the programme in the State. 
c) District Level: Watershed Cell-cum Data Centre (WCDC) is the District level 
institution to supervise and coordinate projects implementation in 
the District. WCDC is set up in District Rural Development Agency / Zilla 
Parishad / District Level Implementing Agency / Department in all programme 
districts as per the convenience of the State Governments.  

6 
 
d) Project Level: Project implementation is supervised by the Project 
Implementing Agency (PIA). As per the Common Guidelines for Watershed 
Projects, 2008 (Revised 201 1 ), Panchayats, Government and Non Government 
agencies may function as PIAs. Each PIA is to have a Watershed 
Development Team (WDT) comprising of 3 to 4 technical experts. 
e) Village Level: Watershed Committee (WC) is constituted by the Gram Sabha 
for implementation of the project at field level. It comprises of at least 10 
members, half of which are representatives of Self Help Group 
(SHGs) and User Groups (UGs), SC / STs, women and landless. One member 
from WDT is also represented in WC.     
 
 Responding to the query raised during the course of evidence regarding the 
compliance of earlier suggestions given by the Committee, Secretary, DoLR 
stated as under:- 
"जब िपछली बार माननीय सिमित ने हमको िनदőश िदए थे, तो हमने उन िनदőशों क े अनुपालन मŐ डीपीआर 
क े गुणवȅा क े साथ अǅ ी Ůोफ े शनल एजŐसीज से बनवाने और उसको पİɰक डोमेन मŐ रखने का आदेश 
जारी कर िदया था। हमने Ůोजेƃ ्स को ससमय एवं गुणवȅा क े साथ पूणŊ करने का आदेश चीफ सेŢे टरी 
को जारी कर िदया था और उनको कहा गया था की आप बजट का अिधकािधक ऑिɐमल उपयोग 
कीिजये, सŐटŌल एवं ː ेट ˋ ीम क े साथ कɋजőɌ कीिजए और Ůोजेƃ  तथा Ůोजेƃ  एİƃिवटीज को भी 
िŮऑįरटीज़ कीिजए। अगर कहीं पर कोई अिनयिमतता आए ं, िवशेष ŝ प से िवȅीय अिनयिमतता आए ं, तो 
आप उस Ůकरण को, जैसा उपयुƅ  हो, आप तीनो एįरयाज मŐ कारŊवाई करŐ। िडपाटŊमŐटल एƕ न, और जो 
दोषी ː ाफ है, आप उनक े ऊपर िसिवयर एƕ न लीिजए। िसिवल एƕ न, जो सरकारी पैसा गलत तरीक े 
से यूज़ हो गया हो, उसको िवद इंटरेː  वापस लीिजए। और अगर िŢिमनल कİʙिबिलटी बनती है, तो 
िŢिमनल एƕ न लीिजए।"          
 
C.  ROLE OF STATES IN THE SCHEME  
 Asked to elaborate the role being played by the States vis-a-vis the 
implementation of the Scheme, the DoLR in its written replies have stated that:- 
"WDC-PMKSY projects are being implemented by the respective SLNAs in 
accordance with the Common Guidelines for Watershed Development Projects.   
Common Guidelines for Watershed Development Projects-2008 (Revised Edition 
- 2011) envisage a dedicated SLNAs (Department / Mission / Society/ Authority) 
to be constituted by the State Government for the implementation of Watershed 
projects with the Development Commissioner / Additional Chief Secretary / 
Agricultural Production Commissioner/ Principal Secretary of the concerned 
department or their equivalent nominated by the State Government as the 

7 
 
Chairperson of the State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA). The SLNA has a full-time 
Chief Executive Officer who may be a serving Government officer on deputation 
or appointed on a contract. The main functions of SLNAs inter alia include the 
following: 
  
• Prepare a perspective and strategic plan of watershed development for 
the State on the basis of plans prepared at the block and district level and 
indicate implementation strategy and expected outputs/outcomes, 
financial outlays and approach the Nodal Agency at the central level in the 
Department for appraisal and clearance.  
• Sanction watershed projects for the State on the basis of approved State 
Perspective and Strategic Plan as per procedure in vogue and oversee all 
watershed projects in the State within the parameters set out in the 
Guidelines. 
• Provide technical support to Watershed Cell cum Data Centre (WCDC) 
throughout the State.  
• Approve a list of independent institutions for capacity building of various 
stakeholders within the State and work out the overall capacity building 
strategy in consultation with NRAA/Nodal Ministry.  
• Approve Project Implementing Agencies identified/selected by WCDC / 
District Level Committee by adopting appropriate objective selection 
criteria and transparent systems. 
• Establish monitoring, evaluation and learning systems at various levels 
(Internal and external/ independent systems).  
• Ensure regular and quality online monitoring of watershed projects in the 
State in association with Nodal Agency at the central level and securing 
feedback by developing partnerships with independent and capable 
agencies.  
• Constitute a panel of Independent Institutional Evaluators for all watershed 
projects within the state, get this panel duly approved by the concerned 
Nodal Agencies at the central level and ensure that quality evaluations 
take place on a regular basis.  
• Prepare State Specific Process Guidelines, Technology Manuals etc in 
coordination with the Nodal Ministry/ NRAA and operationalize the same."  
        
 F urther, Secretary, DoLR during evidence stated as under regarding the 
role of the States:- 
 "सर , वाटर शेड Ůोजेƃ ्स मŐ क ेȾ  और ː ेट अंश होते हœ, वह शेयįरंग पैटनŊ पर इ̱ɘीमŐट होते हœ। 
 इ̱ɘीमŐटेशन ː ेट गवनŊमŐट Ȫारा िकया जाते हœ।"  
          
 
  
  

8 
 
(i) Detailed Project Report (DPR) Preparation 
 The scrutinisation of the documents submitted before the Committee by the 
DoLR brought to fore the important aspect of DPR preparation in the success of the 
Projects under this Scheme. On enquiring further, the Committee was apprised by the 
DoLR in its written reply as below:- 
"WDC-PMKSY projects are being implemented by the respective State 
Department / Agencies as per the concerned State Government's 
technical, administrative and financial rules and in accordance with the 
Common Guidelines for Watershed Development Projects.  
 As per the Common Guidelines for Watershed Development 
Projects - 2008 (Revised in 2011) the DPR is to be prepared by the 
Watershed Development Team (WDT) for integrated development of the 
watershed area with active participation of the Watershed Committee 
(WC). The WC comprises of at least 10 members. Half of the members 
are to be representatives of SHGs and User Groups, SC/ST community, 
women and landless persons in the village. For the preparation of the 
DPR, Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) exercise is conducted.  
 It is imperative that the planning for the integrated development of 
the watershed areas by the Project Implementing Agencies & Watershed 
Development Teams is professionally undertaken and the Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs) are holistically and aptly prepared. As such, the role of 
the agency engaged for the purpose of preparation of DPRs is very 
important. The Chief Secretaries of all States (except Goa) have been 
requested on 24.01.2017 to issue instructions to the State Department / 
Agencies implementing watershed development in the State to  ensure 
that (i) the selection of the agencies for preparation of the DPRs is done in 
accordance with the laid down procedures and rules and without any 
irregularity etc., (ii) the agencies having the essential qualification and 
capabilities for preparing DPRs of the requisite standards and quality 
alone are selected, (iii) funds for preparation of the DPRs are utilized in a 
cost-effective manner, (iv) the DPRs are made available in the public 
domain in an appropriate way, and (v) that there has to be general 
awareness about the works envisaged to be undertaken, their 
implementation and completion." 
           
 Elaborating further upon the role being played by the States in the preparation of 
DPRs, the Secretary, DoLR during the course of evidence submitted as under:- 
"हरेक Ůोजेƃ  क े िलए डीपीआर ː ेट Ȫारा चयिनत आगőनाइजेशन बनाती है। हरेक Ůोजेƃ  की 
अपनी डीपीआर बनती है और उसक े िलए ː ेट Ȫारा अपनी एजŐसी सेलेƃ  की जाती है। िजतने भी 
Ůोजेƃ ्स होते हœ, उनकी Ůोजेƃ  ˙ ेिसिफक įरƓायरमŐट्स क े अनुसार DPRs बनती हœ। यह ː ेट 
क े दायरे का काम है और ː ेट क े एडिमिनː Ōेिटव, टेƋ ीकल एवं फाइनŐिसयल ŝʤ  व्  

9 
 
 
डɰ ूडी-सीपीएमक े इसवाई की गाइडलाइɌ  क े तहत इसकी इ̱ɘीमŐटेशन ː ेट गवनŊमŐट की 
एजŐसी, ː ेट गवनŊमŐट क े ŝʤ  क े साथ करती है। उसको सेलेƃ  करने का जो उनका काम है, 
उसमे हमने उनको एडवाइस िकया है िक ̿वालीटेिटव एजŐसीज सेलेƃ  करŐ और इन डीपीआरस 
को पİɰक डोमेन मŐ रख दŐ, तािक लोगों को भी जानकारी िमल सक े ।"     
 
D. PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE OF THE SCHEME  
 During the course of examination, DoLR have stated that :- 
"A total of 8214 projects covering an area of about 39.07 million hectare 
have been sanctioned from 2009-10 to 2014-15 in 28 States (except Goa) 
under the erstwhile Integrated Watershed Management Programme 
(IWMP) / now Watershed Development Component of the Pradhan Mantri 
Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (WDC–PMKSY).These projects are being 
implemented by the respective State Department / Agencies as per the 
concerned State Government's technical, administrative and financial 
rules and in accordance with the Common Guidelines for Watershed 
Development Projects."     
 
Progress as on 30.04.2017 
    Works phase  Consolidation phase  
    2326 (26%)  1419 (17%)  
 
     4469 (55%) 
     Preparatory phase 
 
  

10 
 
  
 Asked about the state-wise details of the projects under WDC-PMKSY, the DoLR 
has furnished the data as under:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


11 
 
 Responding to the query of the Committee regarding the current status of the 
Projects, DoLR has furnished the following details:- 
  
Distribution of Projects by Phase of Implementation 
Sl.
No. State No. of  Projects 
Sanctioned 
Preparatory 
Phase 
Works 
Phase 
Consolidation 
Phase 
1 Andhra Pradesh 432 59 313 60 
2 Bihar 123 59 64 0 
3 Chhattisgarh 263 82 181 0 
4 Gujarat 610 61 398 151 
5 Haryana 88 28 60 0 
6 Himachal Pradesh 163 32 131 0 
7 Jammu & Kashmir 159 34 125 0 
8 Jharkhand 171 54 97 20 
9 Karnataka 571 141 311 119# 
10 Kerala 83 42 41 0 
11 Madhya Pradesh 517 166 227 124 
12 Maharashtra 1186 177 636 373 
13 Odisha 310 76 169 65 
14 Punjab 67 34 33 0 
15 Rajasthan 1025 381 419 225 
16 Tamil Nadu 270 31 189 50 
17 Telangana 330 93 222 15 
18 Uttar Pradesh 612 363 163 86 
19 Uttarakhand 65 3 62 0 
20 West Bengal 163 86 77 0 
North Eastern States 
21 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 156 42 101 13 
22 Assam 372 146 226 0 
23 Manipur 102 27 75 0 
24 Meghalaya 96 35 14 47 
25 Mizoram 89 40 33 16 
26 Nagaland 111 13 57 41 
27 Sikkim 15 12 3 0 
28 Tripura 65 9 42 14# 
Total 8214 2326 4469 1419 
# 79 projects (Karnataka 69 projects & Tripura 10 projects) are reported by SLNAs as  
 completed. 
            Note: as on 30.04.2017 

12 
 
 Elaborating upon the state of progress of the projects under WDC-PMKSY and 
the approach to be adopted henceforth, DoLR has further submitted that :- 
"The principal emphasis is on qualitative and timely execution of the 
watershed development projects with  
one: optimal utilization of available budgetary support,  
two: convergence with relevant Central and State schemes and  
three: prioritization of projects / project activities.    
 Chief Secretaries of all States (except Goa) have been accordingly 
requested on 02.02.2017. Further in pursuance of arrangements for 
qualitative and timely / early completion of the Watershed Development 
Projects and with due emphasis on getting the projects completed in a 
qualitative and time bound manner, at the earliest possible and 
exceptional exceptions excepted, positively within the upper limit of 7 
years within the relevant administrative, financial and technical rules and 
completion of each and every component as approved in the Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) and expenditure as envisaged in para 67 of the 
Guidelines by resorting to optimum use of available budgetary support 
and other  resources from the pertinent Central and State schemes that 
are feasible and appropriate to be implemented in the watershed 
development projects and fit into the schematic design with emphasis on 
convergence and prioritization of projects / project activities, the 
Chairman, State Level Nodal Agencies (SLNAs) for implementation of 
WDC-PMKSY of all States (except Goa), have been requested on 
11.04.2017 to make necessary arrangements for qualitative and timely / 
early completion of the watershed development projects; Strengthening of 
Monitoring Mechanism, Reporting Status on Completed Projects."   
           
      
 
E.  FINANCIAL RESOURCES/PERFORMANCE OF THE SCHEME 
 A total of 8214 projects covering 39.07 Million ha. with a total project cost of  
Rs. 50,740 crore  have been sanctioned in 28 States (except Goa) during 2009-10 to 
2014-15. During 2015-16 and 2016-17, no new projects were sanctioned.  
           
 The cost norm for IWMP is Rs. 15,000/- per ha for hilly & difficult area,  
Rs. 12,000/- per ha for other areas and upto Rs. 15,000 per ha for IWMP projects in 
Integrated Action Plan (IAP) Districts. While the funding pattern between Centre and  

13 
 
 
States in the erstwhile IWMP was 90:10, the funding pattern under Watershed 
Development Component of PMKSY is 60:40.However, for North-Eastern States and 
Hill States (J&K, H.P & Uttarakhand) the funding pattern between Centre and the States 
continues to be 90:10.The projects under IWMP undertake a cluster of micro-
watersheds of area about 5000 ha in rainfed/ degraded areas having no assured 
irrigation. Dedicated institutions are also provided at Centre, State and District levels. 
The programme lays emphasis on meticulous planning and capacity building, by 
providing a special provision of 1 % for preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
and 5 % for Institution and Capacity Building.       
 
(i) FINANCIAL PROGRESS 
 A total outlay of Rs. 1,500 crore was approved for WDC-PMKSY during the 
financial year 2015-16. However, due to receipt of additional amount of funds through re-
appropriation from other heads, a total of Rs.1,508.82Crore (Rs 1,487.83 for Project 
Funds and Rs 20.99 crore for Institution Support) was released to the States as central 
share. However, as against the CCEA approval of Rs. 1,950 crore, an amount of Rs. 
1,495.00 crore has been provided in the budget for FY 2016-17 for WDC-PMKSY. As on 
31.12.2016, an amount of Rs. 1104.72 crore has been released to the States as Central 
Share including for institutional support.              
 
 
The Expenditure Component of the projects vis-a-vis institutional support share 
alongwith the details of the Central Funds released during 2009-2010 to 2016-2017 
are illustrated through the tables produced below:- 

14 
 
 


15 
 
            


16 
 
 
(ii) FUTURE PLAN VIS-A-VIS BUDGET ALLOCATION 
No sanctioning of new projects will be taken up. For the WDC- PMKSY, it is 
targeted to bring an area of 11.5 lakh hectares under irrigation coverage during 2015-20 
out of the already sanctioned projects which are at various stages of implementation. An 
area of 2.46 lakh hectare has already been brought under irrigation upto 31st March 
2016.  
 
The additional area estimated to be brought under irrigation, if funds are provided 
as indicated in the approved Cabinet Note of PMKSY, during the next four years, is as 
follows: 
Financial 
Year 
Amount required for 
the sanctioned 
projects (Rs. in Cr.) 
Amount allocated 
in the Cabinet 
Note of PMKSY 
(Rs. in Cr.) 
Additional area estimated 
to be brought under 
irrigation (lakh ha.) 
2016-17 7482.02 1950* 1.65 
2017-18 5749.69 2540 2.15 
2018-19 4685.06 3300 2.79 
2019-20 3193.37 4300 3.64 
Total 21110.14 12090 10.23 
*BE Rs. 1495 crore 
  
  
 As an amount of Rs 1495.00 crore only (including technical support funds) has 
been provided in the budget proposal for FY 2016-17 for PMKSY-WDC as against the 
total allocation of Rs. 1950 crore. With this fund availability, the additional area to be 
brought under irrigation during 2016-17 is estimated as 1.18 lakh ha.  
 
  

17 
 
(iii) SHORTFALL OF FUNDS 
 Fund requirement for completion of 8214 sanctioned IWMP projects covering an 
area of 39.07 m.ha. is as below: 
 
Year 
Amount 
Required    
(Rs in Cr.) 
Amount Allocated in the 
Cabinet Note of PMKSY 
(Rs. in Cr.) 
Shortfall in 
Budget 
(Rs. In Crore) 
2016-17 7,482.02 1,950* 5,532.02 
2017-18 5,749.69 2,540 3,209.69 
2018-19 4,685.06 3,300 1,385.06 
2019-20 3,193.37 4,300 - 1,106.63 
Total 21,110.14 12,090 9,020.14 
       * An amount of Rs 1495.00 crore only (including technical support funds) has been provided in 
the budget proposal for FY 2016-17 for PMKSY-WDC as against the total allocation of Rs. 1950 
crore. 
 
 Considering the shortfall in funds and the financial constraints evidenced during 
the course of examination, the Committee queried about the strategy of DoLR in 
meeting the challenges, the DoLR in its written replies have stated that:- 
 
 "Budget Estimate (BE) in a financial year is firmed-up as part of the 
overall budgetary exercise. The increase in budgetary allocation for the 
fiscal year 2017-18 (proposed BE Rs. 2150.47 crore) as compared to the 
previous fiscal year 2016-17 (BE / RE Rs. 1550 crore) is inter alia having 
regard to the requirements of the Watershed Development Component 
(WDC) of the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY). 
 Utilization of available budgetary support in full is integral to the 
plan of action for qualitative and timely execution of watershed projects 
already sanctioned. Necessary actions are being taken for optimal 
utilization of available budgetary support which inter alia includes putting 
the funds released as Central share along with the matching State share 
to immediate productive use for implementation of watershed projects. In 
addition efficient implementation of the projects at all levels is also being 
stressed.  
 Keeping in view that successful implementation of projects inter alia 
requires concerted efforts towards convergence of schemes and 
programmes of not only of Central Government Ministries but also of State 
Government Departments as may fit into the schematic design and overall 
requirements and objectives of watershed development, action has 

18 
 
specifically been initiated to prepare apt convergence matrix inclusive of 
both Central and State schemes in the projects.  
 To optimize the resources action has been initiated for signing an 
MoU with the three Departments in Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare, namely (i) Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers 
Welfare, (ii) Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries and 
(iii) Department of Agricultural Research and Education.  
 Action has also been taken to undertake Natural Resources 
Management activities by utilizing the labour component of MGNREGS 
and to undertake some of the Entry Point Activities in convergence with 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin).  
 Emphasis is also on minimizing / checking irregularities and / or 
corruption / financial malfeasance. Chief Secretaries of all States (except 
Goa) have been requested on 20.01.2017 that it becomes imperative to 
inquire into each complaint etc. of irregularity and / or corruption or 
financial malfeasance in any project in a time-bound manner and to take 
the necessary action as appropriate in any or all of the following three 
domains: 
one: departmental action on the errant officers / officials, 
two: civil action for recovery of the government monies irregularly spend 
and  
three: criminal action in case of criminal culpability.  
 
 
IV.  INSPECTION/MONITORING OF THE SCHEME 
 The Department of Land Resources undertakes Monitoring and Evaluation of the 
Projects. A comprehensive system of Monitoring and Evaluation has been evolved. The 
salient features as outlined by the DoLR are as under: 
(i) At the Central level, a Steering Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary, 
 DoLR has been constituted for administering WDC-PMKSY with members from 
 various line departments of the Central Government, NITI Aayog, technical 
 experts from different scientific institutions, experts in the field of watershed 
 management, voluntary organizations and State Governments. 
(ii) The Guidelines of the programme provide for an in-built monitoring mechanism 
 so as to ensure that the objectives of the schemes are achieved by their 
 implementation. 

19 
 
(iii) Dedicated institutions with professional support at State, District and Project 
 levels have been set up. 
(iii)  At the State level, the SLNA, a dedicated institution with professional support, for 
 implementation of the programme has been set up in 29 States. The SLNA 
 constantly monitors and evaluates the programme and is responsible for the 
 implementation of the programme. 
(iv) The fund flow for implementation of Projects is being routed through State 
 Governments to the SLNA 
(v) The Department monitors the progress of works under Watershed Projects 
 through the Quarterly Review Meetings, Management Information System (MIS), 
 progress reports, utilization certificates and Audited Statement of Accounts 
 etc. 
(vi) Regional Review Meetings with State Government officers are held under the 
 Chairpersonship of Secretary (LR) to review the performance of programme 
 being  implemented by the States in a selected State. The review includes a field 
 visit where the other invited States also participate. 
(vii) Officers, dealing with the implementation of the programmes at State 
 Headquarters & district visit project areas to ensure that the programme 
 is being implemented satisfactorily 
(viii) With a view to monitor the quality in implementation of programmes of the 
 Ministry including watershed programme, Vigilance & Monitoring Committees are 
 constituted with Members of Parliament and elected representatives of the  
 people in State Legislatures and Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
(ix) A system of Third party concurrent M&E has been put in place in the Department 
 as well as the States. 
(x) Bhuvan Geo-Portal Srishti encompassing the information on the natural 
 resources and mobile application 'Drishti' have been developed for better 
 programme implementation and monitoring. 
 
 

20 
 
 
(xi) For evaluation of Watershed Projects by the independent evaluating agencies, 
 specific financial provision of 1% of project fund has been provided in the 
 Guidelines.           
While assessing the ground reality vis-a-vis the stated Inspection/Monitoring 
Mechanism put in place, the Committee was desirous to ascertain the functionality of 
the check and balance modes and enquired further with the Department. In its written 
reply, the DoLR have submitted as under:- 
 "Keeping in view that the key to any successful programme is the 
achievement of the desired and stated objectives and for this it is essential 
that robust, state of the art, unbiased and truthful Monitoring and 
Evaluation systems are in place, with essential elements of timely mid-
course correction, systemic improvements from lessons learnt, 
authenticity and reliability of data and focus on outcomes / benefits, the 
Department has laid particular emphasis on this aspect and has constantly 
endeavored to improve its M&E systems.  
 The Department has tied up with the National Remote Sensing 
Centre for use of space technology to monitor the watershed programme.  
 A geo-spatial portal named Srishti is being implemented and used 
from 2015 with the assistance of National Remote Sensing Centre 
(NRSC), Hyderabad for monitoring of watershed projects under the WDC-
PMKSY.  
 Boundaries of projects can be visualized together with other 
information including satellite images. Geo-coded and time-stamped 
photographs on near real time basis are uploaded on Srishti portal using a 
mobile application Drishti specifically developed for the purpose. The 
Drishti mobile app is in public domain for capturing photographs of 
activities together with geo-location and time-stamp.  
 Both tools have been extended to all the States in 2016-17. As on 
22.05.2017, about 5.96 lakh photos of activities undertaken during the 
implementation of WDC-PMKSY pertaining to 28 States have been 
uploaded by the States 
 These tools aid in physical and qualitative assessment of the works 
undertaken. Any shortcomings etc. as evidenced through Srishti portal are 
appropriately taken up on a continuing basis by the project implementers 
at the various levels.  
 The Department has taken up third party Monitoring, Evaluation & 
Learning (ME&L) of the watershed projects sanctioned during 2009-10 to 
2013-14. The details of ME&L activities undertaken by the Department are 

21 
 
given in Annexure E. In addition States also undertakes third party 
evaluation of the watershed projects. 
 Public Financial Management System (PFMS) is being used 
wherever possible and around 40,917 agencies have been brought under 
this umbrella.  
 Likewise, MIS have been developed for the scheme.  
 The objective of the Department is to ensure timely, correct and 
transparent flow of information, inter alia to also undertake timely mid- 
course corrections, and incorporate the learnings in improving the design 
of the scheme. 
 Chief Secretaries of all States (except Goa) have been 
requestedon 02.02.2017 (copy enclosed - Annexure B) to emphasize 
upon qualitative and timely / early execution of the watershed 
development projects, with optimal utilization of available budgetary 
support, convergence with relevant Central and State schemes and 
prioritization of projects / project activities. 
 In pursuance of directions issued on 02.02.2017 to Chief 
Secretaries of States, the Chairman, State Level Nodal Agencies for 
implementation of WDC-PMKSY of all States (except Goa), have been 
requested on 11.04.2017 to make necessary arrangements for qualitative 
and timely / early completion of the Watershed Development 
Projects;Strengthening of Monitoring Mechanism,Reporting Status on 
Completed projects(copy enclosed - Annexure C). The same was 
reviewed in the Conference of the CEOs of SLNA of all States held on 12-
13 May, 2017. In response SLNAs are reporting progress to DoLR".  
        
 
V.  CHALLENGES BEING FACED BY THE SCHEME 
 During the course of examination, DoLR has stated about the challenges being 
faced by the Scheme as under:- 
"Financial constraints, both in respect of Central share as well as State 
share, as also administrative & technical constraints at the implementation 
/ field level lead to difficulties, which are appropriately addressed on a 
continuing basis by the Department as well as the State Governments and 
their Agencies."   
 
 Asked by the Committee as to how does the DoLR plans to tackle the 
challenges, it has been stated by the DoLR as under:- 
"To optimize the resources, action has been initiated for signing an MoU 
with the three Departments in Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, 

22 
 
namely (i) Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, 
(ii) Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries and (iii) 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education".  
 
 The Committee during the course of evidence enquired about the delay in the 
completion of projects. In this connection, Secretary, DoLR stated as under:- 
"the projects have to be completed in maximum seven years, the 
normative period is four to seven years. The projects which were 
sanctioned in year one have completed seven years by 31st March, 2017. 
So, some projects are already delayed. Therefore, in my opening 
submissions and also in the presentation, we have humbly and 
respectfully submitted that we are trying to complete them as soon as 
possible. We also have budgetary constraints. The budgetary support is 
not commensurate with the total funds required for completion of the 
projects. We do not foresee that our budget will be increased radically. So, 
we are doing the best under the obtaining situation. We are trying to use 
the resources of other schemes. Earlier, we were only concentrating on 
the Central Government Schemes but we have now also added the State 
Government Schemes and we are trying to use their resources. We are 
pushing the States to complete the projects as soon as possible. The 
feedback has started coming. But we cannot give a categorical 
unequivocal timeframe to the Hon'ble Committee under the obtaining 
situation".                 
 
 Feeling constrained at the high number of projects with unprepared DPRs as yet, 
the Committee sought an explanation during the course of Evidence. The Secretary, 
DoLR clarified as stated below:-  
 
"There are definitely projects which have been sanctioned and in which 
DPRs have not been framed till now. But these are projects which were 
sanctioned in the later years. In so far as working within the available 
resources and making optimal utilization of funds and of convergence and 
also prioritization are concerned, we have not interfered in the domain of 
the States but we have suggested to them that projects sanctioned in the 
later years where steps have not been taken to prepare DPRs may be 
kept at low priority. You may keep them at low priority; if you feel you want 
to keep them in abeyance and complete the projects where the work is 
going on, you are free to do so. Projects in which DPRs have not been 
finalized or those in which any work or activity has not been initiated, may 
be given low priority when we give you funds in bulk. Prioritization of 
different works within a State is done by the State Government. When we 
issued these instructions about a few months back, there were 1774 
projects in which DPRs were not formed or any expenditure was not made 
or work not started. If the Chief Secretary of the State feels that he may 
keep them on hold and use the available resources to finish the projects 

23 
 
which are in progress, he is free to do that. We are not interfering in their 
wisdom. Let the Chief Secretary and the Minister in-charge of the State 
decide that." 
        
 
VI.  IMPETUS TO THE SCHEME BY THE CENTRE 
 The initiatives taken by the Department of Land Resources (DoLR) to strengthen 
the implementation of Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana (WDC- PMKSY) are as below:         
  
 A. NEERANCHAL PROJECT 
 (i) OBJECTIVE 
 Raising a query regarding the start of a new project, the Committee was eager to 
know about the goal envisaged to be achieved through the new project. The DoLR in its 
written replies have submitted that:- 
 "Neeranchal National Watershed Management Project 
(Neeranchal), sanctioned in 2015-16, is meant to provide support to WDC-
PMKSY through technical assistance to improve incremental conservation 
outcomes and agricultural yields for communities in selected sites, and 
adoption of more effective processes and technologies in participating 
States. Neeranchal Project is being implemented in 18 selected districts in 
9 States, namely Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan and Telangana." 
 
 
 (ii) SCOPE  
 The project will also strengthen key National and State institutions that currently 
implement WDCPMKSY including DoLR at the National level, State Level Nodal 
Agencies (SLNAs) at the State level and field level staff for watershed management in 
participating States. National level partner agencies and various State level institutions 
will also benefit from improved coordination of research and approaches for technology 
transfer to communities and farmers. 
       
 
  
 

24 
 
 
 (iii) IMPLEMENTATION OF NEERANCHAL PROJECT 
 The Committee during the course of examination enquired about the mechanism 
of implementation envisioned by the DoLR in the context of the Neeranchal Project. 
DoLR in its written reply have submitted as under:- 
"The project will be implemented on pilot basis and will contribute to 
enhanced watershed management activities in two districts in each 
participating State, covering 400 sub-watersheds, each of about 5,000 ha 
and reaching approximately 4,82,000 farmer households and 2.0 million 
people. The project would initially focus on 80 sub-watersheds with 
intensive technical assistance. After this first phase, the project would then 
help scale up best practices into WDC-PMKSY operations in an additional 
320 sub-watersheds in the 9  States, within the two selected districts per 
State."  
 
 (iv) INVOLVEMENT OF AGENCIES 
 Elaborating further upon the functioning of the Project, DoLR have stated that :- 
"Neeranchal envisages providing technical assistance for the watershed 
programme through specialized agencies and experts both at National 
and State level, which will be hired or partnered by the implementing 
agencies at DoLR and the 9 States.  
 National Institute of Hydrology (NIH) has been engaged in the 
Neeranchal project as an Implementing Partner (IP) through a formal 
Memorandum of Understanding signed on 10.11.2016 for providing a 
Decision Support System for Hydrology (DSS-Hydrology) and developing 
the capacity of ground level staff." 
 
 
 The Committee during the course of evidence felt that increased utilisation of 
Government agencies could augur well for the progress of the projects. Stressing upon 
the fact, the Committee was desirous to know the point of view of the DoLR. Secretary, 
DoLR responded as below:- 
"अभी माननीय मंũी जी से मागŊदशŊन लेकर अनुमोदन लेना है की हम एनीहाउ िसलेƃ ेड मीिडयोकर Ůाइवेट 
एजŐिसयों से काम नहीं कराना चाहते हœ बİʋ सरकार की ˙ ेशलाइǕ  एजŐसी जो इस Ɨेũ मŐ एƛ पटŊ हो से 
काम कराना चाहते हœ। हमारे देश मŐ काफी सरकारी एƛ पटŊ एजŐिसयां हœ।  इसक े दो फायदे हœ, एक है की 
मीिडयोकर टाइप की Ůाइवेट एजŐिसयां नहीं आए ं गी, द ू सरा फायदा है की इस Ůोजेƃ  का दीघŊकालीन उȞेʴ  
है की हमŐ जो टेİƋकल अिसːŐस इस समय िमल, उस इनफामőशन और नॉलेज को आगे क े िलए हाउस 
करक े यूज़ करते चलŐ जाए ं । अगर हम मीिडयोकर िसलेƃ ेड Ůाइवेट एजŐसी से कायŊ करवाते हœ, जब कॉȴ Ōैƃ  
पीįरयड ख़ȏ  हो जायेगा तब वह एजŐसी चले जाएगी। हम एक सरकारी सं̾था जो आईसीऐआर क े अंडर हो 
या िमिनː Ōी ऑफ़ फारेː  एɋायनŊमŐट Ƒ ाइमेट चŐज क े नीचे हो, िजसने इस Ɨेũ मŐ महारत हािसल की हो, 
उसे यूज करते हœ तो उससे फायदा यह होगा की सरकारी सं̾था होने क े नाते छ ुǥी वाले िदन भी काम करवा  

25 
 
 
सकते हœ, रात िदन भी करवा सकते हœ, अगर कोई गलत काम होता है तो वह Ǜ ादा एकाउनटेबल होगी, उस 
पर एƕ न िलया जा सकता है।  इसमŐ सबसे महȕपूणŊ यह है की हम सारी इनफामőशन और नॉलेज हाउस 
कर दŐगे तािक जो लोग बाद  मŐ पीएचडी या पोː  Ťेजुएशन करŐगे, įरसचŊ करŐगे, उɎŐ बेिनिफट िमलेगा और 
ː ेट भी इसे डŌा कर सकŐगीं। मŐ उस समय देश से बहार था। हमारे अिधकाįरयों ने इसे वʒŊ बœक को बता 
िदया था, उनको पाशŊयली समझ मŐ आ गया था, अब मœ आ गया šँ, मœ उनको DEA क े माȯ म से िचǧी 
िलखकर एƛɘ ेन करने का Ůयास कŝँ गा।"     
  
 (v) PROGRESS SO FAR  
 On being asked about the headway made by the Neeranchal project so far, 
DoLR have submitted as under:- 
"Department has released Rs. 50.00 lakh to each of the Neeranchal 
implementing 9 States during the financial year 2015-16 to carry out the 
preparatory activities under the project. The allocation made for the 
implementation of Neeranchal during 2016-17 is Rs 55 crore (BE/RE). Out 
of this, an amount of Rs. 21.95 crore has been released as on 31.03.2017.  
 In order that Neeranchal does not function in isolation of WDC-
PMKSY and for (a) synergy, (b) coordination, (c) information flow the 
officials working in the Watershed Management Division have been 
deployed for implementing Neeranchal Project ". 
 
 
   
 Responding to the query regarding the ground reality of the Neeranchal Project 
so far, Secretary, DoLR, during the course of evidence stated that:- 
"महोदय, मŐ नीरांचल क े बारे मŐ क ु छ और कहना चाहता šँ। यह वʒŊ बœक का फ ं िडड Ůोजेƃ  है। 
अŮैल - मई, 2017 क े महीनो मŐ वʒŊ बœक क े कमŎ/क ं सʐŐट्स यहाँ आए थे, उɎोंने įरʩ ु िकया था 
और हमारी परफॉरमŐस अनसैिट˛ ै ƃ री रेट की थी। इसक े तीन-चार कारण हœ, हमारे फ ं ड Ǜ ादा 
įरलीज़ नहीं Šए, जो इंː ीट ू शɌ  हमŐ क ै पेिसटी िबİʒंग और एƛ पट्Ŋस क े िलए आइडेनफाइ करने 
थे, उनक े कॉȴ Ōैƃ ्स की िबिडंग माचŊ, 2016 मŐ  Ůारʁ  की थी और अभी तक फाइनल नहीं कर 
सक े थे।"  
         
Reacting sharply to the unsatisfactory rating given to the Neeranchal Project by 
the World Bank, the Committee during the evidence asked about the course of 
action to be employed by the DoLR. Secretary DoLR replied as mentioned 
below:- 
  

26 
 
 
 "इस समय जो हमारी अनसैिट˛ ै ƃ री रेिटंग है, हम इसे Ůोफ े शनली सही टŌैक पर  डालकर 
 तीन-चार महीने मŐ ठीक करने का Ůयास करŐगे।"   
 
 B. CREATION OF PORTAL/MOBILE APP 
 Development of Srishti portal together with the Drishti mobile app was started 
during February 2015 with the help of National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), 
Hyderabad for the monitoring of Watershed Projects. Srishti is a web based geo-portal 
on which the boundaries of Projects can be visualized together with other information 
including satellite images. Drishti is a mobile app in public domain for capturing 
photographs of activities together with geo location and time stamp. Both these tools 
were implemented in 10 States in the first phase and have been extended to all the 
States in 2016-17.           
  Elaborating further upon the applicability of these portals, the DoLR have 
submitted in its written replies as under:- 
"Geo-coded and time-stamped photographs on near real time basis are 
uploaded on Srishti portal using a mobile application Drishti specifically 
developed for the purpose. As on 22.05.2017, about 5.905 lakh photos of 
activities undertaken during the implementation of WDC-PMKSY 
pertaining to 28 States have been uploaded by the States These tools aid 
in physical and qualitative assessment of the works undertaken. Any 
shortcomings etc. as evidenced through Srishti portal are appropriately 
taken up on a continuing basis by the project implementers at the various 
levels."             
 
 Explaining about the usage of these portals, during the course of evidence, the 
Secretary, DoLR submitted as under:- 
"सृिʼ और िūिʼ पोटŊल बनाए ं हœ। अब कोई भी आदमी अपने मोबाइल मŐ िकसी भी एसेट को फोटो 
खींचकर इस पर अपलोड कर सकता है। वह फोटो िजओ-टै̑ड होगी, उसमŐ लैिटǨ ूड और 
लांगीǨ ूड क े साथ ही डेट भी िलखी होगी। अभी तक इस पोटŊल पर छः लाख से Ǜ ादा 
फोटोŤा̫स आयी Šई हœ। बाकी पįरयोजनाओं की तुलना मŐ इसकी मॉिनटįरंग अǅ ी है।"  
                    
  

27 
 
  
 C. USE OF PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (PFMS) 
 In its endeavour to bring more transparency in financial matters, the DoLR have 
stated that:- 
"DoLR has been implementing PFMS in WDC-PMKSY w.e.f 2015-16. Out 
of 28 States where WDC-PMKSY is being implemented, 26 States have 
adopted the PFMS platform. Andhra Pradesh and Telangana use 
Electronic Fund Management System (EFMS)as adopted by State 
Governments. Funds under the programme are released to State 
Government using the PFMS. State Government further releases the 
funds together with State share to the State Level Nodal Agencies 
(SLNAs). SLNAs further transfer fund to sub-district level agencies for 
implementation of programme using the PFMS system. About 40,917 
agencies at the State, district, project and village level have been 
registered on PFMS. The Project Implementing Agency (PIA) and 
Watershed Committee also use PFMS to make payments for salary, 
wages and procurement of goods and services. 
 Training programmes were organized in the States in association 
with the officials of the Controller General of Accounts (CGA) for the 
Accountants & Technical Officers of SLNAs of all the States. Use of PFMS 
will help in reporting of the real time financial status and also increase 
visibility and accountability in the implementation of WDC-PMKSY.  
 Chairman of SLNAs of all States (except Goa) have been 
requested throughletter dated 23.05.2017(copy enclosed - AnnexureF) 
that (a) cent per cent transfer of funds from SLNA to Watershed Cell cum 
Data Centre (WCDC), WCDC to Project Implementation Agency (PIA) and 
Watershed Committees (WC) may be ensured through PFMS and (b) 
payment for goods, services, labour, etc. at all levels i.e SLNA, WCDC, 
PIA and WC may be made through PFMS wherever feasible. They have 
also been requested that digital modes of transactions are proactively 
adopted wherever feasible, and that the public are concurrently made 
aware, encouraged and motivated for adopting digital transactions."   
               
The Committee, during the course of evidence wanted to know about the results 
anticipated by the DoLR by utilising the PFMS mode. Secretary, DoLR stated as under:- 
"पैसे क े दुŝ पयोग को रोकने क े िलए हमारे यहाँ Ǜ ादातर काम इलेƃ Ōॉिनक माȯ म से होते हœ। 
हम ː ेट्स को इलैƃ Ōोिनकली फ ं ड्स टŌांसफर करते हœ। SLNAs से भी अŤेतर पैसा अिधकांशतः 
इलेƃ Ōािनकली ही जाता है। हम अब लाː  ː ेज पर यह कोिशश कर रहे हœ, और इसक े  िलए हमने 
इंː Ō ƕंस भी इʴ ू की हœ, की Ǜ ादा से Ǜ ादा िडिजटल मोड ऑफ़ पेमŐट्स Ůमोट िकये जाए ँ , और 
उनकी ̿वाटलŎ įरपोट्Ŋस हमŐ भेजना शुŝ  कर दŐ, Ɛ ोंिक यह माननीय Ůधान मंũी जी का Ůायोįरटी 
एįरया है। लाː  लेवल पर जाकर जो लाː  ʩİƅ  को पेमŐट करते हœ, वह भी िडिजटल माȯ म से  

28 
 
 
ही होना चािहए और आपने टोटल िकतनी टŌांजेƕɌ  की और उनमŐ से िकतनी िडिजटल मोड से 
की, इसकी जानकारी भी आप हमŐ अपनी ̿वाटलŎ įरपोटŊ मŐ दे। इलेƃ Ōॉिनक पेमŐट होने से 
फाइनैनिशयल मेलफीसŐस की İˑिथ कम होती चली जाएगी।"  
 
 D. CONVERGENCE OF SCHEMES 
 During the course of examination, it came out before the Committee that for the 
holistic progress of the projects, convergence with other schemes was vital. Asked 
about the approach of the DoLR in this regard, it has been submitted by the Department 
as under:- 
"Keeping in view that successful implementation of projects inter alia 
requires concerted efforts towards convergence of schemes and 
programmes of not only of Central Government Ministries but also of State 
Government Departments as may fit into the schematic design and overall 
requirements and objectives of watershed development, action has 
specifically been initiated to prepare apt convergence matrix inclusive of 
both Central and State schemes in the projects.  
 Action has also been taken to undertake Natural Resources 
Management activities by utilizing the labour component of MGNREGS 
and to undertake some of the Entry Point Activities in convergence with 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin)".    
              
 In this connection, Secretary, DoLR during the course of evidence stated about 
his communication to the States as under:- 
"कɋजőɌ क े ऊपर हम काम कर रहे हœ, िजसमे हम राǛ ों की योजनाओ को भी जोड़ रहे है। 
एक तो कɋजőɌ मैिटŌ ƛ बना दŐ, िजसे फ़ाː  कर सकते हœ। इसक े बारे मŐ हमने उनको कह िदया 
है िक आप एक कɋजőɌ मैिटŌ ƛ बना लŐ।"     
 E. MONITORING AND EVALUATION OF THE PROJECTS  
 Department of Land Resources has taken a new initiative for Concurrent 
Monitoring and Evaluation of the IWMP projects. In this regard many of the States have 
already selected the independent Evaluation Agencies. The Department has also 
appointed three agencies for third party Monitoring and Evaluation of the Watershed 
Development Component of PMKSY for the North, West and North East regions. The 
process of selection of agencies for the South and East regions is under process. 

29 
 
 
 
 F.  SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 One of the major objectives of the WDC-PMKSY  is the development of livelihood 
skills among the populace within the ambit of projects. Enquiring about the approach 
being adopted by the DoLR, it was clarified in its written reply by the Department that:- 
 "WDC-PMKSY projects are being implemented by the respective 
SLNAs in accordance with the Common Guidelines for Watershed 
Development Projects.  These Guidelines inter alia provide for the 
distribution of budget for specific watershed projects for the various 
components which includes allocation of 9% and 10% of the budget for 
livelihood activities for the asset less persons and production system and 
micro enterprises respectively.     
 Livelihood activities taken up by constituting Self Help Groups 
(SHGs),vary from project to project and inter alia include goat rearing, 
poultry, dairy, vegetable production, fishery, bamboo art, small grocery 
shop, tailoring, vermi-compost, nursery raising, making of pickle, papad, 
paper / leaf plates, soft toys, artificial jewelry etc. 
 As per the latest information available from the States, 3,48,119 
SHGs have been formed under WDC - PMKSY since inception and 
9,12,963 households have been covered with livelihood support activities." 
              
VII. COMPLETION STATUS 
 When enquired about the completion of ongoing projects and any mechanism put 
in place for official closure of the projects after its completion, the DoLR in its reply have 
stated that:- 
 "Administrative reports of 79 projects completion (Karnataka 69 
projects & Tripura 10 projects) have been received from State Level Nodal 
Agencies (SLNAs).Formal completion and closure protocol is to be 
finalized. The completion of remaining Batch I projects (2009 - 2010 
sanctions) and Batch II projects (2010 - 2011 sanctions)are being 
focused."          
 Secretary, DoLR further elaborated upon the closure protocol during the course 
of evidence as under:-  
"हम एक फॉमŊल कɼ लीशन ए ं ड Ƒ ोजर Ůोटोकॉल को इनट ू ऑपरेशन मŐ डालŐगे। हमने इसको बना िलया 
था। हमने इसको िनित आयोग को भेजा था और उɎोंने िमिनː Ōी ऑफ़ वाटर įरसोसőस को रेफर करवाया। 
उɎोंने भी अपना क ु छ इनपुट्स िदया है। हमने उनको इनकोपŖरेट कर िलया है। अब हम िफर से उसको 

30 
 
िनित आयोग को भेजŐगे। इस िवभाग, िमिनː Ōी ऑफ़ वाटर įरसोसőस और िनित आयोग की कलेİƃव िवजडम 
से हम अगले एक पƗ यानी पंūह िदन मŐ इसको फाइनल करक े इनट ू ɘ ेस डालने का Ůयास करŐगे।  
 
इस कɼ लीशन और Ůोजेƃ  Ůोटोकॉल मŐ मुƥ त: हमारे दो और अंश हœ, एक िफिजकल और फाइनैनिशयल 
ŮोŤेस क जो सिटŊिफक े ट एवं डॉƐ ुमŐट्स हमŐ चािहए वह। अगर अŮू̺ड कॉː  तक पैसा खचŊ कर चुक े हœ, 
िफर भी अधूरे काम हœ, तो उन अधूरे कामो को अपूणŊ नहीं छोड़Őगे, उसे ː ेट क े खचŊ से पूरा करŐगे। िफर 
िसƐ ोįरटी, मŐटेनŐस और सː ेिनिबिलटी िक यह  चलता रहे, इन चीज़ों को भी सुिनिʮत करŐगे|  यह  
कɼ लीशन एवं Ƒ ोजर Ůोटोकॉल मŐ दŐगे। द ू सरा अंश इसमŐ यह है की हम एक ए ं ड लाइन इवैʞ ुएशन 
करवाए ं गे, िजसका खचŊ कम हो, कॉː  इफ ेİƃव हो और फ़ाː  हो। İƓक, लो कॉː , कॉː  इफ ेİƃव, 
िजससे की हमको पता भी लग जाए िक Šआ Ɛ ा था और मोर ईंपोटőȴली अगर कोई गलती Šई, तो उसका 
आगे क े िलए सुधार कर लŐ। अगर कोई अǅ ी चीज़ Šई थी, गुड Ůैİƃस, बेː  Ůैİƃस, उसको हम आगे क े 
िलए ईंबाइब कर सक े और हमारे पास यह इनफामőशन लौː  ना हो जाये।"   
 
 
  

31 
 
PART II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS 
Expeditious efforts for the completion of Projects 
 
 India is a rural based economy and agriculture forms the fulcrum of this 
nations' burgeoning population's ever growing food security needs. Thus, it 
becomes imperative that for the economy to thrive and remain healthy, 
agriculture productivity must be duly taken care of. It also assumes prime 
importance that since 53% of net sown area in our country is rainfed, so all 
efforts need to be taken to address concerns of irrigation and enhance 
productivity in rainfed areas. Therefore, watershed Development component of 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (WDC-PMKSY erstwhile IWMP) is an 
essential step in the direction of achieving the larger goal of PMKSY.  
 The Committee note that commensurate to the observations of 
Parthasarthy Committee, the Schemes of Drought Prone Area Programme 
(DPAP), Desert Development Programme (DDP) and Integrated Wasteland 
Development Programme (IWDP) of the DoLR were integrated and consolidated 
into a single modified programme called Integrated Watershed Management 
Programme (IWMP) with effect from 26.02.2009 for development of 
rainfed/degraded areas. Accordingly, a total of 8214 projects covering 39.07 
million hectare with a toal project cost of Rs. 50,740 crore have been sanctioned 
in 28 States (except Goa) during 2009-10 to 2014-15. Subsequent to the approval 
of PMKSY, IWMP was subsumed as one of its components and IWMP is now 
implemented as WDC-PMKSY w.e.f. 01.07.2015. 

32 
 
 The Committee further note that as per the common guidelines for 
Watershed Development Projects-2008 (Revised Edition -2011), the period for 
completing Watershed Development Projects is 4-7 years. 
 However, to the utter dismay of the Committee, not even a single project 
out of 8214 projects of WDC-PMKSY have been declared to reach an official 
closure till date by the DoLR. This performance is contrary to the period 
formulated for completion of projects as per the common guidelines for 
Watershed Development. The Committee, strongly believe that projects under 
WDC are absolutely essential for the development of rainfed agricultural areas 
and are constrained to observe the lackadaisical approach of the DoLR. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that an all out effort be made by the 
DoLR to expedite the completion of the ongoing projects under WDC-PMKSY and 
apprise the Committee of the same. 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
Better coordination with the States for the effective progress of the Projects 
 While the funding pattern between Centre and States in the erstwhile IWMP 
was 90:10, the funding pattern under Watershed Development component of 
PMKSY is 60:40. The Committee, while examining the physical progress of the 
projects feel that with the change in the funding pattern of the projects from the 
erstwhile IWMP, the role of the states assume even more importance vis-a-vis 
fund released and proper fund utilisation. Moreover, the Committee also find that 
State Level Nodal Agencies are more or less the primary coordinating and 
supervisory body over the ground level activities pertaining to the projects. The 
poor performance, in terms of completion of projects so far, could have been, 

33 
 
perhaps, averted by better coordination and synergistic approach with the state 
government agencies and other stakeholders. 
 Therefore, the Committee desires that for actual transformation at the 
ground level, an all encompassing approach be adopted by the DoLR by devising 
means of bringing all the SLNAs/Stakeholders on the same platform, vision-wise, 
and create a better coordinating unit for the completion of projects within the 
stipulated time frame. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
Fixing Accountability for the reasons of inordinate delay in the projects 
 The Committee are of the opinion that even flagship programmes of the 
Government of India could perhaps remain a 'Non Starter' due to the dearth of 
administrative acumen, effective will power and lack of visionary approach at the 
level of implementing agencies. WDC is a very important 'Cog in the wheels' of 
PMKSY and for a noble scheme such as PMKSY to run smoothly, all its 
components need to be performing well. The Committee unanimously feel that 
such abysmal performance reflected by WDC-PMKSY could not have been 
possible, had all the stakeholders performed their functions to the optimum. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that due accountability be fixed at 
each/any level to bring out the erring /non-performing agencies/officials to the 
fore and appropriate punitive measures needs to be taken to bring more 
efficiency in execution of the projects. The Committee also feel that persons in 
the domain knowledge should be posted in the key positions to strengthen the 
technical know-how required for successful completion of the projects.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 

34 
 
 Preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) through credible agencies 
 During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee acquainted 
itself of a startling fact that more often than not, the major obstacle in the 
delay/non starting of the projects was due to the lack of quality in the preparation 
of DPR which failed to take into its ambit all the issues and nitty-gritties of the 
geographical location, its challenges and ways for the successful completion of 
the project efficiously. 
 The Committee felt that a strong reason for such an occurrence is due to 
the involvement of agencies lacking skill and acumen needed for such level of 
projects in the preparation of DPRs. DPRs, being the foundation upon which the 
entire project stands, need to be astutely prepared with far-sightedness  
accounting for the challenges and ways to overcome those within the deadline of 
completion. 
 The Committee, thus, urge DoLR to ensure that credible agencies, 
preferably, Government agencies which have substantial amount of expertise in 
the specific field be involved in the preparation of DPRs so that a strong blue-
print is prepared before embarking on a project of such magnitude.   
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
Involvement of local population in the preparation of DPR & placing them in 
Public Domain. 
 The deliberations before the Committee brought to the notice a common 
grouse of the locals living in the vicinity of the projects regarding their non-
inclusion in the ongoing projects and their non-awareness about the 
approach/measures being taken by the implementing agencies at the ground-

35 
 
level. The Committee seriously take into cognisance of such occurrences and feel 
that since the projects are aimed at the welfare of the population residing in those 
areas, so they are an important stakeholder in the project and as such they are 
required to be involved in the project pragmatically and more actively. 
 The Committee, therefore impress upon the DoLR to ensure corrective 
measures so that the local knowledge is utilised at its maximum in the 
preparation of a qualitative DPR and the DPRs are placed in public domain to 
maintain transparency and accountability in a judicious earnest. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
Unprepared DPRs 
 The Committee are concerned to learn that even though no pojects have 
been sanctioned from 2015-16 onwards, still there are significantly large number 
of 1774 projects having unprepared DPR till date. The DoLR is bereft of any 
rationale behind such callousness in the functioning and it is beyond the 
comprehension of the Committee as to how the Department is supposed to 
ensure timely completion of projects when the most basic requirement of any 
project, DPR preparation, is yet incomplete. 
 In this wake, the Committee strongly criticising the approach of DoLR, 
recommend that DoLR tighten its grip over all the stakeholders and spruce up its 
methodologies so that the unprepared DPRs are expeditiously prepared and work 
on the projects get started without any further delay. Progress in this regard may 
be apprised to the Committee.  
(Recommendation Serial No. 6) 

36 
 
Development of Convergence Matrix 
 DoLR enlightened the Committee regarding the implementation of the 
programme in convergence with other ongoing schemes of the Centre/State so 
that wider pool of resources could be crafted for effective and optimal budgetary 
utilization. Some States like Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana & Bihar 
have shown good progress in convergence. However, the Committee note that all 
the participating States have not yet created an institutional arrangement at the 
field level for effective convergence, thus, defeating the purpose set out to 
achieve by mooting this idea. 
 Therefore, the Committee recommend that DoLR should impress upon 
other State Governments to follow the example set by the States going for 
convergence for producing effective results in the projects under WDC-PMKSY.  
(Recommendation Serial No. 7) 
Imparting livelihood skills in the areas of the projects 
 Among the major activities to be taken up under the WDC-PMKSY are 
diverse agro-based activities, promoting sustainable livelihoods and increasing 
the household incomes, nursery raising, horticulture, pasture development, 
livelihood activities for the asset-less persons and production system and micro 
enterprises for small and marginal farmers. 
 Despite proclaiming such livelihood activities to be a collateral outcome of 
the projects under WDC-PMKSY, the Committee are constrained to note that not 
much positive outcome is noticed in this regard. There is absence of such 
activities linked with skill development of rural youths on ground zero and 

37 
 
unawareness about imparting of such skills among the rural populace of the 
project areas.  
 In view of the foregoing, the Committee desire that 'Kaushal Vikas Centres' 
be opened in the areas of the project in tune with the objectives of WDC-PMKSY 
so that livelihood skills associated with the projects are imparted to the rural 
households for a better outcome of the project.  
(Recommendation Serial No. 8) 
Robust mechanism of third party evaluation 
 It has been informed by the DoLR to the Committee that a new initiative for 
concurrent monitoring and evaluation of the projects has been initiated and the 
Department has also appointed three agencies for third party monitoring and 
evaluation for North, West & North East regions. 
 The Committee while taking into consideration the initiatives of the DoLR 
feel that for projects under WDC-PMKSY which have pan-India presence, such 
mechanism should have been placed long time before and by now the results of 
their evaluation would have provided a much better insight into the 
functional/ground zero aspects of the ongoing projects.  
 However, the Committee at this stage urges the DoLR to hasten the 
process of selection of agencies for the South and East regions as well along-
with ensuring that the agencies chosen for the third party monitoring and 
evaluation are credible with proven track records.  
 (Recommendation Serial No. 9) 

38 
 
Utilization of Government Institutions for capacity building 
 The Committee note that 5% of the funds under WDC-PMKSY have been 
ear-marked for institutions and capacity building. The Committee strongly feel 
that institutions and capacity building will go in a long way in ensuring the 
sustainable growth of the projects under WDC-PMKSY. Not only will it help in the 
maintenance and upkeep of the completed projects but would also enable to 
create a repository of knowledge/skills required to create such assets. Thus, it 
becomes imperative that resources of knowledge in the capacity building be 
utilized from such institutions which have high caliber authentic expertise and 
great academic credentials.  
 Therefore, the Committee recommends that Government Institutions of 
higher learning and educations be involved for utilizing their expertise and 
knowledge in the technical aspects of projects undertaken under WDC-PMKSY.  
(Recommendation Serial No. 10) 
Improving the performance of Neeranchal Project 
 The Government has signed a World Bank aided technical assistance 
project named the Neeranchal National Watershed Project (NNWP) to support the 
WDC-PMKSY through technical assistance to improve incremental conservation 
outcomes and agricultural yields in a sustainable manner for farming 
communities in the project states. 
 While acquainting itself of the new initiatives taken by the Government, the 
Committee came to know that the World Bank Officials while analyzing the status 
of the Neeranchal project gave a 'unsatisfactory' rating to the  

39 
 
projects' performance. The Committee is worried at this development. The 
Committee feel that this occurrence aptly sums up the performance of the WDC-
PMKSY project as well as Neeranchal which is supposed to aid and augment the 
technical side of the projects under WDC-PMKSY. The Committee strongly urges 
DoLR to uplift its performance on all accounts and ensure all corrective measures 
in full swing for a better performance of the Neeranchal Project.  
(Recommendation Serial No. 11) 
Identifying the cases of corruption/ malfeasance 
 The Committee while taking into cognizance the performance of various 
projects under WDC-PMKSY failed to note any issue of corruption/malfeasance 
brought to the fore.  
 The Committee feel that the inspection/monitoring agencies system which 
acts has a very important role in the success of any Scheme needs  to be re-
looked and re-structured in the wake of non-reporting of any cases of 
corruption/malfeasance in a project gone awry in terms of target envisaged and 
results achieved so far. The Committee, therefore, strongly presses upon the 
DoLR to review its inspection/monitoring system and identify the cases of 
corruption/malfeasance for necessary corrective measures thus thwarting the 
obstacles in the path of projects' completion and success.  
(Recommendation Serial No. 12) 
 
 

40 
 
Reviewing the need for Budgetary Allocation 
 During the examination of the subject, one of the major obstacles 
pertaining to the non-completion of the projects under WDC-PMKSY that kept on 
creeping before the Committee was the matter of 'shortage of funds'. 
 The Committee feel that for the proper functioning and implementation of 
projects, budget allocation commensurate to the requirements need to be 
sanctioned. In wake of the foregoing, the Committee urges upon the DoLR to 
review its budgetary allocation in regard to the WDC-PMKSY in context of the 
non-completion of projects due to shortfall of funds and take up the matter in due 
earnest with the Ministry of Finance at the RE Stage itself in the first instance.  
(Recommendation Serial No. 13) 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                              DR.  P. VENUGOPAL 
11 July, 2017                                                Chairperson, 
20 Ashadha, 1939 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
Appendix I  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2016-2017) 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD 
ON WEDNESDAY, THE 11 JANUARY, 2017 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room 'E', 
Basement, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi 
PRESENT 
 Dr. P. Venugopal - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
2. Shri Sisir Adhikari 
3. Smt. Butta Renuka  
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Smt. Mausam Noor 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
7. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
8. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
9. Shri Chintaman Wanaga 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo  
11. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
12. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
13. Shri A. K. Selvaraj 
14. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar  -  Joint Secretary 
2.   Shri. S. Chatterjee   - Director 
3. Smt. B. Visala   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Emma C.  Barwa  - Deputy Secretary 
   
  

42 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES 
(MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
1.   Shri Dinesh Singh - Secretary  
2.  Shri Anshu Prakash - Additional Secretary &  
Financial Adviser 
3.  Smt. G Sajeevan - DDG 
4.  Shri Prabhat Tyagi - DIGF (WM) 
5.  Shri Amit Kumar  - Director (WM) 
6.  Shri Pankaj Kumar Tyagi - Director (NRM/RFS) Department of 
Agriculture 
7.  Shri G. K. Dwevedi - Joint Secretary (A&C) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
convened to have  briefing by  the representatives of the Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) on the subject 'Watershed Development 
Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (WDC - PMKSY erstwhile 
IWMP)'. 
[Witnesses were then called in] 
3. After welcoming the witnesses, the Chairperson read out Direction 55(1) 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings.  After permission from the Chairperson, the 
representatives of the Department of Land Resources made a power point presentation 
inter-alia covering salient features, activities under the watershed projects, physical 
progress as on 31.12.2016, financial progress from 2014-15 to 2016-17, World Bank 
assisted 'Neeranchal' which will provide technical support to WDC-PMKSY in which 
there are nine participating States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan and Telangana. The 
representatives also informed that the Department is not sanctioning new projects and 
their focus is on qualitative and timely completion of existing ongoing projects.  
4. The members sought clarifications on various issues pertaining to area of the 
projects, project cost, funding pattern, role of centre in the sanctioning of projects and 
finalisation of DPRs, monitoring and evaluation, convergence with MGNREGA, etc. The 
clarifications sought were responded to by the witnesses. On those queries, on which 
the information was not readily available, the Department was directed to furnish written 
replies to the Secretariat.  
[Witnesses then withdrew] 
   A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

43 
 
Appendix II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2016-2017) 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 30 MAY, 2017 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1310 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Dr. P. Venugopal  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
2.    Shri Sisir Adhikari 
3. Shri Kirti Azad 
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
7. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
8. Shri Balka Suman 
9. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
10. Shri Chintaman Wanaga 
Rajya Sabha 
11. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo 
12. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
13. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya  
14. Shri A. K. Selvaraj 
15. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri S. Chatterjee  - Director 
3. Smt. B. Visala  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Emma C. Barwa - Deputy Secretary 
 
  

44 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Land Resources) 
 
1. Shri Dinesh Singh - Secretary  
2. Shri Anshu Prakash - Additional Secretary &  
Financial Adviser 
3. Shri G. Sajeevan - DDG  
4. Shri Prabhat Tyagi - DIGF 
5. Shri Amit Kumar - Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to 
the sitting convened to take evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) in connection with the examination 
of the subject 'Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY-WDC erstwhile IWMP)'.  
[Witnesses were then called in] 
3. After welcoming the witnesses, the Chairperson read out Direction 55(1) of 
the Direction by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceedings.  
Thereafter, with the permission of the Chairperson, the representatives of the 
Department of Land Resources made a Power Point presentation on various issues 
inter-alia relating to the salient features of WDC-PMKSY, Budget and Expenditure, 
status of implementation, progress of projects, World Bank assisted Neeranchal 
National Watershed Management Project performance, etc.   
 
4. The Members then raised queries on various issues pertaining to the non-
completion of projects, better utilisation of funds, preparation of Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) from credible agencies, proper convergence of the ongoing 
programme with other Central/State programmes for optimum resource 
management, increased participation of Government agencies in the preparation of 
DPRs, lack of effective monitoring, linkage of watershed development with imparting 
livelihood skills to the natives, etc. were highlighted by the Members.  The Secretary, 
DoRD responded to the queries raised by Members. The Chairperson then thanked 
the representatives of the Department of Land Resources for appearing before the 
Committee and directed the Department to furnish written replies to the Secretariat on 
those queries, on which the information was not readily available..  
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
4.  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

45 
 
APPENDIX III 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2016-2017) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 11 JULY, 2017 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. in Committee Room No. E, 
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
  Dr. P. Venugopal  -- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
2. Smt. Renuka Butta 
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
5. Shri Ajay Mishra (Teni) 
6. Smt. Mausam Noor 
7. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel 
8. Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
10. Dr. Yashwant Singh 
11. Shri Ladu Kishore Swain 
12. Shri Chintaman Wanaga 
Rajya Sabha 
  
13. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo 
14. Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra 
15. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
16. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri S. Chaterjee  - Director 
3. Smt. B. Visala   - Additional Director 
        
  

46 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to 
the sitting convened to consider and adopt two Draft Reports viz. (i) Draft Report on 
Watershed Development Component of 'Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
WDC-PMKSY' erstwhile IWMP pertaining to the Department of Land Resources 
(Ministry of Rural Development) and  XXXX      XXXX       XXXX       XXXX.  
3. After discussing the above Draft Reports in detail, the Committee adopted the 
same without any modifications. The Committee then authorized  the Chairperson to 
finalise the aforesaid Draft Reports and after factual verification from concerned 
Ministries/ Departments, present the same to the Hon'ble Speaker   
4. The Committee appreciated the work done and the assistance rendered to 
them  by the Secretariat. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 