 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
 
                   
 
(2014
-
201
5
)
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
         
MINISTRY OF 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
 
         
(DEPARTMENT OF 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
)
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
First
 
Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014
-
15) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development).
 
 
TENTH
 
REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
10
 


TENTH
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
 
(2014
-
201
5
)
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
(
SIXTEENTH
 
LOK SABHA)
 
 
         
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
)
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
First
 
Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014
-
15) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of 
Rural Development
).
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on
 
12
 
August, 2015
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
12
 
August, 2015
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
August
, 
2015
/
Shravan
a
, 193
7
 
(Saka)
 
 
 


CRD No. 
107
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 20
15
 
BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(________Edition) and Printed by __________________.
 

CONTENTS
 
 
PAGE
 
C
OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014
-
20
1
5
) ............
.......................... 
 
 
  
(i
i
)
 
 
INTRODUCTION ................................................................
............................ 
 
 
  
(i
v
)
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 
Report ..........................................................................
 
 
  
01
 
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
 
Recommendations that have 
been accepted by
 
the Government ..............................................
.......... 
 
 
  
18
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
Recommendations which the Committee do not
 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
 
reply ................................................
...
.......................... 
 
 
  
40
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
 
Recommendations in respect of which replies
 
of the Government have not been accepted
 
by the Committee ........................
.............................
 
 
 
  
43
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
Recommendations in respect of 
which final
 
replies of the Gover
nment are still awaited ....
........
.
 
 
 
  
53
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES
 
 
I.
 
Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the
 
Committee held on 
         
10 
August, 2015
 
………………………………………………
 
 
  
54
 
 
II.
 
Analysis of Action taken by the Government
 
on the 
recommendations contained in the
 
First
 
Report of the 
 
Committee
 
(
16
th Lok Sabha).....................
........................
 
   
56
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
(2014
-
2015)
 
 
        
 
 
Dr. P. Venugopal
 
 
--
 
Chairperson
 
MEMBERS
 
LOK  SABHA
 
2.
 
Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
 
3.
 
Shri Kirti Azad
 
4.
 
Shri Harish Chandra Chavan
 
5.
 
Shri Biren Singh Engti
 
6.
 
Shri Jugal Kishore
 
7.
 
Shri Manshankar Ninama
 
8.
 
Shrimati Mausam Noor
 
9.
 
Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey
 
10.
 
Shri Prahlad Singh Patel
 
11.
 
Dr. Ramesh 
Pokhriyal “Nishank”
 
12.
 
Shri Gokaraju Ganga Raju
 
13.
 
Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss
 
14.
 
Shrimati Butta Renuka 
 
15.
 
Dr. Yashwant Singh
 
16.
 
Shri Naramalli Sivaprasad 
 
17.
 
Shri Balka Suman
 
18.
 
Shri Ladu Kishore Swain
 
19.
 
Shri Ajay Misra Teni
 
20.
 
Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga
 
21.
 
Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak*
 
RA
JYA SABHA
 
22.
 
Shri Munquad Ali
 
23.
 
Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi
 
24.
 
Shri D. Bandyopadhyay
@
 
25.
 
Shri Ram Narain Dudi
 
26.
 
Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
 
27.
 
Shri 
Ranvijay Singh Judev**
 
28.
 
Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
$
 
29.
 
Shri A. K. Selvaraj
 
30.
 
Shrimati Kanak Lata Singh
 
31.
 
Sh. Ashwani Kumar
#
 
 
____________________________________________________________________
 
 
 
*
 
Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 07.10.2014.
 
 
 
@   
 
Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 13.05.2015
 
 
 
**
 
Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 25.09.2014 vice Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya.
 
 
 
$
 
Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.11.2014 vice Shri Jairam Ramesh
 
 
 
#
 
Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 16.07.2015
 
(i
i
)
 

S
ecretariat
 
 
 
1.
 
Shri 
Abhijit Kumar
 
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
2.   
 
Shri R. C. Tiwari
 
 
 
-
 
Di
rector
 
3.
 
Smt. B. Visala
 
 
 
 
-
 
Additional 
Director
 
4.
 
Shri 
Manish Mohan Kamble
 
 
-
 
Committee 
Officer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(
i
i
i)
 

INTRODUCTION
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
(2014
-
2015) having been authorised
 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present the 
Tenth
 
Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 
First
 
Report of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development (2014
-
15) (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on De
mands for Grants (2014
-
15) of the 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Rural Development
). 
 
2. 
 
The 
First
 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha
/laid in 
Rajya Sabha
 
on 19 December, 201
4.
 
R
eplies of the Government to all the 
recomme
ndations contained in the Report were received on 
11
 
March
, 2015.
 
3. 
 
The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered 
and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
 
10
 
August, 2015.
 
4.
 
 
An analysis of the action taken by t
he Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 
First
 
Report of the Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix
-
II.
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
DR. P. VENUGOPAL
 
10 
August, 2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
Chairperson
,
 
       
 
19
 
Shravana, 
1937 
(Saka
)                    
 
Standing Committee on Rural Development
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(
i
v
)
 

1
 
 
              
 
 
REPORT
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2014
-
15) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Rural Deve
lopment (Department of Rural Development) for the year 
 
2014
-
2015.
 
 
2.
 
The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2014 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 26 
observations/recommendations.:
 
 
3.
 
Action Taken
 
Notes in respect of all the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government. These have been 
examined and categorized as follows: 
----
 
 
 
(i)
 
 
Observations/recommendations which have been 
accepted by the 
Government:
 
Serial Nos.: 1, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 
      
 
22, 23 and 24
          
 
Total: 16
 
Chapter
-
II
 
 
(ii)
 
 
Observations/recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government:
 
Serial 
Nos.: 9 and 10
 
Total: 02
 
Chapter
-
III
 
 
(iii)
 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee: 
 
Serial Nos.: 2, 3, 6, 12, 14, 18 and 26
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total: 07
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter
-
IV
 
 
(iv)
 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited:
 
Serial Nos. 25
 
Total: 01
 
Chapter
-
V
 
 
 

2
 
 
              
 
 
4.
 
The Committee desire that final replies in respect of 
observations/recommendations for which only interim replies h
ave been 
submitted by the Government and Action Taken Notes on the 
observations/recommendations contained in Chapter
-
I of the Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report.
 
 
5.
 
The Committee will now deal w
ith action taken by the Government on some 
of their observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments.
 
 
 
 
I.
 
Need for higher allocations for various schemes
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
 
 
6. 
 
With regard to the reduced 
outlay for various schemes, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:
-
 
 
"The Committee note that the Demands for Grants for the Department of 
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 24
th
 
July, 2014 made a provisio
n of Rs.80093.33 crore with 
Plan component of Rs.80043.00 crore and non
-
Plan component of 
Rs.50.33 crore.  The proposed outlay of the Department for the Annual 
Plan 2014
-
15 placed before the Planning Commission was Rs.92679.76 
crore and the finally approve
d outlay was Rs.80043.00 crore for the plan 
schemes of the Department.  The Committee observe that the allocated 
outlay has been reduced to the extent of Rs.12637.76 crore with reference 
to the proposed outlay.  While keeping in view the importance of the 
rural 
development for inclusive growth, the Committee are constrained to note 
that as a consequence of the reduced outlay, the physical targets have 
also been proportionately reduced under the major rural development 
schemes like Indira Awas Yojana (IAY), 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak 
Yojana (PMGSY), National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) and 
National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM), as otherwise the targets could 
have been fixed at higher levels.  The Committee are of the firm opinion 
that such reduced al
location would affect the implementation of the major 
schemes and the prospects of the Department in achieving the desired 
targets during the year 2014
-
15.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry should pursue the matter with the Ministry of
 
Finance and 
Planning Commission for seeking higher allocation by emphasizing the 

3
 
 
              
 
 
various important parameters which form the basis for allocation for 
various schemes for the financial year and fully utilise the allocated funds 
for achieving the plan targe
ts and effective implementation of the various 
schemes and programmes for an inclusive rural development in the 
country."
 
 
 
7.
 
The DoRD in thier action taken reply have stated as under:
-
 
 
“IAY
: In the Annual Plan 2014
-
15 for IAY, a Budgetary outlay of Rs. 
18,000 crore was proposed for the current financial year 2014
-
15 with a 
physical target for construction of 30 lakh houses.  However, Rs. 16,000 
crore was allocated against which a physical target for construction of 
25.18 lakh houses could be fixed.  This
 
amount got revised to 
Rs.11000.00 crore at RE stage.
 
 
NRLM/Aajeevika
: For the year 2014
-
15, the budget provision approved 
for NRLM is Rs. 4,000 crore which also includes a provision of Rs. 400 
crore for the DRDA Administration Scheme.  The funds available
 
in BE 
2014
-
15 are adequate for meeting the programme expenditure because of 
the following reasons:
 
 
(i)
 
With the termination of the earlier scheme of SGSY, the balances 
under SGSY amounting to Rs. 1272 crores was allowed to be 
utilized for NRLM.
 
(ii)
 
The 
transition from SGSY to NRLM by States is subject to setting 
up of dedicated implementation structure with professional teams at 
state, district and block levels.  Since many of the States took time 
to set up the structures, their transition to NRLM was de
layed, 
resulting in lower utilization of funds.
 
 
The allocation in RE 2014
-
15 has been drastically reduced from Rs. 4000 
crores to Rs. 2186 crores.  A proposal to increase the RE ceiling has been 
taken up with the Ministry of Finance.  If this proposal is 
not agreed to and 
the RE 2014
-
15 is kept at the level of Rs. 2186 crores, some of the 
financial commitments will have to be postponed to the next financial year. 
For Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU
-
GKY) an 
additional Rs. 276.05 crore has
 
been sought.
 
 
PMGSY
: During the year 2014
-
15, against the demand of Rs. 22,000 
crore in Annual Plan proposal, PMGSY was allocated only Rs 14,391 
crore, which further reduced to Rs 14,200 crore at RE stage, which was 
not enough to achieve physical targets under PMGSY. The Min
istry 
pursued the matter with Ministry of Finance to enhance the budget 
allocation of PMGSY  in order to meet the physical targets under PMGSY. 
Minister of Rural Development had written a letter to Finance Minister for 
enhancement of allocation of PMGSY by
 
Rs 4000 crore during the fiscal 

4
 
 
              
 
 
year 2014
-
15. The enhancement was to be achieved by borrowing Rs 
12000 crore over a 3 year period (Rs 4000 cr each year) from NABARD. 
Accordingly, a proposal for taking fresh loan from Rural Infrastructure 
Development Fund 
(RIDF) NABARD for gap funding of PMGSY was sent 
to Ministry of Finance, which is not yet agreed to. A request to provide a 
significant amount in the fiscal year, from the recent enhancement of 
excise duty on petrol and diesel has also been made by Minister
, Rural 
Development to Finance Minister. The Ministry has pursued the matter 
with Ministry of Finance for higher allocation. 
 
National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP): During the financial year 
2014
-
15 an amount of Rs. 10,635.00 crore  has been provided
  
for the 
implementation of schemes under NSAP.   This Ministry is receiving 
representations from State Governments to enhance the allocations due 
to the increase number of beneficiaries under these schemes.  
 
 
Based on the recommendations of the Task Forc
e, a EFC Note was 
submitted to Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure for approval.   
The EFC Note includes enhancement of pension under all the three 
pension schemes.   Apart from this, the EFC proposes to introduce a new 
pension scheme for single
 
and distressed women.    If the proposal is 
approved/accepted, the annual outlay for the schemes of NSAP for the 
year 2014
-
15 would be approx. Rs. 26,031 crore.  However, the Ministry 
of Finance has sought further information.”
 
 
 
8. 
 
During examination of
 
Demand for Grants of the Department of Rural 
Development for the year 2014
-
15, the Committee had observed that there was 
direct linkage between the Budgetary allocations and the physical targets of 
different schemes
 
like Indira Awas Yojana (IAY), Pradhan 
Mantri Gram Sadak 
Yojana (PMGSY), National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) and National 
Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM).  Taking into account the fact that the reduced 
allocation would affect the implementation of the major schemes, the Committee 
had re
commend that the Ministry should pursue the matter with the Ministry of 
Finance and Planning Commission for seeking higher allocations.  The 
Committee observe from the action taken reply furnished by the Ministry that the 
budgetary allocations in almost al
l important schemes of rural development like 
Indira Awas Yojana, NRLM (Aajeevika), PMGSY and NSAP have been reduced 
instead of getting it enhanced.  The Committee express their unhappiness over 
the reduced allocation in such important schemes of rural dev
elopment and 
strongly reiterate their recommendations that budgetary allocations at enhanced 

5
 
 
              
 
 
level should be made in all these schemes crucial for rural development of the 
country so that the schemes could be effectively implemented to achieve the 
physical
 
targets.
 
 
 
II. 
 
Non
-
Utilization of Funds.  
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
 
 
9.
 
In context of the non
-
utilization of funds for various schemes, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:
-
 
 
"The Committee note that during the year 2012
-
13, the 
BE of Rs.73175.00 crore 
allocated for the plan schemes of the Department was drastically reduced to 
Rs.52000.00 crore at RE  stage and the actual expenditure of Rs.50161.86 was 
even less than the RE.  The Committee further note that even during the year 
20
13
-
14, the BE of Rs.74429.00 crore was reduced to Rs.59310.00 crore at RE 
stage and the actual expenditure was Rs.58630.15 crore which was less than the 
RE.  The Committee are constrained to observe that during both these years, the 
reduced allocation and 
expenditure was largely under some of the major 
schemes of the Department viz. NRLM, PMGSY and IAY, due to the slow pace 
of expenditure for various admitted reasons like compulsory uploading of 
physical and financial progress by the States on the MIS softw
are before release 
of second instalment, problems of connectivity and capacity to use the MIS, slow 
progress in construction of houses under IAY, delay in transition from the 
erstwhile scheme of SGSY to NRLM by the States and inadequate absorption 
capacity
 
at state level under PMGSY, which are not convincing to the Committee.  
As a consequence, the Committee while taking a serious view in the matter on 
the recurrent under
-
utilisation of funds, are of the firm opinion that the low 
absorption of funds had adv
ersely affected the targets under the different rural 
development programmes and also the progress of rural development by 
hampering the work in some of the major areas of rural connectivity under 
PMGSY, providing shelter to the rural needy under IAY and g
iving self
-
employment under NRLM schemes.  The Committee therefore recommend that 
the Ministry should make earnest efforts for strengthening the capacities of the 
States in analysing and overcoming the problems involved in optimum utilisation 
of allocated 
funds and also by regular monitoring of the pace of expenditure and 
flow of funds on the various schemes during the year for the overall improvement 
in the quality of life in rural areas through employment generation, development 
of rural infrastructure, p
roviding shelter to the homeless and provision of other 
basic amenities."
 
 
 
 
 

6
 
 
              
 
 
10.
 
The DoRD in thier action taken reply have stated as under:
-
 
 
MGNREGA
 
 
"The Ministry reviews the physical and financial progress in the states through 
periodic meetings of the Performance Review Committee of the Ministry, 
monitoring through National Level Monitors, field visits by Area Officers of the 
Ministry to various stat
es, etc.  The Ministry has also put in place an on
-
line 
Management Information System. The States/UTs are persuaded during the 
course of Performance Review Committee meetings (held on quarterly basis) 
and during the Coordinating Officers meetings (held on 
monthly basis in respect 
of IAY) to accelerate the pace of expenditure and to achieve the physical targets.  
Letters in this regard are also sent to the States from time to time. 
 
 
Programme specific steps are given below: 
 
 
IAY
: From the year 2013
-
14, 4% 
of the States’ allocation is being released as 
administrative cost which can, inter alia, be used for capacity building by the 
States, such as training of master masons and beneficiaries providing labour, 
including training on maintenance practices; traini
ng of Community Resource 
Persons (CRPs) and Non
-
Governmental Organisations (NGOs); payment of 
honorarium to CRPs and service charges to NGOs; training of officials and 
elected representatives of Panchayats; etc.   In addition, AwaasSoft training 
programmes
 
are also being conducted at Central level from time to time, 
particularly on demand from the State Governments.  In this way, there is 
continuous effort to improve implementation and overcome problems.
 
 
NRLM/Aajeevika
: In order to facilitate effective implementation of NRLM and 
optimum utilization of funds, the Government has set up an autonomous society 
namely National Rural Livelihoods Promotion Society (NRLPS) in July 2013 to 
provide necessary professional and techn
ical support to the National Rural 
Livelihoods Mission and State Rural Livelihoods Missions.  In addition, NRLPS 
has put in place a multi
-
disciplinary team of professionals and has designated 
State Anchors for each State to provide the necessary support to
 
all states.  The 
professional staff of NRLPS tour the states extensively, both to provide technical 
support wherever necessary and also to monitor the performance of the states in 
NRLM implementation.  Regular video conferences are held with states 
author
ities to assess implementation status, provide advice to states and also 
share best practices among various states.  
 
 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU
-
GKY)
:The 
Guidelines on DDU
-
GKY provides for moving from direct implementation to 
furth
er building capacities of State Government for implementation of the 
programme. The Ministry has approved Annual Action Plan (including capacity 
building component), of 09 States (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, 
Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telan
gana & Uttar Pradesh), who have 
developed the capacity to implement the programme. Funds for capacity building 

7
 
 
              
 
 
for the State of Assam have also been approved by the Government of India. 
Further action in this regard is underway.
 
PMGSY
: State Governments ar
e also being advised through various Regional 
Review meetings & Empowered Committee meetings to take suitable necessary 
action to expedite timely completion of road works under PMGSY. The following 
steps in this regard have been taken by the Ministry:
 
 
i.
 
Sta
tes have been requested to augment executing capacity and 
contracting capacity and their compliance in this regard is regularly 
reviewed.
 
ii.
 
Bidding document provisions have been rationalized.
 
iii.
 
Training is imparted to field engineers and contractors as well as
 
their 
staffs for capacity building. 
 
iv.
 
Regular and structured review of physical & financial parameters is 
conducted at regular interval in various zones for a cluster of states of that 
zone."
 
 
11. 
 
The Committee during examination of the Demand for Grants had 
expressed their concern over the recurrent under
-
utilization of budgetary 
allocations which in turn adversaly affected the targets under the different rural 
development programmes.  The Committe
e had, therefore, recommended the 
Ministry to make earnest efforts for strengthening the capacities of the States in 
analyzing and overcoming the problems involved in optimum utilization of 
allocated funds and also through regular monitoring of the pace of
 
expenditure 
and flow of funds on the various schemes for the overall improvement in the 
quality of life in rural areas through employment generation, development of rural 
infrastructure, providing shelter to the homeless and providing other basic 
amenitie
s
 
to the rural populace.  The Committee observe that the action taken 
reply of the Government does not indicate as to what concrete steps were taken 
by the Government for strengthening the capacities the States in analyzing and 
overcoming the problems invo
lved in optimum utilization of allocated funds.  
Since under
-
utilization of funds year after year not only reflect the faulty 
budgetary process of the Department but also leaves a serious adverse impact on 
implementation of rural development schemes result
ing in failure to achieve the 
targets and thereby depriving the rural population from the benefits intended to 
be extended to them through these schemes.  The Committee strongly reiterate 
their recommendation and emphasis that concrete steps need to be tak
en by the 

8
 
 
              
 
 
Department to avoid under
-
utilization of funds in all these rural development 
schemes in future. 
 
 
 
III.
 
Non
-
submission of utilization certificates
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
 
 
12.
 
In context of the non
-
submission of utilization 
certificates, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:
-
 
 
“
The non
-
submission of utilisation certificates by the respective States/UTs is 
another area of serious concern to the Committee as further processes are often 
held up for want of such certificates w
hich may result in stalling of the progress in 
implantation of important schemes having direct impact on the poor and needy 
class of people. The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry must 
develop a mechanism for getting the utilisation certificat
es in time.  The Ministry 
should also take up such issues with the highest functionary in the States/UTs for 
getting the desired results.  Nodal officers may be appointed or the purpose of 
looking after a group of States.
 
 
13.
 
The DoRD in thier action take
n reply have stated as under:
-
 
 
MGNREGA
:
 
One of the preconditions for release of funds towards 2
nd
 
instalment is 
submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs) for funds released in the past.  In case of 
non
-
completion of prescribed formalities including non
-
submission of UCs, Central funds 
are released on ad
-
hoc basis to meet emergent needs and temporary shortage of funds.  
The regular release of funds is restored on completion of all prescribed formalities under 
MGNREGA.  Further, States/UTs/Districts are r
equested from time to time (through 
letters and review meetings between officials of Central and State Governments) to 
furnish UCs and other information to make regular releases of Central fund under 
MGNREGA. 
 
 
IAY
: As per the IAY guidelines, first instalm
ent of funds is released in respect of 
all districts which had taken second instalment of previous year.  Districts who 
have not availed second instalment of previous financial year have to submit 
proposal for first instalment along with all requisite docu
ments which were 
required to be submitted for the release of second instalment of previous 
financial year.  Second instalment is released after utilisation of at least 60% of 
total available funds and after examination of Utilisation Certificate and Audit 
Report for the previous financial year and the Utilisation Certificate for the current 
financial year along with other requisite documents.  Thus, no funds are released 
to the States/DRDAs under normal IAY, unless UCs due for the previous 
releases are rece
ived. UCs for the funds released for special projects are 
monitored separately.  The matter is regularly taken up with the concerned 
States in the monthly meeting of the State Coordinating Officers as well as in the 

9
 
 
              
 
 
Performance Review Committee meetings (h
eld on quarterly basis).  As a result, 
the number of pending UCs which was 70 as on 31
st
 
March, 2014 involving an 
amount of Rs. 158.88 crore has now come down to 35 by the end of December, 
2014 involving an amount of Rs.33.23 crore.
 
 
NRLM/Aajeevika
:
 
The NR
LM guidelines already provide that the second installment 
of grants in aid in a financial year will be subject to submission of (i) Utrilization 
Certificate and Audit Report in respect of funds released during the previous year 
and (ii) utilization Certifi
cate for the Current indicating expenditure of not less 
than 60 of available funds.  Directions have also been issued to SRLM that the 
U.C. and Audit Report should be submitted within the prescribed time schedule 
without linking it with release of funds.  
Financial Management related issues are 
reviewed/discussed with all State Missions on bi
-
monthly basis and Financial 
Statements are obtained on a quarterly basis to monitor progress of expenditure.
 
 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU
-
GKY)
: 
The 
Division is regularly monitoring and getting UCs from States/UTs.
 
 
PMGSY
: 
State Governments are time and again requested to submit latest 
Utilisation Certificate in the prescribed format along with the proposal for release 
of funds. However, no funds 
are being released to States having less than 60% 
of expenditure. During the Regional Review Meetings also, State Governments 
are requested to furnish Utilisation Certificate to the Ministry on time.
 
NSAP
: If any State/UT fails to submit the Utilization Ce
rtificate for the last 
financial year and the expenditure reported by them up to December is less than 
50% of the total available funds, funds for the last quarter are not released.
 
 
14.
 
The Committee in their original report had expressed serious concern 
over 
the trend of non
-
submission of utilization certificates in time by the States/UTs 
and, therefore, had recommended the Ministry to develop a mechanism for 
getting the utilization certificates in time, to take up the matter with the highest 
functionarie
s in the States/UTs for getting the desired results and also to appoint 
Nodal Officers for this purpose.  In their action taken note, the Ministry has 
mentioned the process which they follow in routine to get the utilization 
certificates and to release the
 
funds.  The Ministry has, however, not indicated the 
concrete action taken on any of the specific recommendations of the Committee.  
The Committee are of the strong view that non
-
submission of utilization 
certificate adversely impact the progress in imple
mentation of important rural 
development schemes which directly affect the poor and needy class of people.  
The Committee, therefore, while expressing their displeasure over non
-
serious 
approach of the Ministry on such vital issues, strongly reiterate thei
r 

10
 
 
              
 
 
recommendation and desire the Ministry to apprise the Committee of the steps 
taken in this regard within a period of three months.
 
 
IV. 
 
Quality Inspection Mechanism  
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
 
 
15.
 
With regards to the irregularities
 
in PMGSY and Quality Inspection Mechanism 
for the same, the Committee had recommended  as under:
-
 
 
"
The Committee note that under PMGSY, the maintenance and repair of roads is 
the responsibility of the respective State Governments. PMGSY has a 3 tier 
qual
ity inspection mechanism. First tier inspection of all PMGSY roads is done by 
contracting agencies & PIUs, second tier inspection of all PMGSY roads is done 
by contracting agencies & PIUs, second tier by State Quality Monitors (SQMs) & 
3rd tier by National
 
Quality Monitors (NQMs). The Committee is constrained to 
observe from the details of inspection of roads under PMGSY during the last 
three Years i.e. from March, 2011 to March, 2014 that out of the total inspection 
of 1727 completed works by NQMs, 259 wor
ks inspected, 1267 works have been 
reported to be unsatisfactory. Keeping in view the importance of rural 
connectivity of roads, the Committee desire to be apprised of the reasons for the 
unsatisfactory completion of the various works, the irregularities i
nvolved and the 
remedial action taken therefore by the concerned authorities. The Committee 
strongly feel that unless a mechanism of fixation of responsibility and 
accountability is not put in place, the various problems and malpractices in 
implementation 
of the scheme will not be effectively cured and, therefore, the 
Committee recommend that a mechanism be devised by the Ministry whereby 
responsibility and accountability could be straightway fixed on the erring 
agencies and individuals and punitive action 
taken against them. The Committee 
also recommends that the suggestions and recommendations of the public 
representatives should also be taken into account while considering proposal for 
construction of roads under the PMGSY scheme.
"
 
 
16.
 
The Ministry in 
their action taken replies have stated as under:
-
 
 
"
Ensuring quality of road works under PMGSY is the responsibility of the 
respective State Governments. To ensure that the roads constructed are as per 
the prescribed standards, a three tier quality control
 
mechanism has been put in 
place. The first two tiers of the mechanism are operated by States through 
process control at first level and subsequently the independent verification of the 
proper functioning of this tier through independent State Quality Moni
tors at    2
nd
 
level.  Under the third tier of this mechanism, random inspections of road works 
are conducted by independent National Quality Monitors (NQM) of NRRDA, with 
a view to identify and address the systemic issues in the quality Management 
system 
of the State. 
 

11
 
 
              
 
 
 
2.
 
During the period of March 2011 to March 2014 a total of 8278 (ongoing & 
completed) works were inspected, out of which 1526 works were reported as 
“unsatisfactory” by NQM. The reasons put forth for unsatisfactory grading in 
these 1526 ca
ses broadly relate to deficiencies in earth work (441 cases),  sub
-
base (633 cases), base
-
course water bound macadam (1020 cases) & 
bituminous layer premix carpet surface dressing (256 cases).
 
 
 
3.
 
Immediately after inspection, the reports of inspections by NQMs are 
shared with the States and PIUs are required to initiate the remedial actions and 
take steps to rectify the works as per the observations of the NQM and report to 
the State Quality Coordi
nator (SQC).  On receipt of the action taken report from 
PIU, the SQC gets the facts verified through independent State Quality Monitor 
(SQM) who carries out all necessary tests and verifies that the compliance of the 
observations of the original report of
 
the NQM has been done. Upon verification, 
if the SQC is satisfied about the adequacy of the remedial action taken, he 
mentions this fact on the ATR and sends the same to NRRDA for grade 
improvement. 
 
4.
 
The ATRs received from the State Governments are exp
editiously and 
closely closely monitored at NRRDA. In respect of the 1526 works (graded 
unsatisfactory), referred to in para 2, Action Taken Reports (ATRs) in respect of 
920 works from the respective State Governments have been received and 
accepted.  In t
he case of 318 works, ATRs were not found adequate and 
returned to the State Governments for further rectification.  For balance 287 
works, ATRs have not yet been received from the State Governments. The 
status of ATRs is monitored on regular basis at vari
ous fora viz., Pre
-
empowered 
Committee meetings, Empowered Committee meetings, Regional Review 
meetings and through communications to the States.
"
 
 
 
17
. 
 
The Committee in their original Report had observed that the works in 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
 
(PMGSY) in large number of cases had been 
found unsatisfactory and therefore the Committee had recommended that to 
effectively curb the various problems and malpractices in implementation of the 
schemes, a mechanism need to be devised by the Ministry to s
traightway fix the 
responsibility and accountability on the erring agencies and individuals with a 
view to take punitive action against them.  The Committee observe that the 
Ministry in their action taken reply has not indicated about any new mechanism 
dev
eloped by them as had been recommended by the Committee.  Further, the 
Ministry has also not furnished the reasons for the unsatisfactory completion of 
the various works, the irregularities involved and the remedial action taken by the 
concerned authoritie
s. Similarly, the Ministry has also not responded to the 

12
 
 
              
 
 
recommendation of the Committee that suggestions and recommendations of the 
public representatives should also be taken into account while considering 
proposal for construction of roads under the PMG
SY Scheme.  Taking into 
account the seriousness of the problem, the Committee strongly reiterate their 
recommendations and desire the Ministry to take immediate necessary steps in 
this regard. 
 
 
 
V.
 
Rationalisation of the process of appointment of 
contractors
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
 
 
18.
 
With regards to the irregularities in PMGSY and Quality Inspection Mechanism 
for the same, the Committee had recommended  as under:
-
 
“The Committee note that against the target of 30000 km of 
road length, only 
24161 km was achieved in 2012
-
13 and the shortfall was to the extent of 5839 
km. Further, even during the year 2013
-
14, 25316 km of road length was 
achieved as against the target of 27000 km and there was a shortfall in achieving 
the desi
red targets for road length for rural connectivity.  The Committee while 
emphasizing the need to strengthen the capacities of the States, recommend that 
the Ministry should make earnest efforts to provide proper guidance and 
assistance to the States for ad
equately enhancing their absorption and 
contracting capacities for an effective implementation of the scheme in achieving 
the desired targets. The Committee further recommends that the process of 
appointment of contractors should be rationalized and rural 
connectivity should 
cover the inhabitations of weaker sections of society.”
 
 
 
19.
 
The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:
-
 
 
Against the 12
th
 
Five year plan allocation for PMGSY i.e. 1,05,000 crore, this 
Ministry has received Rs 32,
975 crore only during the first three years of the plan 
(2012
-
13 to 2014
-
15), which is 31.4% of the Five year allocation. All the State 
Government are fully geared up in terms of execution capacities to complete the 
balance road works and meet the annual t
argets. As the implementation of 
PMGSY is being done by the State Governments, some States are unable to 
fulfil the estimated target.   Due to steep cuts in budget in the last two years and 
anticipated cost in this fiscal have adversely affected the pace o
f implementation 
of PMGSY projects. To increase the executing capacity of the States the 
following steps have been taken:
 
 
1.
 
An Expert Committee has been constituted for recasting the Standard Bidding 
Document. 
 

13
 
 
              
 
 
2.
 
Training is being imparted to field engineers, contractors and their staff for capacity 
building.  Contractors outreach programmes are also being organized.  
 
3.
 
Regular and structured review of physical and financial parameters is being carried 
out.
 
Regarding providing connectivity to weaker sections of the society, the objective 
of the PMGSY is to provide connectivity to the eligible unconnected habitations in 
the rural areas with a population of 500 persons and above in plain areas, in 
respect of Sp
ecial Category States with a population of 250 
-
499 persons 
(census 2001).  This includes habitations of weaker section of society also.”
 
 
 
20.
 
The Committee appreciate that the Government has initiated certain steps 
for increasing the executing capacity o
f the States to complete the works and 
meet the annual targets. The Committee, however, are dismayed to note that the 
action taken note of the Government is silent on the recommendation of the 
Committee about rationalization of the process of appointment o
f contractors.  To 
curb the malpractices and irregularities in the process, it is essential that the 
contractors are appointed in a fair and transparent manner.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly reiterate their recommendation and desire the Government to
 
rationalize the process of appointment of contractors.
 
 
 
V. 
 
Difficulties faced to avail Loan
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 2.18)
 
 
21. 
 
With regard to difficulties faced in availing loans in IAY, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:
-
 
 
"The 
Committee note that there have been various difficulties faced by the 
beneficiaries to avail loans under the scheme.  Difficulties like eligibility in respect 
of income ceiling and land holdings, poor repaying capacity of the beneficiaries, 
etc. have been 
reported by the Ministry.  The Committee desire that the Ministry 
should take necessary steps to facilitate the beneficiaries in taking loans by 
providing all the necessary assistance and should ensure that the various 
hardships being faced by them are app
ropriately resolved. The possibility of 
giving necessary relaxations may also be explored for timely availability of funds 
to the needy families so that the beneficiaries should be able to have a shelter for 
their own under the IAY scheme."
 
 
 

14
 
 
              
 
 
22.
 
The Minis
try in their action taken replies have stated as under:
-
 
 
"The guidelines of IAY suggest the methodology that can be adopted for availing 
the loans under DRI Scheme for SC/ST beneficiaries. The guidelines also advise 
the States for provision of supplementa
ry grants by the State Government over 
and above the assistance  by Government of India and mobilization of other 
loans at a subsidized interest rates. 
 
 
Ministry of Rural Development in pursuance to the announcement of the 
Government 
to achieve the goal 
of “pucca houses for all” by 2022,
 
is in the 
process of restructuring IAY into Gramin Awaas Mission (GRAM). The focus of 
the Mission is not only on construction of houses but also on providing basic 
amenities through convergence and promoting a livable hab
itat. Accordingly, it 
has been proposed under GRAM that every eligible family in rural area shall be 
covered, with priority being given to SC/STs and Minorities 
 
 
Keeping in view the amount required for construction of a durable house with all 
basic amenit
ies, it has been proposed under GRAM that the loan under 
Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) be increased upto Rs. 1.00 lakh covering all the 
beneficiaries under GRAM and simplify the procedures involved in securing 
loan."
 
 
23.
 
The Committee note that the 
Government is in the process of restructuring 
Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) into Gramin Awaas Mission (GRAM) to achieve the goal 
of “pucca houses for all” by 2022 and the focus of the mission is not only on 
construction of Houses but also on providing basis ame
nities through 
convergence and promoting a livable habitat.  The Committee however constraint 
to note that the fundamental problem in availing the loan by needy and poor class 
will still remain unresolved unless the procedures are not simplified and 
benefi
ciaries are not appropriately facilitated. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation for initiating steps to facilitate the beneficiaries in taking 
loans by providing all necessary assistance and also granting relaxation in 
deserving cases s
o that the beneficiaries should be able to have their own shelter 
under the Indira Awas Yojana(IAY) which is now being restructured in the name 
of Gramin Awas Mission (GRAM).  
 
 
 
 

15
 
 
              
 
 
VI. 
 
Monitoring mechanism and Nodal Officer
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, 
Para No. 2.26)
 
 
24.
 
With regard to monitoring mechanism and Nodal Officer, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:
-
 
 
“
The Committee in the process of examination of Demands for Grants find that 
non
-
submission/incomplete submission plans by States/UTs, slo
w response and 
a pathetic attitude by the functionaries, non
-
utilization of allocated funds, lack of 
technical staff, delay in submission of utilization certificates, etc. are some of the 
constraints faced in the effective implementation of the schemes.  U
nfortunately, 
the existing monitoring mechanism for ensuring transparency and fixation of 
responsibility in all the centrally sponsored schemes had not been very effective 
to bring the desired improvements.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend the
 
Ministry to revamp the entire monitoring mechanism which could 
not only boost up the speed of implementation of schemes but also bring 
transparency and accountability in the process at all levels.  Further, effective 
steps need to be taken for holding reg
ular monthly meetings of Performance 
Review Committee for getting regular feedback about the progress of the 
Scheme from different sources.  The Management Information System (MIS), 
External Monitoring through field visits by Area Officers and the feedback
 
of 
vigilance and Monitoring Committees could be some of the tools which may be 
used for bringing improvement in the processes.  The Committee express their 
dissatisfaction that the new initiatives taken by the Ministry like AwaaSoft, e
-
FMS, e
-
Muster, CPGR
AM, etc. have not been able to bring the desired impact.  
The Committee feel that taking timely remedial action will be possible only when 
there is a well defined mechanism of getting real time data/information from 
difference sites of execution of the sch
emes but this is not happening as the 
Ministry do not have its own Nodal Officers at different levels who could 
constantly monitor the progress of the schemes and report immediately to the 
Govt. for further necessary action.  The Committee is therefore, of
 
the strong 
opinion that Nodal Officers should be appointed by the Ministry at different levels 
for not only conducting concurrent physical verification of the status of 
implementation of various programmes, it asserts but also to keep a close watch 
over t
he utilization of funds by the states.  Such Nodal Officer should be 
mandated to have effective coordination with the State Governments and to 
directly report all the developments to the Central Government so that any 
problem occurring in the process of im
plementation of schemes be effectively 
and timely addressed by the controlling authorities/Ministry.  The Committee is 
confident that appointing Nodal officers will bear immediate result and will be 
able to iron out the various difficulties which have crep
t into the system.” 
 
 
 
 

16
 
 
              
 
 
25.
 
The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:
-
 
 
“Effective monitoring of the Programmes is considered very important for efficient 
delivery at the grass root level in view of the substantial step up in the 
allocation 
of funds for rural development programmes.  In order to ensure this, appropriate 
performance indicators have been developed for each of the specific 
programmes for effective monitoring at the District, Bock, Gram Panchayat and 
Village levels so 
that alarm signals are captured well in advance for mid
-
course 
corrections.  The important instruments of monitoring are: (i) Review by the 
Union Ministers, (ii) Web based management and monitoring, (iii) Utilization 
Certificates/Audit Reports, (iv) Perfor
mance Review Committee (PRC) (iv) 
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees(VMCs), (v) National Level Monitors (NLMs) 
and (vi) Area Officer’s Scheme.  As suggested by the Committee, these 
monitoring tools would be reviewed and redesigned to ensure more transpare
ncy 
and accountability.
 
The PRC meetings, chaired by the Secretary (RD) are held on quarterly basis.  
As Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of States/UTs participate in these PRCs, 
holding these meetings on monthly basis is not considered at present, as 
sug
gested by the Committee.  State nodal officers meetings for individual 
programmes are also held regularly in between the PRC meetings.
 
The web
-
based monitoring systems, capturing both physical and financial 
progresses for individual programmes are regular 
monitoring features of the 
Department.  MGNREGA soft, on
-
line management, Monitoring and Accounting 
system (OMMAS), Awaas Soft, NSAP
-
MIS, NRLM
-
MIS are designed keeping in 
view the requirements of various stakeholders periodically to keep with 
technological
 
developments and new requirements. The existing Area Officer’s 
scheme has provisions for appointment of Principal Area Officers (PAO) and 
Area Officers (AOs) for individual states for monitoring both physical and financial 
progress of programmes at field 
and national level.  The guidelines will be 
amended to address the concerns of the Committee.”
 
 
26.
 
The Committee during examination of the Demands for Grants had 
expressed their concern that the existing monitoring mechanism for ensuring 
transparency and 
fixation of responsibility in all the Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes have not been very effective to bring the desired improvements.  The 
Committee had, therefore, strongly recommended for revamping the entire 
monitoring mechanism and to appoint Nodal Officer
s at different levels who 
could constantly monitor the progress of the Schemes and report immediately to 
the Government so that corrective measures could be taken timely by the 
Government.  The Committee are concerned to note that the Government has not 
gi
ven any indication in their action taken reply about appointment of Nodal 
Officers at all levels for constant monitoring of the implementation of the 

17
 
 
              
 
 
schemes.  Since all the existing mechanisms and processes had not been able to 
bring the desired results, 
the Committee strongly reiterate their recommendations 
and desire the Government to act upon it in a time
-
bound manner.
 
 
 

18
 
 
              
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation 
(Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
 
 
 
The Committee
 
take note that the Rule 331G of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha relating to examination of Demands for Grants by 
the Departmentally Related Standing Committees (DRSCs) was suspended by the 
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to enable t
he House to pass the demands for Grants for 
the year 2014
-
15 without the same being referred to the concerned DRSCs.  Hon’ble 
Speaker, Lok Sabha, however, made observations in the House on 15
th
 
and 21
st
 
July, 
2014 that the Demands would however stand referred to the Standing Committees for 
examination and report to the House so that the Committee can make suitable 
recommendations which may be used in preparation of Demands for Grants for the next 
year. T
he Committee have accordingly examined the Demands for Grants of the 
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development). Since the Budget 
for the year 2014
-
15 has already been passed by the Parliament, the Committee 
endorse the same. Neverthel
ess, the Committee feel that the suggestions and 
recommendations of the Committee in this Report would help the Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development) in analysing their physical and financial 
performance and implementation of vari
ous schemes and projects during the current 
year and also in preparing the Demands for Grants for the next financial year.  The 
observations and recommendations of the Committee are given in the succeeding 
paragraphs.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Observations
 
made by the Committee have been noted.
 
 
[
O. M. No.
 
H 
–
 
11020/03/201
4
 
–
 
GC (P), d
ated: 
11
 
March
, 
201
5
 
Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)
]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, 
Para No. 2
.4)
 
 
 
The Committee was informed that the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan outlay for the 
Department of Rural Development is Rs.399926.00 crore which is 105% higher than the 
approved outlay of Rs.194933.28 crore for the 11
th
 
Plan and 44% higher than the actual 
expenditure of Rs.278561.77 crore during the 11
th
 
Plan. However, while observing the 
huge reduction in the allocated funds at RE stage and expenditure being even less than 
the RE during the first two years of the twelfth five year plan viz. 2012
-
13 and 2013
-
14, 
the Committee are apprehensive about the 
full utilisation of the total funds allocated for 
the twelfth plan during the remaining three years of the plan period.  Admittedly, the 
Department has to take initiatives for enhancement of capacity building to increase the 

19
 
 
              
 
 
absorption capacity of the Stat
es/UTs besides strengthening the monitoring mechanism. 
The Committee feel that the rapid growth in rural development sector during the twelfth 
plan period can be achieved through a strategy to allocate adequate financial resources 
for achieving the plan ta
rgets with effective implementation of the various important 
schemes and programmes for rural employment, rural infrastructure and social welfare.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make vigorous efforts to 
develop a mechanism fo
r providing appropriate assistance and guidance regularly to 
the States/UTs for improving their capacities and rationalisation of processes with a 
view to ensure full utilisation of funds during the twelfth plan period and to achieve the 
targets with timel
y implementation of the schemes in effective manner for all inclusive 
rural development.  The Committee desire that the monitoring and evaluation of 
implementation of the various schemes of the Department should be carried out 
regularly for assessing the p
rogress of the schemes and corresponding utilisation of 
funds.  Such regular monitoring will also enable the Government to detect the lapses 
and take remedial action in time.  The Committee expect the Ministry to take concrete 
steps in this regard.
 
 
 
Reply
 
of the Government
 
 
    
 
Monitoring and evaluation of each and every programme is done regularly in a 
structured framework.  Besides, review based monitoring, DoRD also conducts field 
based monitoring.  In recent years, IT based monitoring through MIS is done for all the 
major pro
grammes. 
 
 
 
 
MGNREGA: 
Following initiatives are taken in this regard:
-
 
 
1.
 
For smooth fund flow, the electronic Fund Management System (e
-
FMS) has 
been introduced which would also reduce delays in payment of wages.
 
 
2.
 
Ministry has conducted training of Resource
 
Persons from the States/UTs on 
MGNREGA Operational Guidelines to develop a cadre of identified trainers/ experts in 
the subject matter of MGNREGS implementation in respective States. These trained 
functionaries will in turn train District Resource teams a
nd in turn Block Resource 
Teams.
 
 
IAY
: The States/UTs are requested during the course of Performance Review 
Committee meetings (held on quarterly basis) and during the Coordinating Officers 
meetings (held on monthly basis) to accelerate the pace of expendi
ture and to achieve 
the physical targets.  Funds are being provided to the States for capacity building. 4% of 
the funds allocated are earmarked for administrative expenses which can inter alia be 
used by the states for capacity building of stakeholders li
ke training of master masons 
and beneficiaries providing labour, including training on maintenance practices; training 
of Community Resource Persons (CRPs) and Non
-
Governmental Organisations 
(NGOs), training of officials and elected representatives of Panc
hayats; etc. Moreover 
AwaasSoft training programmes are also being conducted at Central level from time to 
time particularly on demand from the State Governments.  This ensures that there is 
continuous effort to improve the implementation of the programme 
and overcome 

20
 
 
              
 
 
problems that may arise. The administrative expenses released to the State 
Governments can also be used for Monitoring and conducting Evaluation Studies. IAY 
is being continuously reviewed through Monthly and Annual reports received from the 
S
tates/UTs. Apart from this, monitoring is also ensured through Area Officers scheme, 
uploading of photographs of IAY houses, monitoring of Physical and Financial progress 
under IAY through AwaasSoft which  captures beneficiary
-
wise data
.
 
Moreover 
Evaluatio
n Studies are also conducted to assess the implementation and impact of the 
programme.
 
 
NRLM/Aajeevika:
 
An autonomous Society National Rural Livelihood Promotion Society 
(NRLPS) has been created to provide professional and technical support to the States 
for effective implementation of the programme and optimum utilization of funds.  The 
Society has designa
ted Anchor persons to support each State.  The NRLPS has also 
set up a multi
-
disciplinary team of professionals from various thematic areas for 
providing holistic support to all States.
 
 
NRLM has instituted comprehensive Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and
 
Management Information System.  Under M&E, 15 states have initiated the process of 
baseline study.  Process monitoring is in progress in 3 major States and procurement 
action engaging the agencies for the same has been initiated in 6 states.  Thematic 
stu
dies are also in progress in 5 states.
 
 
With the technical support of NIC, NRLM has rolled out an MIS with modules that 
capture SHG profiles, Mission Structure, Monthly Progress Report, Fund Disbursal, MIS 
Analytics etc.
 
 
MoRD is undertaking a regular revi
ew with State Govt. on DDU
-
GKY M&E component 
in States/UTs.  In order to ensure regular monitoring, appropriate performance 
indicators have been devised at different levels so that mid
-
course corrections in the 
implementation of the programmes could be ini
tiated.  The major tools for monitoring 
inter
-
alia includes (i) Review by the Union Ministers, (ii) capacity building and training for 
various stakeholders participating in the poverty elimination programmes and identifying 
high quality institutions in liv
elihoods education and training and facilitate linkage of the 
state organizations with missions with such institutions for capacity building of 
professionals, (iii) developing capacity building and training modules for functionaries of 
the people’s institu
tions as well as the State Agencies and district units, and other 
stakeholders (iv) Web based management and monitoring, (v) Utilization 
Certificates/Audit Reports, (vi) Performance Review Committee (PRC) (vii) Vigilance 
and Monitoring Committees(VMCs), (v
iii) National Level Monitors (NLMs) and (ix) Area 
Officer’s Scheme.  
 
 
PMGSY
: Training of engineers and personnel involved in the implementation of 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) at the PIU and SRRDA level has been 
one of the key interventions de
termining the quality of the project outcomes under 
PMGSY. For capacity building of the personnel implementing PMGSY including 
Engineers, Financial personnel, Contractors, PIU personnel etc. various training 
programmes have been organized by NRRDA through 
National Level Institutes as well 

21
 
 
              
 
 
as State Institute of Rural Developments (SIRDs) in various States in coordination with 
State Rural Roads Development Agency (SRRDA). 
 
Training
 
is being imparted on 
various aspects of the programme 
–
 
project preparation, c
onstruction supervision, 
project management, quality control, financial management, online monitoring, and 
other aspects.
 
 
World Bank’s Technical Assistance programme provide funding support 
in this regard.
 
 
National Rural Roads Development Agency (NRRDA) 
is  focusing on 
capacity building with a target to provide training to at least 1,000 personnel of State 
Rural Road Development Agencies (SRRDAs)/Programme Implementing Units (PIUs) 
and other functionaries and contractors each year to enhance the capacity 
of personnel 
involved in execution of the programme. So far as monitoring of PMGSY is concerned, 
State Governments are advised through various Regional Review meetings & 
Empowered Committee meetings to take suitable necessary action to expedite timely 
comp
letion of road works under PMGSY. The additional steps taken in this regard by 
the Ministry:
 
 
i.
 
States have been requested to augment executing capacity and contracting capacity 
and their compliance in this regard is regularly reviewed.
 
ii.
 
Bidding document prov
isions have been rationalized.
 
iii.
 
Training is imparted to field engineers and contractors as well as their staff for capacity 
building. 
 
iv.
 
Regular and structured review of physical & financial parameters is conducted at 
regular interval in various zones for a c
luster of states of that zone.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, 
Para No. 2
.5)
 
 
 
The Committee observe that the amount of unspent balance in different schemes 
has been to the extent of Rs.13922.44 crore and a total of 372 utilisation certificates 
involving an amount of Rs.3171.71 crore have been outstanding as on 31.03.2014.  The 
Commi
ttee observe that more than half(Rs.7167.87 crore) of the total amount of 
unspent balances is under India Awas Yojana Scheme alone while Rs.4406.31 crore 
unspent balance is under MGNREGA, Rs.2269.00 crore is under Aajeevika and 
Rs.85.26 crore is under PMGS
Y.  The Committee are constrained to note that such 
huge amount of unspent balances in some of the major schemes for rural development 
adversely affect the rural population particularly in the area of wage employment, all
-
weather rural connectively, instit
ution building and basic housing to the needy people for 
whom the budgetary allocations were oriented and reflect lack of planning and foresight 
both at Centre and State level.  The Committee are therefore of the view that the 
Ministry should not feel comp
lacent simply by  releasing the allocated funds and 
thereafter leaving the whole gamut of affairs to the States/UTs with regard to the 
utilisation of funds and implementation of the schemes/programmes. No reasons can 
justify such huge amount of unspent bal
ance in the areas which are at the core of 
sustainable growth of the economy.  The Committee while taking a very serious view on 
huge accumulation of unspent balance, strongly recommend that the least now the 

22
 
 
              
 
 
Ministry should take pro
-
active measures and de
vise a strategy by which all 
implementing agencies including States/UTs should be bound to achieve the physical 
as well as financial targets during the financial year to avoid unspent balance in future.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
MGNREGA
:
 
MGNREGA is a demand driven programme. Therefore, some float of funds 
is necessary to be kept with the implementing agencies. Ministry has made concerted 
efforts to reduce the unspent balances lying with the States/UTs without adversely 
impacting the progr
am implementation. 
An Electronic Fund Management System (e
-
FMS) is being implemented to do away with unspent balance at sub
-
state level.  
Implementation of MGNREGA/utilization of funds by the States/UTs under MGNREGA 
is periodically reviewed in various Nat
ional and State level performance review 
meetings and regional review meetings. Among others, States/UTs are requested to 
follow bottom up approach and realistic estimation of labour demand through household 
survey of job card holders, reinforcement of dem
and registration processes so that all 
those who wish to apply for work under MGNREGA are facilitated and appropriate 
planning of works and their execution time to ensure adequate worker participation rate 
in MGNREGA.  Moreover the closing balance under MG
NREGA has been reducing in 
the last three years.  It has reduced from Rs. 11732.86 Crore during 2011
-
12 to Rs. 
3484.20 Crore during 2013
-
14.  The details are presented in the table below:
 
 
Year
 
Closing Balance (Rs. In Crores)
 
2011
-
12
 
11732.86
 
2012
-
13
 
5852.21
 
2013
-
14
 
3484.20
 
 
IAY
: 
During the year 2013
-
14, the utilization of funds was less mainly because of 
imposition of Model Code of Conduct from October to December, 2013 in four States 
due to elections to the State Assemblies and again in the whole c
ountry w.e.f. 4.3.2014 
due to general elections to the Lok Sabha.   However, as already stated in reply to Para 
2.3 above, the States/UTs are persuaded during the course of Performance Review 
Committee meetings (held on quarterly basis) and during the Coor
dinating Officers 
meetings (held on monthly basis) to accelerate the pace of expenditure and to achieve 
the physical targets.  
 
 
NRLM/Aajeevika
: 
Out of the total balance of Rs. 2269 crore under NRLM, a sum of Rs. 
1272 crore pertains to the balances under S
GSY which were transferred by the DRDAs, 
to the SRLM, consequent to termination of the SGSY scheme from 1.4.2013.  The 
Ministry has made concerted efforts through the State Missions to locate all unspent 
SGSY balances lying in the District Rural Developmen
t Agencies and in the Banks.  
These balances are treated as part of NRLM funds effective from 1.4.13.
 
The core financial support under NRLM is provided in the form of Community 
Investment Support Fund to the SHG federations after they are fully capacitated
 
to 
manage their own affairs.  In order to facilitate the process of capacity building, the 
Programme has devised the Resource Block Strategy to generate adequate social 
capital for scaling up the programme.  A partnership frame work for engaging renowned 

23
 
 
              
 
 
resource organizations, including experienced state missions, NGOs and mature 
community based organizations in the capacity building of Community Cadres and the 
professional staffs of the missions has also been put in place.  An autonomous society, 
the NRL
PS, has also been created at central level to provide the requisite technical and 
professional support to the State Rural Livelihoods Mission (SRLMs).
 
 
The Ministry has also put in place an on
-
line Management information system and is in 
the process of 
rolling out an on
-
line accounting system to ensure regular flow of 
information on financial progress.
 
 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU
-
GKY)
:MoRD is undertaking 
a regular review of DDU
-
GKY projects with Project Implementing Agencies and a
lso 
with State Govt.
 
PMGSY
: Funds, in accordance to programme guidelines, are released to State/UT 
government based on their absorption capacity and utilization of available unspent 
balance. As per the release procedure under PMGSY guidelines, the first in
stallment is 
50% of cleared value of projects and subsequent releases are made on utilization of 
60% of available funds by the State Governments. Also as a pro
-
active measure, the 
States which are having huge unspent balance available are not being release
d any 
further funds. States are regularly being advised to reduce the unspent balance 
available with them. The unspent balance as on 1st April, 2013 was Rs 4,761 crore , 
which was reduced to Rs 804 crore as on 1st April, 2014 crore.
 
NSAP
: The amount availa
ble with the states/UTs at the close of financial year becomes 
Opening Balance which is considered for releasing the fund in the next financial year.  It 
is further mentioned that the matter is being pursued with the State Governments to 
submit the Utilisa
tion Certificates in time so that their request for release of further funds 
may be considered.
 
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7,
 
Para No. 2.7)
 
 
 
The Committee note that MGNREGA is a rights based wage employment 
programme implemented in rural areas of the country.  This programme aims at 
enhancing livelihood security of people in rural areas by providing not less than 100 
days of gu
aranteed wage employment in a financial year to every rural household 
whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. The Committee was 
informed that the Act now covers all the rural districts (644) of the country. The 
Committee note that the pr
oposed allocation for MGNREGA during twelfth plan was Rs. 
358764.00 crore and the allocation actually provided by the Planning Commission is Rs. 
165059.00 crore which is less than half the amount of the proposed allocation. The 
allocation at BE stage for t
he years 2012
-
13 and 2013
-
14 was Rs. 33000 crore for each 
of these two years which was subsequently reduced at RE stage to Rs.29387 crore for 

24
 
 
              
 
 
2012
-
13 and Rs.31000 crore for 2013
-
14. The Committee have been informed that 
during the current financial year 20
14
-
15, against BE of Rs. 34000 crore, an amount of 
Rs.20722.77 crore has been released to States/ UTs and as per the trend of 
expenditure, additional requirement of Rs. 4000 crore has been made at RE stage. 
Keeping in view the likely revision of wage rate 
and expected increase in outreach of 
households, the Committee are constrained to note that the allocation made for the 
current year does not appear to be sufficient for effective implementation of the scheme. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the D
epartment should pursue with the 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for higher budgetary allocations of funds 
for MGNREGA scheme so that the inadequacy of funds could not be a ground and a 
reason for slippage in achieving the objectives of the sch
eme.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
The allocation during the current year 2014
-
15 has been enhanced to 
Rs.34,000 crore (BE) (as against Rs.33,000 Cr (BE) in 2013
-
14). Of this, an amount of 
Rs.27,545.19 crore has been released to States/UTs (as on 19.01.2015).
  
The 
requirement of funds as per the trend of the expenditure has been reassessed by the 
Ministry and it was observed that an amount of Rs.500 crore is required over and above 
the Budget provision of Rs.34,000.00 crore provided under MGNREGA.  Department 
of 
Expenditure has been requested to provide additional funds of Rs.500 crore in the 
current year for programme implementation.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
 
 
 
The Committee have been informed that utility and durability of the MGNREGA 
assets have been confirmed through perception surveys of beneficiaries and 
stakeholders and as per one of the survey rounds of Natio
nal Sample Survey 
Organization (NSSO), the Sates of Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan 
were using the assets created through MGNREGA works. As regards the status of 
convergence of MGNREGA with other schemes of the government, the Committee 
have b
een informed that 21 states/UTs have submitted their state convergence plans. 
The Committee are constrained to note that only a few States have confirmed the utility 
and durability of assets under MGNREGA. The Committee feel that such an 
assessment based o
n perception surveys of beneficiaries and stakeholders may not 
reflect the correct figures. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a thorough 
independent assessment should be done in all the States for collection of authentic 
information about durability
 
and quality of assets created under MGNREGA. The 
Committee also recommend that durable assets created through the funds allocated 
should be taken note of and reflected in different data tables. Keeping in view the need 

25
 
 
              
 
 
to optimize public investment in rur
al areas, the Committee desire that the Ministry 
should persuade all the remaining State/UTs for submission of their state convergence 
plans and expedite the convergence of MGNGREGA scheme with other schemes of the 
Government for addressing the socio
-
econo
mic problems of rural population in an 
integrated manner.
 
Reply of the Government
 
Details of independent studies and those conducted by the Ministry and State 
Governments through independent institutions on usefulness and quality of assets 
created under MG
NREGS are given below:
 
 

 
A study, conducted by the Indian Institute of Forest Management, Bhopal for the State of 
Madhya Pradesh, with objectives to evaluate MGNREGA interventions from ecological 
sustainability point of view and to provide suggestions for o
ptimum utilization of assets 
created under MGNREGA shows that the Kapildhara wells have been successful in 
providing irrigation facility and have increased the crop intensity in Dhar and Ratlam 
districts.
 

 
A study conducted by the Indian Institute of Scienc
e, Bangalore and GIZ across 5 states 
= Rajasthan (Bhilwara), Madhya Pradesh (Dhar), Andhra Pradesh (Medak), Karnataka 
(Chitradurga) and Sikkim (south district) has concluded that the programme has had 
extensive positive impact on the environment and in red
ucing the vulnerability to climate 
risks.  The following have been established in the study: 
 

 
Rise in water availability and area irrigated, 
 

 
Improvement in Soil Quality, 
 

 
Improvement in Ground Water levels, 
 

 
Increase in area under irrigated crop productio
n, 
 

 
Reduction in soil erosion and demonstrated impact on carbon sequestration.
 
 

 
Sambodhi Research and Communications Pvt. Ltd  conducted a  study to evaluate the 
effects of the creation of assets on lands of small and marginal farmers, SC/ST and IAY 
beneficiaries in six States, namely, AP, Chhattisgarh, MP, Odisha, Rajasthan and UP. 
The study has confirmed that MGNREGA works on the land of individual beneficiaries 
have had a significant impact on improving quality of their land, generating extra incom
e, 
aiding small and marginal farmers move to dual and multi
-
cropping and in creating 
alternative sources of livelihoods for these households.
 

 
The study conducted by Tashina Esteves, K V Rao, Bhaskar Sinha quantified the 
environmental and socio
-
economic ben
efits from the MGNREGA works. The study has 
compared the livelihoods before (2006
-
07) and post
-
implementation (2011
-
12) and 
concluded that the works have reduced the vulnerability of agricultural production to 
climatic variability.  
 
 
Further, with a view 
to ensure creation of durable assets, ensure sustainable 
development and achieve livelihood security, the Ministry has taken the following steps: 
 
 

 
Laid down that at least 60% of the expenditure at the district level shall be on 
works that directly benefit
 
agriculture/allied sectors. This will bring substantial 
investments in creation of irrigation potential.
 

26
 
 
              
 
 

 
Inculcate an outcome orientation in the execution of works, by bringing in 
guidelines for assessing outcomes from planning and implementation of each 
work. Accordingly, outcomes of more than 10 lakh works have been assessed 
and recorded in the MIS. This data is made available to general public. 
 

 
The technical supervision, which is crucial for ensuring better quality, is sought to 
be increased by prescri
bing at least one Technical Assistant/barefoot Engineer 
for every 2,500 job cards. The Ministry has also allowed meeting the cost of 
these technical persons from outside the 6% administrative costs, thereby paving 
the way for increasing the technical perso
nnel in the programme implementation. 
 

 
Brought out convergence guidelines on convergence of MGNREGA with various 
schemes of the Central Government and the State Governments.  The Ministry 
has coordinated with various States and UTs to formulate State Conve
rgence 
Plans (SCPs). So far 21 States have formulated State Convergence Plans and 
these are under implementation.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
Recommendatio
n (Serial No. 1
1
, Para No. 2.1
1
)
 
 
The Committee note that the proposal of the Department for PMGSY during XIIth 
Plan (2012
-
2017) was for Rs.2.03 lakh crore while the amount actually allocated by the 
Planning Commission was Rs.1.05 lakh crore out of which the outlay for first three years 
of
 
current Plan period is only Rs. 60091 crore. The Committee further note that during 
the year 2012
-
13, the BE of Rs.24000 crore was reduced at RE stage to Rs.10000 
crore and similarly, during the year 2013
-
14, the BE of Rs.21700 crore was reduced to 
Rs.980
7 crore at RE stage. The Committee also note that BE for the year 2014
-
15 is 
Rs.14391 crore which is lower by Rs.7309 crore in comparison to the amount of BE for 
the year 2013
-
14. The Committee are seriously concerned to observe that during both 
the years,
 
funds allocated at BE stage were drastically reduced by more than 50% at 
the RE stage. The admitted reasons are unspent balances, interest accrual, expenditure 
trends of States and overall fiscal considerations but the fact remains that the reduction 
had 
an adverse impact on mobilization of men and materials for 
construction/upgradation of PMGSY roads and on timely completion of the projects. The 
Committee therefore recommend timely placing of demands for funds by the States and 
also timely release of fund
s to the implementing agencies. The Committee are of the 
firm opinion that it was more the lack of coordination and absence of effective 
monitoring that has led to the situation of reduction in allocation than any substantial 
issue and therefore, it was fo
r the Ministry to ensure that all the issues relating to the 
scheme were comprehensively addressed in time. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should strengthen its mechanism not only to avoid such 
reduction of allocation in future but 
also to ensure optimum utilization of funds during the 
 

27
 
 
              
 
 
financial year. The Committee expects that the Ministry will take urgent necessary steps 
in this regard.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
PMGSY had been allocated with a budget of Rs. 24,000 for the financi
al year 2012
-
13 
which was substantially reduced to Rs. 8,885 crore in Revised Estimate. The reduction 
at R.E. Stage was because of unspent balance amounting to Rs. 8,885 crore being 
available with the States as on 01.04.2012 The budget allocation for year 
2013
-
14 was 
Rs. 21,700 crore which was reduced to Rs. 9,700 crore. Considering the availability of 
unspent balance of Rs. 4,761 crore (as on 1.4.2013), interest accrual of Rs. 3,050 crore 
(since inception of PMGSY upto March, 2013) and expenditure trends o
f states 
Budgetary Allocations of 2013
-
14 were reduced at RE stage.
 
During the year 2013
-
14 States were allowed to utilize interst accured by the States on 
programme fund with the approval of Ministry of Finance and the same is being 
adjusted in subsequent
 
releases from current Financial year. During the last three the 
expenditure (as reported by the States) has substantially improved and the unspent 
balance has progressively come down as a result of effective monitoring and 
coordination by the Ministry.
 
St
ate Governments are also being advised through various 
Regional Review meetings & Empowered Committee meetings to take suitable 
necessary action to expedite timely completion of road works under PMGSY. The 
following steps in this regard have been taken by 
the Ministry:
 
 
a.
 
States have been requested to augment executing capacity and contracting 
capacity and their compliance in this regard is regularly reviewed.
 
b.
 
Bidding document provisions have been rationalized.
 
c.
 
Training is imparted to field engineers and cont
ractors as well as their staff for 
capacity building. 
 
d.
 
Regular and structured review of physical & financial parameters is conducted at 
regular interval in various zones for a cluster of states of that zone.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, 
Para No. 2
.13)
 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that as per the progress report of PMGSY 
works in Integrated Action Plan (IAP) blocks, the construction of roads and providing 
connectivity to the habitations have been far from satisfactory. The specific problems 
and iss
ues faced by the IAP, hilly and tribal areas have been reported to be inadequate 
execution and contracting capacity, difficult hilly terrain, non availability of materials and 
unfavourable weather conditions. The Committee feel that the States of left
-
wing
 
IAP 
Districts are the most vulnerable areas of our country and requisite facilities and 

28
 
 
              
 
 
appropriate relaxations should be given expeditiously to facilitate connectivity in IAPareas. 
The Committee also note that the pace of construction of roads in States 
such as Manipur, 
Mizoram, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Odisha is at a very slow pace. While stressing the 
need of immediate construction of roads under PMGSY in IAP areas, the Committee 
recommend that appropriate measures should be urgently taken by the Ministr
y for 
redressal of the difficulties being faced by the inhabitants in these areas and necessary 
relaxations may be given to facilitate connectivity in IAP districts for achieving the targets. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should coordinate wi
th and seek the assistance 
of other concerned Ministries/Departments wherever required, in dealing with the various 
problems in IAP Districts.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Physical &
 
Financial progress of 88 IAP districts in 10 States upto November, 2014 is given 
as per 
Annexure 
–
 
III
.  66% of the length of roads have been completed against the 
sanctioned length and 61% of the habitations have been connected against the habitations 
cl
eared.  
 
 
 
Implementation of PMGSY is being done by the State Governments. To overcome 
the difficulties being faced in the IAP Districts, the Ministry had facilitated the States for 
expediting the Programme Implementation in LWE/ IAP Districts by relaxing 
certain existing 
guidelines, the details are as under:
-
 
 
(i)
 
The cost of bridges up to 75 meters span under PMGSY will be borne by the 
Government of India as against 50 meters span for other areas.
 
(ii)
 
The limit of minimum tender package amount is reduced to 50 la
cs.  
 
(iii)
 
A time limit up to 24 calendar months would be allowed for completion of road works.
 
(iv)
 
While formulating estimates and preparing DPRs, cost of insurance premium against 
risks can also be included.
 
(v)
 
The difference in cost between Cement Concrete (CC) roa
d and bituminous road 
would be shared by Centre and States concerned in the ration of 90:10 instead of 
50:50 in the case of other States.
 
(vi)
 
General approval under Section 
-
2 of Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 for diversion 
of forest land up to 5 ha for selec
ted public infrastructure projects in IAP districts has 
been given and order have been issued by Ministry of Environment & Forests.
 
(vii)
 
General approval under Section 
–
 
2 of Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 to quarrying 
of materials used in construction of rura
l roads in IAP districts has also been given 
and order have been issued by Ministry of Environment & Forests.
 
(viii)
 
Relaxation for Districts under IAP to revise their Core Network for inclusion of left
-
out 
habitations (as per 2001 census) has been accorded by th
e Cabinet.
 
(ix)
 
The States are permitted to prepare the DPRs in two stages wherever the 
bituminous layer is not feasible at present.
 
(x)
 
The States are permitted to prepare to get the works executed through the Forest 
Department if the road is passing through the f
orest area.
 
(xi)
 
The States have been permitted to send proposals for engagement of State or 
Central PSUs having experience of road construction for which GoI can pay agency 
fee.
 

29
 
 
              
 
 
(xii)
 
In order to address the issue of non
-
awarding of PMGSY works due to no 
response in
 
the repeated tenders issued by the States for the projects sanctioned 
by the Ministry in IAP Districts under PMGSY, the Ministry has accorded Special 
Dispensation in awarding of PMGSY works with non
-
responsive tenders in 
selected 27 critical IAP districts
 
(instructions in this regard already issued).  The 
States have been allowed to award the tenders on a nomination basis after 
repeated bids (at least two) have elicited no response, to be decided by the 
Committee headed by District Magistrate/ Collector of
 
the District and comprising 
of SSP/ SP, DFO and the Head of the concerned PIU of PMGSY representing 
the SRRDA.
 
(xiii)
 
In 267 LWE blocks from within  the IAP Districts, which have been identified by 
MHA, population criteria for the connectivity has been relaxed f
rom  250 to 
include habitation of 100 to 249.
 
 
The States have been advised to review the Status of sanctioned road works in 
the IAP Districts regularly and take all necessary steps to provide connectivity in these 
areas.  The States have been suggested to
 
conduct Review meetings at different levels.
 
 
The States have been requested that local community and Panchayati Raj 
Institutions must be involved at all levels of planning, execution and maintenance of 
road works in IAP districts. 
 
 
Regular 
Contractor
-
outreach conferences shall be organised to address their 
issues.  Contractors who complete the road works assigned to them within time and 
with prescribed quality may be publically felicitated.
 
 
Coordination with other schemes of Rural Developme
nt particularly MGNREGA 
for road side tree plantation and Aajeevika (Skills) for skill training of local youth in 
executing small contracts/ maintenance contracts should also be ensured to the 
maximum extent possible.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P)
, dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
 
 
The Committee observe that there have been complaints from time to time about 
various irregularities including sub
-
st
andard works under PMGSY scheme and during 
the last two years of 2012
-
13 and 2013
-
14, a total of 76 complaints were received by 
the Ministry, out of which 2 were sent to the concerned State Government for 
conducting enquiry and taking necessary action and 
NQMs were deputed for the rest 74 
complaints. Irregularities were noticed in 40 cases which were sent to the concerned 
State Government for rectification purposes. While taking a serious view in the matter, 
the Committee are of the opinion that the Ministr
y should take necessary follow up 
action and vigorously pursue the matter with the concerned authorities to expedite the 
enquiries so that appropriate action can be taken against the persons held responsible 
for such irregularities. The Committee desire to
 
be apprised of the follow up action taken 
and the outcome there of in the matter. The Committee also feel that there is a 
requirement of a mechanism through which the rural people could lodge complaints 

30
 
 
              
 
 
about the quality of work done, faults therein, repa
ir of roads and various other 
grievances so that the Ministry could get timely and actual feedback which will enable 
the Department to take remedial corrective measure in time. The Committee 
recommend that appropriate steps may be taken in this regard.
 
 
Re
ply of the
 
Government
 
 
 
In the 40 cases where NQMs had discovered irregularities, the reports of NQMs 
were sent to the concerned State Governments for necessary action.  Out of these 40 
cases, 19 cases involving 58 road works pertain to the year 2012
-
13 
and 21 cases 
involving 66 road works pertain to the year 2013
-
14.  The present status for these 124 
road works (58 road works for 2012
-
13 & 66 road works for 2013
-
14) has been 
prepared (year
-
wise), based on the response received from the State Governments,
 
and placed at Annexures
-
I & II.  It can be observed from the two annexures that out of 
124 road works involved, final settlement has happened in 66 road works.
 
  
 
Mechanism for Rural people to lodge complaints:
 
To enable the rural people / road user 
lodge
 
a complaint or give a feedback on the quality of PMGSY roads, a system has 
been developed and put in place at the programme monitoring website 
wwww.omms.nic.in wherein the complainant can lodge the complaint online and also 
upload the photograph of the wo
rk on the website, to be addressed by the concerned 
agencies. The system has been launched by Hon’ble Union Minister for Rural 
Development on 25
th
 
December, 2014.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
 
 
The Committee was informed that Rs.16000 crore was allocated for the Indira 
Awas
 
Yojana Scheme (IAY) during the year 2014
-
15.  IAY beneficiaries receive an 
additional assistance in many States ranging from Rs. 5,000 to Rs. 3.25 lakh.  The 
Committee note that during the year 2012
-
13, the budgetary allocation of Rs.11075 
crore was reduc
ed to Rs.9024 crore and the actual expenditure of Rs.7868.76 crore 
was even less than the RE.  Further, against the target of construction of 30.10 lakh 
houses, only 21.86 lakhs houses were constructed.  The Committee further note that 
even during the year
 
2013
-
14, BE of Rs.15184 crore was reduced to Rs.13184 crore 
and actual expenditure of Rs. 12983.64 was again less than the RE.  Further. 15.92 
lakhs houses were constructed against the target of 24.81 lakh.  The committee are 
thus unhappy to note that the
re has been a drastic decline in the physical and financial 
performance under the scheme during both the years 2012
-
13 and 2013
-
14 and such a 
huge decline in the performance of the scheme must have affected one of the basic 
amenities of providing shelter t
o the needy rural people.  The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Ministry should develop a mechanism for providing guidance and 

31
 
 
              
 
 
all necessary assistance to the State governments to overcome the various hurdles 
involved for optimum utilisation of funds
 
and achieving the targets while implementing 
the scheme.  The Committee hope that the ministry will make earnest efforts to utilise 
fully the allocated funds to achieve the objective of providing shelter to the poor 
households in rural areas of the countr
y.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
During the year 2012
-
13, the release of funds under IAY was less than RE as the 
release was linked to uploading of data by the DRDAs on AwaasSoft.  As a result the 
Ministry could not achieve the target of releasing at least 
67% of the total allocation by 
December end and the Ministry was allowed to release only 33% in the last quarter of 
the financial year.
 
 
 
During the year 2013
-
14, the expenditure was less than RE because Rs.200 
crore was transferred to National Rural Livel
ihood Mission to support Bharat Rural 
Livelihood Foundation (BRLF).  Further, Deduction of Budgetary outlay at RE stage 
both during 2012
-
13 and 2013
-
14 had resulted in achieving less physical targets.
 
However, the States/UTs are persuaded during the course
 
of Performance 
Review Committee meetings (held on quarterly basis) and during the Coordinating 
Officers meetings (held on monthly basis) to accelerate the pace of expenditure and to 
achieve the physical targets.  Letters in this regard have also been sent
 
to the States 
from time to time.
 
 
 
From the year 2013
-
14, 4% of the States’ allocation is being released as 
administrative cost which can, inter alia, be used for capacity building by the States, 
such as training of master masons and beneficiaries providi
ng labour, including training 
on maintenance practices; training of Community Resource Persons (CRPs) and 
NGOs; payment of honorarium to CRPs and service charges to NGOs; training of 
officials and elected representatives of Panchayats; etc.  In addition, A
waasSoft training 
programmes are also being conducted at Central level from time to time, particularly on 
demand from the State Governments.  In this way, there is continuous effort to improve 
implementation of the scheme and overcome problems that may com
e.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.17)
 
 
The Committee note that as per the IAY guidelines, the Gram Panchayats have 
an important role in the actual implementation of the scheme, like facilitating the 
participatory identification of the eligible beneficiaries for ensuring maximum 
participation in
 
the Gram Sabha, accessing materials required for construction, 
providing help to families who cannot construct houses on their own, etc.  the 
Committee feel that village panchayats should also ensure convergence of schemes 
using resources over which they 
have command like MGNREGA, BRGF, State and 

32
 
 
              
 
 
Central Finance Commission grants, etc. and therefore the Committee desire that the 
Village Panchyats should conduct an Information, Education and Communication(IEC) 
campaign through various fields of Government, 
Bharat Nirman Volunteers, Self
-
Help 
Groups(SHGs) and Civil Society Organisations in order to create awareness about the 
scheme.  The Committee recommend that the Gram Sabhas/Village Panchayats should 
play a pro
-
active role in effective execution of the sch
eme and regularly monitoring its 
progress so that the needy and deserving rural families get the actual benefit of the 
scheme.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Village Panchayats have a vital role to play to ensure convergence with various 
schemes implemented by 
the Centre and the States. The Panchayats ensure 
convergence of schemes using resources over which they have command like 
MGNREGS, BRGF, State and Central Finance Commission grants, etc.
 
 
 
In order to ensure that Village Panchayats play a pro
-
active role i
n conduct of 
IEC campaign, effective execution and monitoring the progress of the scheme, the State 
Governments do the following :
-
 
 
 
a)
 
Organise training programme to equip the Panchayats to carry out the tasks 
assigned to them.
 
b)
 
Provide the Panchayats IEC ma
terial particularly on materials and building 
technologies.
 
c)
 
Provide share of administrative expenses commensurate with workload. 
 
 
In addition to this, under the scheme of Indira Awaas Yojana, the selection of the 
beneficiaries is done by the Gram Sabha in
 
its meeting. During the meeting of the Gram 
Sabha, the list of ongoing IAY houses and list of houses completed during the year is 
read out and copy posted in the Panchayat office notice board. A community based 
participatory monitoring system has been put
 
in place utilizing the services of the SHG 
network under NRLM. Further the State Government prepares the yearly IEC, Social 
Audit and Capacity Building Action Plans specifying the roles to be played by every 
panchayat. 
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC 
(P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 2.19)
 
 
 
On the issue of huge unsent balances in IAY to the tune of Rs.7161.87 crore, the 
Committee are constrained to note that slow pace of implementation was the main hurdle 
for failing to utilise the funds fully.  The Committee recommend the DoRD to make effort
s to 
minimize the quantum of unspent balance as the allocated funds are 
 
 

33
 
 
              
 
 
meant for the poor families who are in dire need of a roof on their heads.  Further, the 
construction of a house in IAY scheme should be carried out by the beneficiary 
himself/hersel
f and in the case of beneficiaries above 60 years of age and persons with 
disabilities who may not be able to withstand the strain of supervising construction, 
necessary assistance may be provided by the Government if such a request is made in 
writing.
 
 
Re
ply of the Government
 
 
Indira Awaas Yojana is an on
-
going allocation based scheme and therefore, some 
funds always remain with the implementing agencies.  The funds remaining unspent at the 
end of the year are utilized during the next financial year.
 
 
As p
er the scheme guidelines, the house is constructed by the beneficiary 
herself/himself by engaging skilled/unskilled labour in addition to his own labour.  The funds 
are released to the beneficiary in installments depending upon the stage of construction.  
However, the working season for construction of a house is either pre
-
monsoon or after the 
festival season i.e. October
-
November.   Due to this and also due to pre
-
occupation of the 
beneficiary, it takes nearly two years to complete an IAY house.  Therefor
e, though the full 
unit cost of an IAY house is released to the State/DRDA in two installments in a year, actual 
distribution of funds to the beneficiaries spills over to the next year and hence there is 
unspent balance at the end of the year.
 
 
The other r
eason for less utilization of funds during the year 2013
-
14 was imposition 
of Model Code of Conduct from October to December, 2013 in four States due to elections 
to the State Assemblies and again in the whole country w.e.f. 4.3.2014 due to general 
electio
ns to the Lok Sabha.  During that period the work relating to implementation of IAY 
remained almost suspended.  However, the States/UTs are persuaded during the course of 
Performance Review Committee meetings (held on quarterly basis) and during the 
Coordi
nating Officers meetings (held on monthly basis) to accelerate the pace of 
expenditure and to achieve the physical targets.  Letters in this regard have also been sent 
to the States from time to time.
 
 
 
As regards construction of houses, the IAY guidelines
 
already have a provision
 
that
 
the construction should be carried out by the beneficiary himself/herself and no contractor 
should be involved in the construction of houses under IAY.  But construction may be 
entrusted to reputed agencies in the case of ver
y old beneficiaries above sixty years of age 
and persons with disabilities who may not be able to withstand the strain of supervising 
construction and who request for such support in writing.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 De
partment of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
 

34
 
 
              
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 2.20)
 
The Committee was informed that keeping in view the Government’s 
announcement for providing pucca house to all by the year 2022, the Ministry 
has 
undertaken the task of revamping IAY scheme with a mission approach.  The 
Committee was also informed that IAY guidelines have been revised with effect from 1
st
 
April, 2013 in consultation with experts in the Sector and various State governments for 
ma
king the scheme flexible and some of the new major initiatives intend to give priority 
to vulnerable categories, 4% administrative cost, AwaasSoft, Rural Housing Knowledge 
Network (RHKN), etc.   The Committee are also informed that Rural Housing 
Knowledge 
Network (RHKN) was launched in July, 2012 in collaboration with IIT, Delhi 
with the objective of compiling a comprehensive nationwide updatable repository of 
practitioners, institutions and practices related to affordable and sustainable solutions 
for rura
l housing and to develop a multi
-
lingual web portal in the public domain.  The 
Committee desire that all the new initiatives taken to revamp the IAY scheme should be 
used for making the scheme flexible for effective implementation and also for better 
under
standing of the grass
-
root level problems in different geo
-
climatic zones of the 
country. The Committee recommend that comprehensive and prospective planning with 
all inclusive estimated data should be done with regard to providing of pucca house to al 
by 
the target year of 2022.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Ministry of Rural Development in pursuance to the announcement of the 
Government 
to achieve the goal of “pucca houses for all” by 2022,
 
is in the process of 
restructuring IAY into Gramin Awaas Mission (GRAM). The focus of the Mission is not 
only on construction of houses but also on providing basic amenities through 
convergence and promoting a livable habitat.
 
 
As recommended by the Commi
ttee, to achieve the target of providing pucca 
house to all by the year 2022, the proposal has been prepared based on the 
comprehensive and prospective planning and taking into account all the relevant data. 
The salient features of the proposal are as foll
ows:
-
  
 
 
a)
 
Enhancement of unit's size and quantum of assistance 
 
b)
 
Enhancement of unit cost for upgradation of existing kutcha houses.
 
c)
 
Enhancing the amount of subsidised loan under Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) 
scheme and simplification of processes invo
lved.
 
d)
 
Mandatory convergence with the existing schemes / programmes 
 
e)
 
Setting up of Technology Facilitation Centres (TFCs) 
 
f)
 
Introducing of project approach with preparation of a comprehensive yearly plan of 
States/UTs to ensure convergence and time
-
bound com
pletion, and also to facilitate 
mid
-
course reviews 
 
g)
 
Setting up of the National Gramin Awaas Mission (GRAM) at the Centre, and clear 
implementation structures at State, District, Block and Village levels.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 Ma
rch, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 

35
 
 
              
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, 
Para No. 2
.21)
 
 
The Committee are of the considered view that there has been an inordinate 
delay in completion of SECC, 2011 and it has further 
caused hardship and worry to the 
needy in rural areas of the country.  The Committee note that first three stages have 
been completed as on 25.10.2014 in 359 districts in 26 States and a ‘Draft List’ has 
been published.  The Committee recommend that the Mi
nistry should persuade the 
States/UTs to expedite the completion process of SECC, 2011.  The Committee further 
recommend the Ministry to be discerning in selection of genuine BPL/beneficiary 
families to ensure transparency and people’s participation with p
roper verification of 
genuineness of household data collected under SECC.  The Committee were informed 
that the Ministry held consultations on the issue of finalization of methodology with 
organizations in the related field including Planning Commission, R
egistrar General of 
India, National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO), State Governments, experts and 
civil society organizations.  The Committee recommend the Ministry to further take 
expert advice of the above organizations which would facilitate the for
mulation of 
superior Social Welfare scheme for the needy rural populace of the country.  If need be 
public representatives may also be involved to identify the needy persons.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The Socio Economic and Caste Census 2011 was originally planned to be 
completed by December, 2011.  However, the census operation could not be completed 
as targeted and there was inordinate delay resulted due to various factors. The main 
factors are: 
 
 
(1)
 
A n
ew module of ‘verifications and corrections’ has been introduced over and 
above the original stages in order to improve the data on few crucial household 
parameters. 
 
(2)
 
The state of preparedness and capabilities of the States/UTs are not similar. As 
enumerat
ion, supervision, verifications and conducting ‘claims & objections’ is the 
responsibility of the States/UTs, these processes took long time for completing.
 
(3)
 
 
National Population Register (NPR) data collected during Population Census 
2011 were utilized as b
ase for SECC. These NPR data available in image format 
are digitized and merged with SECC. This process took considerable time. 
 
(4)
 
Since the SECC enumeration was done with the help of low cost electronic 
handheld device (Tablet PC) for the first time; certai
n technical and operational 
problems have been faced by the States/UTs. Also, recruiting lakhs of 
Enumerators, Supervisors and Data Entry Operators and training them for SECC 
also took additional time.
 
(5)
 
 
Besides, Legislative Assembly elections in Uttar Prad
esh, Rajasthan, Madhya 
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Jharkhand and other states, General Parliamentary 
election in the whole country and Local Body elections etc. in some of the States 
also added to the delay.  
 
 
 
 

36
 
 
              
 
 
However, since the old BPL list is in ope
ration, and many States follow an up
-
dating protocol as per the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, no major hardship 
was faced by the common people to avail benefits under various government 
programmes.
 
 
In order to ensure accuracy and transparency t
o achieve authenticity, the well 
structured process like enumeration, supervision, verification & correction, draft list 
publication, claims and objections and final list publication are adopted. Specific steps 
adopted during the SECC process that ensures 
transparency and people’s participation 
are:
 

 
PRI members, NGOs etc were allowed to accompany Enumerator at the time of 
data collection. 
 

 
After collecting the data, the Enumerator reads it out to the respondent and an 
acknowledgement slip is issued.
 

 
The ‘draft list’ is published and put up for viewing by public at the prominent 
locations of the village, Gram Panchayat office and Block Development Office. 
 

 
The Gram Sabha convenes for scrutiny of the ‘draft list’. The responses by the 
households are rea
d out there and claims and objections dealt with. 
 

 
Claims and objections are dealt with following 2 stage appeal procedure 
(intermediate and district level). 
 
 

 
Further, Independent Monitoring Agencies (IMAs) have been engaged as third 
party independent age
ncies to concurrently monitor the process. 
 
 
 
The Ministry of Rural Development has been continuously monitoring the 
progress of SECC with the States/UTs through regular visits, trainings and video 
conferencing to ensure early completion and sort out 
various issues with the States.  
States/UTs specific reviews and assessment of the progress of work was also taken up 
in the Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting held on a quarterly basis
-
 
the 
last two PRC meeting took place on 19
th
 
September 2014 an
d 14
th
 
January 2015. 
Based on the review and decisions taken in the Performance Review Committee, senior 
official from the Ministry of Rural Development visited the States to short out state
-
specific issues. So far, 8 rounds of video conferencing with all 
the States/UTs have 
been conducted in connection with the progress of SECC 2011. Secretary (RD) has 
also written to all the States Chief Secretaries advising them to adhere to the timelines 
and early completion of the Census in their respective State and h
as also had special 
meetings with CMDs of Central PSUs. Hon’ble Minister (RD) wrote to the Chief Minister 
of major states intimating them the tentative dates for ‘draft list’ publication and 
requested them to adhere to the timelines. 
As a result of all the
se steps, the number of 
districts where ‘Draft List’ has been published increased from 250 districts in June 2014 
to 396 districts in November 2014 to 483 districts in January 2015. Similarly, the ‘Final 
List’ publication increased from nil districts in Ju
ne 2014 to 51 districts in November 
2014 to 107 districts in January 2015.
 
 
 
Though the method of identification of BPL families in rural areas was based on 
the recommendations of the Expert Group constituted by the Ministry of Rural 
Development, it was re
fined with pilot survey in 254 villages and discussions with States 
and experts. The Union Cabinet approved the SECC process. 
However, as 
recommended by the Committee, further consultations would be made with all 

37
 
 
              
 
 
stakeholders including Planning Commission 
(now NITI Aayog), ORGI, NSSO, State 
Governments, experts and civil society organizations in this regard.
   
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
Recommendation (Se
rial No. 22, 
Para No. 2
.22)
 
 
The Committee note that for the 12
th
 
Plan period, an amount of Rs. 29006 crore 
was approved against the proposed outlay of Rs. 48107 crore. The BE of Rs. 3915 
crore for the year 2012
-
13 was reduced at RE stage to Rs. 2600 crore and the 
expenditure of Rs.2195.39 crore was even less than the a
llocation at RE stage. Again, 
the BE of Rs. 4000 crore for the year 2013
-
14 was reduced to Rs. 2600 crore at RE 
stage but the expenditure of Rs. 1822.11 crore was much less than the RE. The 
allocation for the year 2014
-
15 at BE stage is Rs. 4000 crore. The
 
Twelfth plan outlay 
which includes a provision of Rs. 5000 crore from World Bank funded National Rural 
Livelihoods Project which on its restructuring in May, 2013 has got a reduced outlay of 
Rs. 3000 crore. The Committee are unhappy with such reduction at
 
RE stage and also 
with the level of expenditure being even less than the RE. The Committee would 
therefore like the Ministry to take appropriate steps to avoid such reduction in future so 
that the fundamental purpose of the scheme is not defeated. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The reduction in budget provision in the initial phase of NRLM was on account of 
(i) delay on the part of State Governments in creating the institutional structure at State, 
District and Block level which is a pre
-
requisite for tra
nsiting to NRLM (ii) availability of 
unspent balances under SGSY(after this scheme was terminated) for being utilized for 
NRLM.
 
 
The core financial support under NRLM is provided in the form of Community 
Investment Support Fund to the SHGs and their federa
tions after they are fully 
capacitated to manage their own affairs. In order to facilitate the process of capacity 
building, the Programme has devised the Resource Block Strategy to generate 
adequate social capital for scaling up the programme. A partnersh
ip frame work for 
engaging renowned NGOs in the Capacity building of Community Cadres has also been 
put in place. An autonomous society has also been created at central level to provide 
the requisite technical and professional support to the State Rural Li
velihoods Mission 
(SRLMs).
 
 
Apart from capacity building and hard holding support to the SRLMs, the other 
measures being taken to ensure timely implementation of NRLM and utilization of funds 
are periodic meeting of the Performance Review Committee of the 
Ministry, monitoring 

38
 
 
              
 
 
through National Level Monitors, field visits of Area Officers of the Ministry to various 
States, etc. The Ministry has also put in place an on
-
line Management Information 
System and is in the process of rolling out an on
-
line accounti
ng system to ensure 
regular flow of information on financial progress.
 
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, 
Para No. 2
.23)
 
 
The 
Committee note that the Swarnjayanti Gram Swarojgar Yojana (SGSY) on 
being restructured was named as National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) 
subsequently renaming it as “Aajeevika” which was formally launched on 3
rd
 
June, 
2011. The committee note that al
l States except Goa have transited to NRLM, while 
among the UTs, only Puducherry has transited to NRLM. As informed to the Committee, 
Goa and the remaining Union Territories (except Chandigarh and Delhi) are expected to 
transit to NRLM in 2014
-
15. The Comm
ittee recommend that the Ministry should take 
up the matter with the State of Goa and remaining UTs to expenditure their action plans 
and overall preparedness for early transition from SGSY to NRLM. The Committee may 
be apprised of the steps taken in the m
atter.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
The MORD has taken up the issue of early transition of Goa and remaining UTs 
into NRLM on a priority basis. Both Goa and the remaining UTs are expected to transit 
to NRLM 
by
 
March/April 2015 or the first quarter of 
2015
-
16.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, 
Para No. 2
.24)
 
 
The Committee note that various Self Help Groups (SHGs) have been formed in 
States Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana 
and Jammu & Kashmir and these States are collectively implementing the resource 
block strategy in 47
 
blocks spread across 39 districts and these States have 
promoted/strengthened 17727 SHGs in 2485 villages in these blocks. The Committee 

39
 
 
              
 
 
desire that all the States should be encouraged to establish SHGs at different levels for 
strengthening and scaling up
 
of the programme which should be community driven.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
 
The intensive block strategy is being implemented in 2,125 blocks of 316 
districts. Up to Dec. 2014, about 2.40 crore households have been mobilized into 20.95 
lakh SHGs in 
these blocks. The intensive approach of NRLM is expected to be 
implemented in all districts and blocks of the country by 2020
-
21.
 
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural 
Development)]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40
 
 
              
 
 
CHAPTER II
I
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DONOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
 
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
 
 
 
The Committee observe that the implementation status report of MGNREGA 
reveals
 
that out of 12.78 crore job cards issued during 2012
-
13, 5.14 crore households 
have demanded employment but 4.98 crore households had been provided 
employment and only 51.40 lakh households had completed 100 days of employment.  
The situation was not diff
erent in the year 2013
-
14 when out of 13.12 crore job cards 
issued, 5.17 crore households had demanded employment, 4.75 crore were provided 
employment and only 45.78 lakh households could get 100 days of employment. The 
Committee are dismayed to note that 
during the last two years, while less than 50% of 
the total job card holder households had demanded employment, the number of 
households who were actually given employment was much less than that Shockingly, 
those who had completed 100 days of employment d
uring the last two years have been 
at dismally low level which exposes the efficacy of the programme. It becomes all the 
more alarming when level of under
-
employment in the country is estimated at more than 
6.6 billion person days on per annum basis causin
g distress migration of the rural 
population.  The substantial decline in the physical performance during the years 2012
-
13 and 2013
-
14 where 25.60 lakhs works were completed against the total of 106.51 
lakhs works taken up in 2012
-
13 and 19.70 lakh works 
completed against the total 
138.49 lakhs works taken up in 2013
-
14 clearly indicates the failure of the scheme.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to undertake an exercise to completely review 
the scheme to find out the reasons for such dismal 
progress at ground level resulting in 
non
-
achievement of the objectives for which MGNREGA was launched and to take 
corrective and remedial measures to make the scheme successful in future.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The MGNREGS provides guaranteed one hundred days of wage employment to 
all rural households whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled labour. The 
provision of employment, therefore, is contingent on registering demand for work. The 
demand for work is, 
in itself,  is influenced by various factors such as 
rainfall pattern, 
availability of 
alternative and remunerative employment opportunities outside 
MGNREGA and prevailing market unskilled wage rates. The basic purpose of the 
Scheme is to provide supplementary wage employment. There is no breach in provision 
of the entitlements provided unde
r the Act.  The decline in the physical performance 
requires to be seen in this context. 
 
 
Regarding the difference in the demand and provision of work, it may be seen 
that since fifteen days time is given for provision of employment from the date of 
deman
d, at any point of time, there is bound to be some gap between these two figures.  
 
 

41
 
 
              
 
 
Ministry has issued several advisories (copy enclosed as 
Annex
-
I
) to States/UTs 
on timely completion of works undertaken under the scheme. The matter is regularly 
reviewed
 
in the Performance Review Committee meetings and Labour Budget 
meetings. States/UTs have been asked not to open up new works in a Gram Panchayat 
if the ongoing works can accommodate the potential demand for employment. The 
Status of works undertaken under
 
the scheme is at 
Annex
-
II.
 
 
Further, it is emphasized that the programme has been a major intervention in 
increasing work availability to the vulnerable sections, especially when there is no other 
work. It has reduced distress migration and succeeded in s
moothening the rural 
consumption levels. Several independent studies have established the positive impacts 
of the programme on rural economy. 
 
 
The major steps taken by the Government to improve the programme 
implementation under MGNREGA are as follows:
 
 

 
A
t least 60% of the works to be taken up in a district in terms of cost shall be for 
creation of productive assets directly linked to agriculture and allied activities 
through development of land, water and trees. 
 

 
To facilitate states to engage technical a
ssistants/barefoot engineers for better  
technical planning and supervision of works under MGNREGA, guidelines have 
been issued to allow their establishment cost as a part of material cost of works 
instead of administrative cost.
 
The quality of the assets 
is sought to be improved 
through better planning and closer technical supervision. 
 

 
The associated outcomes of each work would be estimated before taking up the 
work and the same would be measured after completion of the work
-
thereby 
bringing in more focus
 
on outcomes. 
 

 
The States/UTs have been asked to deploy State Quality Monitors to inspect the 
quality of assets created under the Scheme.
 

 
In order to support the States to conduct the Social Audits as laid down under the 
Rules, it has been decided to provi
de technical assistance of Rs.147 crore under a 
special Project that will be in operation till 2017. Under this, the cost of engaging 
social audit resource persons at the State and District Levels will be reimbursed to 
the States/UTs.
 

 
Ministry would 
conduct training of Technical Resource Persons from the States/UTs 
on different technical aspects of type of works which can be taken up under the 
scheme.
 
 
Mobile Monitoring Systems has been introduced in 35000 GPs to empower GPs 
and implementation 
agencies with live data from the worksites and allow an online and 
real
-
time updation of database for complete transparency
  
 
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 

42
 
 
              
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
 
 
The processes in other areas in the implementation of MGNREGA Scheme are also very 
much disappointing.  The various issues like complaints of corruption in implementation of 
the scheme, delay in payment of wag
es, lack of physical checks and verification, lack of 
accountability etc. are the serious issues which need to be addressed timely and effectively 
by the Ministry. Since the primary objective of MGNREGA is to enhance the livelihood 
security of the rural ho
usehold by providing minimum 100 days of guaranteed wage 
employment in a year to every household on demand for doing unskilled manual work. The 
Committee are of the firm opinion that the ground level problems unless they are dealt with 
dispassionately, wil
l not allow the scheme to take off in the manner desired. For this 
purpose, the Committee fell that a well defined mechanism is needed to be put in place not 
only for monitoring the scheme but also ensuring the transparency and fixing the 
accountability an
d responsibility.  The Committee expect the Ministry to take immediate 
measure in this regard.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The Act provides for adequate measures for ensuring transparency and 
accountability at all levels of implementation of the scheme. 
MGNREGS is the only Scheme 
in which the social audit has been institutionalized. The social audit is done by the primary 
stakeholders. All the information (in the form of records) relating to the scheme (muster 
rolls, material procurement bills and voucher
s etc.) is provided to the stakeholders who are 
trained in reading the same.  The primary stakeholders from a different GP conduct 100% 
door to door verification of muster rolls and worksite verification including the quality 
aspects. The findings are then
 
discussed in the special Gram Sabha and Implementing 
Agencies ensure adequate action on the findings.
 
 
States/UTs have been asked to strengthen Social audits of MGNREGS works in 
accordance with the provisions of the Audit of Schemes Rules 2011 issued in c
onsultation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. A special scheme for strengthening social 
audit has been sanctioned at a cost of Rs. 147 Cr under which assistance is being provided 
in setting up the social audit units at the State and distri
ct levels. So far 10 States/UTs have 
set up Social Audit Units as per the aforesaid Rules.
 
 
Further, the States/UTs have appointed an Ombudsman at the district level for 
expeditious redressal of grievances on the implementation of MGNREGS. State Quality 
Monitors have also been deployed by the States/UTs to inspect the quality of assets 
created un
der the Scheme. In cases, where the allegations are substantiated by the 
documentary evidence, independent National Level Monitors (NLMs) are deputed by the 
Ministry to visit the concerned place and submit their findings. The State Governments 
ensure adequ
ate action on the findings of the NLMs. 
 
 
Mobile Monitoring Systems has been introduced in 35000 GPs to empower GPs and 
implementation agencies with live data from the worksites and allow an online and real
-
time 
updation of database for complete transparen
cy
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 

43
 
 
              
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
 
 
The Committee note that the Demands for Grants for the Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development) laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24
th
 
July, 2014 made a provision of Rs.80093.33 crore with
 
Plan component of Rs.80043.00 
crore and non
-
Plan component of Rs.50.33 crore.  The proposed outlay of the 
Department for the Annual Plan 2014
-
15 placed before the Planning Commission was 
Rs.92679.76 crore and the finally approved outlay was Rs.80043.00 cr
ore for the plan 
schemes of the Department.  The Committee observe that the allocated outlay has 
been reduced to the extent of Rs.12637.76 crore with reference to the proposed outlay.  
While keeping in view the importance of the rural development for inclu
sive growth, the 
Committee are constrained to note that as a consequence of the reduced outlay, the 
physical targets have also been proportionately reduced under the major rural 
development schemes like Indira Awas Yojana (IAY), Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak 
Y
ojana (PMGSY), National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) and National Rural 
Livelihood Mission (NRLM), as otherwise the targets could have been fixed at higher 
levels.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that such reduced allocation would affect 
the i
mplementation of the major schemes and the prospects of the Department in 
achieving the desired targets during the year 2014
-
15.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance and 
Planning Commi
ssion for seeking higher allocation by emphasizing the various 
important parameters which form the basis for allocation for various schemes for the 
financial year and fully utilise the allocated funds for achieving the plan targets and 
effective implementa
tion of the various schemes and programmes for an inclusive rural 
development in the country.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
IAY
: In the Annual Plan 2014
-
15 for IAY, a Budgetary outlay of Rs. 18,000 crore was 
proposed for the current financial year 2014
-
15 with
 
a physical target for construction of 
30 lakh houses.  However, Rs. 16,000 crore was allocated against which a physical 
target for construction of 25.18 lakh houses could be fixed.  This amount got revised to 
Rs.11000.00 crore at RE stage.
 
 
NRLM/Aajeevika
: For the year 2014
-
15, the budget provision approved for NRLM is 
Rs. 4,000 crore which also includes a provision of Rs. 400 crore for the DRDA 
Administration Scheme.  The funds available in BE 2014
-
15 are adequate for meeting 
the programme expenditure bec
ause of the following reasons:
 
 
(iii)
 
With the termination of the earlier scheme of SGSY, the balances under 
SGSY amounting to Rs. 1272 crores was allowed to be utilized for NRLM.
 

44
 
 
              
 
 
(iv)
 
The transition from SGSY to NRLM by States is subject to setting up of 
dedicated 
implementation structure with professional teams at state, district 
and block levels.  Since many of the States took time to set up the structures, 
their transition to NRLM was delayed, resulting in lower utilization of funds.
 
 
The allocation in RE 2014
-
15
 
has been drastically reduced from Rs. 4000 crores to Rs. 
2186 crores.  A proposal to increase the RE ceiling has been taken up with the Ministry 
of Finance.  If this proposal is not agreed to and the RE 2014
-
15 is kept at the level of 
Rs. 2186 crores, som
e of the financial commitments will have to be postponed to the 
next financial year. For Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU
-
GKY) an additional Rs. 276.05 crore has been sought.
 
 
PMGSY
: During the year 2014
-
15, against the demand of Rs. 22,0
00 crore in Annual 
Plan proposal, PMGSY was allocated only Rs 14,391 crore, which further reduced to Rs 
14,200 crore at RE stage, which was not enough to achieve physical targets under 
PMGSY. The Ministry pursued the matter with Ministry of Finance to enha
nce the 
budget allocation of PMGSY  in order to meet the physical targets under PMGSY. 
Minister of Rural Development had written a letter to Finance Minister for enhancement 
of allocation of PMGSY by Rs 4000 crore during the fiscal year 2014
-
15. The 
enhanc
ement was to be achieved by borrowing Rs 12000 crore over a 3 year period 
(Rs 4000 cr each year) from NABARD. Accordingly, a proposal for taking fresh loan 
from Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) NABARD for gap funding of 
PMGSY was sent to Minist
ry of Finance, which is not yet agreed to. A request to 
provide a significant amount in the fiscal year, from the recent enhancement of excise 
duty on petrol and diesel has also been made by Minister, Rural Development to 
Finance Minister. The Ministry has
 
pursued the matter with Ministry of Finance for 
higher allocation. 
 
National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP): During the financial year 2014
-
15 an 
amount of Rs. 10,635.00 crore  has been provided  for the implementation of schemes 
under NSAP.   This Mi
nistry is receiving representations from State Governments to 
enhance the allocations due to the increase number of beneficiaries under these 
schemes.  
 
 
Based on the recommendations of the Task Force, a EFC Note was submitted to 
Ministry of Finance, Depar
tment of Expenditure for approval.   The EFC Note includes 
enhancement of pension under all the three pension schemes.   Apart from this, the 
EFC proposes to introduce a new pension scheme for single and distressed women.    If 
the proposal is approved/acc
epted, the annual outlay for the schemes of NSAP for the 
year 2014
-
15 would be approx. Rs. 26,031 crore.  However, the Ministry of Finance has 
sought further information. 
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
 

45
 
 
              
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
 
 
T
he Committee note that during the year 2012
-
13, the BE of Rs.73175.00 crore 
allocated for the plan schemes of the Department was drastically reduced to 
Rs.52000.00 crore at RE  stage and the actual expenditure of Rs.50161.86 was even 
less than the RE.  The
 
Committee further note that even during the year 2013
-
14, the 
BE of Rs.74429.00 crore was reduced to Rs.59310.00 crore at RE stage and the actual 
expenditure was Rs.58630.15 crore which was less than the RE.  The Committee are 
constrained to observe that 
during both these years, the reduced allocation and 
expenditure was largely under some of the major schemes of the Department viz. 
NRLM, PMGSY and IAY, due to the slow pace of expenditure for various admitted 
reasons like compulsory uploading of physical a
nd financial progress by the States on 
the MIS software before release of second instalment, problems of connectivity and 
capacity to use the MIS, slow progress in construction of houses under IAY, delay in 
transition from the erstwhile scheme of SGSY to N
RLM by the States and inadequate 
absorption capacity at state level under PMGSY, which are not convincing to the 
Committee.  As a consequence, the Committee while taking a serious view in the matter 
on the recurrent under
-
utilisation of funds, are of the f
irm opinion that the low absorption 
of funds had adversely affected the targets under the different rural development 
programmes and also the progress of rural development by hampering the work in 
some of the major areas of rural connectivity under PMGSY, 
providing shelter to the 
rural needy under IAY and giving self
-
employment under NRLM schemes.  The 
Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry should make earnest efforts for 
strengthening the capacities of the States in analysing and overcoming the pr
oblems 
involved in optimum utilisation of allocated funds and also by regular monitoring of the 
pace of expenditure and flow of funds on the various schemes during the year for the 
overall improvement in the quality of life in rural areas through employmen
t generation, 
development of rural infrastructure, providing shelter to the homeless and provision of 
other basic amenities.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
MGNREGA
 
 
The Ministry reviews the physical and financial progress in the states through periodic 
meetings of the Performance Review Committee of the Ministry, monitoring through 
National Level Monitors, field visits by Area Officers of the Ministry to various state
s, 
etc.  The Ministry has also put in place an on
-
line Management Information System. The 
States/UTs are persuaded during the course of Performance Review Committee 
meetings (held on quarterly basis) and during the Coordinating Officers meetings (held 
on m
onthly basis in respect of IAY) to accelerate the pace of expenditure and to achieve 
the physical targets.  Letters in this regard are also sent to the States from time to time. 
 
 
Programme specific steps are given below: 
 
 
IAY
: From the year 2013
-
14, 4% o
f the States’ allocation is being released as 
administrative cost which can, inter alia, be used for capacity building by the States, 
such as training of master masons and beneficiaries providing labour, including training 
on maintenance practices; trainin
g of Community Resource Persons (CRPs) and Non
-

46
 
 
              
 
 
Governmental Organisations (NGOs); payment of honorarium to CRPs and service 
charges to NGOs; training of officials and elected representatives of Panchayats; etc.   
In addition, AwaasSoft training programmes 
are also being conducted at Central level 
from time to time, particularly on demand from the State Governments.  In this way, 
there is continuous effort to improve implementation and overcome problems.
 
 
NRLM/Aajeevika
: In order to facilitate effective impl
ementation of NRLM and optimum 
utilization of funds, the Government has set up an autonomous society namely National 
Rural Livelihoods Promotion Society (NRLPS) in July 2013 to provide necessary 
professional and technical support to the National Rural Live
lihoods Mission and State 
Rural Livelihoods Missions.  In addition, NRLPS has put in place a multi
-
disciplinary 
team of professionals and has designated State Anchors for each State to provide the 
necessary support to all states.  The professional staff of
 
NRLPS tour the states 
extensively, both to provide technical support wherever necessary and also to monitor 
the performance of the states in NRLM implementation.  Regular video conferences are 
held with states authorities to assess implementation status, 
provide advice to states 
and also share best practices among various states.  
 
 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU
-
GKY)
:The Guidelines on 
DDU
-
GKY provides for moving from direct implementation to further building capacities 
of State Governm
ent for implementation of the programme. The Ministry has approved 
Annual Action Plan (including capacity building component), of 09 States (Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana & Uttar 
Pradesh), who have develop
ed the capacity to implement the programme. Funds for 
capacity building for the State of Assam have also been approved by the Government of 
India. Further action in this regard is underway.
 
PMGSY
: State Governments are also being advised through various Re
gional Review 
meetings & Empowered Committee meetings to take suitable necessary action to 
expedite timely completion of road works under PMGSY. The following steps in this 
regard have been taken by the Ministry:
 
 
v.
 
States have been requested to augment exec
uting capacity and 
contracting capacity and their compliance in this regard is regularly 
reviewed.
 
vi.
 
Bidding document provisions have been rationalized.
 
vii.
 
Training is imparted to field engineers and contractors as well as their 
staffs for capacity building. 
 
viii.
 
R
egular and structured review of physical & financial parameters is 
conducted at regular interval in various zones for a cluster of states of that 
zone.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry
 
of Rural Development)]
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report)
 

47
 
 
              
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
 
 
 
The non
-
submission of utilisation certificates by the respective States/UTs is 
another area of serious
 
concern to the Committee as further processes are often held 
up for want of such certificates which may result in stalling of the progress in 
implantation of important schemes having direct impact on the poor and needy class of 
people. The Committee there
fore recommend that the Ministry must develop a 
mechanism for getting the utilisation certificates in time.  The Ministry should also take 
up such issues with the highest functionary in the States/UTs for getting the desired 
results.  Nodal officers may be
 
appointed or the purpose of looking after a group of 
States.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
MGNREGA
:
 
One of the preconditions for release of funds towards 2
nd
 
instalment is submission 
of Utilization Certificates (UCs) for funds released in the past.  In case o
f non
-
completion of 
prescribed formalities including non
-
submission of UCs, Central funds are released on ad
-
hoc 
basis to meet emergent needs and temporary shortage of funds.  The regular release of funds is 
restored on completion of all prescribed formali
ties under MGNREGA.  Further, 
States/UTs/Districts are requested from time to time (through letters and review meetings 
between officials of Central and State Governments) to furnish UCs and other information to 
make regular releases of Central fund under 
MGNREGA. 
 
 
IAY
: As per the IAY guidelines, first instalment of funds is released in respect of all 
districts which had taken second instalment of previous year.  Districts who have not 
availed second instalment of previous financial year have to submit pro
posal for first 
instalment along with all requisite documents which were required to be submitted for 
the release of second instalment of previous financial year.  Second instalment is 
released after utilisation of at least 60% of total available funds and
 
after examination of 
Utilisation Certificate and Audit Report for the previous financial year and the Utilisation 
Certificate for the current financial year along with other requisite documents.  Thus, no 
funds are released to the States/DRDAs under norma
l IAY, unless UCs due for the 
previous releases are received. UCs for the funds released for special projects are 
monitored separately.  The matter is regularly taken up with the concerned States in the 
monthly meeting of the State Coordinating Officers as
 
well as in the Performance 
Review Committee meetings (held on quarterly basis).  As a result, the number of 
pending UCs which was 70 as on 31
st
 
March, 2014 involving an amount of Rs. 158.88 
crore has now come down to 35 by the end of December, 2014 involv
ing an amount of 
Rs.33.23 crore.
 
 
NRLM/Aajeevika
:
 
The NRLM guidelines already provide that the second installment of 
grants in aid in a financial year will be subject to submission of (i) Utrilization Certificate 
and Audit Report in respect of funds 
released during the previous year and (ii) utilization 
Certificate for the Current indicating expenditure of not less than 60 of available funds.  
Directions have also been issued to SRLM that the U.C. and Audit Report should be 
submitted within the prescr
ibed time schedule without linking it with release of funds.  
Financial Management related issues are reviewed/discussed with all State Missions on 
bi
-
monthly basis and Financial Statements are obtained on a quarterly basis to monitor 
progress of expenditu
re.
 

48
 
 
              
 
 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU
-
GKY)
: The Division is regularly 
monitoring and getting UCs from States/UTs.
 
PMGSY
: 
State Governments are time and again requested to submit latest Utilisation Certificate 
in the prescribed format along
 
with the proposal for release of funds. However, no funds are 
being released to States having less than 60% of expenditure. During the Regional Review 
Meetings also, State Governments are requested to furnish Utilisation Certificate to the Ministry 
on tim
e.
 
NSAP
: If any State/UT fails to submit the Utilization Certificate for the last financial year and the 
expenditure reported by them up to December is less than 50% of the total available funds, 
funds for the last quarter are not released.
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 
March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, 
Para No. 2
.12)
 
 
The Committee
 
note that under PMGSY, the maintenance and repair of roads is the 
responsibility of the respective State Governments. PMGSY has a 3 tier quality inspection 
mechanism. First tier inspection of all PMGSY roads is done by contracting agencies & PIUs, 
second 
tier inspection of all PMGSY roads is done by contracting agencies & PIUs, second tier 
by State Quality Monitors (SQMs) & 3
rd
 
tier by National Quality Monitors (NQMs). The 
Committee is constrained to observe from the details of inspection of roads under PM
GSY 
during the last three Years i.e. from March, 2011 to March, 2014 that out of the total inspection 
of 1727 completed works by NQMs, 259 works inspected, 1267 works have been reported to be 
unsatisfactory. Keeping in view the importance of rural connecti
vity of roads, the Committee 
desire to be apprised of the reasons for the unsatisfactory completion of the various works, the 
irregularities involved and the remedial action taken therefore by the concerned authorities. The 
Committee strongly feel that unl
ess a mechanism of fixation of responsibility and accountability 
is not put in place, the various problems and malpractices in implementation of the scheme will 
not be effectively cured and, therefore, the Committee recommend that a mechanism be 
devised by
 
the Ministry whereby responsibility and accountability could be straightway fixed on 
the erring agencies and individuals and punitive action taken against them. The Committee also 
recommends that the suggestions and recommendations of the public represent
atives should 
also be taken into account while considering proposal for construction of roads under the 
PMGSY scheme.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Ensuring quality of road works under PMGSY is the responsibility of the respective State 
Governments. To ensure 
that the roads constructed are as per the prescribed standards, a 
three tier quality control mechanism has been put in place. The first two tiers of the mechanism 
are operated by States through process control at first level and subsequently the independen
t 
verification of the proper functioning of this tier through independent State Quality Monitors at    
2
nd
 
level.  Under the third tier of this mechanism, random inspections of road works are 
conducted by independent National Quality Monitors (NQM) of NRRD
A, with a view to identify 
and address the systemic issues in the quality Management system of the State. 
 
2.
 
During the period of March 2011 to March 2014 a total of 8278 (ongoing & completed) 
works were inspected, out of which 1526 works were reported as
 
“unsatisfactory” by NQM. The 
reasons put forth for unsatisfactory grading in these 1526 cases broadly relate to deficiencies in 
earth work (441 cases),  sub
-
base (633 cases), base
-
course water bound macadam (1020 
cases) & bituminous layer premix carpet su
rface dressing (256 cases).
 
 

49
 
 
              
 
 
3.
 
Immediately after inspection, the reports of inspections by NQMs are shared with the 
States and PIUs are required to initiate the remedial actions and take steps to rectify the works 
as per the observations of the NQM and re
port to the State Quality Coordinator (SQC).  On 
receipt of the action taken report from PIU, the SQC gets the facts verified through independent 
State Quality Monitor (SQM) who carries out all necessary tests and verifies that the compliance 
of the observ
ations of the original report of the NQM has been done. Upon verification, if the 
SQC is satisfied about the adequacy of the remedial action taken, he mentions this fact on the 
ATR and sends the same to NRRDA for grade improvement. 
 
4.
 
The ATRs received fr
om the State Governments are expeditiously and closely closely 
monitored at NRRDA. In respect of the 1526 works (graded unsatisfactory), referred to in para 
2, Action Taken Reports (ATRs) in respect of 920 works from the respective State Governments 
have b
een received and accepted.  In the case of 318 works, ATRs were not found adequate 
and returned to the State Governments for further rectification.  For balance 287 works, ATRs 
have not yet been received from the
 
 
State Governments. The status of ATRs is m
onitored on 
regular basis at various fora viz., Pre
-
empowered Committee meetings, Empowered Committee 
meetings, Regional Review meetings and through communications to the States.
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Ru
ral 
Development(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please 
see 
Paragraph No. 1
7
 
of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
 
 
The Committee note that against the target of 30000 km of road length, only 
24161 km 
was achieved in 2012
-
13 and the shortfall was to the extent of 5839 km. Further, even during 
the year 2013
-
14, 25316 km of road length was achieved as against the target of 27000 km and 
there was a shortfall in achieving the desired targets for ro
ad length for rural connectivity.  The 
Committee while emphasizing the need to strengthen the capacities of the States, recommend 
that the Ministry should make earnest efforts to provide proper guidance and assistance to the 
States for adequately enhancing
 
their absorption and contracting capacities for an effective 
implementation of the scheme in achieving the desired targets. The Committee further 
recommends that the process of appointment of contractors should be rationalized and rural 
connectivity shoul
d cover the inhabitations of weaker sections of society.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
Against the 12
th
 
Five year plan allocation for PMGSY i.e. 1,05,000 crore, this Ministry 
has received Rs 32,975 crore only during the first three years of the plan (2012
-
13 to 2014
-
15), 
which is 31.4% of the Five year allocation. All the State Government are fully geared u
p in terms 
of execution capacities to complete the balance road works and meet the annual targets. As the 
implementation of PMGSY is being done by the State Governments, some States are unable to 
fulfil the estimated target.   Due to steep cuts in budget i
n the last two years and anticipated cost 
in this fiscal have adversely affected the pace of implementation of PMGSY projects. To 
increase the executing capacity of the States the following steps have been taken:
 
 
1.
 
An Expert Committee has been constituted f
or recasting the Standard Bidding 
Document. 
 
2.
 
Training is being imparted to field engineers, contractors and their staff for capacity 
building.  Contractors outreach programmes are also being organized.  
 
3.
 
Regular and structured review of physical and 
financial parameters is being carried out.
 
 
Regarding providing connectivity to weaker sections of the society, the objective of the 
PMGSY is to provide connectivity to the eligible unconnected habitations in the rural areas with 
a population of 500 person
s and above in plain areas, in respect of
 

50
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
Special Category States with a population of 250 
-
499 persons (census 2001).  This includes 
habitations of weaker section of society also.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department 
of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 23
 
of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 2.18)
 
 
The Committee note that there have been various difficulties faced 
by the 
beneficiaries to avail loans under the scheme.  Difficulties like eligibility in respect of 
income ceiling and land holdings, poor repaying capacity of the beneficiaries, etc. have 
been reported by the Ministry.  The Committee desire that the Minist
ry should take 
necessary steps to facilitate the beneficiaries in taking loans by providing all the 
necessary assistance and should ensure that the various hardships being faced by 
them are appropriately resolved. The possibility of giving necessary relaxa
tions may 
also be explored for timely availability of funds to the needy families so that the 
beneficiaries should be able to have a shelter for their own under the IAY scheme.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The guidelines of IAY suggest the methodology that ca
n be adopted for availing 
the loans under DRI Scheme for SC/ST beneficiaries. The guidelines also advise the 
States for provision of supplementary grants by the State Government over and above 
the assistance provided by Government of India and mobilization
 
of other loans at a 
subsidized interest rates. 
 
 
Ministry of Rural Development in pursuance to the announcement of the 
Government 
to achieve the goal of “pucca houses for all” by 2022,
 
is in the process of 
restructuring IAY into Gramin Awaas Mission (GRAM
). The focus of the Mission is not 
only on construction of houses but also on providing basic amenities through 
convergence and promoting a livable habitat. Accordingly, it has been proposed under 
GRAM that every eligible family in rural area shall be cove
red, with priority being given 
to SC/STs and Minorities 
 
 
Keeping in view the amount required for construction of a durable house with all 
basic amenities, it has been proposed under GRAM that the loan under Differential Rate 
of Interest (DRI) be increased
 
upto Rs. 1.00 lakh covering all the beneficiaries under 
GRAM and simplify the procedures involved in securing loan.
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 

51
 
 
              
 
 
 
Recommenda
tion (Serial No. 26, Para No. 2.26)
 
 
 
The Committee in the process of examination of Demands for Grants find that 
non
-
submission/incomplete submission plans by States/UTs, slow response and a 
pathetic attitude by the functionaries, non
-
utilization of alloc
ated funds, lack of technical 
staff, delay in submission of utilization certificates, etc. are some of the constraints 
faced in the effective implementation of the schemes.  Unfortunately, the existing 
monitoring mechanism for ensuring transparency and fix
ation of responsibility in all the 
centrally sponsored schemes had not been very effective to bring the desired 
improvements.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to revamp 
the entire monitoring mechanism which could not only boost up
 
the speed of 
implementation of schemes but also bring transparency and accountability in the 
process at all levels.  Further, effective steps need to be taken for holding regular 
monthly meetings of Performance Review Committee for getting regular feedbac
k about 
the progress of the Scheme from different sources.  The Management Information 
System (MIS), External Monitoring through field visits by Area Officers and the feedback 
of vigilance and Monitoring Committees could be some of the tools which may be u
sed 
for bringing improvement in the processes.  The Committee express their dissatisfaction 
that the new initiatives taken by the Ministry like AwaaSoft, e
-
FMS, e
-
Muster, CPGRAM, 
etc. have not been able to bring the desired impact.  The Committee feel that
 
taking 
timely remedial action will be possible only when there is a well defined mechanism of 
getting real time data/information from difference sites of execution of the schemes but 
this is not happening as the Ministry do not have its own Nodal Officers
 
at different 
levels who could constantly monitor the progress of the schemes and report 
immediately to the Govt. for further necessary action.  The Committee is therefore, of 
the strong opinion that Nodal Officers should be appointed by the Ministry at di
fferent 
levels for not only conducting concurrent physical verification of the status of 
implementation of various programmes, it asserts but also to keep a close watch over 
the utilization of funds by the states.  Such Nodal Officer should be mandated to 
have 
effective coordination with the State Governments and to directly report all the 
developments to the Central Government so that any problem occurring in the process 
of implementation of schemes be effectively and timely addressed by the controlling 
au
thorities/Ministry.  The Committee is confident that appointing Nodal officers will bear 
immediate result and will be able to iron out the various difficulties which have crept into 
the system. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
     
 
Effective monitoring of the P
rogrammes is considered very important for efficient 
delivery at the grass root level in view of the substantial step up in the allocation of 
funds for rural development programmes.  In order to ensure this, appropriate 
performance indicators have been dev
eloped for each of the specific programmes for 
effective monitoring at the District, Bock, Gram Panchayat and Village levels so that 
alarm signals are captured well in advance for mid
-
course corrections.  The important 
instruments of monitoring are: (i) Re
view by the Union Ministers, (ii) Web based 
management and monitoring, (iii) Utilization Certificates/Audit Reports, (iv) Performance 

52
 
 
              
 
 
Review Committee (PRC) (iv) Vigilance and Monitoring Committees(VMCs), (v) 
National Level Monitors (NLMs) and (vi) Area Of
ficer’s Scheme.  As suggested by the 
Committee, these monitoring tools would be reviewed and redesigned to ensure more 
transparency and accountability.
 
The PRC meetings, chaired by the Secretary (RD) are held on quarterly basis.  As 
Principal Secretaries/S
ecretaries of States/UTs participate in these PRCs, holding these 
meetings on monthly basis is not considered at present, as suggested by the 
Committee.  State nodal officers meetings for individual programmes are also held 
regularly in between the PRC mee
tings.
 
The web
-
based monitoring systems, capturing both physical and financial progresses 
for individual programmes are regular monitoring features of the Department.  
MGNREGA soft, on
-
line management, Monitoring and Accounting system (OMMAS), 
Awaas Soft, 
NSAP
-
MIS, NRLM
-
MIS are designed keeping in view the requirements of 
various stakeholders periodically to keep with technological developments and new 
requirements. The existing Area Officer’s scheme has provisions for appointment of 
Principal Area Officers
 
(PAO) and Area Officers (AOs) for individual states for 
monitoring both physical and financial progress of programmes at field and national 
level.  The guidelines will be amended to address the concerns of the Committee.
 
 
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
G
C (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 
26
 
of Chapter I of the Report)
 

53
 
 
              
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
 
THE 
GOVERNMENT ARESTILL AWAITED
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 2.25)
 
 
 
The Committee observe that the National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) is a 
programme for poor BPL households for the aged, widows and disabled.  The programme 
also includes p
rovisions for one time assistance in the case of death of the primary bread 
earner in the BPL family.  The NSAP basically comprises of Indira Gandhi National Old Age 
Pension Scheme, Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme, Indira Gandhi National 
Disabi
lity Pension Scheme, National Family Benefit Scheme and Annapurna.  While taking 
into account the socio
-
economic fabric of the society, the committee strongly feels that there 
is a need for reduction in eligibility conditions, more so in respect of widows 
from the 
present 40 years to 18 years and enhancing the quantum of pension under these schemes.  
The Committee expect that the Ministry will take concrete steps in this regard and apprise 
the action taken in this regard.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
A Task Fo
rce was constituted under the Chairmanship of  Member, Planning 
Commission to prepare a proposal for Comprehensive National Social Assistance 
Programme.  The Task Force considered the issues pertaining to eligibility criteria, 
identification of beneficiari
es, quantum of assistance and grievance redressal, etc., and 
submitted its report to the Ministry inter
-
alia recommending, expanding the scope of 
coverage and enhancing the quantum of pension.  The recommendations of the Task Force 
have been examined in de
tail in the Ministry of Rural Development.  As this has financial 
implications action has been initiated to take the approval of the Competent Authority 
through the mechanism of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) headed by Secretary 
(Expenditure).
 
  
 
[O. M. No. H 
–
 
11020/03/2014 
–
 
GC (P), dated: 11 March, 2015 Department of Rural 
Development 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. P. VENUGOPAL
 
10 
August
, 201
5
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
Chairperson
 
19 
Shravana
,
 
193
7
 
(Saka)
 
 
 
  
Standing Committee
 
on Rural Development
 
 
 
 

54
 
 
              
 
 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (201
4
-
201
5
)
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, 
 
THE 10 AUGUST, 2015
 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B', Ground Floor, 
Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
                
Dr. P. Venugopal
 
 
    
-
 
 
Chairperson
 
 
Members
 
 
Lok Sabha
 
2.
 
Shri Kirti Azad
 
3.
 
Shri Harish Chandra Chavan
 
4.
 
Shri Manshankar Ninama
 
5.
 
Shri Prahlad Singh Patel
 
6.
 
Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
 
7.
 
 
Shri Gokaraju 
Ganga Raju
 
8.
 
Smt. Butta Renuka
 
9.
 
Dr. Yashwant Singh
 
10.
 
Shri Ladu Kishore Swain
 
11.
 
Shri Ajay Misra Teni
 
12.
 
Adv. Chintaman Navasha Wanaga
 
13.
 
Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak
 
 
Rajya Sabha
 
14.
 
Shri Gulam Rasool Balyawi
 
15.
 
Shri 
Ram Narain Dudi
 
16.
 
Shri Mahendra Singh Mahra
 
17.
 
Shri Ranvijay Singh 
Judev
 
18.
 
Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
 
19.
 
Shri A. K. Selvaraj
 
20.
 
Smt. Kanak Lata Singh
 
21.
 
Shri Ashwani Kumar
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Shri Abhijit Kumar
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri R.C.Tiwari
 
 
 
-
 
 
Director
 
3.
 
Smt. B. Visala
 
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
 
 

55
 
 
              
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson 
welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, 
the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:
-
 
(i)
 
Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the First Report on Dema
nds for Grants (2014
-
15) of the Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development);
 
 
(ii)
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
(iii)
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
(iv)
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
(v)
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
(vi)
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
 
XXX
 
 
 
 
3.
 
After detailed discussions, the Committee adopted the Reports without any modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Reports and present the same to the 
Parliament. 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
---------
 
 
 

56
 
 
              
 
 
APPENDIX 
-
 
V
 
[
Vide 
 
para 4 of Introduction of Report]
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY SECOND REPORT (15
TH
 
LOK SABHA) 
OF THE 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
 
I.
 
Total number of 
recommendations:
 
 
 
 
    
      
 
 
         
2
6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II.
 
Recommendations that have been accepted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by the Government :
 
 
Serial Nos. 1, 4,
 
5,
 
7
,
 
8
, 
11, 
13, 15, 
16, 
17,
19, 20
, 21, 22, 23
 
and 24
.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
     
16
 
Percentage:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
61.53
 
%
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
III.
 
Recommendations which the Committee do 
 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies :
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Serial Nos. 9 and 10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
2
 
Percentage:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
7.69
 
%
 
  
 
   
 
IV.
 
Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of
 
 
 
the Government have not been accepted by the
 
Committee :
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Serial Nos. 
2, 3, 6, 12, 14, 18
 
and 
26
 
 
Total:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
7
 
Percentage:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
26.92
 
%
 
        
 
 
 
V.
 
Recommendations in respect of which final replies
 
 
 
of the 
Government are still awaited :
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Serial No
.
 
25
 
 
Total:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
1
 
Percentage:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
 
3.84
 
%
 
     
 
 
 
 
 