 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT& PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2021-2022) 
   
 
 SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Critical Evaluation of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Rural Development)'.] 
 
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
25


 
 
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT& PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2021-2022) 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)on 'Critical Evaluation of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)of the Ministry of Rural Development(Department of 
Rural Development)'.] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2022 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2022/Shravana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
CRD No 179 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
© 2022 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____ Edition) 
and Printed by __________________. 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-2022)   ......................................   (ii) 
  
 
INTRODUCTION      …....................................   (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report   ..........................................................................  1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................................... 26 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies………….............................................................................  62 
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee ............................................................................ 63 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ...................................... 74 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 9 December, 2016………………......      19 
 
I. Extracts of Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee held on 28.07.2022*            75 
 
 II.  Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
 Twentieth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development  
& Panchayati Raj ................................................................................................................ 77 
 
__________ 
* Not Attached 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2021-2022) 
 
  Shri Prataprao Jadhav  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri C. N. Annadurai 
4. Shri A.K.P Chinraj 
5. Shri Rajveer Diler 
6. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
7. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
10. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
11. Shri Narendra Kumar 
12. Shri Janardan Mishra 
13. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
14. Shri Talari Rangaiah 
15. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
16. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
17. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
18. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
19. Shri Kumbakudi Sudhakaran 
20. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
21. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiya 
23. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
24. –vacant- 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
27. Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa 
28. Shri Ram Shakal 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
30. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh 
31. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1.   Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar -  Additional Director 
3. Shri Inam Ahmed  - Executive Officer 
____________________________________________________________ 
 
(ii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj  
(2021-2022) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the 
25th Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (17th Lok Sabha) on 'Critical 
Evaluation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)’ of the Ministry of 
Rural Development (Department of Rural Development). 
2.  The Twentieth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 08.02.2022 and was laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on the same date. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 13.05.2022. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
28.07.2022. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 PRATAPRAO JADHAV 
           28 July, 2022                          Chairperson, 
           06 Shravana, 1944 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj (2021-22) deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twentieth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Critical Evaluation of Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)’ of the 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development).  
2.   The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 
08.02.2022 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. 
The Report contained 33 Observations/Recommendations.  
3.  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been 
received from the Government. These have been examined and 
categorised as follows: -  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 1,3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 
25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 
          Total: 26
          Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL           
          Total: NIL      
         Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 2, 4, 6, 7, 12, 22, 28       
Total: 07 
  Chapter-IV   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
Total: NIL  
       Chapter-V 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that Final Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be furnished to 
the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments.  
I. Effective Coordination with the States for timely release of funds and 
submission of requisite details 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
6. With regard to the Effective Coordination with the States for timely release of 
funds and submission of requisite details, the Committee had recommended  as 
under:- 
"The Committee note the submission made by the Department of Rural 
Development during the course of evidence that one of the 
impediments obstructing the smooth and unhindered flow of funds is 
that of non-completion of requisite procedural formalities by the State 
governments within the stipulated time-frame. Non-updation of muster 
roll within three days of completion of the work or delay in the 
submission of documents for release of wages/skilled/material share by 
the States along-with delay in release of States’ share of 25% material 
costs came to the fore. The Committee were bemused on the approach 
exhibited by the nodal agency of the scheme, i.e. Department of Rural 
Development in highlighting only the States’ loopholes. This is 
completely inacceptable and the Committee find the ‘blame-game’ 
unpalatable. The ‘need of the hour’ in a federal form of government 
should not be limited to merely finger pointing at each other at the cost 
of detriment to a public welfare scheme, rather working in unison with 
the common goal of upliftment of the quality of lives of rural masses. In 
this context, the Committee vehemently recommend the Department of 
Rural Development to entail all possible measures in bringing all the 
shareholders on a common platform and coerce the State 
Governments to abide with the statutory provision of the MGNREGA 
Act in ‘letter and spirit’ so that the beneficiaries fate do not keep 
hanging around the bureaucratic procedures." 
 
7.  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a demand driven wage 
employment programme and funds are released to the State/UTs on 
the basis of "Agreed to" Labour Budget and performance of the 
State/UTs during financial year. Funds release under Mahatma Gandhi 

3 
 
NREGA is based on the provision of the Act and guidelines. First 
installment of the 1st tranche is released in the first half of April after 
adjusting unspent balance available with the States and considering 
the pending liabilities, if any.   
The 2nd tranche is released on the submission of proposal in the 
prescribed format by the State and subject to fulfilment of all the 
prescribed conditions. The proposal can be submitted after a State has 
utilized 75 percent of the total available funds. If the proposal for 2nd 
tranche is submitted after 1st October, then the Audit Report and 
Audited UC of previous FY is also required. Quantum of funds to be 
released as part of 2nd tranche depends upon the performance of the 
State/UT.  
There is a provision that State may submit 2nd Tranche proposal 
at least 15 days before the 50% achievement of the Annual labour 
budget.  
Also appropriate documents for check lists have been made 
available to the State so that State may submit dully completed 
proposal well in advance so that timely release of funds may be 
ensured.   
It also needs to be mentioned that there is a regular dialogue 
with The States/UTs not only through informal channels including 
through Whatsapp, but also through several formal channels such as 
Performance Review Committee, meeting for determination and 
revision of Labour Budgets, Mid-Term Reviews and so on. The States 
are facilitated to the best extent through both.” 
 
8. While  taking note of the submission made by the Department of Rural 
Development (DoRD)  regarding the obstacles witnessed in the seamless flow 
of funds under MGNREGA, the Committee had recommended  DoRD  to ensure  
effective coordination with the States  so that the requisite details  are 
submitted by them for  facilitating  timely release of funds.  DoRD in their 
action taken reply have stated that “funds released under MGNREGA is based 
on the provision of the Act and guidelines” and have  elaborated on the 
existing mechanisms  in  the 1st  tranche and  the 2nd tranche subject to 
fulfilment of all the prescribed conditions.  In addition, various modes of 
communication with the States have also been outlined in their response. 
Nonetheless, the Committee find the reply inadequate, bereft of any concrete 
action  to streamline the prevalent delay causing issues for timely released of 

4 
 
funds under MGNREGA. DoRD have merely furnished their stereotypical reply 
delineating only the provisions of the scheme  without addressing the issue 
with the seriousness it warrants. Delving upon the reply of DoRD, the 
Committee opine that, had these provisions and mechanisms been functioning 
optimally, the issue of delay in fund release would not have  arisen. Thus it 
indicates lack of coherence between the theoretical provisions and their 
enactment on ground level . Taking this into cognisance the Committee feel  
that there is an immediate need for a much more effective and synchronised 
action between the Central and States’ nodal agencies . To address this, the 
Committee emphasise that stringent measures need to be taken  by  DoRD to 
critically assess  and examine the existing situation  and urge  DoRD to 
reinvigorate the process for the betterment of Centre-State ties in the matter 
and reiterate their recommendation for ensuring timely release of funds under 
MGNREGA with suitable action so that the scheme’s progress is unhindered. 
  
II. Mitigation of Unspent Balances 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
9. With regard to the Mitigation of Unspent Balances, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:- 
“While the data provided by the Department of Rural Development 
pertaining to the unspent balances at the end of financial year 2020-21, 
shows an amount to the tune of Rs. 5,270.76 crore as unspent, for the 
current financial year, the amount unspent as on 05.11.2021 is Rs. 
1,351.46 crore. The Committee certainly note the improvement shown 
through the efforts of Department of Rural Development wherein a 
reduction in amount of unspent balances is being noticed. In this 
regard, the Committee are still of the uniform view that funds remaining 
unutilized on one hand along-with the existence of pendency in 
payment of wages and release of skilled share does not augur well for 
the performance of the scheme, thus putting a question mark on the 
administrative acumen of the nodal agency. Keeping this in mind, the 
Committee feel that this downward trend in the accrual of unspent 
balances need to be maintained through rational measures. Therefore, 

5 
 
the Committee recommend the Department of Rural Development to 
ensure that the unspent balances are completely mitigated by the 
utilization of allocated funds in a time-bound and financially prudent 
manner.” 
 
10.  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
"Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage 
employment programme. The Ministry has made concerted efforts to 
reduce delays in payment of wages. A Standard Operating Procedure 
(SoP) on timely payment process for direct payment into the accounts 
of beneficiaries was issued and its implementation by the States/ UTs 
is being monitored on a regular basis. In addition, use of platforms 
such as PFMS/NeFMS has enabled real-time monitoring of the 
payments. Use of the aforesaid mechanisms have resulted in 
considerable improvement in the status of timely generation of pay 
orders leading to improvement in actual time taken to credit wages in 
the workers accounts.  
 The Ministry regularly reviews the performance of the 
implementation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS including pending 
liabilities for material component and unspent balance available with 
States through various fora viz., Labour Budget meetings, Labour 
Budget Revision meetings, Mid-Term Review, Programme Review 
meetings. Central Employment Guarantee Council and State 
Employment Guarantee Councils periodically monitor implementation 
of the programme. 
  The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
further guidance.” 
 
 
11. The Committee had  taken note of the appreciable efforts being   taken 
by the DoRD for the mitigation of unspent balances under MGNREGA  by  
drastically  reducing   the unspent amount from Rs. 5,270.76 crore at the end 
of Financial Year 2020-21 to Rs. 1,351.46 crore as on 05.11.2021. In view of 
that, the Committee had recommended the DoRD to maintain and increase the 
momentum even further so that the complete unspent balance amount gets 
exhausted at the earliest. The response of  DoRD  in this regard has been 
examined  and is found to be in the right direction.  While acknowledging the 
measures undertaken by DoRD for bringing down the unspent balances and 
expediting its utilization, the Committee hope that DoRD would not let their 

6 
 
guards down and would keep accelerating their best effort by maintaining a 
sustained curb on the accumulation of unspent balances.    
III. Delay in Payment of wages  
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
12.  With regard to the increase in wages through linkage with 
commensurate inflationary index, the Committee had recommended  as under:- 
"One of the key aspect behind the enunciation of MGNREGA scheme 
was the guarantee of 100 days work to the rural masses who take up 
works under MGNREGA voluntarily. Not only was this welfare scheme 
envisaged to provide a ‘fall back’ option of employment for those who 
had no other avenues to look upon but the objective was also to create 
durable asset utilizing the manpower. However, the entire fulcrum of 
balance upon which rested the success of this scheme was supposed 
to be the timely payment of wages as guaranteed through the 
MGNREG Act, 2005, wherein the payment of wages is to be done 
within fifteen days from the date of closure of muster rolls. Instead, the 
Committee painfully take the cognizance of the inordinate delay in the 
payment of wages to the beneficiaries of MGNREGA. There may-be 
plethora of reasons causing delay in the payment of wages, but none 
of the reason can be sufficient enough to justify this blatant 
nonadherence to the statutory provision of the Act. The beneficiaries of 
the Act are generally poor and marginalized sections of the society 
whose hopes of decent upliftment to their economic status hinge upon 
the succor through MGNREGA. The Committee in this context view the 
amount of Rs. 276,378.22 lakhs wage liabilities as on 05.11.2021 
seriously and feel sorry at the ‘state of affairs’ in this scheme. No 
reason is good enough for such huge pendencies and hence, the 
Committee, in all earnest, call upon the Department of Rural 
Development to ‘pull up its socks’and take all possible measures to 
wipe off the wage liabilities as soon as possible." 
 
13. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“Under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS), States/UTs submit funds release 
proposals to Government of India. Fund release to the States/UTs is a 
continuous process and Central Government is committed in making 
funds available to States/UTs for the implementation of the Scheme. 
The Ministry release funds periodically in two tranches with each 
tranche consisting of one or more installments, keeping in view the 
“agreed to” Labour Budget, demand for works, opening balance, pace 
of utilization of funds, pending liabilities, overall performance and 
subject to submission of relevant documents by the State/UT. In the 
financial year 2021-22 (as on 31.03.2022), an amount of Rs. 73,023.05 
crore has been released to State/UT for wage component under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS."   

7 
 
14. The Committee  placed  their highest regard with  the ethos upon which 
the entire scheme of MGNREGA was built upon, i.e. a welfare scheme for the 
rural masses providing them with an avenue of employment when they have 
no other means to look upto. Thus, the timely payment of wages guaranteed 
under the MGNREG Act assumes paramount importance which acts as 
additional allurement to the poor and marginalized sections of the society. On 
this premise, the Committee had painfully seized themselves of the burning 
issue of inordinate delay in the payment of wages to the beneficiaries under 
MGNREGA and recommended  DoRD to entail all possible measures to wipe 
off the wage liabilities to the tune of Rs. 2,76,378.22 lakh as on 05.11.2021. 
Responding to the Committee, DoRD have only simply stated about the 
release of funds being a continuous process alongwith the provisions in 
vogue . It has also been mentioned that an amount of Rs. 73,023.05 crore has 
been released to States/UTs for wage component under MGNREGA. The 
Committee are not oblivious to the ‘hue and cry’ for the release of pending 
wages across the Country for plethora of reasons. In  this backdrop, the 
Committee find the reply unsatisfactory as no specific action has been 
elicited regarding the complete wiping off of the pendency in wages. 
Moreover, the amount of existing pendency of wages and the reasons thereof 
have also been  furnished to the Committee. The release of the amount as 
stated by the DoRD maybe a step in the right direction but the ‘need of the 
hour’ is to ensure that the guarantee of payment of wages within 15 days as 
per the MGNREG Act  should be complied with ‘in letter and spirit’ and not a 
single penny remains unpaid to the needy beneficiaries. The bureaucratic 
cobweb surrounding the factors  for delay need to be surgically cleared off. 

8 
 
Therefore, the Committee strongly reiterate their recommendation for taking 
more effective and result oriented steps to ward off the malaise of delay in the 
payment of wages to the beneficiaries of MGNREGA.  
IV. Increase in wages through linkage with commensurate inflationary index 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
15.  With regard to the Increase in wages through linkage with 
commensurate inflationary index, the Committee had recommended  as under:- 
"One of the pertinent issue engulfing the scheme under MGNREGA 
has been concerning with the adequate wage rate, commensurate with 
the inflation. The Committee note the States/UTs-wise wage rates as 
per Gazzette notification for financial year 2021-22 which shows the 
wage rate to range from as low as Rs. 193/- per day in Chattisgarh and 
Madhya Pradesh and Rs. 198/- per day in Bihar and Jharkhand to Rs. 
318/- per day in 3 Gram Panchayats of Sikkim (namely Gnathang, 
Lachung, Lachen) and Rs. 315/- per day in Haryana. Rest all 
States/UTs fall between Rs. 200/- to Rs. 300/- per day bracket 
(majority remaining below Rs. 250/- per day). At a time when cost of 
living is increasing day by day, with the rise of inflation having effect on 
the price rise of even essential commodities, fathoming people of 
marginalized and economically challenged stature, who primarily form 
the beneficiaries of the scheme, striving to make ‘ends meet’ surviving 
on this amount is quite concerning. Taking up works under MGNREGA 
is a sort of last resort for the rural masses when they don’t have any 
other option to utilize, but wages of such nominal nature only 
discourage them and propel them to seek work in areas giving better 
remuneration or migrate to urban locales. One of the objective of 
MGNREGA was definitely to provide work at or nearby places of 
habitation of the poor and downtrodden and not to cause them to move 
longer distances. But, the wage rates being offered under MGNREGA 
is surely working as a deterrent which is amply evident in the data 
reflecting that number of households who were provided employment 
under MGNREGA for the year 2018-19 is 526.61 lakh but households 
who completed 100 days of employment is only 52.58 lakh, similarly in 
2019-20, only 40.60 lakh completed 100 days of work out of 548.23 
lakh household who were provided employment. For 2020-21, the 
figure is 72 lakh out of 755.36 lakh, while as on 31.08.2021, for 
financial year 2021-22 the figure is even more poor with only 7.76 lakh 
households completing 100 days of work out of 537.78 lakh who were 
provided employment. The Committee do understand that MGNREGA 
is a demand driven scheme where the workers move out for better 
opportunities. However, the figures are abysmally low and it definitely 
points towards low wage rates as being one of the major reasons for 
the workers to opt out of MGNREGA, hampering the percentage of 
work completed under MGNREGA also. Upon this very premises, the 

9 
 
Committee have time and again urged Department of Rural 
Development to increase the wage rates under MGNREGA by linking it 
with an index commensurate with inflation. Department of Rural 
Development in their replies have elaborated upon the setting up of Dr. 
Nagesh Singh Committee for wage rate revisions and that the same 
Committee had recommended for using Consumer Price Index – Rural 
(CPI-R) in place of Consumer Price Index – Agricultural Labour (CPI-
AL) for indexation of wages under MGNREGA. The Ministry further 
clarified that it had accepted the recommendations of the said 
Committee and after the approval of Finance Ministry had initiated the 
process of revision of wage rates under MGNREGA by indexing CPI-
(R) in place of CPI – (AL). However, pursuant to a meeting with the 
Ministry of Statistics &Employment, Government of India and with the 
approval of Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development, the Ministry of 
Rural Development has decided to continue with the existing index 
CPI-AL for wage rate revision under MGNREGA. Thus, the wage rates 
under MGNREGA would continue to remain languishing on account of 
no change in indexation. In view of the above situation, the Committee 
strongly recommend the Ministry to review its stand concerning with 
the wages once again and approach all the decision making bodies 
with plausible rationale so that a long pending demand of justifiable 
hike in the wages under MGNREGA is fulfilled for the welfare of 
beneficiaries." 
 
16. The DoRD in thier action taken reply have stated as under:- 
"As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the 
Central Government may by notification specify the wage rate for 
unskilled work for its beneficiaries. Accordingly, the Ministry of Rural 
Development notifies Mahatma Gandhi NREGA wage rate for every 
financial year for States/UTs. To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA workers against inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development 
revises the wage rate every year based on change in Consumer Price 
Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The index is different for 
different States/UTs as notified by Labour Bureau Shimla. If the 
calculated wage rate of any State/UT is coming lower than the wage 
rate of previous year, it is being protected by maintaining the previous 
year wage rate. The wage rate is made applicable from 1st April of 
each financial year.  
The consultation with Ministry of Finance was held earlier. The 
CPI Now, after the due consultation with the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation and Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, the Ministry of Rural Development has decided to 
continue with existing index CPI-AL for wage rate revision under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA with the approval of competent Authority." 
 

10 
 
17.  A long standing demand from various quarters of the country has been 
that of increase in wages under MGNREGA through linkage with an 
appropriate inflationary index. While taking into consideration the efforts made 
by  DoRD in initiating the process of revision of wage rates under MGNREGA 
by indexing  Consumer Price Index – Rural (CPI-R) in place of Consumer Price 
Index – Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL), the issue was discussed threadbare 
during the deliberations of the Committee. It was noted that the efforts of the 
DoRD felt flat in the wake of the final decision by the Government of India to 
continue with the existing index of CPI-AL. Thus, the Committee had urged 
upon DoRD to review its stand  again for the revision of wages. However, the 
reply furnished by  DoRD have again repeated their present stance that after 
due consultation, the Ministry of Rural Development have decided to continue 
with existing CPI-AL for wage rates under MGNREGA. The Committee in wake 
of the non-yielding situation are seriously concerned about the plight of  the 
beneficiaries of MGNREGA who belong to extreme periphery of the society 
and for whom any increase in wage through suitable linkage with inflationary 
index, providing buffer against rising costs, would indeed be a blessing. Thus, 
the Committee once again make a strong appeal to the prudence of the DoRD 
to review its stand and bring onboard all the stakeholders so as to increase 
the wage under MGNREGA through suitable linkage to inflationary index. 
 
 
V. Uniform wages across the country to end the disparity of wages under 
MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
18. With regard to the Uniform wages across the country to end the disparity of 
wages under MGNREGA, the Committee had recommended  as under:- 

11 
 
"Time and again the issue of disparity of wages under MGNREGA crop 
up before the Committee. The Committee find the concept of wage 
rates under MGNREGA being different in the States/UTs of the country 
quite baffling. MGNREGA is a Centrally sponsored scheme with the 
wages of unskilled labour being released through the Central Share. 
Moreover, Department of Rural Development is the nodal implementing 
agency of the scheme in the entire country and it only seem befitting if 
the nodal agency fixes a single unified wage rate at the start of every 
financial year applicable for all the States/UTs of the Country. Wage 
rates fluctuating from Rs. 193/- to Rs. 318/- across the different 
States/UTs in no way seem justified. Moreover, the parameters of 
economics perhaps will also be convenient in terms of calculations and 
indexation in one go for the entire country, rather different States/UTs 
bringing in their own dynamics in fixing the wage rates. It is also 
noteworthy to mention here that the beneficiaries being targeted under 
MGNREGA are no doubt the poor and marginalized sections of the 
society. In this context, States such as Bihar, UP, Jharkhand and West 
Bengal showing a notified wage rate of Rs. 198/-, Rs. 204/-, Rs. 198/- 
and Rs. 213/- is unfathomable. Bridging the disparity of wages and 
bringing the wages at par will not only end the conundrum of 
uncertainty among beneficiaries but will also serve the larger purpose 
of welfare of MGNREGA workers. Thus, the Committee recommend in 
all earnest that the Department of Rural Development look into the 
matter of disparity of wages among States/UTs pragmatically and 
devise a mechanism for notifying a unified wage rate across the entire 
country." 
 
19.  The DoRD in thier action taken reply have stated as under:- 
"As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the Central 
Government may by notification specify the wage rate for unskilled 
work for its beneficiaries. Accordingly, the Ministry of Rural 
Development notifies Mahatma Gandhi NREGA wage rate for every 
financial year for States/UTs. To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA workers against inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development 
revises the wage rate every year based on change in Consumer Price 
Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The index is different for 
different States/UTs as notified by Labour Bureau Shimla. If the 
calculated wage rate of any State/UT is coming lower than the wage 
rate of previous year, it is being protected by maintaining the previous 
year wage rate. The wage rate is made applicable from 1st April of 
each financial year. However State Governments can provide wage 
over and above the wage rate notified by the Central Government.” 
 
20. Over the period of time, since the inception of MGNREGA, one aspect 
surrounding the scheme which has always baffled the Committee is that of 

12 
 
disparity of wages under the Scheme in different States/UTs. The Committee 
fail to comprehend as to why a Centrally Sponsored Scheme cannot have a 
single unified wage rate across the country which could be suitably revised at 
the start of every financial year for accounting the inflationary effect. In this 
context, taking note of fluctuation in wage rates from Rs. 193/- to RS. 318/- 
across different States/UTs, the Committee had recommended  DoRD to 
consider the idea of notifying a unified wage rate across the country.  The 
Committee find the reply of DoRD in this regard, unacceptable and evasive 
wherein the mechanism of revision of wage rates for each financial year has 
been talked about without giving any specific riposte to the novel idea 
recommended by the Committee. The Committee through their 
recommendations aim to bring solace to the poor rural masses of the country 
who rely upon MGNREGA for their livelihoods. It is expected in all earnest that 
any solution being provided by the Committee at least deserve thorough 
analysis and a befitting response. Remaining silent on such significant 
recommendation and bypassing it without giving specific reply does not 
augur well for the sustained efforts being undertaken for the betterment and 
evolution of MGNREGA Scheme. The Committee, therefore, vehemently 
reiterate their recommendation and coerce DoRD to come up with a robust 
mechanism for ending the disparity of wages under MGNREGA by utilizing 
the concept of unified wage rate across the country.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
VI. Increase in number of days of work sought under MGNREGA 
 
21. With regard to the Increase in number of days of work sought under 
MGNREGA, the Committee had recommended as under:- 

13 
 
 While examining the subject of MGNREGA and during their 
deliberations, the Committee were made to realize about demands from 
various quarters of the country regarding the increase in number of days from 
100. The Committee also take cognizance of the provision of the scheme 
through which State Governments can ask for additional 50 days of work 
under MGNREGA to meet the need for work in cases of exigencies arising out 
of natural calamity. The Committee take note of this existing provision and are 
of the view that MGNREGA is a last ‘fall back’ option for numerous rural 
people and the amount of expenditure under it also elicit a keen interest in the 
scheme by the poor and marginalized. It is ‘high time’ that the scheme be 
revamped keeping in view the changing times and emerging challenges 
particularly in wake of the COVID Pandemic. Moreover, the basic thought 
process behind MGNREGA also warranted the creation of permanent durable 
asset while providing works to the needy. The Committee feel that durable 
assets under various heads of permanent nature, go a long way in 
creating/rectifying infrastructures pertaining to the Government agencies. This 
only aids and augments the initiatives of the Government towards progressing 
the society and taking it forward with a robust infrastructure. In view of such 
background, the Committee are of firm opinion that the ‘need of the hour’ is to 
further diversify the nature of works under MGNREGA in such manner and 
through such mechanisms which could also propel the number of guaranteed 
working days under MGNREGA to at least 150 days from the current 100 
days. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend the Department of Rural 
Development to review the scheme of MGNREGA in such a way which could 
ensure an increase of guaranteed days of work from 100 to 150 days. 
 
22.  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGA) is to provide at least 100 days of guaranteed 
wage employment in a financial year to each household in rural areas of the 
country whose adult members volunteers to do unskilled manual work. In 
addition to this, there is a provision for upto additional 50 days of wage 
employment in a financial year in drought/natural calamity notified rural areas. 
As per Section 3 (4) of the Act, the State Governments may make provision 
for providing additional days of employment beyond the period guaranteed 
under the Act from their own funds.” 
 
23. The Committee noted the demand from various quarters regarding the 
hike in the number of days of work sought under MGNREGA, particularly in 
wake of the COVID pandemic causing reverse migration of the workforce from 
urban to rural areas. MGNREGA emerged as a last ray of hope for the poor 
rural masses in the unprecedented challenging times witnessed by all of us. 

14 
 
Taking into cognizance, the role of MGNREGA and the raised demand for 
works under the Scheme, the Committee felt appropriate that the scheme be 
revamped in such a way that the number of guaranteed days of work under 
MGNREGA be increased from the existing 100 days to 150 days. Responding 
to the recommendation of the Committee in this regard,  DoRD in their reply 
have stated about the provision of 100 days of guaranteed wage employment 
under MGNREGA.  Further, the reply also states that Section 3(A) of the Act 
allows the State Governments to make provision for additional days of 
employment beyond the guaranteed period from their own funds. The 
Committee find the reply routine and generic in nature, merely highlighting the 
formulated provisions of the Act. Much time has elapsed since the inception of 
the scheme and the dynamics of rural poverty and employment has 
considerably changed during the present times. The Committee view the 
demand for increase in number of days not only beneficial for the needy but 
also for the aim of the Scheme regarding creation of durable assets as it would 
provide continuity of same experienced workforce on a project for a longer 
time. Although the State Governments may make provisions for additional 
days, still the Committee are of the firm view that the mandatory increase in 
number of guaranteed days should be brought about by the DoRD by moving 
an amendment in the Act in order to make it applicable for the entire country, 
so that the demand of needy beneficiaries may not hinge upon the 
arbitrariness of the State Governments. Therefore, the Committee reiterate 
their recommendation for increase in number of days of work sought under 
MGNREGA from 100 to 150 days and implore upon DoRD to take up the matter 
in right earnest.  

15 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
VII. Prompt release of Skilled/Material Share 
 
24. With regard to the Prompt release of Skilled/Material Share,the Committee 
had recommendedas under:- 
  One of the key aspect which drew the attention of the Committee 
towards itself was the delay in the release of skilled labourers and material 
components share funds by the Centre and State. The funding pattern of the 
scheme clearly outlines that the Central Government shall meet the cost of up 
to three-fourths of the material cost of the Scheme including payment of 
wages to skilled and semi- skilled workers while the State Government will 
bear one-fourth of the material cost of the Scheme including payment of 
wages to skilled and semi-skilled workers. Despite a clear cut demarcation of 
funds origin and their supposed flow, there remained pendency in the release 
of such components. These delays ultimately cause the delay in the 
completion of works under MGNREGA owing to which the projects taken up 
under MGNREGA do not get completed on time and are often left 
incompleted for long period of time wasting the entire exercise of the creation 
of durable assets under MGNREGA. When queried upon this aspect, reasons 
being cited were non-completion of documentary procedures for the release 
of next batches of funds et. al. The Committee find a stereotypical excuse 
placed before them at almost most of the junctures wherein blame-game kept 
on changing posts but redressal remained elusive. Hence, the Committee 
recommend the Department of Rural Development to supervise this aspect at 
each level so that all pre-requisites and the formalities for timely release of 
funds are completed on time so that the status of completion of projects under 
MGNREGA do not get stuck or delayed for want of timely release of funds. 
 
25.  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS fund release to the States is a 
continuous process and Central Government is committed to making fund 
available to States for the implementation of the Scheme. Under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS, States submit fund release proposals to Government of 
India. The Ministry releases funds periodically in two tranches with each 
tranche consisting of one or more installments, keeping in view the “agreed 
to” Labour Budget, demand for works, opening balance, pace of utilization of 
funds, pending liabilities, overall performance and subject to  submission of 
relevant documents by the State. 
 
The Ministry seeks additional funds under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS 
from Ministry of Finance as and when required for meeting the demand for 
work on the ground. 
 
The Central Government had enhanced the financial allocation under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS for previous financial year 2020-21 from Rs. 61,500 
crore at Budget Estimate (BE) stage to Rs.1,11,500 crore at Revised Estimate 
(RE) stage. 

16 
 
 
Section 22 of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA provides the framework for 
the funding pattern under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. Funds will be released to 
the States/UTs normally in two tranches with more than one instalment in one 
tranche based on agreed Labour Budget (LB), opening balance, pending 
liabilities of the previous financial year, if any, and overall performance. The 
first instalment of first tranche will be released to the States/UTs in 1st half of 
April month of the financial year. The fund release system in Programme 
Division has been streamlined in FY 2016-17. Three check lists – (A), (B) & 
(C), have been prepared and shared with the States/ UTs which are to be 
furnished with fund proposal, under the signature of Commissioner, Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA/ Principal Secretary/ Secretary of the Department in-charge 
of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. 
 
First Tranche 
 
The first instalment of the first tranche will be released in the first half of 
April month of the financial year after adjusting unspent balance available with 
the districts/States and considering the pending liabilities, if any. 
 
Steps to release of first tranche 
 
a) Once Labour Budget of a State is examined and agreed to by 
the Ministry and State Government, the State Government shall prepare 
district-wise and month-wise projections of the Category wise (i.e. SC, ST and 
Other beneficiaries) labour demand. 
b)       Requisition for release of 1st tranche should be accompanied 
with modified checklist A and B, provisional UC of previous financial year by 
5th April. 
c)       The 1st tranche is estimated based on funds required for initial 
six months of a financial year (FY) or 50 per cent of the Labour Budget for the 
State/UT, whichever is lower, minus the opening balance of the State/UT as 
per MIS. Pending liability shall also be considered. 
d)      As MIS reports form the basis of fund release, it is necessary that 
all expenditure is entered in the NREGASoft. Expenditure not entered in the 
NREGASoft will result in larger opening balance than what is available and 
the 1st tranche would be lower by an equivalent amount. 
e)       Details of works proposed in the Labour Budget need to be 
entered into the software and should be from among the approved shelf of 
projects. 
f)      1st tranche is released to the State Fund subject to submission of 
the following certificate/ documents: 
 
I.     A certificate to the effect that accounts for all the districts of the 
State for the FY before 2017 have been examined and settled. 
II.   A certificate indicating satisfactory compliance of Ministry’s 
clarifications/ suggestions/ advice/ observations issued from time to time on 
the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA in the State/Districts. 
III.   No mis-utilisation / misappropriation of funds has been noticed, 
during the year 

17 
 
 
g) After receipt of Central share and the matching State share in the 
State Nodal Bank Account of the State Nodal Agency. 
 
h) If the States require additional funds for implementation of Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA up to 30th September, the same would be considered based 
on performance during the period from April to the date of submission of the 
proposal and funds would be released accordingly. 
 
i) The funds towards material, admin and other projects to the states 
will be subject to compliance of guidelines vide the O.M. dated 23.03.2021 of 
Department of Expenditure, Government of India. 
 
a. Instalments under 1st Tranche 
 
The quantum of instalments under the first tranche will be based on – 
 
i. The instalments of fund towards material shall be released for 
two months at a time depending upon availability of the funds. 
ii. The number of persondays projected by States/UTs for the next 
two months of Labour Budget for current FY will form the basis for calculation 
of instalment amount. 
iii. However, the fund released under 1st tranche will be well within 
50% of total persondays agreed to in the Labour Budget for the year. 
iv. Adjustment of unspent balance available with the States/UTs. 
v. Pending liability, which will include excess State share (as per 
the MIS). 
vi. The States would have released the entire State share 
(cumulative). 
vii. The quantum and number of installments for release of funds for 
wage payment will be decided by the programme division as per the actual 
assessment. 
 
b. Second tranche 
 
The 2nd Tranche is released on submission of proposal in the 
prescribed format by the State and subject to fulfilment of all the prescribed 
conditions. The proposal can be submitted after a State/ UTs has utilized 75 
percent of the total available funds. If the proposal for 2nd Tranche is 
submitted after 30th September, then the Audit Report and Audited UC of the 
previous financial year is also required. Quantum of funds to be released as 
part of second tranche depends upon the performance of the State/UT. 
 
State/UT may revise district-wise and month-wise projections of the 
Category wise (i.e. SC, ST and Other beneficiaries) labour demand within 
approved LB with prior approval of Programme division head of the Ministry. 
The 2nd Tranche entitlement of the State/UT will be based on revised 
projection. The State must ensure that the proposal for the 2nd Tranche of 
funds is received at least 15 days before the 50% achievement of the Annual 
labour budget. 

18 
 
 
Steps to release of Second Tranche: 
 
I.  The State/UT/District will submit a consolidated proposal for 2nd 
tranche along with modified checklist A, B and C, to the Ministry, only after 
utilizing 75 percent of total fund available with the State as a whole and 
compliance of the prerequisites as laid down under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. 
 
II.  A certificate stating that no programme fund has been diverted 
during the FY is required to be given. It should also be certified that there has 
been no embezzlement or misappropriation of funds under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA and in cases where this has happened; adequate steps have been 
taken to punish the guilty and recover the embezzled or misappropriated 
amount. 
III. In case State becomes eligible for release of 2nd tranche after 
30th September in a FY, the State will submit a certificate stating that Audit 
Reports (AR) and Utilisation Certificates (UCs) from all the districts in the 
State have been received and found to be in order in all respects. A 
consolidated Audit Report will also be submitted with the proposal. 
IV. If there are pending liabilities at the end of the previous financial 
year, the same should be reflected as liability in the balance sheet of the Audit 
Report of the previous financial year. 
V.     Advance State share or loans taken by the State may also be 
reflected as pending liability in the Utilisation Certificate and balance sheet 
attached to the proposal. 
VI.    A certificate stating that all pending audit observations by the 
auditor have been complied with should be provided along with the fund 
release proposal. 
VII.   The Check list on prerequisites/documents for release of 2nd 
Tranche of Central share (Annexure -27 of the Operational Guidelines, 2013). 
VIII. States/UTs may share Utilization certificate for unskilled wages in 
Category wise manner (i.e. SC, ST and Other beneficiaries). 
 
In financial year 2021-22 (as on 31.03.2022), an amount of Rs. 
98,467.84 crore has been released by Central Government to the States/UTs 
under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
 
Whenever any support is needed by States/UTs, Central Government 
extents, its support to State Audit Report relaxation of guidelines for release of 
2nd tranche of funds to the States under Schemes of the Department of Rural 
Development.” 
 
26. A pertinent issue that has marred the welfare Scheme of MGNREGA for 
long has been the non-timely release of the skilled/material share by the 
Government. Reasons cited for such occurrence have more often than not 
centred primarily around non-completion of documentary procedures for the 

19 
 
release of next batches of funds among others. Taking the importance of this 
issue seriously, the Committee had recommended  DoRD to supervise and 
ensure the timely release of skilled/material share so that the projects under 
MGNREGA do not get stuck due to dearth of funds. From the reply submitted, 
the Committee find that  DoRD while quoting Section 22 of the MGNREG Act 
have elaborately detailed the existing provisions and steps for the release of 
first and second tranche of funds during each financial year . However, the 
serious issue flagged by the Committee through their recommendation have 
been conveniently sidelined and not paid any attention  by DoRD. The 
Committee are wary of the projects under MGNREGA getting delayed/stalled 
specifically for non-release of skilled and material share of the funds. 
Instances are galore for such happenings and the ground experiences of 
elected representatives corroborate such delays. This is a rampant anomaly 
which needs to be addressed strictly on priority. Hence, the Committee, while 
reiterating their recommendation for the prompt release of skilled/material 
share of the funds, also strongly urge DoRD to fine tune the implementation of 
existing theoretical provisions with an hawkish mode of surveillance for the 
effective redressal of grievances of the beneficiaries.     
VIII. Promotion of ‘Buldhana Pattern’ 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22) 
27. With regard to the Promotion of ‘Buldhana Pattern’, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:- 
In recent times, a much recognized and appreciated framework of work 
obtained through the convergence of water conservation aspect with 
National Highway Construction has garnered huge praise and National 
recognition, is that of ‘Buldhana Pattern’ First time used in the 
Buldhana District of Maharashtra in the drought affected 
Vidarbharegion. This pattern synchronizes the work of water 

20 
 
conservation through desilting and deepening of waterbodies by the 
removal of earthen material and silt and using this material for National 
Highway. Thus, a unique and beautiful symbiotic relationship is being 
observed between two aspects of development wherein the raw 
material for road construction is obtained from the clogged and 
overflowing water bodies through their desiltation. This not only 
rejuvenates the water bodies and deepens them but also provide 
cheap and easily available raw material for the road construction. The 
Committee applauded this ‘Buldhana Pattern’ and unanimously decide 
to urge the Department of Rural Develoment to examine the scope of 
this pattern to be brought under the ambit of MGNREGA works. Not 
only will this pattern create new and meaningful work under 
MGNREGA but will also go a long way in increasing the resources of 
the country through convergence with other relevant schemes. 
 
28. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
"Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, construction and renovation of water 
harvesting pond, fishery pond at the community level are permissible 
activities under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. The excavated soil from the 
ponds can be shifted from the site after saturation of the bund 
formation with proper documentation of earthwork. However, 
transportation cost of the earth (soil) from the site to the other place 
should not be made from the scheme as it is not permissible under the 
scheme. Similar kind of renovation/construction work such as canal, 
farm pond, and traditional water bodies can also be taken up in 
convergence with other Department for transportation of excess 
excavated soil." 
 
29. Convergence of various rural development schemes can only further aid 
and augment the progress of welfare oriented programmes of  DoRD which 
would go a long way in addressing the rural poverty. With this thought 
process, the Committee had recommended the widely applauded ‘Buldhana 
Pattern’ to be brought under the ambit of MGNREGA works. This could have 
synchronized the work of water conservation through desilting and deepening 
of water bodies by the removal of earthen material and silt and using this 
material for National Highway. The idea could have further benefitted the 
works under PMGSY through cost-cutting while upholding the tenets of waste 
management. However, the reply of the DoRD state that the transportation cost 
of the earth (soil) from the site to the other place should not be made from the 

21 
 
Scheme as it is not permissible. The Committee find such reply completely 
unsatisfactory, exhibiting lack of farsightedness. Few aspects of the ongoing 
Scheme which can be tweaked for the benefit of symbiotic convergence with 
other scheme is perhaps an exercise of administrative skill and acumen of the 
nodal agency. Instead of citing only the obstacles for the implementation of 
any novel concept, the impetus of  DoRD should be to at least scrutinize the 
proposal in a more elaborate manner and ensure that such practical ideas 
materialize to the hilt. Therefore, the Committee strongly reiterate their 
recommendation to bring the ‘Buldhana Pattern’ under the ambit of MGNREGA 
so that convergence of schemes get fructified on ground.    
 
IX. Better Promotion of Women-Centric Works under MGNREGA 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 28) 
30. With regard to the Better Promotion of Women-Centric Works under 
MGNREGA, the Committee had recommended  as under:- 
MGNREG Act, 2005 mandates for the provision of minimum 33% of the 
work to be provided to the women labourers. It has been also taken 
note of the fact that average percentage of women participation across 
the country is hovering around the 50% mark for the last 5-6 years. In 
this regard, the Committee, however, feel that projects under 
MGNREGA should be envisaged which are women centric in nature 
and which could maintain and increase the women participation even 
further and can go a long way in women empowerment through 
economic independence too. The Committee also observe that there 
already existsself help groups of women in villages which are engaged 
in either farm works or animal rearing activities and these groups can 
be linked to MGNREGA to enable them a source of income. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend Department of Rural Development to work 
upon the idea of promotion of women centric works under MGNREGA 
through creation or linkage of livelihood projects already in existence. 
 
31. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
" As per the Para 15 of Schedule-II of the Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act, “Priority shall be given to women in 
such a way that at least one-third of the beneficiaries shall be women 

22 
 
who have registered and requested for work. Efforts to increase 
participation of single women and the disabled shall be made”.  
  
To encourage women to participate in the works under the Scheme 
features like separate schedule of rates for women, no discrimination in 
the wage, women caretaker for looking after children upto five years of 
age, if there are 5 or more children of such age, encouragement to 
women SHG members as mate, worksite facilities exist under the 
Scheme.  
The percentage of participation of women under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS from FY 2018-19 to FY 2021-22 is given below: 
  
Financial Year 2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 2018-19 
Percentage of 
participation of women 54.72 53.19 54.78 54.59 
 
 
32. The Committee were of the unanimous opinion that MGNREGA can also 
act as a tool of women empowerment through the economic upliftment of rural 
women by engaging them more in the women-centric works. In this context, 
the Committee had recommended  DoRD to devise means through which 
already existing women Self Help Groups engaged in farm works or animal 
rearing activities be linked to MGNREGA for ensuring increased participation 
of women. This would only provide further boost to the cause of ultimate 
welfare of rural women populace of the country.  DoRD in their reply have 
furnished the details of the women centric provisions already existing under 
MGNREGA but have remained silent upon the creation or linkage of more 
livelihood projects under existence with MGNREGA. The Committee, thus, 
after thoroughly examining the reply are of the strong view that much more is 
needed to be done regarding the exploration of the feasibility for the linkage of 
existing women centric works along with finding the practicability of more 
women centric programmes under MGNREGA. The aim should be to provide 
reasonable platforms for the rural women to strengthen their economic 

23 
 
prowess even further. Hence, the Committee reiterate their recommendation 
and stresses upon DoRD to find out ways and means for the realization of the 
objective through creation of more women-centric works and linkage of works 
already in practice with MGNREGA.      
X. Revamping of Scheme to meet the changing Demands including Medical 
Facilities to meet the challenges of Covid/Omicron 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 33) 
33. With regard to the Revamping of Scheme to meet the changing Demands 
including Medical Facilities to meet the challenges of Covid/Omicron, the Committee 
had recommended  as under:- 
MGNREG Act, 2005 was implemented w.e.f. 01st April, 2008 in the 
entire country. ‘Much water has flown under the bridge’ since then and 
the ‘need of the hour’ is the review and revamping of MGNREGA 
Scheme in totality to meet the new demands while overcoming the 
impediments thrown in its path during its journey so far. The Committee 
strongly believe that value addition to the scheme such as skilling of 
labourers in different aspects, introduction of provision to upgrade the 
quality of life of the beneficiaries, increased utilization of technologies 
and software to ward off obstacles associated with wage transfer and 
verification of job cards are just a few required changes. Moreover, the 
Committee also opine that unified wage rate after revision, removal of 
disparity of wages, increasing number of days of guaranteed work, 
completing Aadhar based payment system, review of 60%: 40% wage 
material ratio, inclusion of new works and robust mechanism of 
monitoring are also urgent areas of review. The Committee are also of 
the strong opinion that in prevailing situation of Covid needs/Omicron 
pandemic, it is imperative that all labourers working under MGNREGA 
must be given free basic medical facilities attached with Job Cards at 
the doorstep of respective villages to make them healthy to contribute 
more for creation of durable assets for the country. Therefore, the 
Committee urge Department of Rural Development to conduct a 
holistic review of the scheme and undertake the exercise of its 
revamping for prolonged successful implementation of MGRNEGA. 
 
34. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
" Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment 
programme. The core objective of the Scheme is to provide not less 
than 100 days of unskilled manual work as a guaranteed employment 
in a financial year to every household in rural areas as per demand, 
resulting in creation of productive assets of prescribed quality and 
durability.  

24 
 
 
The following welfare measures to workers under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA at worksite, as elaborated in Schedule II of Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA, 2005 
 
(i) If any personal injury is caused to any person employed under the 
Scheme by any accident arising out of and in the course of his 
employment, he shall be entitled to such medical treatment as 
required, free of cost. 
 
(ii) Where hospitalisation of the injured worker is necessary, the State 
Government shall arrange for such hospitalisation including 
accommodation, treatment, medicines and payment of daily allowance 
which is not less than half of the wage rate. 
 
(iii) If a person employed under the Scheme meets with death or 
becomes permanently disabled by accident arising out of and in the 
course of employment, he or his legal heirs, as the case may be, shall 
be paid by the implementing agency an ex gratia as per entitlements 
under the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana or as may be notified 
by the Central Government. 
 
(iv) If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child 
accompanying a person who is employed under the Scheme, such 
person shall be entitled to medical treatment free of cost; and in case 
of death or disablement of the child due to the said accident, ex gratia 
shall be paid to the legal guardians as determined by the State 
Government." 
 
35. During the changing scenario witnessed by the world due to COVID 
pandemic, the need for bolstering medical facilities and newer ideas for 
strengthening health care came to fore. The Committee strongly believe that 
mass oriented schemes of huge proportions such as MGNREGA need to 
include newer safety measures for the MGNREGA workers in terms of easily 
accessible medical facility at the doorstep of villagers. Thus, the Committee 
had recommended for the revamping of the scheme to meet the new and 
unforeseen challenges of COVID. In this regard, the Committee find that the 
DoRD have furnished about the various welfare measures pertaining to the 
medical facilities provided to the MGNREGA workers ranging from 
hospitalization to insurance schemes, etc. The Committee acknowledge the 

25 
 
existing mechanism for safeguarding health of labourers and find the 
implementation of such components of scheme in right direction. Still, the 
Committee are of the view that COVID pandemic was an unseen and unheard 
calamity which threw unpredictable challenges before everyone. It might have 
ended or not but the prudence calls upon to get prepared for any such 
emergency in future also. In view of this and in the fitness of things, the 
Committee, while appreciating the effort of DoRD urge upon them to carry out 
review of the medical facilities under MGNREGA once again and explore the 
idea of revamping of scheme for the inclusion of doorstep medical facilities 
attached with job cards of the labourers.    
 
 
 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
One of the flagship schemes of the Government of India, MGNREGA is a 
platform which provides opportunity of employment to the rural populace who are 
willing to take up works under MGNREGA. The uniqueness of the scheme lies in its 
statutory backing through the enactment of the Act, providing a Right to Employment 
under MGNREGA to the masses residing in villages and hinterland of the country. 
The Committee find that since its inception and particularly during the last 4 – 5 
financial years, it has been seen through the analysis of its Budget Estimate that 
each time there has been a substantial hike at the Revised Estimate (RE) Stage, 
further augmenting the budgetary allocation of the scheme. In the financial year 
2018-19, the BE was hiked from Rs. 55,000/- crore to Rs. 61,830.09 crore, from 
60,000/- crore to Rs. 71,001.81 crore in 2019-20, from Rs. 61,500/- crore to Rs. 
1,11,500/- crore in 2020-21, while during the ongoing financial year 2021-22, from 
the allocated BE of Rs. 73,000/- crore, Rs. 52,228.84 crore have already been spent 
by 01.09.2021 i.e. in only six months. Thus, the Committee are of the view that the 
scheme is definitely showing an increase in demand as elicited by the ever 
increasing budgetary demand. Moreover, it is also quite perplexing as to the 
rationale behind keeping the BE for 2021-22 at Rs. 73,000/- crore while in the 
previous financial year, the expenditure was to the tune of Rs. 1,11,170.86 crore. 
Even after acknowledging the fact that the last financial year 2020-21 witnessed a 
surge in demand due to reverse migration of workers from urban areas back to rural 
locations and their dependence on MGNREGA as a last resort of solace and also 
taking note that MGNREGA is a demand driven scheme, the Committee are still of 
the view that Budgetary Allocation of a scheme of such enormous magnitude should 
be done in a more pragmatic manner so that there is no dearth of funds in mid-year 
and flow of funds for payment of wages, material share, etc. is maintained 
seamlessly. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Department of Rural 
Development to review its budgetary demand pertaining to MGNREGA and ensure 
that ‘agreed to labour budget’ is made at concerned level keeping in view the 
expenditure of previous years.  

27 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a demand driven wage employment programme 
and funds are released to the State/UTs on the basis of Agreed to Labour Budget 
and performance of the State/UTs during financial year. Funds release to 
States/UTs is a continuous process and Central Government is committed in 
making funds available keeping in view the demand for work on the ground. 
The Annual action plan and Labour Budget is prepared by the State after 
following due process as per provision of the Act. This Labour Budget is an 
anticipated demand for wage employment. After the approval of Empowered 
Committee, the “agreed to Labour budget” is getting revised as per demand from 
the fields and proposal for revision of “agreed to Labour budget” from the State. 
(DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
While the data provided by the Department of Rural Development pertaining 
to the unspent balances at the end of financial year 2020-21, shows an amount to 
the tune of Rs. 5,270.76 crore as unspent, for the current financial year, the amount 
unspent as on 05.11.2021 is Rs. 1,351.46 crore. The Committee certainly note the 
improvement shown through the efforts of Department of Rural Development 
wherein a reduction in amount of unspent balances is being noticed. In this regard, 
the Committee are still of the uniform view that funds remaining unutilized on one 
hand along-with the existence of pendency in payment of wages and release of 
skilled share does not augur well for the performance of the scheme, thus putting a 
question mark on the administrative acumen of the nodal agency. Keeping this in 
mind, the Committee feel that this downward trend in the accrual of unspent 
balances need to be maintained through rational measures. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the Department of Rural Development to ensure that the 
unspent balances are completely mitigated by the utilization of allocated funds in a 
time-bound and financially prudent manner.  
Reply of the Government  
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment programme. The Ministry 

28 
 
has made concerted efforts to reduce delays in payment of wages. A Standard 
Operating Procedure (SoP) on timely payment process for direct payment into the 
accounts of beneficiaries was issued and its implementation by the States/ UTs is 
being monitored on a regular basis. In addition, use of platforms such as 
PFMS/NeFMS has enabled real-time monitoring of the payments. Use of the 
aforesaid mechanisms have resulted in considerable improvement in the status of 
timely generation of pay orders leading to improvement in actual time taken to credit 
wages in the workers accounts.  
  
The Ministry regularly reviews the performance of the implementation of 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS including pending liabilities for material component and 
unspent balance available with States through various fora viz., Labour Budget 
meetings, Labour Budget Revision meetings, Mid-Term Review, Programme Review 
meetings. Central Employment Guarantee Council and State Employment 
Guarantee Councils periodically monitor implementation of the programme. 
  
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for further guidance. 
(DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
One of the pertinent issue engulfing the scheme under MGNREGA has been 
concerning with the adequate wage rate, commensurate with the inflation. The 
Committee note the States/UTs-wise wage rates as per Gazzette notification for 
financial year 2021-22 which shows the wage rate to range from as low as Rs. 193/- 
per day in Chattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh and Rs. 198/- per day in Bihar and 
Jharkhand to Rs. 318/- per day in 3 Gram Panchayats of Sikkim (namely Gnathang, 
Lachung, Lachen) and Rs. 315/- per day in Haryana. Rest all States/UTs fall 
between Rs. 200/- to Rs. 300/- per day bracket (majority remaining below Rs. 250/- 
per day). At a time when cost of living is increasing day by day, with the rise of 
inflation having effect on the price rise of even essential commodities, fathoming 

29 
 
people of marginalized and economically challenged stature, who primarily form the 
beneficiaries of the scheme, striving to make ‘ends meet’ surviving on this amount is 
quite concerning. Taking up works under MGNREGA is a sort of last resort for the 
rural masses when they don’t have any other option to utilize, but wages of such 
nominal nature only discourage them and propel them to seek work in areas giving 
better remuneration or migrate to urban locales. One of the objective of MGNREGA 
was definitely to provide work at or nearby places of habitation of the poor and 
downtrodden and not to cause them to move longer distances. But, the wage rates 
being offered under MGNREGA is surely working as a deterrent which is amply 
evident in the data reflecting that number of households who were provided 
employment under MGNREGA for the year 2018-19 is 526.61 lakh but households 
who completed 100 days of employment is only 52.58 lakh, similarly in 2019-20, only 
40.60 lakh completed 100 days of work out of 548.23 lakh household who were 
provided employment. For 2020-21, the figure is 72 lakh out of 755.36 lakh, while as 
on 31.08.2021, for financial year 2021-22 the figure is even more poor with only 7.76 
lakh households completing 100 days of work out of 537.78 lakh who were provided 
employment. The Committee do understand that MGNREGA is a demand driven 
scheme where the workers move out for better opportunities. However, the figures 
are abysmally low and it definitely points towards low wage rates as being one of the 
major reasons for the workers to opt out of MGNREGA, hampering the percentage of 
work completed under MGNREGA also. Upon this very premises, the Committee 
have time and again urged Department of Rural Development to increase the wage 
rates under MGNREGA by linking it with an index commensurate with inflation. 
Department of Rural Development in their replies have elaborated upon the setting 
up of Dr. Nagesh Singh Committee for wage rate revisions and that the same 
Committee had recommended for using Consumer Price Index – Rural (CPI-R) in 
place of Consumer Price Index – Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) for indexation of 
wages under MGNREGA. The Ministry further clarified that it had accepted the 
recommendations of the said Committee and after the approval of Finance Ministry 
had initiated the process of revision of wage rates under MGNREGA by indexing 
CPI-(R) in place of CPI – (AL). However, pursuant to a meeting with the Ministry of 
Statistics &Employment, Government of India and with the approval of Hon’ble 
Minister of Rural Development, the Ministry of Rural Development has decided to 
continue with the existing index CPI-AL for wage rate revision under MGNREGA. 

30 
 
Thus, the wage rates under MGNREGA would continue to remain languishing on 
account of no change in indexation. In view of the above situation, the Committee 
strongly recommend the Ministry to review its stand concerning with the wages once 
again and approach all the decision making bodies with plausible rationale so that a 
long pending demand of justifiable hike in the wages under MGNREGA is fulfilled for 
the welfare of beneficiaries.  
Reply of the Government  
As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the Central Government may by 
notification specify the wage rate for unskilled work for its beneficiaries. Accordingly, 
the Ministry of Rural Development notifies Mahatma Gandhi NREGA wage rate for 
every financial year for States/UTs. To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA 
workers against inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development revises the wage rate 
every year based on change in Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-
AL). The index is different for different States/UTs as notified by Labour Bureau 
Shimla. If the calculated wage rate of any State/UT is coming lower than the wage 
rate of previous year, it is being protected by maintaining the previous year wage 
rate. The wage rate is made applicable from 1st April of each financial year.  
The consultation with Ministry of Finance was held earlier. The CPI Now, after 
the due consultation with the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
and Ministry of Labour & Employment, Government of India, the Ministry of Rural 
Development has decided to continue with existing index CPI-AL for wage rate 
revision under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA with the approval of competent Authority.  
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) although 
keeps on revising the nature and number of permissible works under MGNREGA, 
still, the Committee are of the firm opinion that the ambit of permissible works under 

31 
 
MGNREGA require a much frequent revision for including such works also which are 
felt utmost necessary at the local levels through the emerging needs of the specific 
geographical terrain. Particularly, works such as construction of bunds which would 
stop the land erosion/cutting due to flow of rivers during the time of floods in various 
parts of the country definitely merit a serious look. Other works such as boundary 
works for croplands/agricultural fields in order to protect them from grazing animals 
are a valid demand. The Committee strongly believe that while revising and adding 
new works to be undertaken under MGNREGA, a process of dialogue with 
concerned stakeholders at ground level should always be done in order to ascertain 
the local sentiments and requirements. Works can also be added in area-specific 
manner through specific orders for a fixed time period. Thus, the Committee, 
recommend the Department of Rural Development to revisit their procedures while 
revising and including new works under MGNREGA for having an objective and 
logical approach to include area specific work as per local requirement also.  
Reply of the Government  
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment programme. The core 
objective of the Scheme is to provide not less than 100 days of unskilled manual 
work as a guaranteed employment in a financial year to every household in rural 
areas as per demand, resulting in creation of productive assets of prescribed quality 
and durability. 
As per Schedule -I of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), "works which are non-tangible, not 
measurable, repetitive such as, removing grass, pebbles, agricultural operations, 
shall not be taken up". 
There are 262 permissible works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. Adding 
new works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is a regular exercise and new works are 
added on the basis of merit in alignment with focus and objectives of the Act. 
Addition of new work such as unconnected villages and border areas and 
construction of Bio Gas Plant for individuals and  unskilled wage component of 
community Bio Gas Plant have been done in the list of permissible work recently. 
  

32 
 
          There is a committee under the chairpersonship of Joint Secretary (RE) to 
review the request of addition of any work.  
 
(DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
The Committee with utmost concern note the provision mentioned in 
Schedule-II of the MGNREGA, 2005 through which wage seekers are entitled to 
receive payment of compensation for the delay in receiving wages at the rate of 
0.05% of the unpaid wages per day for the duration of delay beyond the sixteenth 
day of closure of muster roll. While examining the data concerning the delay 
compensation paid by various States/UTs, the Committee find that during financial 
year 2018-19, 2019-20 & 2020-21 amounts to the tune of Rs. 729.08 lakhs, Rs. 
289.33 lakhs and Rs. 160.63 lakhs were paid respectively across the country as 
delay compensation. While, during the ongoing financial year as on 05.11.2021 an 
amount of Rs. 92.47 lakhs have been paid so far. These are abysmally low figures 
which either suggest that the amount of delay in payment of wages is very less or 
tha t the provision of delay compensation is not being implemented strictly on ground 
level. The experience of the Committee through its interaction with local populace 
and the sentiments echoed by the MPs reflect clearly that the picture regarding 
payment of wages is very grim. There is inordinate delay in payment of wages and 
despite that, the payment of delay compensation allowance is not at all adhered to 
strictly at majority of the places in the country. The Committee find this non-
adherence to the provision of the Act regarding payment of delay compensation as a 
‘breach of trust’ of the goal of the scheme, aimed at first place and thus, vehemently 
recommend the Department of Rural Development to ensure stricter compliance of 
the provision of MGNREGA Act, 2005 in payment of compensation so that delay 
compensation is paid immediately without any further lapse.  
Reply of the Government 
As per the provisions of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, wage seekers shall be entitled to receive payment of compensation 
for the delay, at the rate of 0.05% of the unpaid wages per day of delay beyond the 
sixteenth day of closure of muster roll. 
 As per the provision of the Act, the State Government shall pay the 
compensation upfront after due verification within the time limits as specified above 

33 
 
and recover the compensation amount from the functionaries or agencies who are 
responsible for the delay in payment.  An amount of Rs. 431.73 lakh has been paid 
as delay compensation in the financial year 2021-22 by the State Governments to 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS workers.  
  The Ministry regularly reviews the payment of delay compensation to 
beneficiaries of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS during the Labour Budget meetings, 
Labour Budget Revision meetings, Mid-Term Review and other review meetings. 
This Ministry also requests to State Governments/UTs from time to time through 
issuing advisories/ circulars requesting to make payments of delay compensation 
timely. 
           Government of India has accorded priority and also requested State 
Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC) to review it. For this, the Central 
Government has shared an indicative agenda points for SEGC including review of 
status of delay compensation. As per the Act, SEGC is authorised to monitor the 
implementation of this Act and the Schemes in the State and coordinating such 
implementation with the Central Council. 
  It may be mentioned that as per the provision of Act, Scheme notification & 
implementation is the primary role of State Government. 
  State/UT-wise details of delay compensation under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS 
during the last three financial years 2019-20,  2020-21 and 2021-22 is given at 
Annexure-I. 
(DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
The Committee are taken aback and appalled at the blatant violation of the 
provision of unemployment allowance mandated through Section 7(1) of the 
MGNREGA, 2005 which envisages that if an applicant for employment under 
scheme is not provided employment within 15 days, he/she shall be entitled to a 
daily unemployment allowance that shall not be less than one-fourth of the wage rate 
for the first thirty days during the financial year and not less than one-half of the 
wage rate for the remaining period of the financial year. This being the legal 
mandate, while the stark reality reflects a dismal picture evinced by the data of the 
ministry which reflects that only Rs. 0.12 lakh in 2019-20, Rs. 0.03 lakh in 2020-21 
and Zero amount in 2021-22 as on 05.11.2021 have been paid in the name of 
unemployment allowance. This is a shocking revelation to say the least and the 
Committee are dumbfounded at the state of affairs. The Committee are fully aware 

34 
 
that it is the responsibility of each State Government to determine the rate of 
unemployment allowance and pay the same to the eligible applicants. Still, the 
Committee cannot decipher the role of the nodal agency, the Department of Rural 
Development in this regard merely ‘passing the buck’ and moving one’s face in the 
opposite direction. This approach can not at all justify the inaction and callous 
methods of the Central Ministry regarding such a key provision. The Scheme is a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme with all its modalities being supervised by the 
Department of Rural Development. In such scenario, the role of nodal agency is 
definitely of paramount importance and any inaction shows it in very poor light. 
Therefore, the Committee, while taking very strong notice of the dire situation firmly 
call upon the Department of Rural Development to shed its lackadaisical manner and 
ensure that the provision of MGNREG Act, 2005 do not remain unheeded but are 
implemented intrue ‘letter and spirit’ on the ground level. 
Reply of the Government 
As per Section 7(1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), “If an applicant for employment under 
the Scheme is not provided such employment within fifteen days of receipt of his 
application seeking employment or from the date on which the employment has been 
sought in the case of an advance application, whichever is later, he shall be entitled 
to a daily unemployment allowance in accordance with this section.” 
  
As per provision of the Act, the unemployment allowance is to be paid by the 
State Government and State Government may prescribe the procedure for payment 
of unemployment allowance under this Act. The unemployment allowance payable to 
the household of an applicant jointly shall be sanctioned and disbursed by the 
Programme Officer or such local authority (including the Panchayats at the district, 
intermediate or village level) as the State Government may, by notification, authorise 
in this behalf”.  
  
Also as per Section 7 (5) of the Act, “Every payment of unemployment 
allowance under sub-section (1) shall be made or offered not later than fifteen days 
from the date on which it became due for payment”.  
  
Following the process defined in the relevant rules framed by State 
Government, Unemployment Allowance shall be paid to the workers. The State 
Government, District Progromme Co-ordinator (DPC) and Programme Officers will 
monitory this for each Gram Panchayat and also take all required remedial 
measures, like getting an adequate shelf of projects prepared in the Gram 
Panchayats. MIS Reports on payment of unemployment allowance and remedial 
measures taken will have to be part of the essential set of reports for monitoring at 
the State level.  
  

35 
 
States have to pay unemployment allowances as per the provisions of the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act.  An amount of Rs. 
1.52 lakh has been paid as unemployment allowance in the financial year 2021-22 
by the State Governments to Mahatma Gandhi NREGS workers.  
  
However, the Ministry regularly monitors the status of payment of 
unemployment allowances by framing of the Rules during the Labour Budget 
meetings, Labour Budget Revision meetings, Mid-Term Review Meeting. This 
Ministry also makes pressure upon State Governments/UTs time to time for timely 
payment of unemployment by issuing circulars, advisories and through monitoring 
visits by the Central Team to streamline the payment of unemployment allowances. 
  
Government of India has accorded priority and also requested State 
Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC) to review it. For this, the Central 
Government has shared an indicative agenda points for SEGC including review of 
status of unemployment allowances. As per the Act, SEGC is authorised to monitor 
the implementation of this Act and the Schemes is the State and coordination such 
implementation with the Central Council. 
  
It may also be mentioned that as per the provision of Act, Scheme notification 
& implementation is the primary role of State Government. 
  
State/UT-wise details of unemployment allowance paid by States/UTs under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS during the last three financial years 2019-20, 2020-21 and 
2021-22 is given at Annexure-II. 
 
(DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
The beneficiaries of MGNREGA become eligible for the payment of their 
wages after the muster closure on the completion of the work and fifteen days count 
(ceiling for wage payment) starts from this time onwards. During the deliberation of 
the Committee, Members sharing their ground experience brought before the 
Committee the startling fact of delay in muster roll updation as one of the main 
reasons for delay in payment of wages to the workers. The Committee, painfully, 
note the ordeal which the beneficiaries of MGNREGA undergo due to lethargic 
speed of muster clerks in updating the muster roll. Various reasons for this delay 
came up, primary being that of non-updation of muster roll at the level of Gram 
Panchayat itself.Instead, the prevalent practice of the muster clerks travelling to the 
Blocks for updating muster of 2-3 Gram Panchayats at once, perhaps due to non-
availability of working internet connection at Gram Panchayat level or just a casual 
approach towards a major fundamental procedure upon which rests various further 

36 
 
stages of payments came up. The Committee also noted this practice while on their 
study visits to different Gram Panchayats and were extremely anguished at the non-
alarcity exhibited by the officials at Gram Panchayat level against their primary 
responsibility. Therefore, finding this exercise of timely muster roll updation as a very 
important factor in timely release of wages, the Committee urge the Department of 
Rural Development to issue necessary directions at all the concerned levels by also 
bringing the State Governments onboard for ensuring that the muster rolls are 
updated at the Gram Panchayat level itself without any delay. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the provision, e-muster is the norm. Only in exceptional and 
unavoidable circumstance, paper musters can be issued by State Government after 
due approval of Central Government. e- Muster has printed names of workers who 
have demanded employment and are allocated a particular work. In the case of e-
muster, muster roll numbers are generated by the NREGASoft and, therefore, not 
required to be entered in the system.  
  
    Central Government has made mandatory for capturing of real time 
attendance alongwith geotagged photographs of beneficiaries through National 
Mobile Monitoring system (NMMS) of all worksite wherein muster roll have been 
issued to engage 20 or more beneficiaries. These captured attendances go directly 
to NREGASoft for wage list creation. There is no need to do separate data entry. 
State can use NMMS even for the worksite having less than 20 workers. 
  
   Schedule-II of the Act has provision for the purpose of ensuring accountability 
in payment of wages and to calculate culpability of various functionaries or agencies, 
the State shall devise the processes leading to determination and payment of wage 
into various stages and specified Stage wise maximum time limits alongwith the 
functionary or agency which is responsible for discharging the specific function. 
These are required to be monitored by the State. These are also reviewed at 
different occasions as alluded to earlier and States advised to improve.  
  
       It has also been advised that the State Government shall pay the 
compensation upfront after due verification within the time limits as specified above 
and recover the compensation amount from the functionaries or agencies who is 
responsible for the delay in payment.  
  
It is further stated that the Operational Guidelines of the Programme permit 
data entry at the GP level, however, the critical bottleneck is availability of Internet 
Facility, which is being addressed by Bharatnet. Ministry is working with the Ministry 
of Telecommunications to expedite the internet connectivity through Bharatnet.  

37 
 
(DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
The Committee take due note of the provision as per Para 20 of the 
Schedule-I of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA that entails “for all works taken up under 
the scheme, by the Gram Panchayat and other implementing agencies, the cost of 
the material component including the wages of the skilled and semi skilled workers 
shall not exceed forty percent at the district level”. Thus 60% component is for the 
wages of unskilled labourers under MGNREGA. However, the Committee were 
enlighted during the course of meetings and also through their assessment on 
ground that with the passage of time, the nature of works under MGNREGA has 
undergone myriad changes and practices which were integral to the scheme at the 
inception have now become obsolete and redundant at various places. With the 
evolution of time, the manual works being undertaken under MGNREGA are now 
being taken up by the usage of machines in the pretext that the demand of nature of 
works such as digging of ponds, construction of roads, leveling work etc necessarily 
require the increased usage of machines. This is an undeniable reality of today’s 
situation that creation of asset of permanent nature through MGNREGA undoubtedly 
require the increased usage of machines. Majority of the works requiring only 
manual labours have been exhausted and same works are also beyond manual 
intervention. The Committee are well aware of the fact that usage of machines is 
permitted in few enlisted works under MGNREGA. However, still, the Committee feel 
that the ‘need of the hour’ has changed necessitating DoRD to take an informed 
decision regarding changes in requirement of works under MGNREGA as per usage. 
The increased usage of machine will only augment the nature of infrastructure 
creation under MGNREGA and with ever evolving list of permissible works, one can’t 
shy away from the ground reality. In view of the existing situation, the Committee 
recommend the Department of Rural Development to conduct exhaustive exercise 
for assessing the ground condition regarding usage of machines and take a flexible 
and logical approach in reviewing and revising the present 60%:40% wage-material 
ratio in a manner commensurate with the present requirement. 
 
 

38 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment programme. The 
core objective of the Scheme is to provide not less than 100 days of unskilled 
manual work as a guaranteed employment in a financial year to every household in 
rural areas as per demand, resulting in creation of productive assets of prescribed 
quality and durability.  
Para 22 of Schedule-I of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, lays down that “as far as 
practicable, works executed by the programme implementation agencies shall be 
performed by using manual labour and no labour displacing machines shall be 
used”.  
 However, there may be activities in executing works which cannot be carried 
out by manual labour, where use of machine may become essential for maintaining 
the quality and durability of works.  For some prescribed works only, machines can 
be used under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA.  
As per Para 20 of the Schedule-I of the Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, lays 
down that, “For all works taken up under the Scheme, by the Gram Panchayat and 
other Implementing Agencies, the cost of the material component including the 
wages of the skilled and semi-skilled workers shall not exceed forty percent at the 
district level.” The wage material ratio of 60:40 at the district level has been 
purposefully mandated as per Para 20 of Schedule-1 of the Act to promote creation 
of productive assets, as on date, there is no plan to change wage material ratio 
under the Scheme. 
As per MIS, the percentage of material expenditure at the National Level during the 
last three financial years is given below: 
Financial Year 2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 
Material expenditure (%) 26.89 27.48 24.9 
           State Government can also make provisions for more material extensive 
works either by convergence or through some other source of funds. The 60:40 
wage material ratio provisions has been provided also for the making availability of 
funds for works related to Natural Resources Management, climate resilience related 
works, wherein otherwise getting funds for such works from other sources may be 
difficult. 
(DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
MGNREGA is a marquee scheme of the Government of India of enormous 
proportion with the intent of welfare of assets. The reach of this scheme assumes 
great value as it spans to every ‘nook and corner’ of the country in rural areas and 
the beneficiaries view it as a last ‘fall back’ hope. Even during the COVID pandemic, 
when various other schemes could not progress on a good rate owing to various 
Standard Operating Procedures put in place for the prevention of spread of Corona 
virus, the BE of MGNREGA was hiked by Rs. 40,000/- crore during financial year 

39 
 
2020-21, which is a clear indicator of the fact that this scheme provided succor to the 
poor and needy of the rural masses. The Committee, take cognizance of the above 
facts and feel that the enormity of this scheme along-with huge finances involved in it 
all the more necessitates a much robust mechanism of monitoring. Although 
provisions are already in place under MGNREGA, however, the Committee are still 
of the unanimous opinion that the aspect of real time monitoring of the scheme may 
be increased and strengthened further to have an honest assessment of the ground 
reality. Beside geo-tagging of assets under MGNREGA, steps may-be devised to 
supervise and monitor ongoing works through real time surveillance systems and 
increased uses of technology for also verifying the number of labourers engaged 
along-with checking of their credentials like genuinity of job cards, etc. This 
mechanism would go a long way in ensuring the progress of MGNREGA as 
envisaged, while covering the loopholes and vulnerabilities in its ground zero 
implementation. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend to devise/strengthen 
‘real-time’ surveillance system for having stricter and effective monitoring of the 
scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
The National Mobile Monitoring Service (NMMS) was launched on 21st May 
2021. The National Mobile Monitoring System App permits taking real time 
attendance of workers at Mahatma Gandhi NREGA worksites along with geo-tagged 
photographs. This NMMS app aids in increasing the citizen oversight of the 
programme and is one more step towards transparency and accountability. 
  
      The Mobile Monitoring system has enabled real time attendance capturing for 
NREGA workers. The attendance is uploaded on daily basis by 11:00 am along with 
photograph of the workers on work site and the second photograph in between 2:00 
to 5:00 pm. The vigilant groups can verify the attendance in real time. The morning 
attendance along with first Photograph can be captured in offline mode and to be 
uploaded once the device comes in network.  
Area Officer Monitoring Visit App was also launched on 21st May 2021. The 
purpose of the App is to make real time inspection & evidence-based reporting of RD 
scheme.   
The Ministry has been constantly reviewing various aspects of the monitoring 
through the Area Officer Monitoring Visit Application. Moving forward with this 
endeavor, the Ministry has directed the States/UTs to register their senior officers to 
this App and start monitoring through this App. The minimum nos. of visit of ongoing 
work to be conducted by the Commissioner, DPC/ ADPC, in charge Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA and Project officer (PO) per month regularly and visit report may be 

40 
 
uploaded by using the App which could be seen by any citizen on the link 
https://ruraldiksha.nic.in/areaofficerwebnew/login.aspx. 
This App will facilitate the officials of the State/UT to record their field visit 
findings online. The App will also allow the officials to record time stamped and 
geotagged photograph for all the schemes launched by Department of Rural 
Development. This App will help in developing hassle-free reporting of field visit. The 
provision to view the field visit outcome report by the senior officials is also there in 
the App.  
Real time monitoring by geo-tagging of assets and special monitoring is also 
done through NLM. 
(DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
The Gram Sabha shall conduct regular Social Audits of all the projects under 
the scheme taken up within the Gram Panchayat” is an integral provision of the 
MGNREG Act, 2005. Further, the Secretary, DoRD deposed before the Committee 
that as per Social Audit rules there is a mechanism of conducting Social Audits of the 
Gram Panchayats twice a year. Despite the provision and the rules, the Committee 
find to its utter dismay that the actual implementation of this provision is poor and 
abysmally low figures of audit of Gram Panchayats come before the Committee. 
While only 29,611 Gram Panchayats were audited at least once in financial year 
2020-21, the picture is even more bleak during the current financial year 2021-22 
with only 18,589 Gram Panchayats audited so far out of total 2,68,981 Gram 
Panchayats. These are ridiculously low figures reflecting a very poor adherence to 
such an important mechanism of monitoring/accounting of Gram Panchayats by the 
Gram Sabha. The Committee take a very strong view of this negligent and non-
serious approach elicited by the concerned agencies in obviating the regular conduct 
of Social Audits of the Gram Panchayats and vehemently urge Department of Rural 
Development to take up this matter in all earnest with a firm resolve and ensure that 
the Gram Panchayats do not go unaudited during the financial year. The Committee 
also desire that a copy of such audit report received in time by the Department may 
be forwarded to the Committee through Secretary, DoRD for information. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the provision, Social Audit has to be conducted for at least once in 
every six month of every Gram Panchayat. Keeping in view the COVID-19 pandemic 

41 
 
situation the Ministry has issued guideline of concurrent of Social Audit on 15th July, 
2020. 
  
State has been directed to conduct regular Social Audit and if not possible in case 
due to COVID-19, concurrent Social Audit may be conducted. During the FY 2020-
21, a total of 31,235 regular Social Audit and a total of 4,30,061 concurrent Social 
Audit were conducted. Similarly, during the FY 2021-22 a total of 62,164 regular 
Social Audit and a total of 80,767 concurrent Social Audit were conducted. 
  
To ensure the compliance in letter and spirit of the provisions on Social Audit 
Government has linked the finalisation of “agreed to Labour Budget” for the FY 2022-
23 with the condition that State has to have independent SAU under independent 
Director, all the GP which have not been Audit by SAU in 2019-20 to be Audited as 
well as 75% of the recovery of the total recoverable amount as brought under Social 
Audit to be made. 
  
In addition with this, findings of Gram Panchayat wise Social Audit report are 
available on public platform. Report comprises Social Audit Basic Information 
Details, Expenses for the facilitation of this Social Audit, Summary of Reported 
Issues, Summary of Action Taken Report, details on Individual Issues along with a 
Gram Panchayat checklist with on Job Cards, Work and Wage, Administration, 
Transparency & Accountability, Worksite Facilities and Personnel & Training. The 
Gram Panchayat wise details may be seen on following URL: 
 
https://mnregaweb4.nic.in/netnrega/SocialAuditFindings/SAGPReport.aspx?lflag=en
g&fin_year=20222023&source=national&labels=labels&rep_type=SoA&Digest=TJp6
Joa/Wi5B9HbDxz6yMQ 
(DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
The other aspect concerning with Social Audits of Gram Panchayats that 
flummoxed the Committee was that of absence of Socia Audit Reports for public. 
The Committee could not fathom the logic behind non-publication of Social Audit 
Reports so far. The Scheme of MGNREGA runs on a huge budget and accounting of 
every penny spent under the scheme needs to be mandatorily brought to fore in 
public domain. Until and unless the agencies and other stakeholders, primary being 
Gram Panchayats are not held accountable for their performances, such welfare 
scheme would not be able to serve the purpose it was meant to, at its initiation. The 
people have the right to know the detail of the work done and amount spent in this 
regard, through MGNREGA and thus, it is essential to bring all Audit Reports Gram 
Panchayat-wise in full public domain, accessible to anyone who wants to know about 
it. Therefore, the Committee, unequivocally recommend the Department of Rural 

42 
 
Development to take stock of the situation and devise mechanism for timely 
placement of Social Audit Reports of Gram Panchayats immediately after the audit 
exercise is over. 
Reply of the Government 
Gram-Panchayat wise findings of Social Audit are available in NREGASoft, in 
public domain. The recommendation of the committee is accepted. 
  
(DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
Among the various issues thwarting the successful implementation and 
conduct of MGNREGA works at ground level, one of the primary lacuna that 
emerged before the Committee was that of non-participation of officials of concerned 
Departments for a thread-bare discussion at the time of deciding the works that need 
to be undertaken through MGNREGA by the Gram Panchayats. The Committee find 
this aspect baffling as the success of projects taken under MGNREGA solely depend 
on the choices made at the selection level itself and also merit the inputs from the 
officials of the concerned departments. The discussion at the selection of projects’ 
time delineate the administrative and infrastructure teething issues at the onset and 
various clearances and other procedural hassles can be obtained at early stage. 
Rather than the stalling of projects at later stages, discussion at initial moment would 
perhaps go a long way in ensuring the success of MGNREGA works. Thus, the 
Committee recommend Department of Rural Development to ensure the mandatory 
participation of concerned officials of Government agencies/departments at the stage 
of selection of works by the Gram Panchayats under MGNREGA. 
Reply of the Government 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment scheme with bottom up 
planning. The works are identified, approved and prioritized out of shelf of work by 
the Gram Panchayat, recommended by Gram Sabha in each State/UT as per the 
provision of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act. 
Accordingly, the works are approved and taken up by Panchayat as per the 
demand. The planning of works is done as per the estimated person days to be 
generated for the work in a financial year at the time of assessment of labour budget.  
  

43 
 
Convergent planning is an important strategy of implemntation of the Scheme, 
wherein, the resources from the Scheme are pooled with those of other schemes for 
more impactful outcomes. As such, the States have been directed to ensure the 
presence of the officials of the line departments to ensure such convergence.  
  
Spatial planning of works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS have been started 
using advanced technologies viz. Geographical Information System (GIS) and 
Remote Sensing (RS). The Ministry has provided States/UTs-wise detailed training 
to Mahatma Gandhi NREGS functionaries on using GIS & RS technology in rural 
area planning. Thereafter, all the States/UTs were directed to start the preparation of 
GIS based Gram Panchayat plans in 4 Gram Panchayats per Block and accordingly 
prepare a shelf of works from the GIS based Integrated Plan during FY 2020-21. The 
States/UTs were directed to prepare GIS based plans in saturation mode for all the 
Gram Panchayats of the Block in FY 2021-22. So far 2.58 lakh GPs have prepared 
their plan out of 2.69 lakh GPs. It is a special case of convergent planning by the 
Gram Panchayats involving the departmental officials. 
  
However, considering the gravity of matter, this recommendation would be 
gain brought to the notice of the States both through circulars and during interactions 
with the States.  
  
(DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
The provisions of MGNREGA permits for the 50% of works to be done though 
Gram Panchayats while the other 50% of works to be undertaken through different 
agancies/departments. While the attention centres around the work done through 
Gram Panchayats and monitoring of work through Gram Panchayats take front seat, 
perhaps the monitoring of works done under MGNREGA by other agencies merit a 
relook. The Committee note that although majority of the works under MGNREGA 
are being conducted through Gram Panchayats, yet the different yardstick of 
monitoring is followed vis-à-vis work done by the other agencies. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the Department of Rural Development to employ the same 
yardstick of monitoring on all the works under MGNREGA and the Monitoring/Social 
Audit of works through other agencies should be given equal weightage.  
Reply of the Government 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGA) provides at least 100 days of wage employment in a 
financial year to every rural household whose adult member volunteers to do 
unskilled manual work. Gram Panchayat is the implementing agency under the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme at Panchayat level 

44 
 
and at least 50 percent of the works are to be implemented by Gram Panchayats. 
The works being taken up through agencies other than Panchayati Raj Institutions 
are also subject to the same level of monitoring and audit processes. 
  
The Ministry regularly reviews the performance of the implementation of 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS (including completion of ongoing works) in States/UTs 
through various fora viz., Mid-Term Review, Labour Budget meetings, Labour 
Budget Revision meetings, Programme Review meetings. Central Employment 
Guarantee Council and State Employment Guarantee Councils periodically monitor 
implementation of the programme. 
  
(DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
One of the malaise afflicting the implementation of the scheme since inception 
has been the rampant prevalence of fake job cards as highlighted through various 
quarters. The Committee find through the dialogue with stakeholders and 
assessment of ground reality through study visits that there is a possibility of 
collusion between the unscrupulous elements at the Gram Panchayat level along-
with erring officials who not only facilitate the issuance of fake job cards by way of 
manipulating the genuine beneficiaries but also devise fraudulent means for creating 
fake job cards and signatures. Therefore, it cannot be rule out that there is also a 
huge nexus of commission mongering agents whereby wages under the garb of fake 
labourers are being collected and distributed on commission basis. Although the 
creation of job cards has gone through manifold changes over the years, still the 
fraud created through connivance of mischievous characters at ground level not only 
undermine the scheme but also deprive genuine beneficiaries from their legitimate 
and need based right. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the 
Department of Rural Development to keep a hawkish eye of surveillance over the 
issue of job cards and monitor each aspect associated with job cards with increased 
seriousness. 
Reply of the Government 
As per Para 3 of Schedule-II of the Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, the job card 
is valid for at least five years after which, it may be renewed after due verification. 
  
The States may hold time bound campaigns to verify/ update JCs on a 
periodic basis. It is the role of the District Programme Coordinator/ Collector and the 
State Government to ensure that these verification campaigns are conducted in a 

45 
 
time bound manner. For verification/ update of a Job Card, the following may be 
looked into: 
  
i. SECC TIN number, if any; bank account/ Post Office account number must be 
verified and entered into the Job Card.  
ii. Either family photo or photos of workers or individual photos (preferably) of 
that family, duly attested by the competent authority is mandatory.  
iii. Demand, allocation, work done and payment details must be updated in the 
Job Card. 
  
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, cancellation of Job Cards No Job Card is to 
be cancelled in a routine manner and certainly not on the ground of non-
demand/non-reporting for work. The JCs can be cancelled, after due verification, 
only if,  
  
i. The household has migrated permanently to the urban areas, or  
ii. It is proved to be a duplicate, or  
iii. It has been registered based on forged documents (i.e. not issued by 
authorised personnel and/or issued to non-existent person or to a person on 
the basis of fake identity) 
iv. A household migrated to a different Gram Panchayat.  
  
Further, in case a Gram Panchayat area is declared as a Municipality/ Municipal 
Corporation, all households residing in the area will cease to have the facilities of 
employment on production of the existing Job Cards. All such Job Cards shall be 
considered as automatically cancelled. The DPCs will ensure that these are done 
immediately after such notification. Concomitant changes will also be made by the 
concerned State Government, who will also bring this to the notice of the Ministry.  
  
In all cases, the Programme Officer, after independent verification of the facts, may 
direct the Gram Panchayat to cancel the Job Card. All 
additions/deletions/cancellations must be made public, presented to the Gram 
Sabha/Ward Sabha, reported to the Programme Officer and updated in the MIS. 
 Further, as per Schedule-II (para 32, 33 and 34), the Gram Panchayat shall prepare 
and maintain or cause to be prepared and maintained such registers, vouchers and 
other documents in such form and in such manner as may be specified in the 
Scheme containing particulars of job cards and pass books issued, name, age and 
address of the head of the household and the adult members of the households 
registered with the Gram Panchayat. 
           The Gram Panchayat shall send such list or lits of the names and addresses 
of households and their adult members registered with it and supply such other 
information to the concerned Programme Officer at such periods and in such form as 
may be specified in the Scheme. 
 
34 (I) Notwithstanding anything contained this Schedule, in the event of any national 
calamity such as flood, cyclone, tsunami and earthquake resulting inmass dislocation 

46 
 
of rural population, the adult members of the rural households of areas so affected 
may-  
a. Seek for registration and get job card issued by the Gram Panchayat or 
Programme Officer of the area of temporary relocation; 
b. submit written or oral application for work to the Programme Officer or the 
Gram Panchayat of the area of temporary relocation; and 
c. Apply for re-registration and re-issuance of job card in the event of any loss or 
distruction. 
(2) The details of such job cards shall be intimated to the District Programme 
Coordinator. 
 (3)     In the event of restoration of normalcy, the job card so issued shall be re-
endorsed at original place of habitation and clubbed with the original job card on 
being retrieved to avoid the delicacy of the job cards.  
 During the financial year 2021-22, 28.56 lakh job cards have been deleted and a 
total number of job card included in 2021-22 is 128.93 lakh.  
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
A key issue pertaining with the assets created under MGNREGA has been 
that of durability. The Committee note the fact that mere creation of assets under 
MGNREGA does not suffice the objective of the scheme. The intent of the scheme 
was not only to provide wage guarantee to rural masses but also that of creation of 
infrastructure through durable assets such as ponds, Gram Panchayat Bhawans, 
roads, etc. Therefore, until and unless the quality of assets created under 
MGNREGA is not maintained, the purpose of the scheme is defeated. Hence, it is of 
utmost importance that the durability of assets is maintained under MGNREGA. 
Thus, the Committee strongly recommend Department of Rural Development to 
ensure stricter compliance with the qualitative and maintenance aspect of 
infrastructure or other assets created through MGNREGA funds for the better 
realization of the objectives of the scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment programme. The core 
objective of the Scheme is to provide not less than 100 days of unskilled manual 
work as a guaranteed employment in a financial year to every household in rural 
areas as per demand, resulting in creation of productive assets of prescribed quality 
and durability.  
  

47 
 
The Ministry has a comprehensive system of monitoring and review 
mechanism for Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. Some of the important elements of the 
above framework are listed below : 
The Ministry regularly reviews the performance of the implementation of 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in States/UTs through various fora viz., Mid-Term Review, 
Labour Budget meetings, Labour Budget Revision meetings, Programme Review 
meetings. Central Employment Guarantee Council and State Employment 
Guarantee Councils periodically monitor implementation of the programme. 
National Level Monitors, Common Review Missions and Officers of the 
Ministry visit States/UTs at regular interval to review implementation of the 
programme. After the field visits, the findings/shortcomings and recommendations 
are shared with the States/UTs for appropriate action at their end.  In respect of 
more than 70% of cases referred to NLM inquiry has already been conducted. 
Auditing Standards for Social Audit have been issued and States/UTs have 
been advised to establish independent Social Audit Units, conduct Social Audit as 
per Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011 and training of village resource persons for 
conducting Social Audit etc. Internal Audit Teams of the Department also conduct 
regular audit. 
Steps have been taken to strengthen transparency and accountability which 
include geo-tagging of assets, Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT), National electronic 
Fund Management System (NeFMS), Aadhar Based Payment System (ABPS), 
Software for Estimate Calculation using rural rates for Employment (SECURE) and 
appointment of Ombudsperson in every district of States/UTs. 
Steps have been taken for establishment of Technical Cell at all levels for 
qualitative monitoring and supervision of works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
In order to ensure higher level of monitoring and oversight, National Mobile 
Monitoring System and Area Officer App have been introduced. In the former, 
attendance of workers on a particular work, where more than 20 workers are 
employed is taken daily along with a geo-tagged & time stamped photograph of 
theirs. The latter has been designed to ensure that field officials do conduct 
inspections in the requisite numbers and look into all the relevant aspects of the 
scheme. 
In addition Central and State Employment Guarantee Councils, District 
Development Coordination and Monitoring Committees (DISHA) as also PRIs do 
also take up the monitoring and oversight of the Programme. 
  
  
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, GeoMGNREGA where 3 stages (Before, 
During and After) of Geotagging provision has been made. The provision made for 
the better monitoring of the progress of the work. It is also available on Public 
domain so that any citizen can check the quallity of the Asset created on ground.  As 
per the ground survay conducted by third party, it has been found that 91% of the 
assets surveyed were in usable condition.  
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 

48 
 
The Committee while going through the examination of the subject 
MGNREGA pondered over the multifaceted approach that can be undertaken 
through this scheme which can help achieve more than one target in ‘one go’. 
Specifically discussing about the drought prone areas and the scarcity of water also 
in rainfed areas for their agricultural works, the Committee harped upon the 
feasibility of lining of ponds / dug wells / pits with plastic so that the water is stored in 
them during the rainy season for future agricultural works. More often than not it has 
been observed that the farmers of rain deficient region somehow sow their crop and 
wait for proper rainfall for water needs. Even if they are able to irrigate their crops 
initially but later are not able to do so owing to the scarcity of rains. This situation can 
be eased a bit if through MGNREGA works the water is stored and not allowed to be 
wasted by the lining of plastic done all around with proper cover so that water so 
stored is not evaporated by scorching heat and this water can be used in the time of 
need when there is severe shortage. On the one hand, it will create a new area of 
work while on the other hand it will create a reservoir of water in rain deficient 
regions. The Committee are aware of the fact that the concept of ‘ground water 
recharging’ exists, but still, it recommend Department of Rural Development to 
examine this issue based on geographical stretch and specific location which are 
deprived of water mostly and come up with suitable revision in their list of 
permissible works by including the plastic lining of ponds also. 
Reply of the Government 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment programme. The core 
objective of the Scheme is to provide not less than 100 days of unskilled manual 
work as a guaranteed employment in a financial year to every household in rural 
areas as per demand, resulting in creation of productive assets of prescribed quality 
and durability. 
  
Construction of farm pond, dug well for the individuals are being taken up as 
per the design specification of the structure and presently these water bodies are 
being taken up as per feasibility provided through GIS planning. Farm pond /dug 
wells are such types of structures in which rain water as well as the seepage water 
enters the structures through cracks in the nearly vicinity. However grass turfing in 
the farm pond and masonry lining in the dug wells are being provided for protection 
of the structures. 
  
The purpose of such ponds is to ensure Water Harvesting & Conservation. 
State may take up such works, as proposed by the Committee, through 
convergence.  

49 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23) 
While examining the works permitted under ‘National Resource Management’ 
component of MGNREGA, the Committee feel that although the provision mandate 
for nurturing and strengthening water resources in the country through MGNREGA 
works, still much can be done by way of rejuvenating already existing dilapidated 
and unusable traditional water bodies like ponds, old wells and reservoirs, etc. The 
Committee note that work is progressing in this regard but the pace is very slow and 
a sustained focus for accelerated momentum is required. The Committee feel that 
rejuvenating traditional water bodies not in use at present will not only save financial 
resources but will also yield better results in much less amount of time. Suchage old 
water bodies which used to be engineering marvels need to be studied extensively 
and through positive manipulation and better utilization of scientific temperament can 
again bring them back to their erstwhile glory. Thus, the Committee urge Department 
of Rural Development to ensure through stricter directives and supervision so that 
the traditional water bodies may be revived and rejuvenated using the MGNREGA 
resources. 
Reply of the Government 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment scheme with bottom up 
planning. The works are identified, approved and prioritized out of shelf of work by 
the Gram Panchayat, recommended by Gram Sabha in each State/UT as per the 
provision of the Act. Accordingly, the works are approved and taken up by 
Panchayat as per the demand. The planning of works is done as per the estimated 
person days to be generated for the work in a financial year at the time of 
assessment of labour budget. 
  
As per Schedule I of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA Section 4 (3), Para 4 (1), I. 
Category: A : Public works relating to Natural Resource Management (iv) renovation 
of traditional water bodies including desilting of irrigation tanks and other water 
bodies and conservation of old step well/boalis  is a permissible activity. 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24) 
Plantation of trees is a permissible work under MGRNEGA. According to the 
guidelines, saplings are planted on roadside, government lands or other feasible 

50 
 
sites and are taken care of for the next three years. However, the Committee note 
that more often than not, plants of such nature are sowed which do not have any 
revenue generation capacity. Keeping them alive for 3 years and despite investing in 
them in terms of time, money and human resources entails quite a lot of effort. The 
Committee feel that this provision under MGNREGA can be effectively utilized in a 
much more pragmatic manner so that the purpose of plantation is also solved on one 
hand while simultaneously creating a revenue model side by side. Plantation of cash 
crops like fruit bearing trees or trees having good wood quality for utilization purpose 
in the long term would perhaps amplify and add value to the work taken under 
MGNREGA. Therefore, the Committee recommend Department of Rural 
Development to suitably ammend their guidelines for the inclusion of mandatory 
plantation of such plants under MGNREGA works which bear fruits or products 
having economic value to aid the revenue of the local administration. 
Reply of the Government 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment programme. The core 
objective of the Scheme is to provide not less than 100 days of unskilled manual 
work as a guaranteed employment in a financial year to every household in rural 
areas as per demand, resulting in creation of productive assets of prescribed quality 
and durability.  
  
As per Schedule I of Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, Section 4(3), Para 4(1) I: 
Category A: Public works relating to Natural Resource Management:(v)Afforestation: 
tree plantation and horticulture plantation in common and forest lands, road margins, 
canal bunds, tank foreshore and coastal belts duly providing right to usufruct to the 
household covered in  Paragraph-5;and Category B: (Community assets or 
Individual assets) for vulnerable sections (only for households in Paragraph 5) (ii) 
Improving livelihood through horticulture, sericulture, plantation and farm forestry are 
permissible activities.  
  
Fruit bearing trees under horticulture plantation and trees having good wood 
quality for utilization purpose under forestry tree plantation are already permissible 
under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
  
As per Schedule -I of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), "works which are non-tangible, not 
measurable, repetitive such as, removing grass, pebbles, agricultural operations, 
shall not be taken up". 
  
There are 262 permissible works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. Adding 
new works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is a regular exercise and new works are 
added on the basis of merit in alignment with focus and objectives of the Act. 
 

51 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25) 
A long pending demand to widen the ambit of works / nature of workers under 
MGNREGA which attracted the attention of the Committee was that of inclusion of 
agricultural labourers and variety of agricultural works also under the ambit of 
MGNREGA. On practical grounds, it is a known fact that the agricultural work 
comprises majority of the unskilled nature of works and utilizing this aspect can only 
widen the horizon of the permissibility of works under MGNREGA. There are 
numerous new works that can be undertaken in the villages under MGNREGA but 
cannot be done now since they do not fall under the permissible category. These 
works are in some way or other associated with agriculture related activities like 
sowing, reaping, cutting of weeds, fencing/barricading of farms and other earthen 
works associated with farming. Therefore, the Committee find it appropriate if a 
review of inclusion of agricultural works and agricultural labourers are done by the 
Department of Rural Development and recommend the Department to find ways by 
interpreting such requirements on practical terms so that more agricultural works and 
agricultural labourers are included under permissible domain of MGNREGA.  
Reply of the Government 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment programme. The core 
objective of the Scheme is to provide not less than 100 days of unskilled manual 
work as a guaranteed employment in a financial year to every household in rural 
areas as per demand, resulting in creation of productive assets of prescribed quality 
and durability. 
  
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is for providing a fall back option for livelihood 
security to the rural poor and is not a regular employment scheme. 
  
There are 262 works which are permissible under Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS), of which 164 
works relate to agriculture and allied activities. Mahatma Gandhi NREGS already 
lays emphasis that atleast 60% of works at district level in terms of cost shall be for 
creation of productive assets directly linked to Agriculture and Allied Activities which 
include works related to water security like construction of farm ponds, wells, earthen 
check dam, field channels and other water harvesting structures. The expenditure on 
Agriculture and Allied Activities is given as under: 
  
Year 2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 
Percentage of expenditure 64.37 65.01 66.13 

52 
 
  
As per Schedule -I of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), "works which are non-tangible, not 
measurable, repetitive such as, removing grass, pebbles, agricultural operations, 
shall not be taken up". 
  
There are 262 permissible works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. Adding 
new works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is a regular exercise and new works are 
added on the basis of merit in alignment with focus and objectives of the Act. 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26) 
The provisions of MGNREGA are aimed at the fulfillment of objective of 
providing mainly uskilled works to willing persons of rural population who do not have 
any other avenue of employment while also creating durable assets as a result. 
While 60% of the funds are earmarked for the payment of wages to unskilled 
labourers, the remaining 40% of the funds cover for material component and wages 
of skilled/semi skilled workers employed as per requirement. In this context, the 
Committee are of the view that the above formula of fund division was done from the 
initiation of the scheme wherein primary works were concerned with unskilled 
manual component. However, with the passage of time and changing demands of 
infrastructure/asset creation, there is an increased need of skilled labourers to 
perform meaningful work under MGNREGA. Thus, the Committee are of the firm 
view that with growing requirement of skilled labour, it is perhaps in the fitness of 
things if skilling of labourers, already engaged in MGNREGA works is done 
simultaneously, so that in a span of time a pool of skilled labourers is created along-
with fulfillment of objective of the scheme. Therefore, the Committee recommend the 
Department of Rural Development for creating ways and mechanism pragmatically 
for effectively carrying out the skilling of labourers which would certainly go a long 
way in not only ensuring the improvement of professional opportunities of labourers 
by equipping them with new armory of skill-set but would also augment the faster 
completion of MGNREGA works in future. 
Reply of the Government 
The Capacity building of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS functionaries and skilling 
of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS workers is important for effective implementation of the 
Programme at one end and for facilitation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS workers to 

53 
 
break out of cycle of unskilled employment at the other end.  The steps being taken 
towards capacity building of the functionaries and workers are Barefoot Technicians 
trainings, Project Unnatti, skilling of masons, training of technical persons of 
SAKSHAM, capacity building of resource persons of Social Audits Units and of the 
Village Resource Persons from women SHGs, amongst others.  States need to 
utilize these training/ skilling exercises by faciliting coordination with National 
Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj and the State Institutes of Rural 
Developments as well as Extension Training Centres. 
    
         The Project ‘UNNATI’, launched in December 2019 by Government of 
India, is a skilling project that intends to upgrade the skill base of Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS workers and thereby improve their livelihoods, so that they can move from 
the current partial employment to full employment and thereby reduce their 
dependence on Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. So far, about 21, 235 candidates have 
been trained.  
  
This project will improve the livelihoods of most needy Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS workers by providing a skill either for self-employment or wage employment. 
This project is meant for providing training for one adult member (of age 18 -45 year) 
of a household who has completed 100 days of work under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA in the previous financial year from the year of commencement of the project. 
Registration of candidates will be done through Aadhaar identification. This skilling 
program will be conducted through convergence between Rural Skill Division of 
MoRD, NRLM Division of MoRD and KVKs of Ministry of Agriculture with Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA Division of MoRD. The household from which, a candidate will be 
selected for the training; will continue to enjoy 100 days of work under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA. A family member of eligible household in age group of 18-35 years 
will be eligible for under DDU-GKY. In case of special groups, the age group shall be 
upto 45 years as per DDU-GKY guideline. For RSETI and KVKs, a family member of 
eligible household in age group of 18-45 years will be eligible. The candidate 
undergoing training will be paid stipend for a maximum period of 100 days and for 
one program per household as per the wage rate prevailing in the concerned State 
as per the provisions of the project, subject to the guidelines of the project. 
  
The Ministry of Rural Development has launched the Rural Mason Training 
(RMT) program under the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana- Gramin (PMAY-G) to 
address the issue of insufficient number of skilled masons for construction of quality 
PMAY-G houses. The initiative not only avails livelihood opportunities for the rural 
workforce but also contributes towards the availability of a skilled workforce for the 
construction of rural infrastructure under different schemes. The MoRD has 
partnered with the Construction Skill Development Council of India (CSDCI) and 
National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) in the implementation of the RMT 
program.  
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27) 
From the replies submitted by the Department of Rural Development 
regarding the provision for creating a better workplace for women under MGNREGA, 

54 
 
the Committee note that Para 23 and 24 of Schedule II of MGNREG Act, 2005 has 
mandated for the facilities of safe drinking water, shade for children, periods of rest, 
first aid box, deployment of a women from amongst women workers for providing 
child care services and encouragement to women for working as the mate (worksite 
supervisor). However, the ground experience is perhaps not according to the 
provision mandated and instances of non-compliance are visible at many locales. 
These provisions were indeed drafted with noble intent aimed at the welfare of 
women labourers and provide encouragement to them so that workers of female 
gender feel safe and have basic amenities to carry on their work under MGNREGA. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend the Department of Rural 
Development to ensure stricter compliance with the provision for creating a better 
workplace for women workers without any laxity and also undertake surprise visits 
through Central Monitoring Agencies to keep a tab on the ground reality vis-à-vis 
implementation of the provisions of MGNREGA. 
Reply of the Government 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment programme which provides 
for the enhancement of livelihood security of the households in rural areas of the 
country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in 
every financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do 
unskilled manual work. 
  
As per the Para 15 of Schedule-II of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, “Priority shall be given to women in such a way that at 
least one-third of the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and 
requested for work. Efforts to increase participation of single women and the 
disabled shall be made”.  
  
To encourage women to participate in the works under the Scheme, features 
like separate schedule of rates for women, no discrimination in the wage, women 
caretaker for looking after children upto five years of age, if there are 5 or more 
children of such age, encouragement to women SHG members as mate, worksite 
facilities exist under the Scheme.  
  
As per Schedule –II  
  
Para 23: of the Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act: The facilities of safe drinking 
water, shade for children and periods of rest, first aid box with adequate material for 
emergency treatment for minor injuries and other health hazards connected with the 
work being performed shall be provided at the work site. 
  
Para 24: In case of number of children below the age of five years 
accompanying the women working at any site is five or more, provisions hall be 

55 
 
made to depute one of such women workers to look after such children. The person 
so deputed shall be paid wage rate. The more marginalized women in the locality, 
women in exploitative conditions or bonded labour or those vulnerable to being 
trafficked or liberated manual scavengers should be employed for providing child 
care services. 
  
The following welfare measures to workers under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA 
at worksite, as elaborated in Schedule II of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, 2005 
  
(i) If any personal injury is caused to any person employed under the Scheme 
by any accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, he shall be 
entitled to such medical treatment as required, free of cost. 
  
(ii) Where hospitalization of the injured worker is necessary, the State 
Government shall arrange for such hospitalization including accommodation, 
treatment, medicines and payment of daily allowance which is not less than half of 
the wage rate. 
  
(iii) If a person employed under the Scheme meets with death or becomes 
permanently disabled by accident arising out of and in the course of employment, he 
or his legal heirs, as the case may be, shall be paid by the implementing agency an 
ex gratia as per entitlements under the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana or as 
may be notified by the Central Government. 
  
(iv) If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child accompanying a 
person who is employed under the Scheme, such person shall be entitled to medical 
treatment free of cost; and in case of death or disablement of the child due to the 
said accident, ex gratia shall be paid to the legal guardians as determined by the 
State Government. 
  
The percentage of participation of women under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS 
from FY 2018-19 to FY 2021-22 is given below:  
Financial Year 2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 2018-19 
Percentage of participation of women 54.72 53.19 54.78 54.59 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 29) 
A major bottleneck that emerged during the deliberations of the Committee 
having a negative impact of the timely transfer of wages to the beneficiaries of 
MGNREGA was the frequency of failed transactions and non-completion of Aadhar 
based payments in entirety. The Committee also note the judgment of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court on 26th September, 2018 whereby it has been stated that the 
benefits of subsidies or services from Central/State Government would only be given 

56 
 
on furnishing proof of possession of Aadhar. Numerous instances of transfer of funds 
to the beneficiaries are present wherein amount do not credit into the accounts of the 
beneficiaries causing concern and inordinate delay in actual realization of wages to 
the beneficiaries. These are procedural lapses and need to be strengthened in a 
robust manner to avoid failed transactions causing pain to the MGNREGA workers. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend Department of Rural Development to 
complete the formalities at the earliest for the Aadhar Based Payment (ABP) to all 
the MGNREGA workers, while also ensuring tightening of payment modalities so as 
to redress the grievances of MGNREGA workers arising out of failed transactions.  
Reply of the Government 
States/UTs have been directed to enrolled 100% Aadhaar seeding to job card 
holders under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. Currently, 12.17 crore Aadhaar seeded in 
Management Information System (MIS) of the Scheme, which is 82.06% of total 
Active workers (14.83 crore).  
 There is a provision that in case a payment got rejected due to valid reasons 
under Aadhaar Based Payment System (ABPS), the payment can be regenerated by 
using existing account number of the beneficiaries.  
 Ministry will work timely implementation of the recommendation of the 
Committee.  
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 30) 
With utmost concern and anguish over the repeated failure of the Department 
of Rural Development in complying with the provision of appointment of 
Ombudsmen, the Committee note that only 263 Ombudsmen have been appointed 
so far out of total 715 possible appointments. This is completely unacceptable and 
show a very grim picture of the coordination between the Centre and State nodal 
agencies. Such an important provision of the MGNREG Act, 2005 which gives the 
aggrieved beneficiaries a potent platform to approach for redressal of his/her 
grievance is left neglected. No reason on part of Department of Rural Development 
can probably be enough for justifying such callousness over a long period of time, 
i.e. since inception of MGNREGA. The Committee feel that all possible measures 
including punitive ones or stoppage of funds under MGNREGA to the erring States 
may be initiated by the Department of Rural Development to send a strong message 
to ‘all and sundry’ in the machinery that the time for casualness and irrational 
approach by the State Governments is over and that they need to act on war scale 

57 
 
for ensuring the appointment of ombudsmen immediately. Therefore, the Committee 
in sternest possible manner recommend Department of Rural Development to shed 
its laxity and bring on-broad the State Governments, with firm resolve for ensuring 
the compliance with the provision of ombudsmen appointment. 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry has advised the State Governments at all possible fora to 
appoint ombudspersons in all the districts. As this did not bear much fruit, for the first 
time, this Ministry has set few pre-requisite for taking up Annual Action Plan and 
Labour Budget for FY 2022-23, one of which is positioning of Ombudsperson in the 
State/UTs i.e. more than 80% of ombudspersons position are to be filled. 
Additionally, an online app called Ombudsperson app has been created to take all 
processes online. Further, to attract better candidates, the daily remuneration has 
been raised from rs. 1000 to Rs. 2,250. Committee may, accordingly, like to review 
its observation about the laxity of the DoRD. 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 31) 
The well being of the performance of any scheme involving huge public 
money can only be ascertained through the measure of issues pertaining to 
malpractices and misappropriation of funds. MGNREGA is a welfare scheme of 
gargantuan importance in a country where majority still reside in rural areas. It acts 
as succor in need of distress, this being vindicated during the ongoing Corona period 
wherein the steep hike in the BE of MGNREGA to the tune of Rs. 1,11,000/- crore in 
financial year 2020-21 and also the ongoing expenditure during the financial year 
2021-22 denote that the scheme acquires paramount importance in terms of 
monitoring and surveillance so that even the single penny of taxpayers’ account do 
not get misused through the nexus of unscrupulous and conniving officials of Gram 
Panchayats. The Committee have always sounded alert to the Department of Rural 
Development on every possible occasion through its various recommendations given 
earlier to increase the monitoring and strengthen the payment system more so, 
through electronic mode and have a hawkish mode of surveillance through the 
usage of software based technology for fixing the accountability of everyone involved 
in the scheme. However, the Committee still find through the experience of ground 
reality shared by the members and also by having reality check throughinteractions 
with locals during its regular study-visits to different parts of the country that the 
situation is not so ‘rosy’ as depicted by the Department of Rural Development in 

58 
 
reflecting through its data that only 45 number of complaints on irregularities in 
MGNREG Scheme and 28 number of complaints under misuse of funds have been 
received so far. This seem to be very far from the reality as instances are galore 
ofissues of fake job cards, increased number of job cards than the beneficiaries, 
money changing hands in lieu of commission for showing fake list of beneficiaries 
and obtaining the total amount by the erring officials at different levels of 
implementation of the scheme. Moreover, poor maintenance of MGNREGA assets, 
pendency of wages on account of delay in muster update etc. complaints are 
innumerable on ground zero. However, the Committee find the corruption complaints 
under MGNREGA as on 11.11.21 being 1759 received and 1710 disposed while 
pendency being only 49. This again belies the stark reality evinced at the ground. 
Either ‘all is well’ or the mechanism of complaints and their redressal machinery is 
inaccessible to the aggrieved beneficiaries. It also reflects that Department of Rural 
Development is completely oblivious of the real situation associated with the 
implementation of MGNREGA and raises question over the National Level Monitors 
(NLM) of the Department. It is high time that the facts surrounding the scheme are 
explored, ascertained and accepted by the nodal agency of the scheme, i.e. 
Department of Rural Development before striving to reach towards solution to reduce 
anomalies and malpractices that is certainly having a detrimental effect on the 
success of the scheme. Therefore, the Committee with due concern and profound 
humility beseech upon the wisdom of Department of Rural Development to not let a 
scheme of such importance engulf itself with the pangs of corrupt practices, instead, 
go all out and devise all possible stringent measures for the well-being and success 
of this scheme in a potent and transparent manner. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry, under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS receives complaints of 
irregularities /misuse of funds under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA etc. Since the 
responsibility of implementation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is vested with the State 
Govt./UTs, all complaints received in the Ministry are forwarded to the concerned 
State Govt./UTs for taking appropriate action including investigation, as per law. 
Steps have been taken to strengthen transparency and accountability which include 
geo-tagging, Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT), National electronic Fund Management 
System (Ne-FMS), Aadhaar Based Payment System (ABPS), Software for Estimate 
Calculation using Rural rates for Employment (SECURE) and establishment of 
independent social audit units and appointment of Ombudsman in the States. State 
specific reviews of States are also undertaken from time to time. Officers of the 
Ministry and National Level Monitors also visit various districts to oversee the 
performance of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. State/UT-wise details of complaints on 

59 
 
corruption and malpractices under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS since inception to 
financial year 2022-22 (as on 25.04.2022) are given at Annexure-III. 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 32) 
The Committee find very disconcerting and disheartening, the treatment 
meted out to the elected public representatives and miniscule respect given to their 
experience of ground realities. The Members of Parliament are a repository of wide 
and diversified pool of knowledge enriched through the years of work done 
‘onground’ and through their interaction with the local communities. They are always 
in the ‘thick of things’ and are perhaps the best resource to plan any project or 
development work in that specific area. Thus, it becomes imperative and is wise to 
tap into the pool of wisdom and knowledge of the local MPs at the time of finalization 
of works to be taken up under MGNREGA in that area. The Gram Sabha and Gram 
Panchayats officials should be instructed in no mean terms not to bypass but involve 
the local Members of Parliament in consultation and finalization processes. This 
would only strengthen and ensure the performance of the scheme in right directions. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend Department of Rural Development to ensure, 
by issuing all directives to the State Government and local bodies, the active and 
increased involvement of Members of Parliament in the implementation of 
MGNREGA. 
Reply of the Government 
          Planning of works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is done on bottom - 
up approach. Gram Sabha decides the Shelf of works for the Gram Panchayats. 
Subsequently, following due process at Block level, District level and Central level, 
the Shelf of works get finalized. Hon'ble MPs are usally members of the both District 
and Inetrmediate Panchayats. As the responsibility of approval of the Shelf of work is 
of those tiers of PRIs, Hon'ble MPs can meaningfully participate in the approval of 
those shelves of works. 
  
The responsibility of approval of Shelf of works and the monitoring of the 
implementation of the Scheme lies on the Gram Sabha and the Gram Panchayat. 
The former is a body consisting of all adult individuals, residing within the jurisdiction 
of Gram Panchayats. The latter gives effect to the decisions of the Gram sabhas. 
The issue of mode of consultation with the Hon'ble MPs by the Gram Sabhas has 
been taken up with Ministry of Panchayati Raj. Based on that, appropriate advisory 
will be issued to the States.  
  
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 

60 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 33) 
MGNREG Act, 2005 was implemented w.e.f. 01st April, 2008 in the entire 
country. ‘Much water has flown under the bridge’ since then and the ‘need of the 
hour’ is the review and revamping of MGNREGA Scheme in totality to meet the new 
demands while overcoming the impediments thrown in its path during its journey so 
far. The Committee strongly believe that value addition to the scheme such as 
skilling of labourers in different aspects, introduction of provision to upgrade the 
quality of life of the beneficiaries, increased utilization of technologies and software 
to ward off obstacles associated with wage transfer and verification of job cards are 
just a few required changes. Moreover, the Committee also opine that unified wage 
rate after revision, removal of disparity of wages, increasing number of days of 
guaranteed work, completing Aadhar based payment system, review of 60%: 40% 
wage material ratio, inclusion of new works and robust mechanism of monitoring are 
also urgent areas of review. The Committee are also of the strong opinion that in 
prevailing situation of Covid needs/Omicron pandemic, it is imperative that all 
labourers working under MGNREGA must be given free basic medical facilities 
attached with Job Cards at the doorstep of respective villages to make them healthy 
to contribute more for creation of durable assets for the country. Therefore, the 
Committee urge Department of Rural Development to conduct a holistic review of the 
scheme and undertake the exercise of its revamping for prolonged successful 
implementation of MGRNEGA. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment programme. The core 
objective of the Scheme is to provide not less than 100 days of unskilled manual 
work as a guaranteed employment in a financial year to every household in rural 
areas as per demand, resulting in creation of productive assets of prescribed quality 
and durability.  
  
The following welfare measures to workers under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA 
at worksite, as elaborated in Schedule II of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, 2005 
  
(i) If any personal injury is caused to any person employed under the Scheme 
by any accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, he shall be 
entitled to such medical treatment as required, free of cost. 
  
(ii) Where hospitalisation of the injured worker is necessary, the State 
Government shall arrange for such hospitalisation including accommodation, 
treatment, medicines and payment of daily allowance which is not less than half of 
the wage rate. 
  
(iii) If a person employed under the Scheme meets with death or becomes 
permanently disabled by accident arising out of and in the course of employment, he 
or his legal heirs, as the case may be, shall be paid by the implementing agency an 
ex gratia as per entitlements under the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana or as 
may be notified by the Central Government. 
  

61 
 
(iv) If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child accompanying a 
person who is employed under the Scheme, such person shall be entitled to medical 
treatment free of cost; and in case of death or disablement of the child due to the 
said accident, ex gratia shall be paid to the legal guardians as determined by the 
State Government. 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 35 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
  

62 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(DoRD O.M. No. H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
  

63 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
The Committee note the submission made by the Department of Rural 
Development during the course of evidence that one of the impediments obstructing 
the smooth and unhindered flow of funds is that of non-completion of requisite 
procedural formalities by the State governments within the stipulated time-frame. 
Non-updation of muster roll within three days of completion of the work or delay in 
the submission of documents for release of wages/skilled/material share by the 
States along-with delay in release of States’ share of 25% material costs came to the 
fore. The Committee were bemused on the approach exhibited by the nodal agency 
of the scheme, i.e. Department of Rural Development in highlighting only the States’ 
loopholes. This is completely inacceptable and the Committee find the ‘blame-game’ 
unpalatable. The ‘need of the hour’ in a federal form of government should not be 
limited to merely finger pointing at each other at the cost of detriment to a public 
welfare scheme, rather working in unison with the common goal of upliftment of the 
quality of lives of rural masses. In this context, the Committee vehemently 
recommend the Department of Rural Development to entail all possible measures in 
bringing all the shareholders on a common platform and coerce the State 
Governments to abide with the statutory provision of the MGNREGA Act in ‘letter 
and spirit’ so that the beneficiaries fate do not keep hanging around the bureaucratic 
procedures. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a demand driven wage employment programme 
and funds are released to the State/UTs on the basis of "Agreed to" Labour Budget 
and performance of the State/UTs during financial year. Funds release under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is based on the provision of the Act and guidelines. First 
installment of the 1st tranche is released in the first half of April after adjusting 
unspent balance available with the States and considering the pending liabilities, if 
any.   
The 2nd tranche is released on the submission of proposal in the prescribed 
format by the State and subject to fulfilment of all the prescribed conditions. The 
proposal can be submitted after a State has utilized 75 percent of the total available 

64 
 
funds. If the proposal for 2nd tranche is submitted after 1st October, then the Audit 
Report and Audited UC of previous FY is also required. Quantum of funds to be 
released as part of 2nd tranche depends upon the performance of the State/UT.  
There is a provision that State may submit 2nd Tranche proposal at least 15 
days before the 50% achievement of the Annual labour budget.  
Also appropriate documents for check lists have been made available to the 
State so that State may submit dully completed proposal well in advance so that 
timely release of funds may be ensured.   
          It also needs to be mentioned that there is a regular dialogue with The 
States/UTs not only through informal channels including through Whatsapp, but also 
through several formal channels such as Performance Review Committee, meeting 
for determination and revision of Labour Budgets, Mid-Term Reviews and so on. The 
States are facilitated to the best extent through both. 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
One of the key aspect behind the enunciation of MGNREGA scheme was the 
guarantee of 100 days work to the rural masses who take up works under 
MGNREGA voluntarily. Not only was this welfare scheme envisaged to provide a ‘fall 
back’ option of employment for those who had no other avenues to look upon but the 
objective was also to create durable asset utilizing the manpower. However, the 
entire fulcrum of balance upon which rested the success of this scheme was 
supposed to be the timely payment of wages as guaranteed through the MGNREG 
Act, 2005, wherein the payment of wages is to be done within fifteen days from the 
date of closure of muster rolls. Instead, the Committee painfully take the cognizance 
of the inordinate delay in the payment of wages to the beneficiaries of MGNREGA. 
There may-be plethora of reasons causing delay in the payment of wages, but none 
of the reason can be sufficient enough to justify this blatant nonadherence to the 
statutory provision of the Act. The beneficiaries of the Act are generally poor and 
marginalized sections of the society whose hopes of decent upliftment to their 
economic status hinge upon the succor through MGNREGA. The Committee in this 
context view the amount of Rs. 276,378.22 lakhs wage liabilities as on 05.11.2021 
seriously and feel sorry at the ‘state of affairs’ in this scheme. No reason is good 
enough for such huge pendencies and hence, the Committee, in all earnest, callupon 

65 
 
the Department of Rural Development to ‘pull up its socks’and take all possible 
measures to wipe off the wage liabilities as soon as possible. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGS), States/UTs submit funds release proposals to 
Government of India. Fund release to the States/UTs is a continuous process and 
Central Government is committed in making funds available to States/UTs for the 
implementation of the Scheme. The Ministry release funds periodically in two 
tranches with each tranche consisting of one or more installments, keeping in view 
the “agreed to” Labour Budget, demand for works, opening balance, pace of 
utilization of funds, pending liabilities, overall performance and subject to submission 
of relevant documents by the State/UT. In the financial year 2021-22 (as on 
31.03.2022), an amount of Rs. 73,023.05 crore has been released to State/UT for 
wage component under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
Time and again the issue of disparity of wages under MGNREGA crop up 
before the Committee. The Committee find the concept of wage rates under 
MGNREGA being different in the States/UTs of the country quite baffling. 
MGNREGA is a Centrally sponsored scheme with the wages of unskilled labour 
being released through the Central Share. Moreover, Department of Rural 
Development is the nodal implementing agency of the scheme in the entire country 
and it only seem befitting if the nodal agency fixes a single unified wage rate at the 
start of every financial year applicable for all the States/UTs of the Country. Wage 
rates fluctuating from Rs. 193/- to Rs. 318/- across the different States/UTs in no 
way seem justified. Moreover, the parameters of economics perhaps will also be 
convenient in terms of calculations and indexation in one go for the entire country, 
rather different States/UTs bringing in their own dynamics in fixing the wage rates. It 
is also noteworthy to mention here that the beneficiaries being targeted under 
MGNREGA are no doubt the poor and marginalized sections of the society. In this 
context, States such as Bihar, UP, Jharkhand and West Bengal showing a notified 

66 
 
wage rate of Rs. 198/-, Rs. 204/-, Rs. 198/- and Rs. 213/- is unfathomable. Bridging 
the disparity of wages and bringing the wages at par will not only end the conundrum 
of uncertainty among beneficiaries but will also serve the larger purpose of welfare of 
MGNREGA workers. Thus, the Committee recommend in all earnest that the 
Department of Rural Development look into the matter of disparity of wages among 
States/UTs pragmatically and devise a mechanism for notifying a unified wage rate 
across the entire country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the Central Government may by 
notification specify the wage rate for unskilled work for its beneficiaries. Accordingly, 
the Ministry of Rural Development notifies Mahatma Gandhi NREGA wage rate for 
every financial year for States/UTs. To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA 
workers against inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development revises the wage rate 
every year based on change in Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-
AL). The index is different for different States/UTs as notified by Labour Bureau 
Shimla. If the calculated wage rate of any State/UT is coming lower than the wage 
rate of previous year, it is being protected by maintaining the previous year wage 
rate. The wage rate is made applicable from 1st April of each financial year. 
However State Governments can provide wage over and above the wage rate 
notified by the Central Government. 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
While examining the subject of MGNREGA and during their deliberations, the 
Committee were made to realize about demands from various quarters of the 
country regarding the increase in number of days from 100. The Committee also 
take cognizance of the provision of the scheme through which State Governments 
can ask for additional 50 days of work under MGNREGA to meet the need for work 
in cases of exigencies arising out of natural calamity. The Committee take note of 
this existing provision and are of the view that MGNREGA is a last ‘fall back’ option 
for numerous rural people and the amount of expenditure under it also elicit a keen 
interest in the scheme by the poor and marginalized. It is ‘high time’ that the scheme 
be revamped keeping in view the changing times and emerging challenges 

67 
 
particularly in wake of the COVID Pandemic. Moreover, the basic thought process 
behind MGNREGA also warranted the creation of permanent durable asset while 
providing works to the needy. The Committee feel that durable assets under various 
heads of permanent nature, go a long way in creating/rectifying infrastructures 
pertaining to the Government agencies. This only aids and augments the initiatives 
of the Government towards progressing the society and taking it forward with a 
robust infrastructure. In view of such background, the Committee are of firm opinion 
that the ‘need of the hour’ is to further diversify the nature of works under 
MGNREGA in such manner and through such mechanisms which could also propel 
the number of guaranteed working days under MGNREGA to at least 150 days from 
the current 100 days. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend the Department 
of Rural Development to review the scheme of MGNREGA in such a way which 
could ensure an increase of guaranteed days of work from 100 to 150 days. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA) is to provide at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in 
a financial year to each household in rural areas of the country whose adult 
members volunteers to do unskilled manual work. In addition to this, there is a 
provision for upto additional 50 days of wage employment in a financial year in 
drought/natural calamity notified rural areas. As per Section 3 (4) of the Act, the 
State Governments may make provision for providing additional days of employment 
beyond the period guaranteed under the Act from their own funds. 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
One of the key aspect which drew the attention of the Committee towards 
itself was the delay in the release of skilled labourers and material components 
share funds by the Centre and State. The funding pattern of the scheme clearly 
outlines that the Central Government shall meet the cost of up to three-fourths of the 

68 
 
material cost of the Scheme including payment of wages to skilled and semi- skilled 
workers while the State Government will bear one-fourth of the material cost of the 
Scheme including payment of wages to skilled and semi-skilled workers. Despite a 
clear cut demarcation of funds origin and their supposed flow, there remained 
pendency in the release of such components. These delays ultimately cause the 
delay in the completion of works under MGNREGA owing to which the projects taken 
up under MGNREGA do not get completed on time and are often left incompleted for 
long period of time wasting the entire exercise of the creation of durable assets 
under MGNREGA. When queried upon this aspect, reasons being cited were non-
completion of documentary procedures for the release of next batches of funds et. al. 
The Committee find a stereotypical excuse placed before them at almost most of the 
junctures wherein blame-game kept on changing posts but redressal remained 
elusive. Hence, the Committee recommend the Department of Rural Development to 
supervise this aspect at each level so that all pre-requisites and the formalities for 
timely release of funds are completed on time so that the status of completion of 
projects under MGNREGA do not get stuck or delayed for want of timely release of 
funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS fund release to the States is a continuous 
process and Central Government is committed to making fund available to States for 
the implementation of the Scheme. Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, States submit 
fund release proposals to Government of India. The Ministry releases funds 
periodically in two tranches with each tranche consisting of one or more installments, 
keeping in view the “agreed to” Labour Budget, demand for works, opening balance, 
pace of utilization of funds, pending liabilities, overall performance and subject to  
submission of relevant documents by the State. 
  
The Ministry seeks additional funds under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from 
Ministry of Finance as and when required for meeting the demand for work on the 
ground. 
  
The Central Government had enhanced the financial allocation under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS for previous financial year 2020-21 from Rs. 61,500 crore 
at Budget Estimate (BE) stage to Rs.1,11,500 crore at Revised Estimate (RE) stage. 
  
Section 22 of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA provides the framework for the 
funding pattern under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. Funds will be released to the 
States/UTs normally in two tranches with more than one instalment in one tranche 
based on agreed Labour Budget (LB), opening balance, pending liabilities of the 
previous financial year, if any, and overall performance. The first instalment of first 

69 
 
tranche will be released to the States/UTs in 1st half of April month of the financial 
year. The fund release system in Programme Division has been streamlined in FY 
2016-17. Three check lists – (A), (B) & (C), have been prepared and shared with the 
States/ UTs which are to be furnished with fund proposal, under the signature of 
Commissioner, Mahatma Gandhi NREGA/ Principal Secretary/ Secretary of the 
Department in-charge of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. 
 
First Tranche 
The first instalment of the first tranche will be released in the first half of April 
month of the financial year after adjusting unspent balance available with the 
districts/States and considering the pending liabilities, if any. 
  
Steps to release of first tranche 
a) Once Labour Budget of a State is examined and agreed to by the 
Ministry and State Government, the State Government shall prepare district-wise 
and month-wise projections of the Category wise (i.e. SC, ST and Other 
beneficiaries) labour demand. 
b)       Requisition for release of 1st tranche should be accompanied with 
modified checklist A and B, provisional UC of previous financial year by 5th April. 
c)       The 1st tranche is estimated based on funds required for initial six 
months of a financial year (FY) or 50 per cent of the Labour Budget for the State/UT, 
whichever is lower, minus the opening balance of the State/UT as per MIS. Pending 
liability shall also be considered. 
d)      As MIS reports form the basis of fund release, it is necessary that all 
expenditure is entered in the NREGASoft. Expenditure not entered in the 
NREGASoft will result in larger opening balance than what is available and the 1st 
tranche would be lower by an equivalent amount. 
e)       Details of works proposed in the Labour Budget need to be entered into 
the software and should be from among the approved shelf of projects. 
f)      1st tranche is released to the State Fund subject to submission of the 
following certificate/ documents: 
  
I.     A certificate to the effect that accounts for all the districts of the State for 
the FY before 2017 have been examined and settled. 
II.   A certificate indicating satisfactory compliance of Ministry’s clarifications/ 
suggestions/ advice/ observations issued from time to time on the implementation of 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA in the State/Districts. 
III.   No mis-utilisation / misappropriation of funds has been noticed, during the 
year 
  
g) After receipt of Central share and the matching State share in the State 
Nodal Bank Account of the State Nodal Agency. 
  
h) If the States require additional funds for implementation of Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA up to 30th September, the same would be considered based on 
performance during the period from April to the date of submission of the proposal 
and funds would be released accordingly. 
  

70 
 
i) The funds towards material, admin and other projects to the states will be 
subject to compliance of guidelines vide the O.M. dated 23.03.2021 of Department of 
Expenditure, Government of India. 
  
Instalments under 1st Tranche 
  
The quantum of instalments under the first tranche will be based on – 
  
The instalments of fund towards material shall be released for two months at 
a time depending upon availability of the funds. 
The number of persondays projected by States/UTs for the next two months 
of Labour Budget for current FY will form the basis for calculation of instalment 
amount. 
However, the fund released under 1st tranche will be well within 50% of total 
persondays agreed to in the Labour Budget for the year. 
Adjustment of unspent balance available with the States/UTs. 
Pending liability, which will include excess State share (as per the MIS). 
The States would have released the entire State share (cumulative). 
The quantum and number of installments for release of funds for wage 
payment will be decided by the programme division as per the actual assessment. 
  
Second tranche 
The 2nd Tranche is released on submission of proposal in the prescribed 
format by the State and subject to fulfilment of all the prescribed conditions. The 
proposal can be submitted after a State/ UTs has utilized 75 percent of the total 
available funds. If the proposal for 2nd Tranche is submitted after 30th September, 
then the Audit Report and Audited UC of the previous financial year is also required. 
Quantum of funds to be released as part of second tranche depends upon the 
performance of the State/UT. 
 State/UT may revise district-wise and month-wise projections of the Category 
wise (i.e. SC, ST and Other beneficiaries) labour demand within approved LB with 
prior approval of Programme division head of the Ministry. The 2nd Tranche 
entitlement of the State/UT will be based on revised projection. The State must 
ensure that the proposal for the 2nd Tranche of funds is received at least 15 days 
before the 50% achievement of the Annual labour budget. 
  
Steps to release of Second Tranche: 
I.  The State/UT/District will submit a consolidated proposal for 2nd 
tranche along with modified checklist A, B and C, to the Ministry, only after utilizing 
75 percent of total fund available with the State as a whole and compliance of the 
prerequisites as laid down under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. 
 II.  A certificate stating that no programme fund has been diverted during 
the FY is required to be given. It should also be certified that there has been no 
embezzlement or misappropriation of funds under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA and in 
cases where this has happened; adequate steps have been taken to punish the 
guilty and recover the embezzled or misappropriated amount. 
III. In case State becomes eligible for release of 2nd tranche after 30th 
September in a FY, the State will submit a certificate stating that Audit Reports (AR) 
and Utilisation Certificates (UCs) from all the districts in the State have been 

71 
 
received and found to be in order in all respects. A consolidated Audit Report will 
also be submitted with the proposal. 
IV. If there are pending liabilities at the end of the previous financial year, 
the same should be reflected as liability in the balance sheet of the Audit Report of 
the previous financial year. 
V.     Advance State share or loans taken by the State may also be reflected 
as pending liability in the Utilisation Certificate and balance sheet attached to the 
proposal. 
VI.    A certificate stating that all pending audit observations by the auditor 
have been complied with should be provided along with the fund release proposal. 
VII.   The Check list on prerequisites/documents for release of 2nd Tranche of 
Central share (Annexure -27 of the Operational Guidelines, 2013). 
VIII. States/UTs may share Utilization certificate for unskilled wages in 
Category wise manner (i.e. SC, ST and Other beneficiaries). 
  
In financial year 2021-22 (as on 31.03.2022), an amount of Rs. 98,467.84 
crore has been released by Central Government to the States/UTs under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS. 
  
Whenever any support is needed by States/UTs, Central Government extents, 
its support to State Audit Report relaxation of guidelines for release of 2nd tranche of 
funds to the States under Schemes of the Department of Rural Development. 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22) 
In recent times, a much recognized and appreciated framework of work 
obtained through the convergence of water conservation aspect with National 
Highway Construction has garnered huge praise and National recognition, is that of 
‘Buldhana Pattern’ First time used in the Buldhana District of Maharashtra in the 
drought affected Vidarbharegion. This pattern synchronizes the work of water 
conservation through desilting and deepening of waterbodies by the removal of 
earthen material and silt and using this material for National Highway. Thus, a 
unique and beautiful symbiotic relationship is being observed between two aspects 
of development wherein the raw material for road construction is obtained from the 
clogged and overflowing water bodies through their desiltation. This not only 
rejuvenates the water bodies and deepens them but also provide cheap and easily 
available raw material for the road construction. The Committee applauded this 

72 
 
‘Buldhana Pattern’ and unanimously decide to urge the Department of Rural 
Develoment to examine the scope of this pattern to be brought under the ambit of 
MGNREGA works. Not only will this pattern create new and meaningful work under 
MGNREGA but will also go a long way in increasing the resources of the country 
through convergence with other relevant schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, construction and renovation of water 
harvesting pond, fishery pond at the community level are permissible activities under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. The excavated soil from the ponds can be shifted from 
the site after saturation of the bund formation with proper documentation of 
earthwork. However, transportation cost of the earth (soil) from the site to the other 
place should not be made from the scheme as it is not permissible under the 
scheme. Similar kind of renovation/construction work such as canal, farm pond, and 
traditional water bodies can also be taken up in convergence with other Department 
for transportation of excess excavated soil.  
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 28) 
MGNREG Act, 2005 mandates for the provision of minimum 33% of the work 
to be provided to the women labourers. It has been also taken note of the fact that 
average percentage of women participation across the country is hovering around 
the 50% mark for the last 5-6 years. In this regard, the Committee, however, feel that 
projects under MGNREGA should be envisaged which are women centric in nature 
and which could maintain and increase the women participation even further and can 
go a long way in women empowerment through economic independence too. The 
Committee also observe that there already existsself help groups of women in 
villages which are engaged in either farm works or animal rearing activities and 
these groups can be linked to MGNREGA to enable them a source of income. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend Department of Rural Development to work 
upon the idea of promotion of women centric works under MGNREGA through 
creation or linkage of livelihood projects already in existence. 
 

73 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per the Para 15 of Schedule-II of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, “Priority shall be given to women in such a way that at 
least one-third of the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and 
requested for work. Efforts to increase participation of single women and the 
disabled shall be made”.  
  
To encourage women to participate in the works under the Scheme features 
like separate schedule of rates for women, no discrimination in the wage, women 
caretaker for looking after children upto five years of age, if there are 5 or more 
children of such age, encouragement to women SHG members as mate, worksite 
facilities exist under the Scheme.  
The percentage of participation of women under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS 
from FY 2018-19 to FY 2021-22 is given below:  
  
Financial Year 2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 2018-19 
Percentage of participation of women 54.72 53.19 54.78 54.59 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

74 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.H-11013/01/2020-RE-II(pt)dated 13/05/2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 PRATAPRAO JADHAV 
           28 July, 2022                          Chairperson, 
           06 Shravana, 1944 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Rural Development& Panchayati Raj 
 
  

75 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2020-2021) 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON TUESDAY,  03 AUGUST, 2021 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1555 hrs. in Committee Room. 'B,' 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
Prataprao Jadhav     -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok  Sabha 
 
2. Shri C. N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Rajveer Diler 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
6. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
7. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
8. Shri Narendra Kumar 
9. Shri Janardan Mishra  
10. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
11. Shri Talari Rangaiah 
12. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
13. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
14. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
15. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
16. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
17. Shri Shamsher SIngh Dullo 
18. Shri Iranna Kadadi  
19. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
20. Shri Rathwa Naranbhai Jemlabhai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shr D. R. Shekhar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri. A. K. Shah   - Director 
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Nishant Mehra  - Deputy Secretary 
 

76 
 
 At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the XXX Draft Action Taken 
Reports on Demands for Grants (2021-22) in respect of (i) Department of Rural 
Development (ii)  XXX  XXX  XXX, (iii) XXX XXX         XXX,  
(iv) XXX  XXX  XXX. 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Reports without any 
amendment and authorised the Chairperson to present Reports to the House. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________ 
XXX  Not related to the Draft Report 
  

77 
 
APPENDIX - II 
[Vide  para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:    33 
       
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 1, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 
24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 
          Total:26
        Percentage:-      79%
    
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL          
          Total: NIL 
       Percentage:- 0%      
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 2, 4, 6, 7, 12, 22, 28       
Total: 07 
Percentage:-21% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
Total: NIL  
Percentage:- 0%      
 
 
 