 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2022-2023) 
      
 
      
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
   
 
 
[Action taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty First Report on  
 'Demands for Grants’ (2023-24) pertaining to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj] 
 
 
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
35 


 
 
 
 
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2022-2023) 
 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty First Report on  
 'Demands for Grants’ (2023-24) pertaining to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.07.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.07.2023 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2023 / Shravana, 1945 (Saka) 


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 189  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price:  Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____ Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-2023)................................................................ ii 
INTRODUCTION....................................................................................................................... iii 
CHAPTER I Report................................................................................................ 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 9 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies...................................................... 
19 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee....................................... 
20 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited............................................................. 
25 
ANNEXURES 
I Extract of Minutes of the 11th Sitting of the Committee held on 
25.07.2023…..……………………………………………………………. 
26 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty First Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj.................................................................................. 
28 
Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 9 December, 2016………………......      19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2022-2023) 
 
          Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri A.K.P Chinraj 
4. Shri Rajveer Diler 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
7. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
8. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
9. Ms. S. Jothi Mani 
10. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
11. Shri Narendra Kumar 
12. Shri Janardan Mishra 
13. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
14. Dr. Talari Rangaiah 
15. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
16. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
17. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
18. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
19. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
20. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
23. Shri Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiya 
24. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
25. Dr. Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade 
26. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
27. Shri Ram Shakal 
28. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
29. Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa 
30. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh 
31. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram  - Director 
3. Shri Arjun Choudhary  - Executive Officer  
  

 
 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
(2022-2023) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present the 35th Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty First Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj. 
2.  The Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 14th March 2023 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 15th March 2023. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 29.05.2023 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
25.07.2023. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25 July, 2023 
03 Shravana, 1945 (Saka)    
KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural  
Development & Panchayati Raj 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (2022-23) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
their Thirty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants’ (2023-24) pertaining to 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj'. 
1.2 The Thirty First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 14th March 2023 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 15th March 2023. The Report contained 13 Observations/ 
Recommendations. 
1.3  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from the Government. These have been examined and categorized as 
follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:  
 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12 & 13 
 Total:   09 
Chapter II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of replies of the Government: NIL 
    Total:  NIL 
Chapter III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee:  
 
Serial Nos. 7, 8, 9 & 10 
Total:     04 
  Chapter IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: NIL 
Total:  NIL 
Chapter V 
 

 
 
2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation of the 
recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for any reasons 
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter shall be reported to the 
Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that Final Action Taken 
Notes on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
I.     Incentivization of Panchayats scheme 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
1.6 With regard to Incentivization of Panchayats scheme, the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
“The Committee appreciate that the Ministry is incentivizing the best performing 
Panchayats through National Panchayat Awards. These awards have been revamped  
w.e.f. 2022 to assess the performance of PRIs in attainment of Sustainable 
Development Goals through nine identified Localization of SDG themes. Total five 
awards are given, in which Gram Panchayats are chosen under each award. Perusal of 
the information given by the Ministry shows that Madhya Pradesh received Rs. 5.13 
Crore as maximum incentive under these awards during the last three years and the 
current year. Total incentive given to all States/UTs was Rs. 52.49 Crore during 2021-
22. Moreover, the some States/UTs viz. Puducherry, Lakshadweep, Mizoram, Andaman 
& Nicobar, Goa and Arunachal Pradesh are least performing States/UTs. While 
acknowledging the importance of these awards which endeavours to develop healthy 
competition among PRIs to work towards effective, efficient and transparent governance 
of PRIs, the Committee strongly recommend that number and quantum of awards under 
each category should be increased so as to encourage more and more Panchayats to 
come forward to fulfill the SDGs. Moreover, the Ministry should also impress upon the 
least performing States/UTs to perform better so as to achieve the objectives of the 
award scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard.” 
1.7 In regard to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 
their action taken reply have stated as below:- 
“The National Panchayat Awards (NPA) given by Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) 
under the Incentivization of Panchayats scheme have been revamped from the Year 
2022 establishing a multi-level pyramidical structure of awards competition at Block, 
District, State/UT and National Level aligning these awards with 9 Localization of 
Sustainable Development Goals (LSDGs) themes. The 9 award themes are (i) Poverty 

 
 
3 
 
free and enhanced livelihoods Panchayat, (ii) Healthy Panchayat, (iii) Child friendly 
Panchayat, (iv) Water sufficient Panchayat, (v) Clean and Green Panchayat, (vi) Self-
sufficient infrastructure in Panchayat, (vii) Socially secured Panchayat, (viii) Panchayat 
with good governance and (ix) Women-friendly Panchayat. These themes are conferred 
under the category of Deen Dayal Upadhyay Panchayat Satat Vikas Puraskar 
(DDUPSVP). For awards under these themes, 3 top ranking Gram Panchayats/ 
equivalent bodies are shortlisted at Block, District, State/UT and National Level, 
designated as respective level awardees, and further nominated for higher level/next 
level competition before they reach the National level competition. These shortlisted 
Gram Panchayats/equivalent bodies are termed as respective level awardee Gram 
Panchayats/equivalent bodies. The other category of awards is Nanaji Deshmukh 
Sarvottam Panchayat Satat Vikas Puraskar (NDSPSVP), under which Gram 
Panchayats, Block Panchayats and District Panchayats are conferred best performing 
Panchayat awards for their overall performance in all the above nine themes. In addition 
to this, there are also special categories awards for Gram Panchayats. These are ‘Gram 
Urja Swaraj Vishesh Panchayat Puraskar’ to 3 Gram Panchayats for their outstanding 
works towards their efforts of energy self-sufficiency in their Panchayats and ‘Carbon 
Neutral Vishesh Panchayat Puraskar’ to 3 Gram Panchayats for their outstanding works 
in their efforts to ensure net zero carbon emission in the Panchayats.  
Under the NPA 2023, 42 National Level financial incentive-based awards have been 
conferred to best performing Panchayats on 17.04.2023. Additionally, 4 Gram 
Panchayats were provided certificates for their appreciable performance. Further, more 
than 72 thousand Gram Panchayats/equivalent bodies emerged as at Block, District and 
State/UT level. Award money has also been exponentially increased ranging from 
minimum Rs.50 Lakhs for a Gram Panchayat/Equivalent body to maximum Rs. 5.00 
crore for a District Panchayat from the existing of minimum Rs.5 lakh to maximum of 
Rs.50 lakh.  
Around 2.41 lakh out of 2.6 lakh Gram Panchayats/Equivalent Bodies in the country 
successfully participated under the NPA 2023. This achievement reflects the remarkable 
and integrated efforts of states/UTs and Panchayats and also the level of awareness 
created on the LSDGs among them. This inculcates an aspiration that the country is on 
the right path to achieve the 2030 Agenda of SDGs through rural local bodies.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.8 The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their reply have outlined the 
details of the Incentivization of Panchayats scheme but have not addressed fully the concerns 
raised by the Committee. The Committee recommended that number and quantum of awards 
should be increased as more than 2.55 lakhs Gram Panchayats are there in the country and to 
impress upon the least performing states so as to achieve the objectives of the scheme. While 
the first aspect of the recommendation has been addressed by the Ministry, the reply given by 

 
 
4 
 
the Ministry is silent on the second aspect. The Committee note that these awards inculcate a 
healthy competition among Gram Panchayats and motivate them to work towards achieving 
different goals particularly the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In this regard, the 
Committee note that under National Panchayat Awards, 2023, 42 national level financial 
incentive based awards were conferred. Further, 72000 Gram Panchayats/equivalent bodies 
emerged at block/district/state/UT levels. The Committee also note that award money has been 
increased considerably. Since these awards are aimed at rewarding the best performing Gram 
Panchayats in achieving the goals of SDGs, the Committee feel that 42 awards at national level 
is not adequate. The Committee, therefore reiterate the earlier recommendation that the number 
of national level awards should be increased. Moreover, gram Panchayats shortlisted at 
block/district/state levels should also be given financial incentive so as to encourage them 
perform better to reach the next level.  
1.9 The Committee also note that about 20,000 Gram Panchayats had not participated in the 
NPA, 2023. In this regard, the Committee recommend again that the Ministry should impress 
upon the least performing states/UTs to perform better so as to achieve the objectives of the 
award scheme. 
II.   Unavailability of Computers in Gram Panchayats (GPs) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
1.10 Regarding uavailability of computers in Gram Panchayats (GPs), the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee are concerned to note that out of 271102 Gram Panchayats in the 
country, only 219889 GPs have computers in them. Availability of computers is a 
prerequisite for using internet service facilities. Perusal of information provided by the 
Ministry shows that the Gram Panchayats in some states have not even one computer. 
The Ministry has formulated e-Panchayat project which is a mission mode project under 
Digital India Programme to make the working of PRIs more transparent, accountable 
and effective through information and communication technology. But in the absence of 
adequate computer infrastructure, effective implementation of this project may not be 
possible. The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry in coordination with 
State Governments/ UTs should take steps for installation of at least two computers with 
internet service in each Gram Panchayat in the country in a time bound manner.” 
1.11 In regard to the above recommendation, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken 
reply have stated as follows:-  
“Panchayat being a State subject, providing computers for Panchayats is primarily the 
responsibility of States/ Union Territories (UTs). However, Ministry, under the scheme of 
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) supplemented the efforts of all States by 

 
 
5 
 
providing computers for Panchayats as proposed by States/UTs in their Annual Action 
Plan and approved by Central Empowered Committee, on a limited scale. 
As on Date, 2,55,666 Gram Panchayats or equivalent bodies have prepared their Gram 
Panchayat Development Plans for FY 2022-23 in e-Gram SWARAJ application. Further, 
2,26,407 Gram Panchayats carried out online transitions amounting to Rs. 29,995 
Crores for Fifteenth Finance Commission grants in FY 2022-23 through e-Gram 
SWARAJ-PFMS Interface.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.12 The Committee in their recommendation had emphasized the basic necessity of 
Computers in Gram Panchayats and exhibited their concern towards unavailability of 
Computers in more than 50,000 Gram Panchayats in the country. However, the Committee note 
that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj have tried to shed their responsibility by stating that 
providing computers for Panchayats is primarily the responsibility of States/Union Territories 
and the Ministry only supplements them in their efforts. Further, the Ministry have not outlined 
any time bound roadmap to provide computers to all the Gram Panchayats of the Country. In 
this regard, the Committee would like to draw attention of the Ministry towards their goal of 
Digitization of functioning of more than 2.55 lakh Gram Panchayats in the country. Digitization 
of Gram Panchayats is a distant dream without basic infrastructural requirements such as 
Computers. Further, the computers are pre-requisites even for using e-Gram Swaraj application 
launched by Ministry and for uploading of Panchayat Development Plans. Therefore, the 
Committee reiterate the earlier recommendation that the Ministry in coordination with State 
Governments/UTs should take steps for installation of at least two computers with internet 
service in each Gram Panchayat in the country in a time bound manner. 
 
III.    Lack of Internet Connectivity in Gram Panchayats 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
1.13      With regard to lack of internet connectivity in Gram Panchayats, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj aims at ‘Digitization of Gram 
Panchayats’ by providing broadband connectivity to more than 2.55 lakh GPs of the 
country in collaboration with the Ministry of Telecommunications and Ministry of 
Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY). It is imperative for a ‘Digitally Inclusive 
and Empowered Society’ envisaged under the flagship programme of Digital India. 
However, the Committee acknowledge that progress of the ‘BharatNet Project’ is not 
encouraging. Only 80,742 rural local bodies have active internet connection as on 21-
01-2023 out of 2,71,102 rural local bodies even though 1.92 lakh Gram Panchayats 
have been made service ready. The Committee have also observed lack of broadband 

 
 
6 
 
connectivity in the Gram Panchayats and use of private cellular data for public service 
delivery during its Study Visits undertaken to States such as Maharashtra. Considering 
the significance of the project, the Committee urge the Ministry to take concrete steps in 
coordination with other two Ministries to make all the 1.92 lakh service ready GPs to 
have active internet connection during 2023-24 and to connect all GPs with Broad Band 
connectivity by 2024-25. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made 
in this regard.” 
1.14 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below:-  
“The BharatNet project is being implemented by the Department of Telecommunication 
to facilitate digital infrastructure in rural India to provide doorstep delivery of government 
services. The aim of the project is to connect all the Gram Panchayats with high 
bandwidth broadband internet. BharatNet, one of the biggest rural telecom projects of 
the world, is being implemented in a phased manner to provide broadband connectivity 
to all Gram Panchayats (approx. 2,55,000) in the country. Now, the scope of the project 
has been expanded up to all inhabited villages. 
All efforts are being made by this Ministry to connect Gram Panchayats to the high-
speed Internet. In this regard, Ministry of Panchayati Raj constituted a Project 
Monitoring and Steering Committee on 30th September, 2021 under the Chairmanship of 
Additional Secretary, Panchayati Raj to review the progress of BharatNet connections 
and CSC co-location at Gram Panchayat Bhawan. The committee comprises members 
from the Department of Telecommunications (DoT), Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY), Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL) and State 
Implementing Agencies (SIAs). The Terms of Reference (ToR) of the committee are to 
review the  
I. State/UT wise Service Ready GPs 
II. State/UT wise active internet connection at Gram Panchayat Bhawan 
through BharatNet. 
III. Co-location of CSC with Gram Panchayat Bhawan.  
IV. Any other related issues. 
The Ministry is holding regular meetings with BBNL/DoT/State officials in this regard. In 
addition, several advisories have been issued to States in order to sensitize the 
Panchayats to opt for internet connectivity through BBNL/BSNL.  
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.15    The Committee are concerned to note that the reply furnished by the Ministry fails to 
address the thrust of the recommendation made by the Committee that BharatNet project to 
provide phased manner broadband connectivity to all Gram Panchayats in the country has not 
been given any time frame to achieve its target of roadmap. In this regard, the Committee 

 
 
7 
 
emphasize that internet connectivity to Gram Panchayats is necessary to achieve the objectives 
of Digitization of Gram Panchayats and ambitious Digital India programme. All the initiatives of 
the Ministry such as e-Gram Swaraj application to bring efficiency and Public Financial 
Management System to bring transparency in the functioning of Gram Panchayats depend on 
Internet connectivity in the Gram Panchayats. Even online Gram Panchayats services cannot be 
provided to rural populace without Internet Connectivity. In the opinion of the Committee, 
Internet Connectivity is sine qua non in transforming the functioning of Gram Panchayats of the 
country and bring efficiency, transparency and accountability. Therefore, the Committee 
reiterate the earlier recommendation that the Ministry should take concrete steps in 
coordination with other Ministries to make all the 1.92 lakh service ready GPs to have active 
internet connection during 2023-24 and to connect all GPs with Broad Band connectivity by 
2024-25.  
IV.    Non-delivery of services by Panchayats 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
1.16         Regarding non-delivery of services by Panchayats, the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
“The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj have launched “Digitization of 
Gram Panchayats” programme in 2019 to achieve the objective of Smart Governance 
and provision of various online G2G, B2B and B2C services to the Rural Populace. 
However, the Committee are constrained to note that during its recent Study Visits 
undertaken to States of Maharashtra and Sikkim, it has been noted that most of the GPs 
provide only few online services related to birth and death certificates. The Ministry 
envisaged to bring all Panchayat related public services online.  However, most of the 
online envisaged services are not being provided by the Panchayats to its citizens. The 
Committee are given to understand that, the people rely on private service providers for 
such services and have to pay extra charges. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Ministry to look into this matter and ensure that all Gram Panchayats provide all 
mandated online assured services instead of confining only birth and death certificates 
etc. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.” 
1.17 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj have furnished the following action taken reply on the above 
recommendation:-  
“The vision of MoPR is to make Local Governments more responsive, by defining the 
role of Panchayats in the delivery of key services to rural people, giving them the 
mandate as enshrined under article 243G of the Constitution of India. In this endeavor, 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj in collaboration with National Institute of Rural Development 
& Panchayati Raj (NIRDPR) has prepared a Model Panchayat Citizens Charter/ 
framework for delivery of the services across the 29 sectors, aligning actions with 
localised Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) for the Panchayats to adopt & 

 
 
8 
 
customize. The Citizen Charter would ensure transparent and effective delivery of public 
services for sustainable development and enhanced citizen service experiences; 
deepening inclusive and accountable Local Self Governments by incorporate diverse 
views while designing and delivering services. The aim is to provide services to the 
people in a time bound manner, redressing their grievances and improving their lives. 
Citizen Charter campaign under the aegis of Meri Panchayat, Mera Adhikaar- Jan 
Sevaayein Hamare Dwaar was initiative from 01st July- 30th September, 2021 with an 
intent to of making the role of Panchayats in Service Delivery meaningful and fulfilling. 
This will help to standardise the delivery of Services across the Panchayats, setting 
service standards, the time limit that the people can expect to be served, mechanisms 
for redressing grievances, and a provision for unbiased scrutiny by citizens; making the 
Panchayats and their elected representatives directly accountable to the people, on the 
other hand. As on date, about 2.15 Lakh Gram Panchayats across 30 States/ UTs have 
now finalised their Citizen Charter, offering 952 Services spanning various sectors viz. 
Health & Family Welfare, Drinking Water & Sanitation, Public Welfare, Employment etc.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.18  The Committee had recommended to the Ministry to ensure that all the Gram Panchayats 
of the country provide all mandated online services instead of confining to only birth and death 
certificates etc. However, the Ministry in their action taken reply have stated that more than 2.15 
Lakh Gram Panchayats across 30 States/UTs have finalized their Citizen Charter for offering 
services spanning various sectors. In this regard, the Committee are of the firm opinion that 
merely finalising Citizen Charter on paper without actually offering those services to the people 
will not serve any purpose. Even this assessment of the Ministry reflects that more than 40000 
Gram Panchayats of the country have not finalized their Citizen Charters.  Delivering mandated 
online services will bring efficiency, transparency and accountability in the Gram Panchayats. 
However, these mandated online services are not being provided by most of the Gram 
Panchayats owing to various reasons such as basic infrastructural deficits, lack of internet 
connectivity, lack of training to service providers, competition from private service providers, 
lack of knowledge among public about their rights etc. In view of the above, the Committee 
reiterate that the Ministry should ensure that all Gram Panchayats of the country provide all 
mandated online services to the people and also the conduct a study of effectiveness of ground 
level implementation of citizen charters by Gram Panchayats.  
 
  

 
 
9 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
The Committee are constrained to note that the budgetary estimate for the year  
2023-24 in respect of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) is Rs. 153 Crore less than the demand 
placed by the Ministry. According to the MoPR, the major priorities for the upcoming year of 2023-24 
are to enhance the capacities of Panchayats for good governance and attainment of Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs). The umbrella scheme of the Ministry i.e. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan 
(RGSA) also aims at strengthening PRIs for achieving Sustainable Development Goals. Further, the 
strengthening of PRIs are sine qua non for localization of Sustainable Development Goals, to be 
achieved by 2030. However, the fund allocation to the Ministry has been inadequate when compared to 
its mandate to strengthen and empower PRIs to achieve SDGs. In this regard, the Committee note that 
as against the MoPR’s proposed budget of Rs. 1169.69 Crore for the financial year 2023-24, the 
Ministry of Finance has approved a reduced amount of Rs.1016.42 Crore which perhaps compel the 
Ministry to compromise on expenditure in certain areas. Since the Ministry strives to improve the 
functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions through policy interventions, capacity building, etc., the 
Committee feel that it is imperative that adequate budgetary allocation should be made to the Ministry 
to translate their priorities into realities. In this regard, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should take up the matter at the highest-level with the Ministry of Finance and impress upon it to 
approve the budgetary allocation to the Ministry according to its requirements, as capacity building of 
the PRIs are necessary for achieving Sustainable Development Goals. As far as 2023-24 is concerned, 
the Ministry should place its further demand for funds with the Ministry of Finance for the allocation of 
remaining funds at RE the stage. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry will demand higher funds as per its original demand of Rs.1169.69 crore at RE 
stage in the month of October and November 2023 keeping in view its progress of expenditure of 
allocated fund of Rs.1016.42 crore at BE stage. 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
The Committee acknowledge that capacity building of PRIs have a multiplier effect on the Rural 
Development of the country. Timely and effective spending of budgetary allocations for the 
schemes/programmes of the Ministry is mandatory to achieve the lofty goals set before the Ministry. 
However, the Committee lament the fact that spending pattern of the Ministry has not been satisfactory 
Analysis of spending pattern of the Ministry during the previous year shows that from 2019-20 to 2021-

 
 
10 
 
22, Budget Estimates were reduced every year at Revised Estimate Stage and actual expenditure has 
been much less than the Budget Estimates. For instance, in 2021-22, against BE of Rs. 913.44 Crore, 
RE was reduced to Rs. 868.38 Crore and the Ministry surrendered Rs. 48.60 Crore with respect to BE. 
In 2022-23, the Ministry have been able to spend only Rs. 701.04 Crore out of Rs. 905.77 Crore 
allocated at Revised Estimate stage and have Rs. 204.73 Crore unspent balance as on 31.12.2022. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry chalk out its plan in such a manner so as to 
fully utilize the balance of funds allocated for 2022-23 in a timely manner to fructify and achieve its 
objectives and schemes/programmes in a realistic manner and also strengthen the PRIs. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The RGSA scheme is demand driven and funds are released to the States/UTs only after 
submission of utilization certificate and other requisite documents. The Budget Estimate (BE) / Revised 
Estimate (RE) and actual expenditure during 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 (as on 31.03.2022) under 
the scheme of RGSA are given below: 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual Expenditure 
2019-20  762.34 432.96 432.90 
2020-21 790.53 499.94 499.93 
2021-22  593.00 618.00 617.99 
 
 The expenditure during 2019-20 and 2020-21 was 100% of RE. Further, during 2021-22 the 
allocation under RGSA was enhanced from Rs.593 crore to Rs.618 crore, out of which Rs.617.99 crore 
(99.99%) was utilized fully up to 31.03.2022. During 2022-23 the allocation under RGSA was enhanced 
from Rs.593 crore to Rs.682.98 crore, which was fully utilised up to 31.03.2022.  
 Under Digital India Programme, Ministry is implementing e-Panchayat Mission Mode Project 
(MMP) with the aim to transform the functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), making them 
more transparent, accountable, and effective. Under the scheme funds are released to National 
Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI) for central level support for maintenance and training of e-
Gram SWARAJ and other applications, faculty support and programme management. The details of 
annual expenditure on e-Panchayat MMP is as under: 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year BE RE Actual Expenditure 
2019-20 15.50 7.50 7.25 
2020-21 20.00 17.82 17.79 
2021-22 20.00 11.71 11.71 

 
 
11 
 
2022-23 20.00 15.00 15.00 
The actual expenditure under the scheme has been almost 100% of RE allocation from 2019-
20 to 2022-23.   
The details of annual expenditure under SVAMITVA Scheme is as under: 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year BE RE Actual Expenditure 
2020-21 79.65 79.65 79.65 
2021-22 200.00 140.00 140.00 
2022-23 150.00 105.00 105.00 
 It may also be seen from above mentioned table that the actual expenditure under the scheme 
of SVAMITVA has also been 100% of RE allocation from 2020-21 to 2022-23. Further under the 
scheme of Action Research & Publicity, the expenditure during 2022-23 was Rs.12.98 crore against 
the RE of Rs.13.01 crore, which was also almost 100% of RE allocation. Thus, all the funds allocated 
under the schemes at RE stage to the Ministry during 2022-23 was almost fully utilised adopting 
multipronged strategy. 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
The Committee note that umbrella RGSA is the flagship scheme of the Ministry. According to the 
Ministry, funds under RGSA are released to the States/UTs primarily for Capacity Building & Training 
of Elected Representatives, Functionaries and other Stakeholders of the Panchayats. Further, funds 
are also provided for other admissible activities relating to Strengthening of Panchayats as approved 
under Annual Action Plan (AAP) of the States/UTs under the scheme. However, the Committee note 
that 19 out of 34 States/UTs have not received any funds under the scheme for the financial year 2022-
23 (as on 31.12.2022). Similarly, in 2021-22, no funds were released to 9 out of 34 States/UTs. The 
Ministry to this effect submitted that timely non-submission of requisite documents and non-compliance 
of instructions stipulated by the Ministry of Finance, inter-alia, are the reasons for non-release of funds. 
In Committees’ view, halting funds in such a manner to many states will hamper the progress of this 
important scheme which aims at strengthening of the PRIs. In this context, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should be proactive in ensuring compliance of Ministry of Finance stipulations and 
submission of requisite documents by the States/UTs so that funds are released to all the States/UTs 
uniformly. If necessary, such matters should be taken up at the highest level with the States/UTs so 
that progress of the envisaged schemes may not hamper on account of delay or non-release of funds 
under RGSA. 

 
 
12 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The scheme of RGSA is demand driven in nature and the release of funds to the States/UTs 
depends on the timely submission of Annual Action Plan by the States/UTs, liquidation of unspent 
balance, submission of requisite documents etc. The shortfall in releases and non-release of funds to 
the Sates/UTs is mainly on account of non-submission of requisite documents including Utilization 
Certificates, Audited Statements, non-release of State Share and/or availability of unspent balance with 
States/UTs more than releasable amount and also non-compliance of Ministry of Finance instructions 
regulating release of funds under CSS. In this regard, Ministry is taking following steps for uniformity in 
release of funds: 
 Regular interaction with senior officer/officials of States/UTs through VCs and telephonic calls 
for monitoring the progress of the activities and expediting the utilization of fund for further 
release of grants under the scheme.  
 Mandatory release of funds through PFMS till last level of Executing Agency to track the status 
of expenditure done by States/ UTs. Not using PFMStill last point will not only prevent flow of 
RGSA funds but will also affect the transfer of FFC grants to the States. Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has also issued order regarding payment of interest if Central 
share is not released timely to SNA. This will ensure easy and timely access of the PR 
Department and the Training Institutes to undertake CB&T exercises for the PRIs in timely 
manner.   
 Effective communication with the States for releasing their matching State share, liquidate 
unspent balances and submit the requisite documents viz. UCs etc. for release of funds to the 
maximum extent. Number of States have already released the State share and it is expected 
that with the new guidelines in place there will be expeditious transfer of funds and  
 Necessary advice is given in case of any difficulties faced while utilization of fund through 
PFMS. 
 Physical and financial progress of the fund released has also been examined before approval of 
Annual Action Plan of next financial year. 
 Advisories have been issued for compliance of the instruction received from Ministry of Finance 
for intervention of senior level officer. 
 Hence, it is expected that during the F.Y. 2023-24 more States/ UTs will have better access to 
the fund under the scheme. At the same time, Ministry is also following up with the States to ensure 
release of funds to the SNAs and also to carry out the planned activities under their Annual Action Plan 
of RGSA. 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
  

 
 
13 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
The Committee note that the scheme of revamped RGSA is being implemented for strengthening 
of Panchayats through which the Ministry endeavours for graduated Capacity Building and Training 
(CB&T) of a large number of Elected Representatives (ERs), Panchayat functionaries and other 
stakeholders. In this regard, the Ministry informed the Committee that around 15,11,827 ERs, 
Panchayat Functionaries and other stakeholders have been trained during 2022-23 (as on 
21.01.2023). However, the Committee are of the considered view that though there is provision for 
reservation of women in the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), however for real empowerment of 
women representatives at Panchayat level there is need to strengthen financially empower the women 
to facilitate her in taking independent decision. To curb the prevalent concepts such as 
‘Sarpanch/Pradhan Pati’ are in Panchayati Raj Institutions, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry should take concerted efforts for increasing capacity building and training of women 
representatives of PRIs so that they can function independently without influence and help of others. In 
this regard, a fixed percentage of participation must be reserved for women ERs in all the capacity 
building programmes. The Committee firmly believe that Ministry would take proactive action in this 
regard and apprise the Committee in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry under the scheme of RGSA has made a provision for basic orientation/induction 
training within 6 months of election and refresher training within 2 years of the election for all the 
Elected Representatives (ERs). 21 States have already provisioned for 50% reservation for women in 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in their State Acts. As per information available in the Ministry 
around 45.61% of Elected Representatives are women in PRIs. Hence, as esteemed Committee 
observed, around 45.61% of Women ERs are covered under training. 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
The Committee note that funds are provided to PRIs for construction of Panchayat Bhawans in 
the Gram Panchayats according to the Approved Action Plans of the States/UTs. However, the 
Committee are constrained to note that 51,512 Gram Panchayats are functioning without Panchayat 
Bhawans in various States. The Secretary, MoPR during the course of evidence informed the 
Committee that the majority of Gram Panchayats without Panchayat Bhawans are in the state of Uttar 
Pradesh. Since, the construction of Panchayat Bhawans are very much indispensable for the effective 
functioning of Panchayats, the Committee, strongly recommend that MoPR should take concrete steps 
for the construction of Panchayat Bhawans in a time bound manner to ensure that every Gram 
Panchayat has a Panchayat Bhawan to enable them to avail full benefits of the scheme launched by 
the Government for Rural Development. 

 
 
14 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry in all earnestness is seized of the concern expressed by the esteemed Committee 
to provide each Gram Panchayat of its own building. The Ministry has also been making all its efforts to 
provide financial assistance to the maximum possible limit to States / UTs for this purpose. In this 
regard, it is also worth mentioning that the Ministry is implementing the scheme of revamped RGSA to 
develop the governance capabilities of Panchayati Raj Institutions through capacity Building & Training 
of Elected Representatives, functionaries, and other stakeholders. In addition to this, various other 
components were also supported under the scheme which includes construction of Panchayat Bhawan 
on a limited scale with focus on North Eastern (NE) States. During the year 2022-23, construction of 
1,283 New Panchayat Bhawan approved to States which includes 1,183 for NE States.  
Primarily, the Untied Grants of the Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV FC) can be utilized for all 
felt needs under the 29 subjects enshrined in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution and thus it 
would also cover construction and repair of Gram Panchayat Bhawans in the rural areas, as one of the 
permissible activities for XV FC mandated activities by Rural Local Bodies (RLBs). 
With a view to expedite saturation in this direction, a Joint Advisory was issued to States / UTs 
by Secretary of this Ministry and that of Ministry of Rural Development on 10.06.2020 requesting for 
construction of GP buildings utilizing various resources under convergence mode viz. Unspent 
14th Finance Commission, FFC grants, 15th Finance Commission untied grants, MGNREGS funds and 
other funds from State Finance Commission (SFC) / Own Source Revenue (OSR) etc. In furtherance to 
that as per D.O. Letter dated 07.01.2021 issued by this Ministry to all States / UTs, they have been 
requested to undertake / concerted efforts to clear the infrastructure deficit regarding GP Bhawans by 
utilizing various resources at their level. They have also been advised to examine the possibility of 
creating a cluster of contiguous GPs for construction of GP Bhawans where the size of GPs is small. It 
has also been advised to States that while creating new GPs, the States should simultaneously make 
provision for creation of GP Bhawan also through available resources under central schemes or from 
the State Budget or OSR of the Panchayats.  
With the constant follow-up to be made in this direction, it is expected that the deficit in GP 
Bhawans will be made upto a great extent. 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
Panchayat Bhawans are basic infrastructure requirements for efficient functioning of PRIs. 
Panchayat Bhawan works as a point of contact between citizens and panchayat functionary and 
permanent address for the Panchayat. However, the Committee during Study Visits have noticed that 
in many Gram Panchayats, Panchayat Bhawans are in dilapidated condition. Further, many 

 
 
15 
 
panchayats are functioning from old buildings which is not only hampering the functioning of the PRIs 
but also endangering the lives of ERs and Panchayat Functionaries who are working there. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that a survey of such dilapidated/old Panchayat Bhawans should be 
conducted and be ensured that renovation of those Panchayat Bhawans be completed in a time bound 
manner on priority. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry in all earnestness is seized of the concern expressed by the esteemed Committee 
to provide each Gram Panchayat of its own building. The Ministry has also been making all its efforts to 
provide financial assistance to the maximum possible limit to States / UTs for this purpose. In this 
regard, it is also worth mentioning that the Ministry is implementing the scheme of revamped RGSA to 
develop the governance capabilities of Panchayati Raj Institutions through capacity Building & Training 
of Elected Representatives, functionaries, and other stakeholders. In addition to this, various other 
components were also supported under the scheme which includes construction of Panchayat Bhawan 
on a limited scale with focus on North Eastern (NE) States. During the year 2022-23, construction of 
1,283 New Panchayat Bhawan approved to States which includes 1,183 for NE States.  
Primarily, the Untied Grants of the Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV FC) can be utilized for all 
felt needs under the 29 subjects enshrined in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution and thus it 
would also cover construction and repair of Gram Panchayat Bhawans in the rural areas, as one of the 
permissible activities for XV FC mandated activities by Rural Local Bodies (RLBs). 
With a view to expedite saturation in this direction, a Joint Advisory was issued to States / UTs 
by Secretary of this Ministry and that of Ministry of Rural Development on 10.06.2020 requesting for 
construction of GP buildings utilizing various resources under convergence mode viz. Unspent 
14th Finance Commission, FFC grants, 15th Finance Commission untied grants, MGNREGS funds and 
other funds from State Finance Commission (SFC) / Own Source Revenue (OSR) etc. In furtherance to 
that as per D.O. Letter dated 07.01.2021 issued by this Ministry to all States / UTs, they have been 
requested to undertake / concerted efforts to clear the infrastructure deficit regarding GP Bhawans by 
utilizing various resources at their level. They have also been advised to examine the possibility of 
creating a cluster of contiguous GPs for construction of GP Bhawans where the size of GPs is small. It 
has also been advised to States that while creating new GPs, the States should simultaneously make 
provision for creation of GP Bhawan also through available resources under central schemes or from 
the State Budget or OSR of the Panchayats.  
With the constant follow-up to be made in this direction, it is expected that the deficit in GP 
Bhawans will be made upto a great extent. 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 

 
 
16 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
The Committee note that the SVAMITVA scheme aims at providing the ‘record of rights’ to 
village household owners possessing houses in inhabited rural areas in villages and issuance of 
property cards to the property owners. The scheme has a wide ranging socio-economic impact on rural 
areas. However, the Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry could not achieve its physical 
targets for the financial years of 2020-21 and 2021-22. The Ministry in its reply have submitted that the 
targets could not be achieved due to issues such as minimal number of drones available with Survey of 
India, climatic conditions among others. The Committee, therefore recommend the Ministry to prepare 
a action plan and set realistic targets, so that the scheme can achieve its targets by 2025-26. It is a 
matter of serious concern that some States are even not on board of the scheme due to local 
conditions. These states may be requested to establish a CoRS network or any other alternate remedy 
which will be helpful for surveying purposes. 
Reply of the Government 
 
As of 28 April 2023, drone flying has been completed in 2.46 lakh villages, 66% of the total 
village target of 3.72 lakhs. To complete the scheme by March 2025, the Ministry has aimed to 
complete the drone flying in the targeted villages by April-May 2024. Survey of India has established 
CORS across the Country to create National Reference Network connecting the entire Country. 567 
out of the total CORS are being established under SVAMITVA Scheme. 
Ministry is continuously following up with States to on-board SVAMITVA Scheme. However, 
despite these efforts the scheme is not currently implemented in the following States: 
i. Bihar – denied to on-board as already performing surveys under State Programme 
ii. West Bengal – confirmation awaited 
iii. Nagaland – confirmation awaited 
iv. Meghalaya – confirmation awaited 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
The Committee have been informed that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj have provided the 
platform of AuditOnline for carrying out online audits of annual accounts of Rural Local Bodies (RLBs), 
as the Central Finance Commission has been emphasizing on ensuring availability of audited 
Panchayat Accounts. Needless to mention here that audit is a significant tool in the hands of the 
Government to determine how the funds provided by the Government were actually and prudently used 
as per the prescribed norms by the Panchayats and to identify factors that contribute to suboptimal 
use. However, the Committee notice that audit report have been generated for only 46 per cent and 70 
per cent Gram Panchayats for 2019-20 and 2020-21, respectively. During its various Study Visits in 

 
 
17 
 
different parts of the Country, the Committee have observed that neither audit of panchayats are being 
conducted in a time bound manner nor audit report were provided to the Committee. The Committee 
appreciate that 15th Finance Commission (FFC), has mandated that with effect from 2023-24 onwards 
all accounts of Panchayats are to be audited for the preceding two years i.e. 2021-22. The commission 
has also mandated that they be placed in public domain as well. Since it has been made mandatory to 
conduct audit of all the accounts of Panchayats, the Committee, recommend that the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj should take up the matter with State Governments at the highest level and impress 
upon them to conduct audit of accounts of Gram Panchayats in a time bound manner with the Audit 
Online application of MoPR and fulfill the conditions of FFC. For transparency of the expenditure of 
funds, results of the audit should also be placed in the public domain as directed by FFC. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Constitutionally, the subject of auditing of accounts of Panchayats comes within the purview of 
State Governments. Article 243J of the Constitution of India provides that the Legislature of a State 
may, by law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Panchayats and the 
auditing of such accounts. 
 
However, for ensuring timely audit of Panchayat accounts i.e. receipts and expenditures of the 
Rural Local Bodies (RLBs), Ministry has rolled out the online application AuditOnline 
(https://auditonline.gov.in). This application not only facilitates online auditing of Panchayat accounts by 
facilitating cross referencing to the data in eGramSwaraj application and also provides for maintaining 
the audit reports of RLBs in its database.  
 
The updated status of audit reports of RLBs generated in AuditOnline for FY 2019-20, 2020-21 
and 2021-22 are 1,19,587(45.52%), 2,00,631(76.38%) and 96,541 (36.75%) respectively.  
 
In order to further improvise on the AuditOnline features, MoPR has circulated a discussion 
paper titled "The ATR: Strengthening Audit Mechanism at Grassroots level" to all the States on 4th 
November, 2022, while also soliciting inputs / suggestions / comments on the same. The discussion 
paper emphasizes on the time bound completion of Action Taken Report (ATR) against the audit 
observations raised during the audit process. 
 
The above effort was followed up with series of Video Conferences with States from 1stApril to 13th 
April, 2023 to discuss on the following agenda points: 
i) States' inputs / comments / suggestions on the Discussion paper that was shared. 
ii) States' strategy / action plan to achieve 100% audits by the stipulated timeline of 30thJune, 
2023. 

 
 
18 
 
A dedicated one-day follow-up meeting was held with all the representatives of Panchayati Raj and 
Local Fund Audit departments of all States during March, 2023, in which the ways and means of 
achievement of 100 % audit of RLBs for FY 2021-22 onwards, being one of the eligibility conditions for 
receipt of XV FC Grants from FY 2023-24 onwards, were discussed. Follow up on the deliberations of 
the meeting are being taken up. 
 
MoPR has made further progress towards streamlining the process of capturing of the ATRs on 
audit observations based on the above initiatives. The ATR module accordingly would be incorporated 
after further discussions with C&AG and other stakeholders, in AuditOnline. The finalised audit reports 
of RLBs are expected to be made available on display in AuditOnline on completion of this exercise. 
 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
The Committee note that out of 26 states for which information was given by the Ministry, only 
nine states have constituted 6th State Finance Commissions and out of them only two are active. Some 
states have not even constituted 4th and 5th Finance Commissions. Since it is necessary that State 
Finance Commissions are constituted regularly for the devolution of funds to PRIs from state finances, 
the Committee, therefore recommend that the MoPR should impress upon the State Governments to 
constitute SFCs regularly and this matter may be taken up at the highest level with them. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
As the constitution of due State Finance Commission (SFC) is necessary condition for release 
of grants to local bodies from 2024-25, MoPR accords priority to ensure that States comply this 
condition in a time bound manner. 
 
Accordingly, Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj wrote to Chief Secretaries of States vide 
letter dated 8th December, 2022 to ensure due constitution and due facilitation for proper functioning of 
the State Finance Commissions (SFC). Follow up letters dated 3rd February, 2023 on the same were 
also sent from Joint Secretary, MoPR to the States. 
 
In response of these initiatives, 21 States including have constituted their due SFCs. The latest 
State to constitute the SFC is the State of Andhra Pradesh which has constituted its 5thSFC on 18th 
March, 2023. The States of Gujarat and Telangana have also informed that the process of constituting 
the respective due SFCs in their States have been initiated. 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
  

 
 
19 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
20 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE  
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
The Committee appreciates that the Ministry is incentivizing the best performing Panchayats 
through National Panchayat Awards. These awards have been revamped w.e.f. 2022 to assess the 
performance of PRIs in attainment of Sustainable Development Goals through nine identified 
Localization of SDG themes. Total five awards are given, in which Gram Panchayats are chosen under 
each award. Perusal of the information given by the Ministry shows that Madhya Pradesh received Rs. 
5.13 Crore as maximum incentive under these awards during the last three years and the current year. 
Total incentive given to all States/UTs was Rs. 52.49 Crore during 2021-22. Moreover, the some 
States/UTs viz. Puducherry, Lakshadweep, Mizoram, Andaman & Nicobar, Goa and Arunachal 
Pradesh are least performing States/UTs. While acknowledging the importance of these awards which 
endeavours to develop healthy competition among PRIs to work towards effective, efficient and 
transparent governance of PRIs, the Committee strongly recommend that number and quantum of 
awards under each category should be increased so as to encourage more and more Panchayats to 
come forward to fulfill the SDGs. Moreover, the Ministry should also impress upon the least performing 
States/UTs to perform better so as to achieve the objectives of the award scheme. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The National Panchayat Awards (NPA) given by Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) under the 
Incentivization of Panchayats scheme have been revamped from the Year 2022 establishing a multi-
level pyramidical structure of awards competition at Block, District, State/UT and National Level 
aligning these awards with 9 Localization of Sustainable Development Goals (LSDGs) themes. The 9 
award themes are (i) Poverty free and enhanced livelihoods Panchayat, (ii) Healthy Panchayat, (iii) 
Child friendly Panchayat, (iv) Water sufficient Panchayat, (v) Clean and Green Panchayat, (vi) Self-
sufficient infrastructure in Panchayat, (vii) Socially secured Panchayat, (viii) Panchayat with good 
governance and (ix) Women-friendly Panchayat. These themes are conferred under the category of 
Deen Dayal Upadhyay Panchayat Satat Vikas Puraskar (DDUPSVP). For awards under these themes, 
3 top ranking Gram Panchayats/equivalent bodies are shortlisted at Block, District, State/UT and 
National Level, designated as respective level awardees, and further nominated for higher level/next 
level competition before they reach the National level competition. These shortlisted Gram 
Panchayats/equivalent bodies are termed as respective level awardee Gram Panchayats/equivalent 
bodies. The other category of awards is Nanaji Deshmukh Sarvottam Panchayat Satat Vikas Puraskar 
(NDSPSVP), under which Gram Panchayats, Block Panchayats and District Panchayats are conferred 
best performing Panchayat awards for their overall performance in all the above nine themes. In 
addition to this, there are also special categories awards for Gram Panchayats. These are ‘Gram Urja 
Swaraj Vishesh Panchayat Puraskar’ to 3 Gram Panchayats for their outstanding works towards their 

 
 
21 
 
efforts of energy self-sufficiency in their Panchayats and ‘Carbon Neutral Vishesh Panchayat Puraskar’ 
to 3 Gram Panchayats for their outstanding works in their efforts to ensure net zero carbon emission in 
the Panchayats.  
Under the NPA 2023, 42 National Level financial incentive-based awards have been conferred 
to best performing Panchayats on 17.04.2023. Additionally, 4 Gram Panchayats were provided 
certificates for their appreciable performance. Further, more than 72 thousand Gram 
Panchayats/equivalent bodies emerged as at Block, District and State/UT level. Award money has also 
been exponentially increased ranging from minimum Rs.50 Lakhs for a Gram Panchayat/Equivalent 
body to maximum Rs. 5.00 crore for a District Panchayat from the existing of minimum Rs.5 lakh to 
maximum of Rs.50 lakh.  
 
Around 2.41 lakh out of 2.6 lakh Gram Panchayats/Equivalent Bodies in the country 
successfully participated under the NPA 2023. This achievement reflects the remarkable and 
integrated efforts of states/UTs and Panchayats and also the level of awareness created on the LSDGs 
among them. This inculcates an aspiration that the country is on the right path to achieve the 2030 
Agenda of SDGs through rural local bodies. 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 & 1.9 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
The Committee are concerned to note that out of 271102 Gram Panchayats in the country, only 
219889 GPs have computers in them. Availability of computers is a prerequisite for using internet 
service facilities. Perusal of information provided by the Ministry shows that the Gram Panchayats in 
some states have not even one computer. The Ministry has formulated e-Panchayat project which is a 
mission mode project under Digital India Programme to make the working of PRIs more transparent, 
accountable and effective through information and communication technology. But in the absence of 
adequate computer infrastructure, effective implementation of this project may not be possible. The 
Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry in coordination with State Governments/ UTs should 
take steps for installation of at least two computers with internet service in each Gram Panchayat in the 
country in a time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
Panchayat being a State subject, providing computers for Panchayats is primarily the 
responsibility of States/ Union Territories (UTs). However, Ministry, under the scheme of Rashtriya 
Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) supplemented the efforts of all States by providing computers for 
Panchayats as proposed by States/UTs in their Annual Action Plan and approved by Central 
Empowered Committee, on a limited scale. 

 
 
22 
 
As on Date, 2,55,666 Gram Panchayats or equivalent bodies have prepared their Gram 
Panchayat Development Plans for FY 2022-23 in e-Gram SWARAJ application. Further, 2,26,407 
Gram Panchayats carried out online transitions amounting to Rs. 29,995 Crores for Fifteenth Finance 
Commission grants in FY 2022-23 through e-Gram SWARAJ-PFMS Interface. 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation Serial No. 9) 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj aims at ‘Digitization of Gram Panchayats’ 
by providing broadband connectivity to more than 2.55 lakh GPs of the country in collaboration with the 
Ministry of Telecommunications and Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY). It is 
imperative for a ‘Digitally Inclusive and Empowered Society’ envisaged under the flagship programme 
of Digital India. However, the Committee acknowledge that progress of the ‘BharatNet Project’ is not 
encouraging. Only 80,742 rural local bodies have active internet connection as on 21-01-2023 out of 
2,71,102 rural local bodies even though 1.92 lakh Gram Panchayats have been made service ready. 
The Committee have also observed lack of broadband connectivity in the Gram Panchayats and use of 
private cellular data for public service delivery during its Study Visits undertaken to States such as 
Maharashtra. Considering the significance of the project, the Committee urge the Ministry to take 
concrete steps in coordination with other two Ministries to make all the 1.92 lakh service ready GPs to 
have active internet connection during 2023-24 and to connect all GPs with Broad Band connectivity by 
2024-25. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The BharatNet project is being implemented by the Department of Telecommunication to 
facilitate digital infrastructure in rural India to provide doorstep delivery of government services. The 
aim of the project is to connect all the Gram Panchayats with high bandwidth broadband internet. 
BharatNet, one of the biggest rural telecom projects of the world, is being implemented in a phased 
manner to provide broadband connectivity to all Gram Panchayats (approx. 2,55,000) in the country. 
Now, the scope of the project has been expanded up to all inhabited villages. 
All efforts are being made by this Ministry to connect Gram Panchayats to the high-speed 
Internet. In this regard, Ministry of Panchayati Raj constituted a Project Monitoring and Steering 
Committee on 30th September, 2021 under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, Panchayati Raj 
to review the progress of BharatNet connections and CSC co-location at Gram Panchayat Bhawan. 
The committee comprises members from the Department of Telecommunications (DoT), Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL) and State 
Implementing Agencies (SIAs). The Terms of Reference (ToR) of the committee are to review the  
V. State/UT wise Service Ready GPs 
VI. State/UT wise active internet connection at Gram Panchayat Bhawan through BharatNet. 

 
 
23 
 
VII. Co-location of CSC with Gram Panchayat Bhawan.  
VIII. Any other related issues. 
 The Ministry is holding regular meetings with BBNL/DoT/State officials in this regard. In 
addition, several advisories have been issued to States in order to sensitize the Panchayats to opt for 
internet connectivity through BBNL/BSNL. 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.15 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation Serial No. 10) 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj have launched “Digitization of Gram 
Panchayats” programme in 2019  to achieve the objective of Smart Governance and provision of 
various online G2G, B2B and B2C services to the Rural Populace. However, the Committee are 
constrained to note that during its recent Study Visits undertaken to States of Maharashtra and Sikkim, 
it has been noted that most of the GPs provide only few online services related to birth and death 
certificates. The Ministry envisaged to bring all Panchayat related public services online.  However, 
most of the online envisaged services are not being provided by the Panchayats to its citizens. The 
Committee are given to understand that, the people rely on private service providers for such services 
and have to pay extra charges. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to look into this 
matter and ensure that all Gram Panchayats provide all mandated online assured services instead of 
confining only birth and death certificates etc. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard.   
Reply of the Government 
The vision of MoPR is to make Local Governments more responsive, by defining the role of 
Panchayats in the delivery of key services to rural people, giving them the mandate as enshrined under 
article 243G of the Constitution of India. In this endeavor, Ministry of Panchayati Raj in collaboration 
with National Institute of Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (NIRDPR) has prepared a Model 
Panchayat Citizens Charter/ framework for delivery of the services across the 29 sectors, aligning 
actions with localised Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) for the Panchayats to adopt & 
customize. The Citizen Charter would ensure transparent and effective delivery of public services for 
sustainable development and enhanced citizen service experiences; deepening inclusive and 
accountable Local Self Governments by incorporate diverse views while designing and delivering 
services. The aim is to provide services to the people in a time bound manner, redressing their 
grievances and improving their lives. 
Citizen Charter campaign under the aegis of Meri Panchayat, Mera Adhikaar- Jan Sevaayein 
Hamare Dwaar was initiative from 01st July- 30th September, 2021 with an intent to of making the role 
of Panchayats in Service Delivery meaningful and fulfilling. This will help to standardise the delivery of 
Services across the Panchayats, setting service standards, the time limit that the people can expect to 

 
 
24 
 
be served, mechanisms for redressing grievances, and a provision for unbiased scrutiny by citizens; 
making the Panchayats and their elected representatives directly accountable to the people, on the 
other hand. As on date, about 2.15 Lakh Gram Panchayats across 30 States/ UTs have now finalised 
their Citizen Charter, offering 952 Services spanning various sectors viz. Health & Family Welfare, 
Drinking Water & Sanitation, Public Welfare, Employment etc. 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
 
25 
 
CHAPTER V 
 RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[O.M. No. H-11022/3/2023-Parl. Dated: 30th May, 2023] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25 July, 2023 
03 Shravana, 1945 (Saka)    
KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural  
Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 

 
 
26 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2022-2023) 
EXTRACT OF MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
TUESDAY, 25th JULY, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1520 hrs. in Committee Room No. 3, Parliament House 
Annexe Extension, (EPHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi     - Chairperson 
       MEMBERS 
 
       Lok Sabha 
2. Shri A.K.P Chinraj 
3. Shri Rajveer Diler 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
6. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
7. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
8. Ms. S. Jothi Mani 
9. Shri Janardan Mishra 
10. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
11. Dr. Talari Rangaiah 
12. Smt Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
13. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
14. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
15. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
16. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
Rajya Sabha  
17. Shri Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiya 
18. Smt Shanta Chhetri 
19. Shri Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade 
20. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
21. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
22. Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram  - Director 
3. Shri Vinay P. Barwa  - Deputy Secretary 
  

 
 
27 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for consideration and adoption of draft reports on XXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXX Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the 31st Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) pertaining to Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj. The Committee considered and adopted the draft reports without any amendment and authorized 
the Chairperson to present the Reports to the House.  
 
3.   XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXX. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
 
 
  

 
 
28 
 
ANNEXURE II 
 [Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY FIRST REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  13  
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted  by the Government 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12, & 13 
 
 
 
Total: 09 
Percentage: 70% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee:   
Serial Nos. 7, 8, 9 & 10 
 
 
 
Total: 04 
Percentage: 30% 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 