 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
                         (2020-2021) 
      
 
        SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
   
PRADHAN MANTRI AWAAS YOJANA - GRAMIN : PMAY(G)  
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
16 


 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2020-2021) 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
   
 
 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI AWAAS YOJANA - GRAMIN : PMAY(G)  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 05.08.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 05.08.2021 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2021/Shravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 


 
 
CRD No.  170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
© 2021 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

 
 
CONTENTS 
                 Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-2021)   ......................................             (iii)
   
 
INTRODUCTION      …...................................            (iv) 
 
REPORT 
PART I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
I. Introductory  
                              1 
(a) Background 
(b) Launch of Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G)          2 
  
II. Fundamentals of PMAY-G                3 
(a) Aims and Objectives                3 
(b) Salient Features                4 
(c) Selection of Beneficiaries               8 
(d) Landless beneficiaries               11 
(e) Fund Sharing Pattern                14 
 
III.  Some of the Major Reforms Incorporated             14 
 
(a) Electronic Governance                 14  
(b) Mobile Governance                   15 
(c) Direct Benefit Transfer                15  
(d) Allotment of house                 15 
(e) Construction of house                  16 
(f) Convergence with various other schemes               16 
(g) Masons Training                  20 
(h) House Design Typologies under PMAY-G Scheme              21 
 
IV. Financial / Physical Performance       22 
(a) Financial Targets                      22 
(b) Total outlay in the Current Financial Year under PMAY-G              23 
 
V. Physical Performance - Achievement of Targets    24 
VI. Monitoring of the Scheme        28 
 
 
  

 
 
Part II Recommendations/Observations 
APPENDICES 
 
 
    Recommendations / Observations    30 
I. Table on Landless Beneficiaries                   47 
II. Table on NREGA unskilled wages availed under PMAY-G since 2016-17  48 
III. Table on PMAY-G houses constructed under Rural Mason Training(RMT)  49 
IV. Table on Financial Progress of PMAY-G      50 
V. Table on Physical Progress of PMAY-G       52 
VI. Table on Pending Central Releases along with reasons for the FY 2017-2018 
under PMAY-G         54 
 
VII. Table on Pending Central Releases along with reasons for the FY 2018-2019  
under PMAY-G         56 
VIII. Table on Pending Central Releases along with reasons for the FY 2019-2020  
under PMAY-G         58 
 
IX. Extracts of the Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 09 January, 2020 61 
 
X. Extracts of the Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 21 August, 2020 63 
 
XI. Extract of the Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 03 August, 2021  65 
  
  
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(2020-2021) 
 
          Shri Prataprao Jadhav  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri C. N. Annadurai 
4. Shri A.K.P Chinraj 
5. Shri Rajveer Diler 
6. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
7. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
10. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
11. Shri Narendra Kumar 
12. Shri Janardan Mishra 
13. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
14. Shri Talari Rangaiah 
15. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
16. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
17. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
18. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
19. Shri K. Sudhakaran 
20. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
21. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. -vacant- 
23. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo 
24. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
25. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
26. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
27. Shri Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiya 
28. -vacant- 
29. Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa 
30. Shri Ram Shakal 
31. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Emma C. Barwa - Additional Director 
3. Shri Nagendra Suman - Under Secretary 
 
 (iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development (2020-2021) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present the Report on 'Pradhan Mantri 
Awaas Yojana - Gramin PMAY(G) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development). 
2. The Committee held briefing by the representatives of the 
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) on  
09 January, 2019.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) 
at their sitting held on 21 August, 2020. 
3. The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at 
their sitting held on 03.08.2021. 
4. The Committee wish to express thanks to the officials of the 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) for 
placing before them the requisite material and their considered views in 
connection with the examination of the subject. 
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense 
of appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the 
officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI;                      PRATAPRAO JADHAV 
03 August, 2021                                     Chairperson, 
12 Shravana , 1943 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
REPORT 
Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana - Gramin (PMAY-G) 
 
PART – I  
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
I. INTRODUCTORY  
(a)  Background 
1.1 Housing is universally recognized as a basic human need. Reducing rural housing 
shortage and improving the quality of housing, especially for the poor, is an important 
component of the poverty alleviation strategy of the Government.   
       
1.2 Government of India launched several programs for Public Housing in the past. 
Beginning from Village Housing Programme (1957), National Rural Employment 
Programme (1980) and Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme (1983), and 
Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) in 1985. Although the IAY was in operation since long, it was 
observed that there still existed a large number of rural families with limited access to 
basic housing amenities. In order to realize objective of Government “Housing for All” by 
2022, a need was felt to create an enabling environment especially in rural areas so that 
the people living in rural areas can construct a pucca house with all basic amenities with 
ease.  
1.3 Moreover, as pointed out by the Performance Audit report of Comptroller and 
Auditor General, 2014, the earlier scheme was facing major challenges in 
implementation. To address these shortcomings and lacuna, the erstwhile Rural Housing 
scheme, IAY was restructured and Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana - Gramin (PMAY-G) 
was launched.  
 
1.4 When enquired about the shortcomings/challenges faced in the earlier scheme, 
the Ministry in their written reply have stated that the Comptroller and Auditor General 
(C&AG) conducted Performance Audit of the erstwhile rural housing scheme, Indira 
Awaas Yojana (IAY) and gave the following findings : 
 

2 
 
i. Non-assessment of housing shortage 
ii. Low quality of house and lack of technical supervision 
iii. Weak mechanism for monitoring 
iv. Lack of transparency in selection of beneficiaries 
v. Lack of convergence  
vi. Loans not availed by beneficiaries 
 
(b)  Launch of Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G) 
1.5 To address the existing gaps pointed out by the C&AG in the rural housing 
program and to bring in place a more comprehensive scheme for providing shelter to 
rural population devoid of proper shelter, the old scheme was restructured and  Pradhan 
Mantri Awaas Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G) was launched with effect from 01 April, 2016 for 
providing “Housing for All" by 2022, through provision of pucca house with basic 
amenities to all houseless households and households in rural areas. 
 
1.6 The Prime Minister on the launch of PMAY-G quoted : 
“I would like to point out that the 'Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana' is not an 
Infrastructure. It is not meant to create walls or to provide land. It is a big 
program to fulfill the dreams and aspirations of the people. Even for the 
poorest of the poor in India and every individual, there is a desire to have 
his own house. However, the desires of the poor are never fulfilled. No poor 
wants to give poverty to their children in inheritance. He also wants to give 
them something. Government has a dream for such people to help them 
fulfill their dreams................ Center is ready to pursue this work. State and 
Central Government will do this work together and provide shelter to 
poorest of poor of this country. His dreams will get a new life with this 
shelter. And with those dreams the country will scale new heights in 2022."  
 
1.7 In response to a specific question as to whether all the shortcomings/challenges 
faced in the earlier scheme have been addressed in PMAY-G, it has been stated that 
the Ministry has addressed the shortcomings of IAY in Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana – 
Gramin (PMAY-G) in a comprehensive way. The following are major changes in the 
restructured rural housing scheme, i.e. PMAY-G : 
i. Housing shortage estimation was done based on reports of Working Group on 
Rural Housing for 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17), Census 2011 and SECC 
2011 
ii. Focus on Quality of house construction through Rural Mason Training, House 
Design typologies, House Quality Review app etc. 

3 
 
iii. Evidence based monitoring of progress of construction through geo-
tagged  photographs on AwaasApp and progress reporting on MIS-AwaasSoft 
iv. For selection of beneficiaries, houseless and people living in dilapidated and 
kucha houses as per SECC 2011 data are considered 
v. Convergence with other programs for basic amenities such as Saubhagya for 
electricity, PMUY for LPG connection, SBM/MGNREGA for toilet construction 
etc. 
vi. Provision for availing loan of upto Rs. 70,000/- 
vii. Unit cost has been increased upto 1.20/1.30 lakh and size of the house has 
been enhanced from 20 sqm to 25 sqm with space for hygeinic cooking.  
 
II. FUNDAMENTALS OF PRADHAN MANTRI AWAAS YOJNA - GRAMIN (PMAY-G) 
 (a) Aims and Objectives 
1.8 PMAY-G aims at realizing the vision of ‘Housing for All by 2022’ through a robust 
delivery and monitoring mechanism and improved scheme architecture. It also aims to 
provide a pucca house with basic amenities to all rural houseless households and 
households living in kucha and dilapidated house by 2022. The mandate of PMAY-G 
which entails construction of 2.95 crore houses by 2021-22 is proposed to be achieved in 
two phases. The target of 1.00 crore houses set to be achieved in 1st phase  have been 
taken up for construction in 3 years i.e., 2016-17 to 2018-19. In the 2nd phase 1.95 crore 
houses are to be taken up for construction in 3 years from 2019-20 to 2021-22. The 
objective is to enable construction of quality houses by the beneficiaries themselves 
using local materials, designs and trained masons. For houses to become homes, 
adoption of a habitat approach through convergence is envisaged. 
 
1.9 During the briefing meeting on PMAY-G, the Secretary, Ministry of Rural 
Development (MoRD) stated as under:- 
 “सर, पहली बात तो यह है िक जब Ůधानमंũी आवास योजना (Ťामीण) को अŮैल,  2016  मŐ 
माननीय Ůधानमंũीजी Ȫारा आगरा से लाँच िकया गया था, तो उस समय यह लƙ  था िक Ťामीण 
Ɨेũों मŐ क ु ल 2 करोड़ 95 लाख ऐसे पįरवार हœ, िजनको आवासों की आवʴ कता होगी।लेिकन िवगत 
वषŘ क े  अनुभव से हमने यह पाया िक यह संƥ ा  2 करोड़ 95 लाख से हर वषŊ घटती गई और अभी 
लगभग 2 करोड़ 49 लाख पįरवार ऐसे हœ, िजनको वषŊ 2022 तक कवर िकया जाना है। यह पहला 
तȚ  मœ आपक े  सामने रखना चाहता था।…..”  
 

4 
 
1.10 The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) during evidence held on 
21.08.2020 further apprised as under : 
".............. आज क े  िदन भी  2  करोड़  95 लाख Ťाम सभाओं क े  सȑापन क े  बाद िनकाले थे और 
अब भी 2 करोड़ 32 लाख आ रहे हœ..............." 
 
(b) Salient Features of PMAY-G  
1.11 The main features of PMAY-G are as follows :-  
(i) Identification and selection of beneficiaries is based on the housing 
deficiency and other social deprivation parameters in SECC-2011 data and 
verification by Gram Sabha.  While devising the procedure for identification 
of beneficiaries, utmost emphasis has been assigned to verification of 
priority lists by Gram Sabhas. To ensure swift and prompt disposal of 
grievances/complaints pertaining to the verification process, a robust 
Appellate mechanism for grievance redressal has been put into place at the 
State Level. Till date, 1.36 crore households out of a universe of 4.04 crore 
have been rejected by Gram Sabha on grounds of having a pucca house, 
migration, death etc. and remaining households have been found eligible to 
receive assistance after conclusion of the Appellate proceedings. 
(ii) Houses to have a minimum size of 25 sq. mt including a dedicated area for 
hygienic cooking. 
(iii) Unit assistance of Rs. 1.20 lakh in plains and Rs.1.30 lakh in hilly States, 
difficult areas and IAP districts.  
(iv) In addition, the beneficiary will get Rs. 12,000/- as assistance for 
construction of toilet under Swachh Bharat Mission (G), Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) or any other 
dedicated financing source and support of 90 person days in plain areas 
and 95 person days in hilly states, difficult areas and IAP districts under 
MGNREGS through convergence. 
(v)    Facilitating willing beneficiaries to avail loan from Financial Institutions for 
an amount of up to Rs. 70,000. 
(vi) Earmarking for focus groups: 60% of the funds are earmarked for SC/ST 
and 15% for minorities. States/UTs should ensure that as far as possible at 
least 5 % of beneficiaries are from among persons with disabilities. 
 
1.12 Replying to a query on unit assistance under PMAY-G, the Ministry in their written 
reply have communicated that PMAY-G houses are constructed by beneficiaries on the 
land owned by them. The unit assistance under PMAY-G has been derived considering 

5 
 
the minimum size of a house to be 25 square meters which has been increased 
substantially from 1st April, 2016. Further many States are providing top-up over and 
above the assistance provided under PMAY-G. Also, there is no proposal to make the 
unit assistance under PMAY-G at par with the PMAY-U. However, States / UTs are free 
to provide top up above the amount under PMAY-G and certain States contribute an 
additional amount over and above the PMAY-G unit assistance, on the basis of their 
assessment of the needs of the beneficiaries. The top up amounts contributed by various 
States is given below: 
SNo State Name Top up amount 
 1. Karnataka Rs. 30,000 for SC/ST 
beneficiaries 
 2. Tamil Nadu Rs. 50,000 
 3. Haryana Rs. 18,000 
 4. Dadra and Nagar Haveli Rs. 1,20,000 
 5. Andhra Pradesh 
Rs. 1,00,000 (SCs), Rs. 
1,00,000 to 1,50,000 (STs) and 
Rs. 50,000 for others 
 
1.13 Ministry of Rural Development may work with the States to analyse the situation in 
the field and suggest additional sources for topping up of the unit assistance through 
convergence with State schemes.   
 
1.14 The Committee when pointedly enquired about the reasons behind very few 
beneficiaries availing loan of Rs. 70,000/- from  Financial Institutions over and above 
their PMAY-G  unit assistance, the Ministry in their written reply have stated that regular 
feedback from States is sought to understand the reasons for delay in construction of 
houses. During the recent Performance Review Meeting held on 25th August, 2020, 
Secretary, Rural Development had sought inputs from States/UTs with reference to the 
sufficiency of funds provided to beneficiaries for house construction and the problems 
faced by beneficiaries for availing the facility of loan Rs. 70,000. In this regard, it was 

6 
 
conveyed by States/UTs that the funds provided were sufficient and not a reason for 
delay in construction of houses. 
 
1.15 Additionally, it was observed that the off take of the loan facility offered under 
PMAY-G was very low due to the below reasons: 
i. The quantum of loan (Rs.70, 000) was low but the administration cost 
involved to administer this loan was high. 
ii. The number of branches, especially in rural areas is few. 
iii. The beneficiaries of PMAY-G are scattered and in remote locations. 
iv. Although Non Bank Financial Companies (NBFC) and Housing Finance 
Companies (HFC) were keen to provide loan to the beneficiaries of PMAY-G, 
the rate of interest was high almost equal to the interest rate charged by the 
private lenders. 
v. Banks often ask for collateral while providing loan and beneficiaries are mostly 
not in a position to provide the same. 
  
1.16 The Ministry informed that it is currently working on developing a loan product, in 
association with Indian Bank Association (IBA), where collateral requirements are 
minimum and interest rates are cheaper. 
 
1.17 The Secretary, MoRD responding over the issue during the evidence, stated that: 
“एक मुद ् दा उठाया गया था िक बœक 70 हजार Ŝपये तक का लोन देने मŐ आना कानी करते 
हœ, इस क े स को भी हम देखŐगे। …..” 
  
1.18 Over the issue of increase in unit cost, the Secretary, MoRD responded as     
under :-  
"जो रािश भारत या राǛ  सरकार देती है उसे अनुदान क े ŝ प मŐ माना जाना चािहए । यह कांटŌेƃ  
का मामला नहᱭ है । वह अपना घर बना रहा है। लोगों ने बŠत बिढ़या, उɺ ा घर बनाए हœ।…………….. 
कई राǛ  सरकारों ने सपोटŊ देने की अलग से ʩ व̾था की है।…………….. मœ एक और िवषय आप 
लोगों क े सामने िवचार क े िलए रखना चाšंगा िक यᳰद राʼŌ की 75 वीं वषŊ गांठ पर हमŐ क ु छ संकʙ  को 
पूरा करक े िदखाना है तो यᳰद हम लागत क े साथ इसको करŐगे तो यह पूरा नहीं हो सकता है। यह तय 
आप लोगों को करना है। यिद आप तय करŐगे िक 1,50,000 नहीं 3,00000 दŐगे तो यह लƙ  पूरा नहीं 
होगा।…………………. शहरी और Ťामीण आवासों मŐ मूलभूत फकŊ  यह है िक शहरी आवासों मŐ जमीन 
क े भी क ु छ लागत आते हœ, लेिकन Ťामीण आवासों मŐ खुद की जमीन होती है या Ťाम सभा देती है।"  
 

7 
 
1.19 When the Committee raised the issue of higher transportation cost being incurred 
in transporting building material to the site in the Himalayan and hilly regions of the 
Country with no motorable roads, the Secretary, MoRD stated that :  
 िसİſ म क े  मामले मŐ  क ै रेज  हाउस  की  बात  Šई  थी। वतŊमान  मŐ  अलग क ै रेज  हाउस 
चाजŊ करने का Ůावधान नहीं है। लेिकन आपने जो  सम˟ ा  उठाई है, यह एक गंभीर सम˟ ा है। 
यह सम˟ ा क े वल िसİſ म की नहीं है, िजतने भी िहमालयी राǛ  हœ, उȅराखंड, जʃ ू-कʳ ीर 
आिद राǛ ों मŐ भी यह सम˟ ा है। हम इस पर िवचार करŐगे िक इस मामले मŐ Ɛ ा िकया जा सकता 
है और उससे आपको अवगत कराए ं गे।  
 
1.20 When the Committee sought clarification on earmarking 60% of the funds for 
SC/ST and 15% for minorities after they reach saturation, The Secretary MoRD during 
evidence responded as under: 
 सर, आपने एक िवषय यह उठाया िक जो जाितगत लƙ  है, उस को įरलेƛ  करक े  द ू सरे  
कʄ ुिनटीज क े  बीच टŌांसफर करने की ʩ व̾था होनी चािहए। इसमŐ िजतने लोग हœ, उन सभी को 
िमलना है। िसफŊसमय का फकŊ है िक िकस को पहले िमलेगा, िकस को बाद मŐ िमलेगा। ……………. 
मœ इस िवषय क े  बारे मŐ बताना चाहता šं िक यह राǛ  सरकार की कमजोरी है। हमारा इंː Ō ƕन 
बŠत ˙ʼ  है िक एस.सी, एस.टी. और माइनॉįरटीज क े  िलए 60 परसŐट और 15 परसŐट रखŐगे बािक 
दूसरे लोगों को दे सकते हœ। यिद एस.सी./एस.टी. और माइनॉįरटी का लƙ  सैचुरेट हो गया है तो 
ऐसे िकतने लोग हœ, िजनकोआवास सœƕन िकया जा सकता है, यह उनकी कमजोरी है। मœ कोिशश 
कŝं गा िक इस संबंध मŐ भी एक इंː Ō ƕन इʴ ू हो जाए।……………. इसमŐ ʩ व̾था यह है िक एक 
बार जब एस.सी./एस.टी. का लƙ  सैचुरेट हो जाता है, मान लीिजए देने क े  िलए पूरे  राǛ  मŐ क ु छ 
नहीं रहा तो चीफ सेŢे टरी मंũालय को पũ िलखता है िक हमारे  यहां एस.सी./ एस.टी. क े  जो 
ईयरमा̋डŊ टारगेट हœ, वे पूरे हो गए हœ, अब हमारे पास कोई पाũ ʩİƅ  नहीं बचा है, अब आप हमŐ 
इजाजत दीिजए िक जो सामाɊ  वगŊ क े  लोग हœ, उनक े  बीच मŐ यह लƙ  दे सकŐ। पũआने पर हम 
लोग तुरंत उसको ˢ ीक ृ त कर देते हœ। लेिकन, पũ नहीं आने के  अभाव मŐ हम लोग इस लƙ  को 
संभव है िक जो एस.सी./एस.टी. कमेटी क े  लƙ  हœ, उनकी जगह पर बाकी कʄ ुिनटीज को 
Ůायोįरटी िमल जाए।“ 
 
1.21 Further clarifying on the issue the Secretary MoRD submitted during evidence 
stated that: 
“यह लƙ  तो हम राǛ  सरकार को देते हœ। राǛ  सरकार को िनधाŊįरत करना है िक उसको क ै से 
बांटे। आप जो कह रहे हœ, मेरेअनुमान से राǛ  सरकार इसमŐ बŠत माइंड अɘ ाई करके  नहीं दे 
रही है। अɊ था, िजस तरह की कमजोरी ŮोŤाम मŐ िदख रही है, वह वैसी नहीं िदखती। मœ िफर से 
इस बात को अपने सािथयों से अनुरोध कŝं गा िक वे इस िवषय को एडŌेस करने की कोिशश 
करŐ।“….. 

8 
 
 
… यिद राǛ  शासन लƙ  दे रहा है, लेिकन देख नहीं रहा है िक उनक े  यहां िकतने लोग हœ, िजनको 
आवास सœƕन िकया जा सकता है, यह उनकी कमजोरी है। मœ कोिशश कŝं गा िक इस संबंध मŐ 
भी एक इंː Ō ƕन इʴ ू हो जाए।….. 
 
(c) Selection of Beneficiaries 
1.22 The beneficiaries of PMAY-G are identified by the Gram Sabha based on the 
housing deprivation parameters as per Socio-Economic and Caste Census data of 2011. 
The universe of eligible beneficiaries under PMAY (G) will include all the houseless and 
households living in zero, one or two room kucha houses as per SECC data, subject to 
the exclusion process. 
1.23 Prioritisation of beneficiaries for providing assistance under PMAY-G is made 
category-wise viz., SC/ST, Minorities and Others. Households are prioritized category-
wise based on houselessness followed by the number of rooms; zero, one and two 
rooms. 
1.24 The priority lists so prepared are verified by the Gram Sabha to check for ineligible 
beneficiaries and changes in priority. Necessary changes in the list are made based on 
the minutes of Gram Sabha indicating the above changes. The lists approved by the 
Gram Sabha are widely publicized within the Gram Panchayat. The complaints regarding 
deletion or change in ranking can be submitted to the Appellate Committee constituted 
by the State Government who would resolve such complaints. 
1.25 After the Appellate process is complete, the category-wise Permanent Waitlist of 
the Gram Panchayat is finalised which is widely published and entered on the website of 
PMAY-G. 
 
1.26 On the issue of anomalies in SECC data, the Ministry have submitted in their 
written replies that the SECC 2011 was conducted based on the data of NPR 2010. The 
NPR 2010 survey was conducted using physical forms which later were digitized through 
manual data entry in the system and such data was used as base data for conducting 
SECC survey. Some digitization errors have been observed which has led to incomplete 

9 
 
data capturing during SECC 2011. For example, in some of the cases, the details of all 
family members are missing. 
1.27 SECC Digitisation Error Resolution Module, available at the respective logins of 
the States/UTs on AwaasSoft, has been developed for re-verification of errors reported in 
details of family members of PMAY-G beneficiaries as per SECC data. The module is 
used for uploading of digitization errors by verifying the reported errors from the images 
of physical forms which were used to capture details during NPR 2010 survey. The 
request is raised by the states in case the details of family members, as per SECC 
survey, are not reflected on AwaasSoft or there is error in the details of family members 
and social category. 
 
1.28 The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development, while responding to the query on 
the anomalies in the SECC-2011 data, during the evidence meeting stated as under : 
“सŐसस को सही मानकर ही चला जाएगा। सŐसस 100 परसŐट सही नहीं माना जा सकता है, आपका 
यह तकŊ िबʋ ु ल वािजब है, इसिलए Ťाम सभाओं की भूिमका दी गई है। अगर 100 परसŐट सही 
होता तो हम Ťाम सभा की भूिमका Ɛ ों रखते? इनको रखा गया है तािक Ǜ ादा से Ǜ ादा सही हो।  
अगर आप की इजाजत हो तो एक आंकड़ा रखना चाहता šं। िजस समय सोʴ ो इकनािमक काː  
सŐसस मŐ इȱ लूजन, एƛƑ ूजन सभी Ţाइटेįरया लाया गया तो क ु ल िमलाकर 4 करोड़ 3 लाख 
लोग शािमल थे। जब Ťाम सभाओं ने सȑापन िकया तो यह संƥ ा घटकर 2 करोड़ 95 लाख हो 
गई। हम यह भी नहीं मान सकते िक Ťाम सभा ने क ु छ नहीं िकया। आज की तारीख मŐ करीब एक 
चौथाई लोगों क े  नाम हटाए गए हœ, यह बात सȑािपत है।  
…..हम यह भी नहीं  कह रहे हœ िक Ťाम  सभाओं ने ũुिट नहीं की है। आज क े  िदन भी  2  करोड़  95 
लाख Ťाम सभाओं क े  सȑापन क े  बाद िनकाले थे और अब भी 2 करोड़ 32 लाख आ रहे हœ, 63 लाख 
सȑापन क े  बावजूद िनकल रहे हœ। माननीय सद˟ ों ने िजस सम˟ ा क े  बारे मŐ कहा, मœ इतना ही 
कहना चाहता šं िक अगर घुन लग जाए तो सं̾थाओं को संभालना मुİʭल हो जाता है। आप िदशा 
सिमित को हैड करते हœ, मœ आपसे िनवेदन कŝं गा, जहां ऐसी İ̾थित आती है, आप आɥ वŊ करŐ 
और हम उस पर कारŊवाई करŐगे। हमारा इरादा िकसी को बचाने का नहीं है। अगर इतने पिवũ काम 
मŐ कोई सŐध लगा रहा है तो कड़ी कारŊवाई होनी चािहए। मंũालय इस बात का पƗधर है।" 
 
1.29 Further clarifying over the definition of kucha house, the Secretary MoRD during 
evidence submitted that: 
"माननीय सभापित जी ने कǄ े घर की पįरभाषा क े  बारे कहा िक वह राǛ  क े  अनुŝ प हो। यह 
िवषय भी हमारे यहां कमेटी मŐ रेफर Šआ था। ŵी नागेश िसंह हमारे मंũालय क े  एिडशनल सेŢे टरी  
थे, उनकी अȯƗ ता मŐ अंतर मंũालयी सिमित गिठत की गई थी। उसमŐ टेİƋकल लोग भी शािमल 

10 
 
थे। कमेटी ने असम और िũपुरा राǛ  क े  कǄ े घरों की पįरभाषा मŐ पįरवतŊन का िनणŊय िलया था, 
लेिकन, बाकी जगहों पर उɎोंने पįरभाषा मŐ कोई पįरवतŊन नहीं करने की जŝ रत बताई।  
 सर, माननीय अजय Ůताप िसंह जी ने Ťाम सभा मŐ एसईसीसी मŐ जो नाम जोड़े गए थे, उनकी Ůगित 
क े  बारे  मŐ जानना चाहा था। मœ आपको अवगत करना चाहता šं िक इनको आवास ɘ स योजना का 
नाम िदया गया है। इनमŐ आपस मŐ Ůाथिमकता क े  िलए जो मानक बनाया गया था, उसमŐ आधार को 
लेना जŝ री था तो हम आधार इकǧा करने की कोिशश कर रहे हœ। हम आधार क े  माȯ म से तीन 
चीजों क े  बेिसस पर उनकी Ůाथिमकता िनधाŊįरत करŐगे। एक तो पįरवार मŐ िकतने सद˟  है। द ू सरा 
यह है िक पįरवार मŐ मुİखया की आयु िकतनी है और तीसरा यह है िक उɎोंने मनरेगा मŐ िकतना 
काम िलया है। सर, सोचने का आधार यह है िक अगर वे मनरेगा मŐ Ǜ ादा काम मांगने आ रहे हœ तो 
वे काफी जŝ रतमंद पįरवार हœ। हम राǛ ों से आँकड़े Ůाɑ  करने की कोिशश कर रहे हœ । मœने 
आपको रोड मैप बताया है।"      
 
 1.30 When the Committee specifically raised the issue of wrong entries and anomalies 
in selection of beneficiaries under PMAY-G as noticed by the Members of the Committee 
during field visits in their constituencies, the Secretary MoRD categorically stated as 
under : 
“यह बात भी आई थी िक िजन क े  पास टŌैƃ र, मोटर साइिकल वगैर ह हœ, उɎŐ नहीं िमलना चािहए। 
इसक े  िलए ŮोŤाम पहले से ही बना है, इसक े  बावजूद भी ऐसा कर रहे हœ तो उन पर कायŊवाही 
होगी।“ 
 
1.31 Over easy transfer of ownership consequent on death of the PMAY-G beneficiary, 
the Secretary MoRD during the evidence stated as under: 
“महोदय, इस संबंध मŐ िडटेʒ  गाइडलाइɌ  इʴ ु कर दी गई हœ और  उस ʩİƅ  क े  कानूनी 
उȅरािधकारी को वह मकान िदया जा सकता है। 10 फ़रवरी, 2020  मŐ यह गाइडलाइन जारी की 
गई है।………… उनकी Ůाथिमकता खȏ  नहीं होगी। मान लीिजए उनका सूची मŐ पहला नाम है, तो 
पहले उɎŐ या उनक े  पįरवार को ही मकान िदया जाएगा…………..उनक े  जो कानूनी उȅरािधकारी हœ 
उɎŐ मकान िमलेगा और Ůाथिमकता सूची मŐ भी उनका वही ̾थान रहेगा।“ 
 
(d) Landless Beneficiaries 
1.32 The details of landless beneficiaries in the Permanent Wait List (PWL), those 
provided land and those yet to be provided land provided by the  Ministry of Rural 
Development is given in Appendix-I.        
1.33 On the role of the Central Ministry in chalking out guidelines on distribution of land 
to the landless being the major obstacle in achieving the goal of “Housing for All by 

11 
 
2022”, the Ministry in their written reply stated that providing land to the landless 
beneficiaries under PMAY-G for the construction of the houses is being given utmost 
importance since they are among the most deserving beneficiaries in the PWL of the 
scheme. Since, it is under the purview of State/UT to provide land to landless beneficiary 
from the government land or any other land including public land (Panchayat common 
land, community land or land belonging to other local authorities) they have been advised 
to provide land to such beneficiaries on priority. The matter of providing land to landless 
beneficiaries is reviewed regularly by the MoRD at the highest level including in EC 
meetings, PRC meetings, VCs, etc.  
 
1.34 The Secretary, MoRD further submitting the details  of  landless, during evidence, 
submitted that : 
“महाराʼŌ मŐ क ु ल 1,10,000 लोग लœडलेस थे। इनमŐ से उɎोंने 28,807 लोगों को घर दे िदया है। आज 
क े िदन भी 81,193 लोग ऐसे हœ, िजɎŐ जमीन/घर नहीं िमला है। सर, आपने बŠत अǅ ा िनदेश िदया है 
िक हम लोगों को अɊ  राǛ  सरकारों क े साथ बात करनी चािहए। हमारे मंũीजी ने इस बारे मŐ दो बार 
िलखा है। हम अपने ˑ र पर भी िजतने फोरम होते हœ, उस पर बार-बार िलखते हœ। इस बार मœने मंũी 
जी से अनुरोध िकया था िक वे जन जातीय कायŊ मंũी और सामािजक Ɋ ाय और अिधकाįरता मंũी को 
भी अपनी तरफ से पũ िलखŐ िक अगर उनकी योजनाओं क े अंतगŊत जमीन क े Ţय क े िलए कोई लाभ 
िमल सकता है तो वे उसक े बारे मŐ सोचे। उɎोंने दोनों मंũीगणों को पũ भेजा है । मœ आशा करता šं 
िक इस बार जŝ र क ु छ होगा। मœ आप लोगों से भी िनवेदन करता šं िक जब आप ‘िदशा’ सिमितयों मŐ 
बैठक करते हœ और राǛ  सरकारों से पũाचार करते हœ तो आप इस िवषयको भी जŝ र उठाए ं ।“ 
 
1.35 The Ministry while responding to the issue of landless beneficiaries have apprised  
that the following State specific schemes for supporting the landless beneficiaries have 
been shared with other States/UTs with request to provide land to landless on priority : 
i. Bihar: Under Mukhymantri Awaas Sthal Kray Sahayta Yojana, financial 
assistance for the site purchase of INR 60,000 is provided. 
ii. Maharashtra: Under Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gharkool Jaga Kharedi 
Arth Sahayy Yojana, financial assistance (up to INR 50,000/-) for the site 
purchase 
iii. Assam: Financial assistance (up to Rs. 50,000/-) to the landless 
beneficiaries 
iv. Odisha: Under Vasudha Scheme government land is sought for & allotted 
for the house construction. If suitable government land is not available, the 
Government purchases the suitable land and makes it available to the 
landless beneficiaries.           

12 
 
1.36 With regard to the strategy adopted to address the issue landlessness in 
consultation with States/UTs, it has been stated that the Ministry continuously pursue 
with the States/UTs for provision of land to landless beneficiaries. Hon’ble Minister of 
Rural Development, vide his D.O. dated 5th September, 2018 addressed to the CMs of 
All States and Administrator/ Lt. Governor of UTs, advised them to assess the 
landlessness among PMAY-G beneficiaries and expedite action to provide them land. 
DO letter dated 4th January, 2019 from the Additional Secretary (Rural Housing) to the 
Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Secretary of RD of All States/UTs for 
expediting action to provide land to all the landless beneficiaries under PMAY-G.  
Hon'ble Minister of State, Rural Development, vide DO letter dated 16th September, 
2019, addressed to Chief Ministers of all States and Administrator/ Lt. Governor of UTs, 
advised them to address the issue of landless beneficiaries in their States. Further, the 
example of State Government of Bihar was also cited, which is running "Mukhymantri 
Awaas Sthal Kray Sahayy Yojana" for providing financial assistance of Rs. 60,000 to the 
beneficiary to buy land. All States/UTs were requested to initiate similar schemes to 
provide land to landless beneficiaries at the earliest in their States/UTs.  
                  
1.37 The Secretary during briefing meeting, responding on the issue submitted that :- 
 
“एक  इʴ ू  यह  था  िक  Ɛ ा  विटŊकली  ऊपर  जाने  वाले  मकान  बना  सकते  हœ। ………… उसमŐ  
कोई Ůितबंध  नहीं  है। अब  कोई  ːœडडŊ  िडजाइन नहीं है। ……………….. हमने कहा है कि◌ जैसा 
आपका ̾थानीय पįरवेश है, वैसा आप मकान बनाए ं ।“ 
…………… राǛ  सरकार 50 हजार Ŝपये तक बेनेिफशरीज को देती है। इसमŐ अलग-अलग राǛ ों 
की अलग-अलग योजनाए ं  हœ। हम वह जानकारी भी उपलɩ  करा दŐगे। उससे यह फायदा हो 
सकता है िक िजन राǛ ों मŐ इस Ůकार की ˋ ीʈ  नहीं हœ, they may consider replicating 
such schemes or copying such schemes, ऐसा क ु छ िकया जा सकता है।   
                                       
 
1.38 Regarding the strategy devised to resolve the issue of landlessness among 
beneficiaries taking into consideration the fact that ‘Land’ being, ‘State’ subject, and 
PMAY-G being a ‘Central’ Scheme, it has been submitted in the post evidence reply that: 
“A module in AwaasSoft MIS is being developed for capturing the details on 
PMAY- G beneficiaries in the PWL with no land to construct the houses. With this, 
progress on providing land to landless beneficiaries and status of their house 

13 
 
construction can be monitored with ease and on a real-time basis by the Ministry 
and accordingly States/UTs lagging behind can be focused upon for timely 
completion of houses”.      
     
1.39 As regards, the strategy in keeping the landless on the top of Permanent Wait List 
of PMAY-G result in change of their landless status, the Ministry submitted that there is 
multi-layered prioritization within the universe of eligible PMAY-G beneficiaries. Priority 
is assigned based on parameters reflecting housing deprivation in each category viz., 
SC/ST, Minorities and Others.  Keeping the landless beneficiaries on the top of the PWL 
of the PMAY-G may expedite availing land to the landless beneficiaries, but at the same 
time, it could affect the overall progress of completion of the houses against the target 
under the scheme, since they required to be dealt first before moving on to the next.  
Furthermore, this exercise helps in identification of landless beneficiaries with no land to 
construct the houses from the entire PWL and can be dealt on priority for availing land 
for the house construction. Also, the Ministry is continuously following up with the 
States/UTs for expediting the process of providing land to the landless and thereafter 
early completion of their houses.       
      
 (e) Fund sharing pattern 
 
1.40 The Grants under PMAY-G are released by the Centre and States in the ratio of 
60:40 except for North-Eastern and Himalayan states including UT of Jammu and 
Kashmir where the funding pattern is in the ratio of 90:10 by the Centre and the States. 
For UTs including the UT of Laddakh , 100% funds are provided by the Centre. 
1.41 Out of the annual budgetary provision for PMAY-G, 95% are earmarked for 
construction of new houses under PMAY-G.  This includes 2% allocation towards 
Administrative Expenses for administering the Scheme at the Central and State 
level.  The remaining 5% of budgetary grant is retained at the Central Level as reserve 
fund for special projects in order to meet exigencies arising out of extra ordinary 
situations like flood, cyclone, earthquakes, etc.  

14 
 
1.42 Financial Assistance is released to States/UTs in two installments of 50% each as 
per provisions of Framework for Implementation of PMAY-G.         
III. SOME OF THE MAJOR REFORMS INCORPORATED 
(a) Electronic Governance 
1.43 The end to end execution of the scheme from the selection of beneficiaries, 
disbursal of assistance to beneficiaries, verification of progress in construction, release of 
funds etc. is conducted through workflow enabled transaction based MIS – AwaasSoft. 
This enables easier monitoring of different aspects of implementation of the scheme. 
(b) Mobile Governance  
1.44 An android based mobile application- ‘AwaasApp’ has been launched by the 
Ministry for inspection of houses. The application empowers officials and citizens to 
capture and upload geo-tagged, time stamped photographs of the house at various 
stages of construction thereby reducing time lags in verification. The Ministry has also 
developed an offline module for data capture and transmission within the app to 
overcome the constraint of limited internet bandwidth. Capturing of geo-referenced 
photographs using AwaasApp and uploading of the same on AwaasSoft has been made 
mandatory under the scheme of PMAY-G for release of assistance to the beneficiaries.  
Minimum 5 geo-tagged photographs are to be uploaded on AwaasSoft (i.e.  Existing 
dwelling ; Place where the house is to be constructed ; Foundation / Plinth level ; 
Windowsill / Linter / Roofcast level ; Completion). 
 
(c) Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 
 
1.45 Under PMAY-G, the assistance to beneficiaries is to be transferred electronically 
through the AwaasSoft-PFMS platform. This ensured seamless transfer of funds 
electronically into the Bank/Post Office account of each beneficiary through Fund 
Transfer Order (FTO).               
(d) Allotment of house  
1.46 Allotment shall be made jointly in the name of husband and wife except in the 
case of a widow/unmarried /separated person. The State may also choose to allot it 
solely in the name of the woman. In the case of landless household, the State may also 

15 
 
facilitate registration of land in the joint name of husband & wife. In the case of 
beneficiaries selected under the quota for persons with disabilities, the allotment should 
only be in the name of such person.           
(e) Construction of house  
1.47 The house shall be constructed by the beneficiary himself/herself under PMAY-G 
or get the house constructed under his/her supervision. No contractor should be engaged 
by the State in construction of houses. The house shall also not be constructed by any 
Government Department/Agency, except where specifically authorised.  In cases where 
the beneficiary is old or infirm or a person with disability, and is therefore not in a position 
to get the house constructed on his own, such houses shall be taken up as a part of the 
mason training program. In case there are still some beneficiaries left out, the State 
Government will ensure that they are assisted through the Gram Panchayats or a ground 
functionary to get their house constructed. The construction of house should be 
completed in 12 months from the date of sanction.                                  
(f) Convergence with various other schemes  
1.48 Real time web link has been developed with NREGASoft to allow creation of a 
NREGA work against each PMAY-G house sanctioned. This will ensure that a 
beneficiary is able to claim his/her entitlement of 90/95 days of paid unskilled labour for 
construction of PMAY-G house under convergence with MGNREGA. 
1.49 Convergence for basic amenities will be ensured so that the beneficiary of PMAY-
G has access to basic amenities in addition to housing. The schemes sought to be 
converged with PMAY-G for providing basic amenities are :- 
(i) Construction of a toilet has been made an integral part of the PMAY-G house 
The toilets are to be provided through funding from Swachh Bharat Mission 
(G), MGNREGA or any other dedicated financing source. The house would 
be treated as complete only after the toilet has been constructed. 
 
(ii) It has been mandatory that the beneficiary of PMAY-G would get wage 
component for 90 person-days (95 person-days in hilly states, difficult areas 
and IAP districts) at the current rates with regard to the unskilled labour 
component for construction of the house under convergence with 
MGNREGA.  
 

16 
 
(iii) The guideline of Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) has been modified 
for eligibility of PMAY-G beneficiary for getting free LPG connection under the 
scheme. Further, the identification of beneficiaries of PMAY-G and Pradhan 
Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yojana (SAUBHAGYA) is based on the common 
parameter i.e., SECC 2011 data which enables all the beneficiaries of PMAY-
G to get free electricity connection under SAUBHAGYA. 
 
(iv) The beneficiary of PMAY-G may be provided access to safe drinking water 
including through convergence with National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme (NRDWP) of Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation. 
(v) States to ensure that the beneficiaries of the PMAY-G gets the advantage of 
the schemes implemented by Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for 
Solar Lanterns, Solar Home Lighting Systems, Solar Street lighting systems 
and the National Bio-Mass Cookstoves Programme (NBCP) for family size 
bio-gas plants. 
 
(vi) The State Government may through convergence with the scheme of 
Swachh Bharat Mission (G) or any other scheme of the State Government, 
ensure management of Solid and Liquid Waste. 
 
(vii) The State to the meet the requirement of building materials, may take up 
production of building materials viz., bricks etc., through convergence with 
MGNREGA. The material that had been manufactured may be supplied at 
subsidized cost to the beneficiaries of PMAY-G.                  
 
1.50 With regard to a query on financial assistance through MGNREGA convergence 
under PMAY-G, the Ministry have submitted in their written reply that Real time web link 
has been developed with NREGASoft to allow creation of a NREGA work against each 
PMAY-G house sanctioned. This ensures that a beneficiary is able to claim his/her 
entitlement of 90/95 days of paid unskilled labour for construction of PMAY-G house 
under convergence with MGNREGA. The State/UT wise details of number of PMAY-G 
households who have availed unskilled wages under of PMAY-G since the start of FY 
2016-17 are given in Appendix-II.              
1.51 The Secretary MoRD during briefing submitted that: 
“90 िदनों क े  वेज का जो सवाल है, इस संबंध मŐ मœ एक ही बात कहना चाšँगा िक अगर मेरा मकान 
बन रहा है और मœ उस पर काम करता šँ, तो मुझे 90 िदनों का वेज मनरेगा क े  पैसे से िमलेगा। 
लेिकन जैसा िक आप का कहना था िक वह कहीं और काम कर सकता था। इसिलए मœ इन को कह 
सकता šँ िक ये मेरे मकान  पर काम करŐ और इनकी 90 िदनों की वेज भी िमलेगी और वह कहीं 
और 90 िदनों का काम भी कर सकता है, ऐसा Ůावधान इसमŐ है।“  
                 
 

17 
 
1.52 As for the benefits that have accrued from convergence of MGNREGA with 
PMAY-G, it has been stated that the financial assistance through convergence of 
MGNREGA under PMAY-G has ensured year-on year growth in the completion of 
houses under PMAY-G scheme. Furthermore, the Ministry has revised the MGNREGA 
wages with effect from 1st April 2020 to provide higher financial assistance towards 
construction of houses by Rs. 20, as an average across the States with a focus on 
individual beneficiary oriented works which directly benefit SC households, ST 
households, women-headed households, small and marginal farmers and other poor 
households.              
 
1.53 While replying to the query to make the toilet functional after construction with 
water connection, the Secretary during briefing stated that: 
“यह भी कहा गया था िक हमने जो शौचालय बनाए हœ, उɎŐ फ ंƕ नल बनाना बŠत जŝ री होगा, 
उनको पानी क े  कनेƕ न िदए जाए। मœ आपकी बात से सहमत šं। सभी माननीय सद˟ ों ने यह 
कहा है। यह कायŊ हमारा मंũालय नहीं देखता है। िडŌंिक ं ग वाटर और सैिनटेशन का अलग िवभाग है, 
इसमŐ अलग सिचव हœ, वे इसे देखते हœ। उɎोंने एक नई योजना शुŝ  की है, िजसक े  माȯ म से घर मŐ 
वाटर कनेƕ न िदया जाएगा। हम आपकी इस िचंता से उनको अवगत कराए ं गे और उनक े  साथ 
फॉलो-अप करक े  सिमित को समय-समय पर अवगत कराते रहŐगे।“ 
 
1.54 On a specific query regarding delay in provision of assistance money for toilet 
under Swachh Bharat Mission (G) and MGNREGA, the Secretary MoRD submitted as 
under : 
“जो ˢǅ  भारत िमशन Ťामीण का है, उनक े  यहां थोड़ा ː Ō Ɓरल Ůॉɰ म है। जब टॉयलेट पूरा हो 
जाता है, तब वे रािश देते हœ। हम लोग उनक े  साथ बात करक े  कोिशश करŐगे िक यिद वे इसका भी 
समाधान िनकाल सकते हœ तो िनकालŐ।“         
1.55 The guideline of the scheme of Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) 
implemented by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas have been modified wherein 
beneficiary of PMAY-G is eligible for getting LPG connection under the scheme. In order 
to ensure real time convergence, the data of the beneficiaries of PMAY-G whose houses 
have been completed or nearing completion is being shared with Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas through web services so that all the beneficiaries of PMAY-G are 
provided LPG connection. 

18 
 
1.56 In reply to the number of beneficiaries of PMAY-G benefitted under Ujawalla 
Yojana and the benefits accrued from provision of LPG connection, the Ministry 
submitted that the PMAY-G households in the under mentioned table have been 
provided LPG Connection: 
 
State  House Above 
Lintel Level 
House with LPG 
connection 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 973 20 
ASSAM 335278 65097 
BIHAR 1042193 222522 
CHHATTISGARH 771418 313904 
GOA 77 0 
GUJARAT 217951 53108 
HARYANA 19748 5684 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 7499 710 
JAMMU AND KASHMIR 26889 4468 
JHARKHAND 634901 175708 
KERALA 17175 838 
MADHYA PRADESH 1688773 486565 
MAHARASHTRA 532545 84839 
MANIPUR 9473 1444 
MEGHALAYA 19217 2182 
MIZORAM 4216 48 
NAGALAND 3844 0 
ODISHA 1336179 295029 
PUNJAB 16223 5494 
RAJASTHAN 859025 312029 
SIKKIM 1055 49 
TAMIL NADU 257278 33879 
TRIPURA 34803 3351 
UTTAR PRADESH 1420725 621402 
UTTARAKHAND 12427 3920 
WEST BENGAL 1646245 567028 
ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR 293 0 
DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI 518 21 
DAMAN AND DIU 13 2 
LAKSHADWEEP 46 0 
ANDHRA PRADESH 46916 649 
KARNATAKA 104463 19924 
Total 1,10,68,379 32,79,914 
 Source: NIC 
                                                                                  
 
1.57 As for the success  rate in  provision of electricity connection to PMAY Units under 
convergence with Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoti Yojana or Saubhagaya Yojana, the 

19 
 
Ministry has stated that identification of beneficiaries of PMAY-G and Pradhan Mantri 
Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yojana (Saubhagya) is based on the common parameter i.e., SECC 
2011 data which enables all the beneficiaries of PMAY-G to get electricity connection 
under Saubhagya but AwaasSoft is yet to be integrated with the Management 
information of the related schemes.          
1.58 The Ministry have further stated that under PMAY-G, steps for convergence with 
other Government schemes for provision of electricity through Saubhagya scheme, LPG 
connection through PMUY, construction of toilets under SBM/MGNREGA, 90-95 
persondays under MGNREGS, drinking water under Atal Jal Yojana/NRDWP/Nal se Jal 
have already been taken. The Ministry has further advised the States to undertake 
convergence with State schemes as well for providing facilities of plantation, solar 
panels, piped drinking water etc.                                                             
1.59 With regard to the success rate of the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry for 
access to safe drinking water, solid and liquid waste management, production of building 
materials, level development etc. the Ministry of Rural Development have intimated that 
AwaasSoft integration with the Management Information Systems of the related schemes 
is yet to be done. The Ministries/departments dealing in the schemes in convergence 
under PMAY-G are being requested to initiate/further the process of integration of their 
scheme MIS with AwaasSoft at the earliest. Further, the data on Rural Mason 
Training(RMT) shall be integrated with AwaasSoft within a period of one month.  
  
1.60 With regard to the reasons for the failure in integrating the convergence schemes 
with the Awaassoft till date, the Ministry in their written reply have submitted that 
presently, AwaasSoft provides progress report on number of man-days generated in 
convergence with MGNREGA and number of beneficiaries who have been provided 
LPG connection under Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana. The Ministry has discussed the 
issue with other concerned Ministries for integration. The major challenge faced in 
integration with other convergence schemes is identification of a common identifier 
such as adhaar number, SECC Tin etc. Further, the Ministry of Power, Deptartment of 
Drinking Water & Sanitation and Ministry of Petroleum have been requested for early 
integration of MIS of their respective scheme with Awaassoft vide OM dated 22.7.2020. 

20 
 
  
(g) Mason Training  
1.61  PMAY-G focuses on quality of construction of houses.  Thus construction of 
houses by trained masons and providing livelihood opportunities has been towards 
ensuring ‘Skill Development of Rural Masons’. This is being done through a formal 
mechanism of training, assessment and certification. Ministry of Rural has developed 
Rural Mason Qualification Pack (QP) in consultation with Construction Skill Development 
Council of India (CSDCI) and got it approved by National Skill Development Corporation 
(NSDC). Rural Mason training is primarily onsite training. The training module for the 
Rural Mason Qualification pack is for an estimated training duration of about 45 days 
considering 8 hours of work per day.                                         
1.62 As reported by Construction Skill Development Council of India (CSDCI), since 
inception of the Scheme, 1,49,842 candidates across the country have been enrolled for 
rural mason training, out of which 1,04,977 have been assessed and 76,193 masons 
certified as on 14th July, 2020.             
 
1.63 The Secretary, endorsed the view that less number of people have been imparted 
mason training and during the briefing meeting submitted as under: 
“एक इʴ ू माननीय सभापित महोदय और िबहार क े  माननीय सांसद महोदय ने उठाया था िक 
मेशन की टŌेिनंग बŠत ही कम तादाद मŐ हो रही है। हमने अपने ŮजŐटेशन मŐ यह बात खुद ˢ ीकार 
की है। हमारा मानना है िक हमŐ िजतने मकान बनाने हœ,  उनक े  िहसाब से हमŐ Ɋूनतम ढ़ाई लाख 
मेशन वकŊसŊ की आवʴ कता है।….”         
1.64 The Ministry have intimated in their written reply on 15 Jul 2020 that the 
information of PMAY-G houses constructed under Rural Mason Training (RMT) 
programme is not readily available on AwaasSoft. However, the updated status on RMT 
as on 05 June, 2020 is submitted by the Ministry is given in Appendix-III. 
  
 
 
 

21 
 
 (h) House Design Typologies under PMAY-G Scheme 
1.65 One of the main objective and focus areas of PMAY-G is construction of durable 
and disaster resilient house and provide credible assistance and support to the 
beneficiaries in making informed choices with regard to the construction of his/her house. 
MoRD, in collaboration with UNDP and IIT-Delhi, had conducted studies to develop 
sustainable, disaster resilient house design typologies suited to the cultural and geo-
climatic conditions of identified zones in various States.  The House Design Typologies 
so developed, in respect of 15 States, have been compiled into a Compendium ‘PAHAL’, 
for use by beneficiaries. Demonstration houses based on house design typologies are 
constructed in the States of Tripura, Sikkim and Maharashtra. 
 
1.66 The Ministry have further intimated in their written reply that as per Framework For 
Implementation (FFI) of PMAY-G, the States/UTs are to provide the beneficiaries a 
bouquet of house designs and appropriate technology suitable to the region of their 
residence. The core house design should include a dedicated space for hygienic cooking 
and include a toilet and bathing area. This is being done when sanction letter of 
assistance for construction of the house is given to a beneficiary and the beneficiary is 
being provided the menu of options of the identified house designs and technologies. 
States are being encouraged to construct demonstration houses on region-specific 
house design typologies for PMAY-G beneficiaries to visit, experience and opt for. The 
PAHAL, compendium of the house designs suitable to the local geo-climatic, socio-
economic and cultural conditions has been made available to all the functionaries and 
beneficiaries under PMAY-G on the website of PMAY-G, pmayg.nic.in.   
1.67 It has also been stated that as per the framework for implementation of PMAY-G, 
along with the sanction letter of assistance for construction of the house, the 
beneficiaries are provided with the menu of options of the identified house designs and 
technologies with the following details - 
(i) The plan, layout, and detailed cost estimates of the house designs. 
(ii) The quantity of materials required and the tentative cost of construction for 
different levels viz. foundation, lintel level, roof, etc., for each identified 
house design. 
(iii) Provide a list of the trained masons and their contact details. 
 

22 
 
(iv) Intimate the location of demonstration houses of different house design 
typologies constructed. 
(v) Contact details of all the material suppliers in the vicinity who deal with 
specific requirements of the house design type. 
 
1.68 The States/ UTs have been asked to construct the demonstration houses 
preferably at a block-level based on the region-specific house design typologies as 
suggested in the Prakriti Hunar Lokvidya(PAHAL) or as developed by the State/ UT. This 
would facilitate beneficiaries to visit, experience, and opt for the suggested house 
designs.               
1.69 Over a specific query as to whether the Prakriti Hunar Lokvidya (PAHAL) 
compendium containing the house design typologies can be easily understood by the 
PMAY-G beneficiaries, the Ministry have replied that the compendium- PAHAL which 
includes house designs suitable to the local geo-climatic, socio-economic and cultural 
conditions, Cost estimations and technical drawings (Plan, Elevations and Sections) and 
the illustrative 3D model images, can be understood by the PMAY-G functionaries and 
beneficiaries. If the need is felt, States/ UTs can develop simpler version of the relevant 
portion from the PAHAL in the local language.       
IV. FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 
(a) Financial Targets: 
1.70 The Statement showing the budget estimates, revised estimates and actual 
expenditure incurred under the PMAY-G scheme for the past five years is as under  
                          (in Crore) 
Year B.E RE Actual Expenditure 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) 
2015-16 10025 10025 10,107.92
2016-17 15000 16078.6 16,074.37
2017-18 23000 22832.31 *29,901.72
2018-19 21000 19600.00 **29,986.91
2019-20 19000 18455.19 ***28930.63
2020-21 19500 - 8173.83
(as on 19.8.2020)
*     Includes Rs.   7,329.43 crore released from Extra Budgetary Resources, i.e. NABARD Loan 
**    Includes Rs. 10,678.80 crore released from Extra Budgetary Resources, i.e. NABARD Loan 
 ***  Includes Rs. 10,811.02 crore released from Extra Budgetary Resources, i.e. NABARD Loan 

23 
 
  
 1.71 Under Phase –I of PMAY-G, Union Cabinet had approved Extra Budgetary 
Resources (EBR) of Rs. 21, 975 crore. However, an amount of Rs.18,008.23 crore had 
been sourced as EBR from NABARD.  Under Phase-II for the year 2019-20, Ministry of 
Finance had approved EBR of Rs 20,000 crore. However, an amount of Rs.10811.02 
crore had been sourced as EBR from NABARD.      
1.72 The financial progress containing the State-wise/Year-wise figures of the  Central 
allocation, release and its utilization by the States since launch of PMAY-G, as provided 
by the Ministry is given in Appendix -IV.       
 (b) Total outlay in the Current Financial Year under PMAY-G 
1.73 The physical target for the Current Financial Year 2020-21 is 70 lakh houses. Out 
of which a target of 61.50 lakh houses has been communicated to States/UTs. The 
balance of 8.5 lakh target would be allocated from the Awaas+ list.  
1.74 The Central Share for construction of 70 lakh houses for the current FY 2020-21 is 
Rs. 57,330 crore. Out of which Rs. 19,500 crore has been provided as the Gross 
Budgetary Resources (GBS) and the balance is to be met through Extra Budgetary 
Resources (EBR) to be raised through National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development (NABARD).  
1.75 The Ministry of Finance has approved Rs. 10,000 crore for PMAY-G for FY 2020-
2021. Further, Ministry of Finance has been requested to provide additional EBR of Rs. 
25,324 crore for FY 2020-21 to meet the financial requirement of States/UTs.   
 
1.76 The Ministry in their written reply dated 19 August, 2020 have provided the 
pending Central Releases under PMAY-G along with the reasons thereof for the 
Financial Year 2017-2018, 2018-2019 and 2019-2020 which are given in Appendix-VI, 
Appendix-VII and Appendix-VIII respectively.         
1.77 When the Committee specifically wanted to know steps taken for extra budgetary 
resources, the Secretary, MoRD during evidence submitted as under : 
“………सर, इसक े  बारे मŐ हमारे मंũालय क े  मंũी जी ने िवȅ मंũी जी को पũ िलखा था। उɎोंने 
उǄ  ˑ रीय मुलाकात भी की है। हमारी ओर से पुनः िवȅ मंũी जी क े  साथ हमारे मंũी जी की बैठक 

24 
 
कराने का Ůयास है। उस बैठक मŐ ये मुȞे उठाए जाए ं गे। हमŐ जो संक े त Ůधानमंũी जी क े  कायाŊलय से 
िमले हœ उसक े  िहसाब से इस ŮोŤाम के  िलए पैसे की कमी नहीं होने दी जाएगी।“ 
            
 
V. PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE - ACHIEVEMENT  OF TARGETS  
 
Physical Targets 
Year Physical Target 
(in Nos) 
Physical Achievement 
(in Nos) 
2015-16 21,20,187 18,22,289 
(IAY Houses) 
2016-17 42,82,454 32,14,495* 
2017-18 32,33,800 44,54,592* 
2018-19 25,14,646 47,33,445* 
2019-20 60,00,000 21,91,832* 
2020-21 61,50,000 8,83,382* 
         * includes completed PMAY-G and IAY houses of current and previous   
          years as per AwaasSoft on 20.08.2020. 
 
 
1.78 In reply to a question as to whether the pending targets of Phase-I have been 
accomplished, the Ministry in their written reply have submitted that after the allocation of 
targets by the MoRD, the time given for completion of PMAY-G house is 12 months from 
date of sanction by the respective State/UT. Out of a total target of 99,94,125 houses for 
PMAY-G Phase I allocated by this Ministry, 89,73,139 houses have been recorded as 
complete (as on 2 September 2020) on AwaasSoft MIS of PMAY-G which is about 90% 
of the target. The backlog equivalent to 10,20,986 houses which are in progress. The 
detailed progress of PMAY-G, Phase-I is provided below: 
 
 

25 
 
 
MoRD  Target 
for PMAY-G 
Phase I 
1st instalment 
released 
2nd instalment 
released 
3rd instalment 
released 
4th instalment 
released 
Completed 
99,94,125 97,41,963 93,72,731 90,42,565 39,73,567 89,73,139 
 
 
1.79 The details of the State-wise, year-wise targets fixed and completed during 
Phase-I and Phase-II of PMAY-G is given in Appendix-V.      
1.80 As against the target of 2, 21, 44,067 house 1, 13, 79,121 (51%) houses have 
been completed under Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana- Gramin (PMAY-G) as on 31st 
August 2020.               
1.81 With regard to a query on strategy to accomplish pending targets, the Ministry in 
their written reply have submitted that initiatives taken towards completion of delayed 
houses are as follows:  
(i)  State-wise analysis of delayed houses and regular follow-up.  
(ii) Regular alerts through emails and SMSs to all levels in the State Govt on 
delayed houses  
(iii) Allowing completion of delayed houses upto June 2020.  
(iv) Negative marking in Performance Index for those houses which are 
delayed beyond 12 months time  
 
1.82 The Hon’ble MRD has requested Hon’ble Chief Ministers of States and 
LG/Administrators to review the  progress of PMAY-G at their level.  Besides, review of 
progress through monthly VC at the level of Secretary / Special Secretary/Deputy DG, 
Ministry of Rural Development and at the level of Dy.DG (Eq. to Joint Secretary) with 
technical teams of the states to resolve the technical issues faced. To ensure faster 
completion of houses, States/ UTs have been requested to do the following:-  
(i)  Focus on completion of those houses where 2nd or 3rd installment of 
funds has been released to beneficiaries.  
(ii)  Prepare a month-wise target for completion of houses for monitoring and 
convey the same to MoRD  
(iii)  Review the low performing districts separately.  

26 
 
  
1.83 In response to a query regarding the policy changes the Ministry propose to arrest 
migration and unwillingness of PMAY-G beneficiaries to construct houses, the Ministry 
have stated that they have issued guidelines on procedure for dealing with cases of 
unwilling beneficiaries, death cases and migration of beneficiaries. The revised 
Framework For Implementation-II of PMAY-G shall be released by the Ministry shortly 
which would incorporate certain policy decisions to deal with such difficult cases. 
Furthermore, the Ministry has taken steps to seek State-wise and category-wise data on 
number of such beneficiaries. Basis such data, resolution, if any of such cases can be 
written off, recovery mechanism etc. can be proposed.         
1.84 With regard to the Members of the association of manufacturers and suppliers, the 
Ministry have provided the number of members of the associations of manufacturers and 
suppliers as under: 
S.No. Association No of members of 
manufactures/ 
suppliers* 
1 AII India bricks and Tile manufactures Federation 10,211 
2 Indian Steel Association 14 
3 Cement Manufacturer's Association 45 
4 Fly ash brick manufacturers association 46                                                                 (*As available on their respective website) 
 
1.85   These Associations during various workshops conducted by the Ministry have 
been asked to keep sufficient material as per availability of States/UTs so that the 
construction of the house does not hinder. The Ministry, however, does not maintain 
any such data of material providers at centre / state /district level.  The scarcity of 
construction materials for the construction of houses under PMAY-G has hardly been 
reported by any of the states recently.                                                
1.86 The Secretary, during the briefing meeting while addressing the issue regarding 
fixing the amount to be disbursed to the beneficiaries of PMAY-G in their first and 
subsequent installments stated that : 

27 
 
 "सर, इस की ɢ ैİƛिबिलटी भी हमने राǛ ों को दी है। पहली िकˑ  िकतनी होनी चािहए, 
 भारत सरकार की ओर से यह िनधाŊįरत नहीं िकया गया है। वैसे यह रािश  30 से 40 परसŐट क े  बीच 
मŐ है।......यह एवरेज 40 हजार Ŝपये क े  आस पास है।"  
 
1.87 The Secretary, further during the briefing meeting apprised the Committee about 
the manner in which Odihsa managed to reduce the time taken in construction of a unit 
under PMAY-G and stated as under: 
“मœ आपको ओिडशा का उदाहरण देना चाšंगा। ओिडशा सरकार ने कहा है िक हमारे Ůधानमंũी 
आवास योजना क े  मकान जʗ ी  बनŐ, समय पर बनŐ, इसक े  िलए हम अपने फीʒ  फ ंƕ नरीज को 
हर दस बेिनिफशरीज क े  साथ जोड़ दŐगे। जो Ťूप ऑफ बेिनिफशरीज था, उनकी įरस्पाɌ िबिलटी 
राǛ  सरकार क े  एक परमानœट ऑिफसर को दी गई और उसने मॉिनटर िकया। उसने कहा िक 
एकाउंट मŐ पैसा आ गया है तो ईंट खरीदते हœ, बालू खरीदते हœ या छड़ लाते हœ। इस तरह क े  क ु छ 
इनोवेशन िकए जा सकते हœ। ओिडशा क े  बारे  मŐ िवशेष सिचव ने बताया है िक अगर आप  6 महीने 
से पहले मकान पूरा करŐगे तो राǛ  सरकार आपको नगद इंसŐिटव  देगी। इस वजह से क ु छ मकान 
जʗ ी बने हœ।“        
 
1.88 The Secretary while responding to the importance of DISHA meetings and their 
frequency during the briefing submitted that: 
“हमारे िवशेष सिचव ने द ू सरा सुझाव िदया है िक जब आप ‘िदशा’ मीिटंग की अȯƗ ता करते हœ तो 
उसमŐ इस मुȞे पर गहन चचाŊ होनी चािहए। माननीय सद˟  ने जो सुझाव िदए हœ, हमने उसे भी नोट 
िकया है िक अगर ‘िदशा’ क े  ही ˑ र पर इसका 15 िदनों मŐ फॉलो-अप िकया जाए तो बेहतर 
पįरणाम िनकलŐगे।…. 
सर, आप अवगत होंगे िक हमने ‘िदशा’ के  िलए जो क ै लŐडर राǛ  सरकारों और िजला अिधकाįरयों 
को भेजा है, उसमŐ हमने कहा है िक साल मŐ चार मीिटंग करŐ, तािक वे फ े का-फाकी न कर सकŐ या 
भाग न सकŐ िक हम मीिटंग नहीं कर रहे हœ। उनको मीिटंग करनी ही है। िवशेष Ůकार क े  कायŘ क े  
िलए चार से अिधक मीिटंग क े  िलए आप उनसे अनुरोध कर सकते हœ और हम यह करŐगे। अनेक 
माननीय सद˟ ों ने यह मुȞा उठाया है  िक किठन राǛ  ने अपने ː ेट शेयर का पैसा िदया, िकɎोंने 
नहीं िदया और िकɎोंने िडले करक े  िदया। हमारे पास यहजानकारी उपलɩ  है। हम इस की 
įरगरस, Ůितिदन मॉिनटįरंग करते हœ, Ɛ ोंिक इस से हमारी योजना की Ůगित जुड़ी Šई है। “ 
 
 
 

28 
 
VI. MONITORING OF THE SCHEME 
1.89 As per the Ministry's written reply, PMAY-G scheme is monitored very closely at 
all levels and with special emphasis on quality and timely completion of construction. The 
scheme provides for the following monitoring mechanisms. 
i. All data regarding beneficiaries, progress of construction and release of funds, 
including geo-tagged photographs etc. are hosted on scheme MIS, AwaasSoft, 
which is an end to end transaction based platform for monitoring both the financial 
and physical progress of the scheme.  
ii. The physical progress of construction is monitored through the geo-tagged 
photographs, which are also time and date stamped, which are uploaded at 
various stages of construction as decided by the respective State Government. 
AwaasApp (a mobile application connected to AwaasSoft) is used for uploading 
the geo-tagged photographs. Release of each installment by the State 
Government to the beneficiary is linked to uploading of geotagged photograph of 
previous stage of construction.  A photograph is to be mandatorily uploaded on 
completion of construction of the house. 
iii. National level Monitors and Area Officers of the Ministry also visit PMAY-G 
houses during their field visits, to the extent possible to assess the progress, 
procedure followed for selection of beneficiaries etc. 
iv. The Programme Management Unit (PMU) at the State level is required to 
undertake the tasks of implementation, monitoring and quality supervision. 
Officers at the Block level are to inspect as far as possible 10% of the houses at 
each stage of construction. District level officers are to inspect 2% of the houses 
at each stage of construction. Every house sanctioned under PMAY-G is tagged 
to a village level functionary (Gram Rozgar Sahayak or any other village level 
worker) whose task is to follow-up with the beneficiary and facilitate construction. 
v. Payment of assistance by the State Government to beneficiaries, who have been 
sanctioned houses, is made directly into their account through the AwaasSoft-
PFMS platform electronically.  This leads to increased transparency by enabling 
real time monitoring of funds disbursed to beneficiaries. 
vi. The Performance Index Dashboard on AwaasSoft, provides real time numerical, 
graphical and cartographic summary of progress in PMAY-G down to the Gram 
Panchayat level, which enables easy monitoring, identification of bottlenecks and 
targeted intervention.         
1.90 On being asked as to whether the strategies adopted by the Ministry have 
resulted in any improvements in the achievement under PMAY-G, the Ministry replied in 
their post evidence reply that as against the target of 2,21,44,067 houses, 1,13,79,121 
(51%) houses have been completed under Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana- Gramin 

29 
 
(PMAY-G) as on 31st August 2020. Though the different initiatives / strategies adopted 
by the Ministry of Rural Development have significantly contributed towards the 
completion of the houses under PMAY-G, the COVID-19 pandemic has adversely 
affected the rate of completion of the houses. However, with the ground level activities 
slowly picking up, it is expected that the pace of construction shall increase over time. 
 
1.91 On the pointed query on the plans of the Ministry to achieve “Housing for All” by 
2022 under the present circumstances, it has been submitted that the Ministry has been 
proactively releasing the Central share as a primary step towards achieving the target 
house completion. Before the outbreak of the pandemic, the Ministry, as a part of regular 
monitoring conducted field visits to understand the gaps and delays from the side of the 
State in achieving the targets. Although after the pandemic induced lockdown, the 
frequencies of such visits have reduced. However, with the gradual opening of the 
economy, field visits and regular meetings with State Officials shall be undertaken. 
Meetings over VC are being conducted to address state specific issues. The Ministry also 
envisages nominating its Officials to specifically co-ordinate with States so that apart 
from regular monitoring, State specific issues, if any can be dealt with urgently. The 
roadmap for completion includes setting of interim deadlines to accelerate the overall 
pace of completion – 
i. Sanction of all targeted houses of FY 2020-21 by 31st October 2020 
ii. Allocation of targets for FY 2021-22 from PWL and  Awaas+ by 31st 
October 2020 
iii. Completion of remaining houses of Phase-I and II by 31st March 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
  

30 
 
Part - II 
Recommendations 
2.1 The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G) 
has been carved out of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY), the erstwhile housing scheme, 
by addressing the shortcomings and lacuna therein as pointed out in the 
Performance Audit Report of Comptroller and Auditor General, 2014 and therefore 
PMAY-G was launched on 01 April, 2016 aiming to provide “Housing for All" by 
2022, through provision of pucca house with basic amenities to all houseless 
households and households with kucha and dilapidated houses in rural areas. The 
PMAY-G primarily focuses on quality house construction through Rural Mason 
Training (RMT), House Design typologies, House Quality Review app etc. Another 
positive step being taken in the scheme is introduction of convergence with other 
programs for basic amenities such as Saubhagya for electricity, Pradhan Mantri 
Ujjwala Yojana  (PMUY) for LPG connection and Swachh Bharat Mission(SBM)/ 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) for toilet 
construction. The amount given under the scheme is Rs. 1.20 lakh given to the 
beneficiaries in plain areas and Rs. 1.30 lakhs in hilly areas. Further, the provision 
for availing loan of upto Rs. 70,000/- from financial institutions is a welcome step 
only if it finds support among the beneficiaries.  The Committee feel that the steps 
initiated by the Government through PMAY-G for ameliorating the social and 
financial conditions of the poor rural populace are steps taken in the right 
direction and need to pursued in the right earnestness.  The Committee also 
appreciates the efforts made for housing shortage estimation on the basis of 
reports of Working Group on Rural Housing for 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17), 
Census 2011 and SECC 2011. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
2.2 The Committee will now specifically deal with all the aspects of PMAY-G and 
analyse the progress made both financial and physical and strategy to be adopted 
to face the challenges ahead in accomplishing the goal set, by the year 2022. 

31 
 
Selection of beneficiaries  
2.3 The contention of the Ministry that PMAY-G aims to realize the vision of 
‘Housing for All by 2022’ through a robust delivery and monitoring mechanism for 
and improved scheme architecture put in place does not stand ground in view of 
the existing challenges of discrepancies in identification of beneficiary, 
cumbersome appellate process which is out of the reach of the rural poor.  Biased 
and politically motivated approach in identification of beneficiary cannot be ruled 
out by the elected body of a Gram Panchayat coupled with the grievance redressal 
appellate mechanism out of the reach of the economically and socially deprived 
rural populace culminating into meaningless exercise in the absence of any 
support mechanism to provide assistance for raising grievance. This view of the 
Committee is further strengthened when the Secretary, Rural Development during 
evidence submitted that the “institutions become difficult to manage, if spoiled. 
Since Members of Parliament head DISHA meetings, they may point out the 
shortcomings and the Ministry of Rural Development shall take strict action 
against those found guilty.” However, the Committee are not fully convinced with 
stance and feel that if the primary concern of proper selection of the beneficiaries 
is not addressed properly, the whole initiative of bringing improvement in the 
living conditions of the rural poor may be ineffective.  In a scenario where the 
centrally sponsored scheme is implemented at the District/Panchayat level and 
monitored at the central level, it becomes utmost important to downsize the role of 
Gram Sabha and to rope in private organizations and non-government bodies for 
identification / authentication of the beneficiary list and the responsibility is fixed 
on the Block Development Officers  by making them accountable for factual 
verification of the details and progress of PMAY-G unit for fairer results. The 
Members of Parliament definitely monitor the progress in the DISHA meetings and 
highlight the anomalies but issues are lost in the tussle of Centre, State 
jurisdiction.  The Committee, therefore, seek the Ministry's intervention to review 
the methodology  by downsizing the role of Sarpanch/Gram Panchayat by 
incorporation of Block Development Officer (BDO) by fixing accountability and 
involving NGOs / Private Bodies that may act as pillars of support for the socially 

32 
 
and economically poor in raising their issues  so that proper identification / 
authentication of targeted beneficiaries of this scheme is achieved and intention of 
the present scheme is materialized. 
2.4 The Committee also observe that PMAY-G at the time of launch in 2016 was 
mandated to construct 2.95 crore houses to visualize the dream of providing 
pucca house with basic amenities to the selected beneficiaries by 2021-2022 will 
now cover 2.49 crore beneficiaries by 2022. The Committee, however, feel that in 
view of the complaints of biased approach of the Gram Panchayats and anomalies 
in the SECC-2011 data, a flexible approach should be adopted by devising a new 
strategy so that no needy houseless or household with kucha roof as defined are 
left out and the list is updated accordingly. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
List of PMAY Beneficiaries 
2.5 The Committee note that migration and death have been stated to be one 
of the reasons behind rejection of 1.36 crore households out of a universe of 4.04 
crore rejected by Gram Sabhas. The Committee is of the view that temporary 
shifting to urban areas in the search of livelihood cannot be construed as 
migration and rejections on grounds of migration and deaths cannot be supported 
because the person who temporarily migrates to the cities in search of job / 
livelihood is bound to return to his village and transfer of ownership can be 
resorted to in the event of death of a PMAY-G beneficiary instead of considering 
the rejection from the list of beneficiaries. The Secretary, Ministry of Rural 
Development while clarifying over SECC-2011 data, admitted to the fact that of the 
total 4.3 crore persons earmarked, only 2.95 crore persons were considered to be 
eligible for house after thorough verification of Gram Sabhas which has 
subsequently come down to 2.32 crore persons making the role Gram Sabhas 
questionable. The Committee feel that if such decisions of rejection are not 
objective and fair, it becomes difficult for a scheme to function properly and 
therefore could jeopardise the scheme of pucca housing for all by 2022.   As such, 

33 
 
the Committee, desire that the Ministry should immediately undertake an exercise 
to counter the anomalies by cross checking through independent agencies and 
introducing the role of Block Development Officers in addition/rejection of a 
beneficiary, by fixing accountability.   
(Recommendation No. 3) 
Rectification of Wrong Entries under PMAY-G 
2.6 The Committee, further, while examining came across instances of 
incomplete and erroneous data namely details of family members were missing; 
names of genuine beneficiaries were not there ; names of ineligible persons' were 
found in the list of beneficiaries of PMAY-G. The Committee, therefore take a 
serious note of it and recommend that the Ministry should take urgent steps to 
rectify the wrong listing of the beneficiaries under the PMAY-G list. The Ministry 
should also direct the States to rectify the errors in the list at the earliest so that 
the benefits could reach to the actual poor and needy persons targeted under the 
scheme. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 Unit Assistance under PMAY-G and Loan Facility   
2.7 The Ministry while admitting to no proposal in hand for  increase in the unit 
assistance under PMAY-G owing to factors like land is owned by the beneficiary, 
minimum plot size is 25 Sq Meters and the unit cost has been substantially 
increased, have also apprised that 05 States i.e., Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Haryana, 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Andhra Pradesh provide specific top up schemes for 
assistance to beneficiaries, in addition to availability of loan facility of 70,000/- 
from financial institutions. In view of it the Committee feel that there is a need to 
re-examine the need for additional finance to meet construction expenses under 
the scheme.. The Committee opine that the Ministry's view of not bringing the unit 
assistance of PMAY-G at par with PMAY-U does not stand ground from their own 
admission that economic conditions of the beneficiaries warrant various States 
Governments to provide top up assistance for construction of PMAY-G house. 

34 
 
Secondly, the Ministry stance that the present unit assistance may not be one of 
the reasons behind non achievement of targets is contradicted by the figures on 
backlog of Phase-I and non achievement of targets of Phase-II of PMAY-G. 
Furthermore, 70,000/- loan scheme does not find acceptance among beneficiaries 
owing to their social and economic conditions making it impossible to render 
collateral and bear high interests / administrative costs. Also the assertion of 
substantial increase in the unit cost since April, 2016 is not convincing because 
the unit-wise plot size has been increased from 20 Sq mtr under the previous 
scheme to 25 Sq meter under PMAY-G and cost escalation during the last 5 years 
besides increased transportation costs especially in remote, hilly and difficult 
terrain areas. The Committee, further, observe that the Secretary, MoRD was 
candid enough to depose the matter and come up with a solution on the issue of 
higher transportation costs being incurred in transporting building material to the 
site in Himalayan and hilly regions of the country. Besides, the Secretary, Ministry 
of Rural Development, in his further deposition stated that as per indication 
received from Prime Minister’s Office there will be no shortage of funds for this 
program.  In this regard, the Committee are of the view that it becomes necessary 
for the Ministry to consider some increase in the unit assistance under PMAY-G on 
the basis of the present day price index and come up with a solution. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that since the scheme is in the mid-way and 
accomplishment of the goal is set for 2022, it would be appropriate, to consider 
enhancement of assistance cost by Rs. 10,000/- both for plain and hilly areas 
respectively. The Committee also recommend that additional sources for topping 
up of unit assistance through convergence with State Schemes so that success of 
PMAY-G Scheme is achieved in all earnestness throughout the country. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
Loan Scheme of Rs. 70,000/- from Financial Institutions 
2.8 The Committee during examination pointed to the problems being faced in 
availing loan from financial institutions and observed that most of the 
beneficiaries under PMAY-G are unable to avail loan facility of Rs. 70,000/- for 

35 
 
construction of house as they belong to economically poor strata of the society 
which neither can bear higher interest nor have any possession / belongings for 
mortgage or security. The Ministry also pointed to the fact that there are very few 
takers of loan facility of Rs. 70,000/- from financial institutions because of higher 
administrative cost, interest rates and collateral etc and stated that they are 
currently working on developing a loan product, in association with Indian Bank 
Association (IBA), with minimum collateral requirements and cheaper interest 
rates. The Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry to expedite their efforts and 
bring out an attractive loan product with minimum collateral, administrative costs 
and lower interest rates best which should be widely circulated in their vernacular 
language among  
PMAY-G beneficiaries. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Shifting of targets on saturation of SC/ST targets  
2.9 The Committee during the course of examination raised the issue with 
regard to clarity on shifting of targets to other communities in the event of 
saturation among SCs/STs. The Secretary, Rural Development, during evidence,  
while explaining that the State Governments were competent to shift the targets 
consequent on saturation after concurrence of the Central Government admitted 
that the slow progress under PMAY-G being witnessed could be attributed to 
failure of the State Governments to take timely decision on shifting of targets 
prompting the Ministry to issue instructions on the subject.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Ministry should immediately resolve the confusion on 
the subject and issue fresh instructions to the States clearly outlining the 
procedure to be adopted for shifting of targets consequent upon saturation along 
with an Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to be followed by the State 
functionaries. 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 

36 
 
Ownership on death of beneficiary 
2.10 The Committee considering ownership of a house as a sign of social and 
economic stability, appreciate the Government initiative that allotment of house 
shall be made jointly in the name of husband and wife except in the case of a 
widow/unmarried /separated person allowing the States to also choose to allot it 
solely in the name of the woman. The Committee, however, observe delays in 
transfer of ownership during field visits, hamper the performance of the Scheme.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should include this aspect 
in the agenda of the meetings for review of progress under the Scheme with State 
Functionaries and reiterate immediate transfer of ownership consequent upon 
death of a PMAY-G beneficiary. The Committee, thus, also desire the Ministry of 
Rural Development to give instructions to the State Governments to resolve all 
ownership issues so that the performance of the Scheme is not affected and the 
rural poor are not faced with hardships on the event of death of the owner of the 
PMAY-G constructed house. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
Landlessness 
2.11 The Committee appreciate that landlessness is being dealt at the highest 
level whereby States are being regularly persuaded to assess landlessness among 
PMAY-G beneficiaries and expedite action to provide land to landless beneficiary 
from the Government land or any other land including public land (Panchayat 
common land, community land or land belonging to other local authorities). Three 
States provide financial assistance for site purchase, namely, Bihar gives Rs. 
60,000/-, Maharashtra and Assam provide Rs. 50,000/- each and Odisha pursues 
Vasudha Scheme entailing allotment of Government Land or purchase of suitable 
land for allotment in case of non-availability of Government land. The Committee 
find that that despite the efforts undertaken, 2,29,321 (65.26%) out of the total of  
4,27,975 landless beneficiaries are yet to be provided land thereby putting a 
serious question on the full success of the scheme.  Maharashtra accounts for 

37 
 
81,193; Odisha - 52,731; Tamilnadu - 43,718; and Assam - 29,591 besides other 
States constituting the total number of landless beneficiaries as 2,79,321 are yet to 
be provided land.  The above submission, makes it amply clear that scheme for 
provision of land to landless beneficiaries by the States has to be pursued  
vigorously by citing examples set forth by the four States/UT along with the 
AwaasSoft MIS module being developed for capturing the details on PMAY- G 
beneficiaries in the Permanent Wait List (PWL) with no land to construct the 
houses for focused monitoring. It is obvious that there are impediments owing to 
the unavailability of Government land and encroachments which need to be 
resolved in a time bound manner. Therefore, the Committee recommend that there 
is need to gear up the existing machinery to get over such obstacles so that the 
landlessness among the poor can be dealt on priority for providing land for the 
construction of house. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
Electronic & Mobile governance 
2.12 The Committee note that the ‘AwaasApp’ empower officials and citizens to 
capture and upload geo-tagged, time stamped photographs of the house at 
various stages of construction thereby reducing time lags in verification. The App 
also enables monitoring end to end execution of the scheme from the selection of 
beneficiaries, disbursal of assistance to beneficiaries, verification of progress in 
construction, release of funds etc through mobile application. The Committee, 
however find that in order to have optimum utilization of the app among the rural 
populace, there is an imperative need to educate people about the operation 
through imparting training programmes at Panchayat levels at regular intervals 
and create help groups to facilitate the rural populace in accessing the benefit 
accruing thereto.  
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 

38 
 
Direct Benefit transfer (DBT) 
2.13 The Committee during examination and field visits came across with the 
irregularities in collusion with the Bank officials and Gram Sabha functionaries 
challenging direct benefit transfer of money to the beneficiaries, the Ministry had 
stated that DBT transfer had been adopted to overcome such challenges.  The 
Committee desire that in order to know the ground reality, the Ministry is required 
to collect views of the State Governments and PMAY-G beneficiaries over the 
issue. The Committee further, recommend that the Ministry should devise a fool 
proof mechanism for seamless transfer of money to the beneficiary with some 
accountability for transfer of money/installments of the various stages of 
completion of house under PMAY-G devoid of irregularities. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
  
Construction of toilets under convergence with Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) 
 
2.14 The Committee note that toilets are being constructed under the scheme 
with the provision of a plastic tank, however, are perturbed at the abysmal 
response of the Ministry that construction of toilet is under the Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation, Ministry of Jal Shakti. The Committee desired that 
there must be coordination between the Ministry in order to make the toilet 
properly functional. The Committee further raised the issue of delayed payment of 
Rs. 12,000/- after construction of toilet in PMAY-G Unit through convergence with 
Swachh Bharat Mission Scheme (SBM) and desired that the issue be resolved in 
coordination with the concerned Ministry. The Secretary, MoRD admitted that 
structural problem persisting in Swachh Bharat Mission, Gramin lead to delayed 
payments after construction of toilet and agreed to resolve the matter in 
coordination with them. The Committee opine that since, PMAY-G under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Rural Development has specifically been 
launched to incorporate the basic amenities under convergence with other 
government schemes after noticing the shortcomings in the (C&AG) Performance 
Audit Report, 2014, of the previous rural housing scheme pointedly referring to 
lack of convergence, it becomes the responsibility to the MoRD to see that the 

39 
 
Scheme achieves its motive in convergence with other schemes by removing the 
gaps and shortcomings by establishing close coordination with the concerned 
Ministries instead of shifting the responsibility by intimating that the subject in 
question is dealt by the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the shortcomings/challenges noticed be 
resolved in coordination with the Ministries responsible for convergence to 
achieve fruitful results for the welfare of the PMAY-G beneficiaries by ensuring 
that toilets are made functional by provision of water connection and timely 
payment is ensured. The Committee, further desire that an update with regard to 
the number of PMAY-G Units being provided with water connections may be 
incorporated in the AwaasApp for quick updates/results. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
MGNREGA convergence under PMAY-G 
2.15 The Committee while evaluating the Scheme have found that the 
mandatory wage component provision and payment with regard to unskilled 
labour for 90 person-days (95 person-days in hilly States, difficult areas and 
Integrated Action Plan (IAP) districts at the current rates under convergence with 
MGNREGA is not being scrupulously followed despite real time web link with 
NREGASoft to allow creation of a NREGA work against each PMAY-G house 
sanctioned. This is evident from the State/UT wise details of number of PMAY-G 
households who have availed unskilled wages under of PMAY-G since the start of 
FY 2016-17.   Though 94.86 % of work has been created against the total houses 
sanctioned, the number of man-days generated for wages is on 69.41% depicting a 
clear shortfall of more than 30%.   The shortfall in number of the works created and 
the number of man-days generated cannot even suffice by the Rs. 20 hike in the 
financial assistance towards construction of houses, consequent on wage revision 
wages with effect from 1st April 2020.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
since PMAY-G incorporates a mandatory provision of 90/95 work days depending 
upon the terrain, creation of equal number of man-days should be made 
compulsory for each house sanctioned and the provision scrupulously followed 

40 
 
by educating the beneficiaries that unwillingness to opt for MGNREGA works 
could be considered as a case for  rejection from the beneficiary list and receipt of 
future works/payment under MGNREGA.  The Committee also desire that the 
effective monitoring of the updates on the AwaasApp may be undertaken by 
constant persuasion to States to abide by the provision scrupulously and 
overcome shortfalls, if any, besides incorporating essential provision for timely 
payment of the wages to help early completion of the PMAY-G Units. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
Convergence with other Government Schemes 
2.16 The Committee appreciate various steps initiated for benefitting the PMAY-
G beneficiaries through convergence with other schemes i.e., Pradhan Mantri 
Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) for free LPG connection, Pradhan Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har 
Ghar Yojana (SAUBHAGYA) for free electricity connection. Safe drinking water 
through convergence with National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) 
besides provision of Solar Lanterns, Solar Home Lighting Systems, Solar Street 
lighting systems and the National Bio-Mass Cookstoves Programme (NBCP) and 
bio-gas schemes being implemented by Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. 
However, to their displeasure, the Committee found that among the  
1,13,79,121(One Crore Thirteen Lakh Seventy Nine Thousand One hundred and 
Twenty One) houses completed under PMAY-G as on 31.08.2020 and only 
32,79,914 houses of the 1,10,68,379 above lintel level are stated to have been 
provided LPG connection. Such, a small number of PMAY-G beneficiaries getting 
LPG connection proves that the vision of the Government under PMUY in 
convergence with PMAY-G is not being followed scrupulously. Furthermore, the 
figures of PMAY-G Units getting electricity under Saubhagaya convergence are not 
readily available with the Ministry owing to the fact that Awaassoft is yet to be 
integrated with the scheme. Similar integration is needed for convergence with 
other schemes on access to safe drinking water, solid and liquid waste 
management, and production of building materials. The Committees are unhappy 
to note that  the convergence of other schemes with PMAY-G in the absence of 
real time data owing to their non-integration on Awaas App till date. The 

41 
 
Committee in view of the above findings, a serious lapse on the part of the 
Ministry, direct them to gear up their machinery to remove the shortfalls and 
shortcomings in the convergence of various schemes so that the benefits thereto  
percolate to the PMAY-G beneficiaries and take expeditious steps for integrating 
all these data on to the AwaasApp in coordination with the concerned Ministries. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
Mason Training  
2.17 The Committee note that since PMAY-G focuses on quality construction 
of houses, it becomes necessary that construction is undertaken by trained 
masons. As such, training for skill development of rural masons has been 
introduced for ensuring construction of houses under trained hands as also 
creating livelihood opportunities. To its dismay, the Committee’s examination has 
revealed a huge shortfall in the Rural Mason Training (RMT) being primarily 
imparted onsite wherein only 76,193 masons out of the total of 1,49,842 enrolled 
have been certified creating skilled labour demand and supply gap. The 
Committee, therefore, seriously view  the shortfall in the number of persons 
imparted training in view of the 2.32 crore houses to be constructed under PMAY-
G and the issue of non-availability of real-time figures on Rural Mason Training 
(RMT) as it is yet to be integrated on AwaasApp. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry spruce up their efforts to enroll and train more and 
more persons for RMT for viability of PMAY-G and speed up the process of 
integrating the programme on the AwaasApp. 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 House Design Typologies under PMAY-G  
2.18 The examination of the material provided has revealed that the objective of 
PMAY-G for construction of durable, disaster resilient house has been lost due to 
unawareness of the beneficiary about PAHAL Compendium. Availability of the 
information on the website of PMAY-G, pmayg.nic.in., does prove awareness of the 

42 
 
beneficiary considering soico-economic condition and background. Furthermore, 
the Committee are disappointed to find that only Tripura, Sikkim and Maharashtra 
have constructed Demonstration houses despite request to the States implying 
that they have not been persuaded enough on the subject. The Committee are also 
astonished to note that the advisory for States/ UTs to develop simpler version of 
the relevant portion from the ‘PAHAL’ in the local language, on need basis totally 
diminishes the spirit of the scheme despite the fact that though the scheme is 
implemented at the State level, monitoring responsibility including the 
effectiveness and success remains the prime job of the Centre.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry take up serious efforts in the direction by 
guiding States on creation of the simplified version of PAHAL and creating 
awareness among the beneficiaries through programmes in local languages, 
pamphlets and signboards besides setting up awareness camps and involvement 
of Self Help Groups (SHGs) and Non-Government Organization (NGOs) may be 
explored. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
Financial Progress 
2.19 The Committee's examination of the figures on the budget estimates(BE), 
revised estimates(RE) and the actual expenditure incurred under PMAY-G reveal 
that finance for the scheme is sourced from  Gross Budgetary Resources(GBS) 
and Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR). The study reveals that  the actual 
expenditure incurred for the years 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20 is over and above 
the BE and RE.   For Phase – I of PMAY-G, the Union Cabinet approved an EBR of 
Rs. 21,975 crore., of which an amount of Rs. 18,008.23 crore  was sourced from 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) and under Phase-
II for the year 2019-20, Ministry of Finance approved EBR of Rs 20,000 crore of 
which Rs. 10,811.02 crore  which again has been sourced from NABARD.  The 
central share for construction of 70 lakh houses for the current fiscal,  2020-21 is 
Rs. 57,330 crore. Out of which Rs. 19,500 crore has been provided as the GBS and 
the balance is to be met through EBR.  The steps taken by the Ministry on 

43 
 
availability of funds for the Scheme has obtained positive response from the 
Government ensuring availability of funds for the program. The evaluation depict 
that the scheme gathered momentum from 2017-18 onwards warranting increased 
expenditure and the efforts initiated for availability of financial resources for the 
scheme establishes true commitment of the Government towards the cause for 
providing 'housing for all' by 2022. 
2.20 The Committee, however, on examining the  details of released/held 
Central/State share under the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana (PMAY-G) for the last 
three years found instances of non- release of Central share to some of States/UTs 
owing to non receipt of utilisation certificates, under utilisation of funds, non issue 
of the 2nd installment of the previous year or non receipt of proposals from the 
State Governments along with requests for surrender of targets under the Scheme 
by the State Government establishing lack of coordination between the Centre and 
the States for early resolutions.  The lackadaisical approach of the Ministry on the 
ongoing scheme targeted to accomplish the goal set by 2022, is remotely possible.  
The Committee, therefore, urge them to modify their methodology for  establishing 
better coordination among the implementing an the monitoring agencies so that 
shortcomings noticed are immediately addressed enabling timely release of 
Centre/States share and submission of utilization certificates to accomplish 
execution of the scheme by 2022.   
(Recommendation No. 17) 
Physical Progress 
2.21 The data submitted to the Committee for examination establish that PMAY-
G Phase I (2016-17 to 2018-19) target of 99, 94,125 houses, has achieved completion of 
only 89, 73,139 units (as on 2 September 2020) creating a shortfall of 10% of the 
target.  The Phase-II (2019-20 to 2021-22)  target of 1,21,49,942 houses set to 
accomplished by 2021-2022, has achieved completion of only 24,05,982 Units as 
on 31.08.2020. This brings to the conclusion that the combined Phase-I & Phase-II 
target of  2,21,44,067 house,  only 1,13,79,121 (51%) houses have been completed 

44 
 
under Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana- Gramin (PMAY-G) as on 31st August 2020.  It 
has also been found that the data provided on the additional list of points has 
been collected at different dates depriving the Committee of the real-time figures 
to make an assessment. The Committee, thus, conclude that besides revealing 
pendency from Phase-I owing to various reasons, the slow start to the completion 
under the Phase-II owing to covid pandemic, has immensely impacted the 
progress of the scheme. The Committee, therefore, desire that  the Ministry should 
spruce up their strategy in the manner that the shortcomings, behind shortfall in 
targets are resolved and pendency of Phase-I targets is expedited, also the 
achievements in the Phase-II are geared up in a coordinated manner for cent per 
cent achievement besides ensuring supply of real-time figures to the Committee 
for examination. 
2.22 The Committee also, note that in order to arrest the pendency of targets on 
account of migration and unwilling beneficiaries, the Ministry has issued 
guidelines on procedure for dealing with cases of unwilling beneficiaries, death 
cases and migration of beneficiaries.  The Ministry is in the process of releasing 
the Revised Framework For Implementation-II for PMAY-G incorporating policy 
decisions to deal with such difficult cases besides steps initiated to collect State-
wise and category-wise data on number of such beneficiaries based on which, 
resolution by way of writing off, recovery mechanism can be proposed. The 
Committee, find the initiative undertaken as a progressive step in the right 
direction and hope that the Ministry expedites collection the required data for 
arriving at a strategy to deal with cases of migration and unwilling beneficiaries 
besides ensuring early release of the Revised  Framework For Implementation-II 
for PMAY-G for better and smoother results. 
2.23 The Committee while examining the percentage of amount to be set for the 
installments found that, flexibility has been given to the States to set the 
percentage of money for an installment and the average for the first installment set 
by States  is around 40 thousand rupees. On the issue of better results, the 
appraisal of Odisha State example wherein timely construction was achieved by 

45 
 
attaching a permanent government official as field functionary for every ten PMAY-
G beneficiaries to monitor construction progress was provided. Over the 
frequency of DISHA meetings, it was mentioned that States were requested to 
ensure four meetings in a year.  The Committee, on their part having much field 
exposure of the ground realities desire that the Ministry should firstly device a 
mechanism for the percentage of installment to be given to a beneficiary on the 
basis of assessing the state-wise progress results under the scheme on the basis 
of viability of the installment percentage set by that State and issue a general 
guideline on the subject.  Secondly,  the Ministry should propose to the State 
Governments to adopt the Odisha model for better and timely results and write to 
States for increase in the number of mandatory DISHA meeting to be held in a year 
from four to twelve meetings for better monitoring by the elected representatives. 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
Monitoring 
2.24 The Committee find that the parameters set for monitoring quality and 
timely construction under PMAY-G cannot be visualised until and unless the 
robust monitoring mechanism is engineered to achieve all the aspects of the 
scheme by suitable upgradation of the  Awass Soft platform to include real-time 
convergence data of all connected schemes.  Furthermore, discrepancies in geo-
tagging, transaction/service cost forced upon the beneficiary noticed in the 
National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) study findings and 
seconded by the field experiences of the Committee are required to be addressed 
properly for better results, apart from introducing a mechanism of third party 
inspection for eliminating corruption and unrealistic figures.  The Committee feel 
that the collective responsibility of the monitoring and the implementing agency to 
achieve success in monitoring and implementation of the scheme requires steps 
for development of best coordination among themselves for efficacious desired 
results. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the MoRD brings in further 
improvements in their monitoring mechanism by redefining their strategy so that 
AwaasSoft is suitably upgraded on a result oriented approach to ensure realistic 
and proper monitoring for unhindered implementation at the grass root level The 

46 
 
Committee also observed that on completion of the PMAY-G houses, the 
beneficiaries use the house one or two years and then sell the house made under 
the scheme. The Committee therefore, feel that a 'tracking system' should be 
developed by the Ministry to track whether the beneficiaries are living in the same 
house or someone has bought it and using it. The Committee also desire that 
some kind of provisions on time bound concept (to live in house for minimum 
number of years) should be made to discourage this kind of practice as it 
ultimately defeats the purpose of having a proper and pucca house for poor and 
needy through 'Housing for All' by 2022. 
2.25 The Committee while deliberating on effective monitoring through DISHA 
meetings at regular intervals stressed on the need for a proper and effective 
mechanism.  The Committee opine that until and unless proper mechanism to 
oversee the action taken on the points that emerge during the deliberations in 
DISHA meetings is devised, the exercise may not bear the desired results.  The 
Committee, therefore recommend that besides uploading the minutes of the 
meeting of DISHA, proper action taken mechanism on the points emerging there 
from may be devised apart from increasing the frequency of these meetings.  The 
Committee further desire that since the meetings are conducted at State level, the 
controlling officers i.e. District Magistrates/Commissioners/District Collectors 
should be made accountable for the number of the meetings held and action taken 
thereon by devising necessary and appropriate measures. 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
  
 
 
NEW DELHI;                            PRATAPRAO JADHAV 
     03 August, 2021                                                                 Chairperson, 
    12 Shravana, 1942 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on Rural Development 

47 
 
 
S r. N o . 
 
Sta te/ U T  N o . o f  lan d les s 
b en ef ic ia ries  in  th e PW L 
N o . o f L an d less  
b en e ficiarie s 
p ro vid ed  lan d  
N o . o f  L an d les s 
b e ne ficiarie s yet  t o  
b e p ro vid ed  lan d  
1 An dam a n & N icoba r 1 053  6 23  430  
2 An dhra  P rad esh 1 888  188 8 0 
3 Aru nach al Pra desh  0  0 0 
4 Assam  303 71 7 80  2 959 1 
5 Bih ar 200 00 6 82 1 931 8 
6 C hha ttisga rh 6 984  648 2 502  
7 D adr a & N aga r Ha veli 88 31  5 7 
8 D iu an d D am an  0  0 0 
9 Go a 66 0 6 6 
1 0 Gu jara t 8 039  546 9 25 70 
1 1 H aryan a 9  0 9 
1 2 H im acha l Prad esh 28 5 12  273  
1 3 J a nd K 12 7 0 127 
1 4 Jhar kh and  49 7 4 01  9 6 
1 5 Ka rnataka  153 46 11 56 0 37 86 
1 6 Ke rala  7 194  2 07  69 87 
1 7 La ksha dw ee p 0  0 0 
1 8 M ad hya Pra desh 381 77 31 53 1 66 46 
1 9 M ah ara sh tr a 11 000 0 28 80 7 8 119 3 
2 0 M an ipur  0  0 0 
2 1 M eg hala ya 23 6 36  200  
2 2 M izora m  0  0 0 
2 3 N aga lan d 0  0 0 
2 4 Od isha 607 98 806 7 5 273 1 
2 5 Po ndiche rry No t Ava ilab le N ot Availa ble  N o t Avai labl e 
2 6 Pu njab 33 7 95 242 
2 7 R aja stha n 554 05 36 52 6 1 887 9 
2 8 Sik kim  0  0 0 
2 9 T am il N ad u 503 50 663 2 4 371 8 
3 0 T ela nga na No t Ava ilab le N ot Availa ble  N o t Avai labl e 
3 1 T ripu ra 15 5 1 19  3 6 
3 2 U ttar  P rad esh 1 993  199 3 0 
3 3 U ttar ak ha nd 53 9 5 39  0 
3 4 W es t B eng al 180 38 617 4 1 186 4 
 T o tal 42 797 5 1 486 54  279 321  
Appendix I. 
Table on LANDLESS BENEFICIARIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   (as reported by the States/ UT, as on 18th August 2020) 

48 
 
Appendix-II 
Table on NREGA unskilled wages availed under PMAY-G since 2016-17 
State Name Houses 
Sanctioned 
No of Work 
Created 
No of 
Days(Mandays) 
Wage 
Paid(Rs.) 
ARUNACHAL 
PRADESH 7612 216 298 0 
ASSAM 410901 406234 17154913 3233821292 
BIHAR 2275851 2069887 79059926 13504625902 
CHHATTISGARH 939358 922270 71878609 12383266942 
GOA 164 157 0 0 
GUJARAT 307957 301834 14798106 2839981022 
HARYANA 21075 20876 751530 209432360 
HIMACHAL 
PRADESH 7961 7937 237185 43637614 
JAMMU AND 
KASHMIR 76284 60405 2430991 390126871 
JHARKHAND 842431 829008 47725807 8009996910 
KERALA 17688 17556 746100 195685130 
MADHYA PRADESH 1985458 1915370 142905987 24696676214 
MAHARASHTRA 694092 656843 30883933 6205463279 
MANIPUR 9911 9716 44299 9123838 
MEGHALAYA 34871 25191 1066622 194518891 
MIZORAM 6515 6316 45404 9531620 
NAGALAND 4244 4140 0 0 
ODISHA 1546801 1531573 111719608 20282427363 
PUNJAB 23455 21772 1074883 255482342 
RAJASTHAN 1117054 1100415 69249400 13093484442 
SIKKIM 1079 1077 37583 6646014 
TAMIL NADU 393643 365046 13017240 2796011178 
TRIPURA 48094 45424 2210512 393730778 
UTTAR PRADESH 1452441 1413346 111900086 19644268054 
UTTARAKHAND 12687 12488 863173 150924816 
WEST BENGAL 2403610 2360835 161645853 29851614057 
ANDAMAN AND 
NICOBAR 1367 142 846 207000 
DADRA AND NAGAR 
HAVELI 5615 3566 0 0 
DAMAN AND DIU 14 0 0 0 
LAKSHADWEEP 53 53 0 0 
PUDUCHERRY 0 0 0 0 
ANDHRA PRADESH 85272 0 0 0 
KARNATAKA 139488 0 0 0 
TELANGANA 0 0 0 0 
Total 14873046 14109693 881448894 158400683929  
                                                        (LOP Pt. 35)         Source: Awaasoft as on 4.6.2020 
 
 
 

49 
 
Appendix-III 
                  Table on PMAY-G houses constructed under Rural Mason Training (RMT)  
S.No. State/ UT 
Cumulative 
Enrolled Assessed Pass 
1 Andhra Pradesh 77 0 0 
2 Assam 310 240 179 
3 Bihar 32 0 0 
4 Chhattisgarh 30063 26235 19865 
5 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 60 0 0 
6 Gujarat 2434 2344 1919 
7 Haryana 90 60 55 
8 Jharkhand 16217 14432 10174 
9 Madhya Pradesh 48158 34794 23694 
10 Maharashtra 2761 1919 1428 
11 Meghalaya 581 581 386 
12 Mizoram 46 46 31 
13 ODISHA 13509 4876 3704 
14 Rajasthan 4382 605 494 
15 Uttar Pradesh 12648 10571 7269 
16 Uttarakhand 27 27 25 
17 West Bengal 13203 7502 6141 
18 KARNATAKA 20 20 18 
  Total 144618 104252 75382 
                                                                                                                  As on 05 June 2020(Pt 39LOP) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
Appendix-IV 
Table on FINANCIAL PROGRESS OF PMAY-G 
S.No. State 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
    Central 
Allocation 
Central 
Release Utilization* Central 
Allocation 
Central 
Release Utilization* Central 
Allocation 
Central 
Release Utilization* Central 
Allocation 
Central 
Release Utilization* Central 
Allocation 
Central 
Release Utilization* 
1 ANDHRA 
PRADESH 56200.25 
21712.785 0.000 35985.83 35192.885 26446.59 0.000 18605.430 26455 34416.000 0.000 976.200 0.000 0.000 0.000 
2 ARUNACHAL 
PRADESH 10993.12 5412.300 0.000 2661.140 1210.970 0.000 0.000 0.000   8775.000 0.000 0.000 
17925.50 
0.000 
13.00 
3 ASSAM 267324.75 132197.898 11382.54 48816.8 166961.670 145847.13 0.000 24408.400 114967 234000.000 143397.400 99148.240 428191.00 12257.35 12265.80 
4 BIHAR 477477.97 211427.064 291.25 403572.5 60257.060 324315.3 0.000 444931.907 560295 584644.810 490296.780 438528.540 580822.00 77815.20 140747.00 
5 CHATTISGARH 181109.27 83815.912 68223.4 158566.7 262507.140 415661.3 268865.94 263695.439 387831 191265.300 56254.500 95851.730 467184.00 0.000 438.39 
6 GOA 500.57 284.785 0 0 0.000 0 0 0.000 59 0.000 0.000 49.600 921.00 0.000 9.00 
7 GUJARAT 85059.62 36527.407 230 68221.67 53264.220 120470.8 0 68219.855 82679 77112.000 38556.000 41832.500 94805.20 0.000 13783.00 
8 HARYANA 8813.72 7414.461 1679.4 7186.98 2153.840 14878.77 0 2839.560 4468.7 0.000 3455.281 3572.460 0.000 0.000 669.41 
9 HIMACHAL 
PRADESH 5931.19 3253.818 1405.3 3055.38 5087.875 3887.13 0 1468.940 3472.6 1053.000 0.000 731.120 
7696.20 
0.000 
100.30 
10 JAMMU & 
KASHMIR 20709.69 8033.007 0 26467.83 4982.112 9571.5 0 22683.112 18614 61425.000 6768.920 10773.900 
74993.40 42771.22 
0.000 
11 JHARKHAND 182584.2 79630.141 27425.46 124547.28 162629.855 308920.55 108754.52 173352.475 27496 245220.000 244276.058 228175.860 310367.00 943.94 19382.30 
12 KARNATAKA 69686.76 27863.995 804.18 39150.26 59304.625 53789.28 0.000 18822.480 59746.9 61920.000 30960.000 4283.030 109234.00 0.000 0.000 
13 KERALA 24380.43 10049.440 4936.08 7392.15 2140.780 10275.6 0.000 0.000 4251.3 0.000 0.000 738.960 0.000 0.000 62.80 
14 MADHYA 
PRADESH 342581.69 170114.866 135959.4 296389.41 487626.830 787544.75 432294.91 425042.660 729732 432072.000 229197.575 266481.090 
724849.00 60459.32 69995.00 
15 MAHARASHTRA 174074.41 73566.023 35635.7 113019.38 110207.766 197014.05 51954.74 113552.925 195609 215109.590 181532.687 92764.910 291655.00 0.000 28728.00 
16 MANIPUR 11851.13 5767.410 0 0 5855.296 6591.76 0 429.975 4996.7 10413.000 1030.271 893.600 18535.10 5295.01 68.00 
17 MEGHALAYA 20722.04 8078.230 0 4520.41 4273.762 10245.3 0 12621.226 10659.6 20124.000 2260.206 4770.890 35025.10 0.000 2084.45 
18 MIZORAM 5847.66 2482.986 0 2182.94 644.250 2325.96 0 2923.830 761.9 1755.000 0.000 615.550 13549.70 1091.47 187.15 
19 NAGALAND 10319.53 4676.217 0 0 832.990 16.9 0 0.000 3902 6903.000 0.000 276.900 11702.30 0.00 0.00 
20 ODISHA 311871.53 149452.934 47763.7 269164.03 312405.903 581037.15 202335.06 329032.427 457736 429113.810 219733.140 262435.100 518272.00 65685.96 52940.50 
21 PUNJAB 7488 7559.100 0 2995.2 1602.060 3067.56 0 0.000 12858.5 7200.000 0.000 637.020 0.000 1271.30 677.22 
22 RAJASTHAN 187393.36 87153.102 34626.6 167453.39 189566.230 418489.5 159647.16 234013.320 316187 262080.000 293333.750 139020.170 311980.00 0.00 62455.60 
23 SIKKIM 1262.43 1190.605 0 0 0.000 926.1 0 0.000 422 0.000 65.033 20.600 0.000 0.00 0.00 
24 TAMIL NADU 132041.91 69059.770 2.08 97504.24 84848.578 93907.83 15724.800 50279.810 135368 144000.000 48752.120 58388.440 0.00 0.00 6948.48 
25 TELANGANA 0.00 14263.335 0.000   4815.530 0.000 0.000 0.000   0.000 0.000 0.000 0.00 0.00 0.00 
26 TRIPURA 28875.11 13455.455 586.85 1531.950 18316.450 23083.34 0.000 765.980 8255.72 33740.460 22952.362 7767.880 0.00 11361.69 3512.60 
27 UTTAR PRADESH 432890.69 223980.445 9498.16 298544.56 494806.433 1024180.08 233592.970 277585.808 477344 129350.000 114564.409 158572.760 0.00 8689.40 3513.08 
28 UTTARAKHAND 10036.26 7484.090 2593.2 4782.96 1381.400 7050.5 0.000 9598.300 6026 0.000 0.000 508.400 0.00 0.00 11.00 
29 WEST BENGAL 331772 139363.741 82492.62 280522.19 455666.018 786788.04 444181.56 437284.790 775922 605799.880 597595.701 354677.720 664923.00 23667.39 126822.00 
30 ANDAMAN AND 
NICOBAR 
262.510 196.370 0 326.98 33.070 0 600 0.000   480.000 359.616 37.200 
903.00 0.00 0.00 

51 
 
31 DADRA & NAGAR 
HAVELI 
378.93 282.830 0.000 999.65 330.880 55.2 7800 946.970 906 0.000 5598.000 919.200 
0.00 0.00 65.00 
32 DAMAN & DIU 67.35 49.880 0.000 33.7 8.740 10.4 0.000 0.000 5 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.00 0.00 0.00 
33 LAKSHADWEEP 70.92   0.000 0 70.920 0 0.000 0.000 23 69.600 0.000 26.250 0.00 0.00 0.00 
34 PUDUCHERRY 0.000 0.000 0.000 0 0.000 0 0.000 0.000   0.000 0.000 0.000 0.00 0.00 0.00 
    3400579.00 1605800.40 465535.920 2465595.510 2988986.138 5376398.370 1925751.660 2933105.619 4427049.92 3798041.450 2730939.809 2273475.820 468354.00 311309.25 545479.08 
(Pt 25LOP) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
Appendix-V 
Table on PHYSICAL PROGRESS OF PMAY-G 
#SNo State Name Phase-I Phase-II 
2016-2017 2017-2018 2018-2019 2019-2020 2020-21 
Target Completion Target Completion Target Completion Target Completion Target Completion 
1 ARUNACHAL 
PRADESH 
9034 821 2187 11 0 0 7500 14 15321 0 
2 ASSAM 219695 180252 40119 29808 0 0 256043 61101 365976 0 
3 BIHAR 637658 494106 538959 348039 0 0 1302259 151438 806698 0 
4 CHHATTISGARH 232903 225933 206372 200247 348960 315238 151100 598 648867 0 
5 GOA 427 25 0 0 0 0 0 0 1280 0 
6 GUJARAT 113595 107897 91108 85729 0 0 130301 21635 131674 0 
7 HARYANA 11904 11082 9598 8278 0 0 0 0 0 0 
8 HIMACHAL 
PRADESH 4874 4607 2511 2136 0 0 900 312 6578 0 
9 JAMMU AND 
KASHMIR 17020 11045 21752 10769 0 0 62932 234 64097 0 
10 JHARKHAND 230855 218796 159052 146600 138884 126617 322000 128893 431066 0 
11 KERALA 32559 12952 9872 3850 0 0 0 0 0 0 
12 MADHYA 
PRADESH 448147 427622 389532  373798 565914 543164 600000 244241 1006736 0 
13 MAHARASHTRA 230422 204358 150934 121768 68464 50097 354501 65838 405077 0 
14 MANIPUR 9740 8875 0 0 0 0 8900 0 15842 0 
15 MEGHALAYA 17030 14656 3715 1821 0 0 17200 123 29936 0 
16 MIZORAM 4806 3227 1794 8 0 0 1500 0 11581 0 
17 NAGALAND 8481 3749 0 0 0 0 5900 0 10002 0 
18 ODISHA 396102 363674 340498 307132 255958 220516 740464 307684 689990 0 
19 PUNJAB 10000 9779 4000 3868 0 0 10000 149 0 0 
20 RAJASTHAN 250258 244472 223629 216714 213204 203773 450816 149602 433306 0 
21 SIKKIM 1079 1052 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
22 TAMIL NADU 176338 130579 130214 80613 21000 8975 200000 13697 0 0 
23 TRIPURA 23730 23144 1259 1201 0 0 28838 5921 0 0 
24 UTTAR 
PRADESH 575258 564262 396594  390783 310764 307810 178900 155656 0 0 
25 UTTARAKHAND 8578 8368 4088 3990 0 0 0 0 0 0 
26 WEST BENGAL 436512 424587 374629  367861 586333 560620 1083488 270523 923505 
0 
 
 

53 
 
 
27 ANDAMAN AND 
NICOBAR 210 97 262 52 500 95 400 43 753 0 
28 DADRA AND 
NAGAR HAVELI 304 68 801 292 6500 59 0 0 0 0 
29 DAMAN AND DIU 0 0 15 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 
30 LAKSHADWEEP 57 9 0 0 0 0 58 0 0 0 
31 PUDUCHERRY 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
32 ANDHRA 
PRADESH 75054 40101 48058 6622 0 0 0 0 0 0 
33 KARNATAKA 93065 40867 52284 44662 0 0 86000 0 151715 0 
34 TELANGANA 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
  Total 4275695 3213447 3203836 2756665 
2516481 2336964 
6000000 1577702 
6150000 
0 
 
 
 
                        
(Pt 25LOP) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

54 
 
Appendix-VI 
Table on Pending Central Releases along with reasons for the FY 2017-2018 under PMAY-G 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT Pending for 2017-18  Reasons for 2017-18 
Prog fund Admin 
Cost 
Total Reasons for 
Prog fund 
Reasons for 
Admin 
1 Arunachal 
Pradesh 2558.79 102.35 2661.14 Pending for release because installment for 
previous FY is pending. 
2 Assam 0.00 0.00 0.00   
3 Manipur 0.00 0.00 0.00   
4 Meghalaya 0.00 0.00 0.00   
5 Mizoram 1049.49 41.98 1091.47 The State has not yet claimed the 2nd installment 
of Central Assistance for FY 2017-18 under 
PMAY-G. 
6 Nagaland 0.00 0.00 0.00   
7 Sikkim 0.00 0.00 0.00   
8 Tripura 0.00 0.00 0.00   
9 A&N Islands   0.00   
10 Daman & Diu 0.00 0.00 0.00   
11 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0.00 36.29 36.29 Admin fund against FY 2017-18 and 2018-19 is 
pending to be release to the UT, However, no 
proposal has been received from the UT. 
Currently, Rs. 4682.10 lakh is showing in the SNA 
of UT as per Awaas soft report as on 18th August 
2020. 
12 Lakshadweep 0.00 0.00 0.00   
13 Jammu & 
Kashmir 0.00 1017.99 1017.99  No proposal is received 
from the UT.  Currently, Rs. 
30290.02 lakh is showing in 
the SNA of UT as per 
Awaas soft report as on 
18th August 
2020. 
14 Ladakh 0.00 0.00 0.00   
15 Andhra Pradesh* 17380.40 0.00 17380.40 State had requested 
for surrender of 
targets . 
 
16 Goa 0.00 0.00 0.00   
17 Himachal 
Pradesh 0.00 58.75 58.75  The State did not release 
its share of admin fund
against the 1st installment 
and  hence was not 
eligible. 
18 Jharkhand 0.00 2395.14 2395.14  As per UC, the State had 
Reported expendite 
of 54.18% of the funds 
available. Therefore, the 
State Government of 
Jharkhand was not eligible 
for 2nd installment of 
Admin. Cost. 

55 
 
19 Kerala# 7392.15  7392.15 Prog. funds and Admin  bifurcation cannot be 
ascertained as the State is yet to submit year wise 
details of the 17651 households it wishes to 
surrender from the combined target of 42431 for 
the year 2016- 17 and 2017-18. 
20 Punjab 0.00 50.85 50.85 State had requested 
to surrender targets 
and accordingly its 
allocation and 
releases have been 
adjusted. State is yet 
to submit documents 
necessary for the   
release  of pending 
admin fund. 
 
21 Tamil Nadu 0.00 0.00 0.00   
22 West Bengal 0.00 7077.17 7077.17  Owing to State's lack of 
proposal for release of 
Admin cost. 
23 Uttarakhand 1907.69 76.31 1983.99 State accepted lesser 
target, i.e. 4088 
against 4915 and no
clarification from the 
State received so far 
against the 
observations of IFD 
for the release  of 2nd 
installment of 17-18. 
 
24 Bihar 0.00 15837.27 15837.27  Clarification 
pending from State Govt. 
25 Chhattisgarh 0.00 0.00 0.00   
26 Gujarat  0.00 0.00   
27 Madhya 
Pradesh 0.00 0.00 0.00   
28 Odisha 0.00 0.00 0.00   
29 Rajasthan 0.00 3220.26 3220.26  Proposal pending 
from State. 
30 Maharashtra 0.00 2203.52 2203.52  Proposal pending 
from State. 
31 Uttar Pradesh 0.00 11482.48 11482.48  Pending because 2nd 
installment for previous FYis 
pending. 
32 Karnataka 0.00 1505.78 1505.78  Pending because 
2nd installment for previous 
FY is pending. 
33 Haryana 0.00 237.56 237.56  Matter under submission on 
file. 
34 Telangana 0.00 0.00 0.00   
Grand Total 30288.52 45343.69 75632.21   
 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 
Appendix-VII 
Table on Pending Central Releases along with reasons for the FY 2018-2019 under PMAY-G 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
S. 
No. 
Name of the State/UT Pending for 2018-19  Reasons for 2018-19 
Prog fund Admin Cost Total Reasons for Prog 
fund 
Reasons for Admin 
1 Arunachal Pradesh 0.00 0.00 0.00   
2 Assam 0.00 0.00 0.00   
3 Manipur 0.00 0.00 0.00   
4 Meghalaya 0.00 0.00 0.00   
5 Mizoram 0.00 0.00 0.00   
6 Nagaland 0.00 0.00 0.00   
7 Sikkim 0.00 0.00 0.00   
8 Tripura 0.00 0.00 0.00   
9 A&N Islands 600.00 24.00 624.00 Proposal received For release of funds for the 
FY 2018-19 but without any supportive 
documents. Supportive documents 
with the proposal is required in order to 
release the lump-sum amount for FY 2018-19 
in one go. File  is under submission 
10 Daman & Diu 0.00 0.00 0.00   
11 Dadra & Nagar Haveli  223.92 223.92 Admin fund against FY 2017- 18 and 2018-19 
is pending to be release to the UT, However, 
any proposal has not been received
 from the UT. Currently, Rs. 
4682.10 lakh is showing in the SNA of 
UT as per Awaas soft report as on 18th 
August 2020. 
12 Lakshadweep 0.00 0.00 0.00   
13 Jammu & Kashmir   0.00   
14 Ladakh 0.00 0.00 0.00   
15 Andhra Pradesh* 0.00 0.00 0.00   
16 Goa 0.00 0.00 0.00   
17 Himachal 
Pradesh 
0.00 0.00 0.00   
18 Jharkhand 0.00 3029.60 3029.60  State  not  eligible 
as did not draw admin 
fund for the last FY either. 
19 Kerala# 0.00 0.00 0.00   
20 Punjab 0.00 0.00 0.00   
21 Tamil Nadu 15120.00 604.80 15724.80 No proposal from the State 

57 
 
22 West Bengal 0.00 17084.03 17084.03  State's lack of 
clarification against 
observations for 
release  of Admin 
Fund 
23 Uttarakhand 0.00 0.00 0.00   
24 Bihar 0.00 0.00 0.00   
25 Chhattisgarh 0.00 5170.50 5170.50  Proposal pending from 
State 
26 Gujarat 0.00 0.00 0.00   
27 Madhya Pradesh 0.00 8216.93 8216.93  Proposal pending 
from State 
28 Odisha 0.00 7777.98 7777.98  Clarification pending from 
State 
29 Rajasthan 0.00 6140.28 6140.28  Pending   because 
2nd installment for 
previous FY is 
pending 
30 Maharashtra 0.00 1998.26 1998.26  Pending because 2nd 
installment for previous FY 
is pending 
31 Uttar Pradesh 0.00 8984.34 8984.34  Pending because 
2nd installment for 
previous FY is pending 
32 Karnataka 0.00 0.00 0.00   
33 Haryana 0.00 0.00 0.00   
34 Telangana 0.00 0.00 0.00   
Grand Total 15720.00 59254.64 74974.64   
 
  

58 
 
Appendix-VIII 
 
Table on Pending Central Releases along with reasons for the FY 2019-2020 under PMAY-G 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
S. 
No 
. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Pending for 2019-20  Reasons for non-release 2019-20 
Prog fund Admin 
Cost 
Total Reasons for Prog. fund Reasons for 
Admin 
1 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
149.18 8775.00 8924.18Pending because installment for 
previous FY is pending. 
2 Assam   0.00  
3 Manipur 88.51 5206.50 5295.01Proposal from state for 2nd installment is 
awaited 
4 Meghalaya 15093.00 256.58 15349.58Proposal from state is awaited. 
5 Mizoram 1755.00 70.20 1825.20Pending because installment for 
previous FY is pending. 
6 Nagaland 5132.50 87.25 5219.75Pending because installment for 
previous FY is pending. 
7 Sikkim   0.00  
8 Tripura   0.00  
9 A&N Islands 480.00 8.16 488.16Pending 
because  installmen t for 
previous FY is 
pending. 
 
10 Daman & 
Diu 
  0.00  
11 Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
  0.00  
12 Lakshadwee p   0.00  
13 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
36815.20 1251.70 38066.90Fund of 2nd installment for the FY 2019-20 is to be 
released. However, any proposal has not been 
received from the UT. Currently, Rs. 30290.02 lakh 
is showing in the SNA of UT as per AwaasSoft 
report as on 18th August 2020. 
14 Ladakh   0.00  
15 Andhra 
Pradesh 
  0.00  
16 Goa   0.00  

59 
 
17 Himachal 
Pradesh 1053.00 17.90 1070.90IFD had returned the   
proposal  with 
an observation about slow 
rate of progress and hence 
to  avoid  parking of 
funds. 
 
18 Jharkhand  18.55 18.55 Admin fund not yet 
released. 
19 Kerala   0.00  
20 Punjab 7200.00 122.40 7322.40State is ineligible as funds   
for   the  FY 
2017-18 have still not
 been 
completely 
released. 
 
21 Tamil Nadu 144000.00 2448.00 146448.00State wishes to select 
beneficiaries 
from the Awaas+ data 
instead owing to its 
submission of 
unavailability of adequate 
number of beneficiaries in 
PWL. 
 
22 West Bengal 92509.23 40214.82 132724.05Pending release of 2nd installment of Central 
Allocation towards additional targets for FY 2019-20 
and inability to release Admin funds due to lack of 
State's proposal. 
23 Uttarakhand   0.00  
24 Bihar 581683.80 16180.96 597864.761st installment of 
Additional  Targets 
of        Rs.105773.1 
lakh is in process of 
release. 2nd 
installment will be 
considered after release      
of      1st 
installment only. 
Pending because proposal
 for  
2nd installment for 
previous FY is pending . 
25 Chhattisgarh 56254.50 56254.50Proposal pending from 
State. 
 

60 
 
26 Gujarat 55260.72 1594.88 56855.60State  has requested 
for surrender of 
Additional Targets, 
however, the 
request of the State has 
not agreed to owing to 
eligible number in PWL 
of the State. Proposal for 
2nd installment has       
not      been 
received from 
State. 
Sufficient       funds 
available with the State. 
Clarification s have been
sought. 
27 Madhya 
Pradesh 
 7513.34 7513.34 Pending because 
proposalfor 
2nd installment for 
previous FY is 
pending. 
28 Odisha 65685.96 9528.26 75214.22Part of 1st installment is 
yet to 
be released. 
Proposal for 2nd 
installment has not been  
received from 
the State. 
Pending because proposal
 for  
2nd installment for 
previous FY is pending. 
29 Rajasthan 31253.77 5517.99 36771.76File under 
submission. 
Pending      because 
proposal for 
2nd installment for 
previous     FY     is 
pending. 
30 Maharashtra 129372.69 4398.67 133771.36Proposal pending from 
State. 
Pending because 
proposal  for  
2nd installment for 
previous FY is  
pending. 
31 Uttar Pradesh  2204.08 11388.88Proposal pending from 
State. 
Pending because 
2nd installment for 
previous FY is 
pending. 
32 Karnataka 30960.00 1052.64 32012.64Proposal pending 
from State. 
Pending because 2nd 
installment for previous 
FY is pending. 
33 Haryana   0.00  
34 Telangana   0.00  
Grand Total 1263931.8
5
106467.8
8
1370399.7
4
  
 
 
 

61 
 
Appendix IX 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2019-2020) 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
THURSDAY, THE 09 JANUARY, 2020 
 
 The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1620 hrs. in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Prataprao Jadhav   - Chairperson 
Members 
Lok  Sabha 
2. Shri A.K.P. Chinraj 
3. Shri Rajveer Diler 
4. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Narendra Kumar 
7. Shri Baidyanath Prasad Mahto 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
10. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
11. Shri Talari Rangaiah 
12. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
13. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
14. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalker 
15. Shri Indra Hang Subba 
Rajya Sabha 
16. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia 
17. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo 
18. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
19. Shri Rathwa Naranbhai Jemlabhai 
20. Shri Ram Shakal 
21. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh 
22. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri S. Chatterjee  - Director 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Rural Development 
 
1.  Shri Rajesh Bhushan - Secretary 
2.  Shri Prasant Kumar - Special Secretary 
3. Shri Gaya Prasad - Deputy Director General 
4. Shri Shailesh Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 

62 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to the 
sitting convened XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX 
for briefing on the subject 'Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana (Gramin) - PMAY (G)' by the 
representatives of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural 
Development).  
[Witnesses were then called in] 
3. After welcoming, the Chairperson apprised the Ministry about the Direction 55(1) 
of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding maintaining confidentiality of the 
proceedings. The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development inter-alia highlighting the 
objectives and the progress made under PMAY-(G) initiated Power Point Presentation 
including major targets and the achievements made thereunder. The, Special Secretary, 
Ministry of Rural Development then further briefed the Committee on the major 
achievements made in providing housing to the rural poor.  
 
4.  Pursuant to the power-point presentation, Members raised queries one by one. 
These included issues pertaining to the performance evaluation of the program viz-a-viz 
achievements made, relaxation in scheme provisions, monetary increase in the 
construction per unit, shortage of mason, issue of transfer of deed in case of death of the 
allottee, reasons for the difference in the amount of disbursal under urban and rural 
schemes, involvement of independent agency in identification of beneficiaries etc., The 
Secretary, Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) 
elaborately responded to the queries of Members. The Chairperson, then thanked the 
representatives of the Ministry for briefing the Committee and directed that written replies 
to unanswered queries arising thereto may be sent to the Secretariat within 15 days.   
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
 
 
5.  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
----------- 
  

63 
 
     Appendix X 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2019-2020) 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
FRIDAY,  21 AUGUST, 2020 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room. 'B,' 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
  Prataprao Jadhav     -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok  Sabha 
2. Shri Rajveer Diler 
3. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
4. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
5. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
6. Shri Narendra Kumar 
7. Shri Janardan Mishra 
8. Shri Talari Rangaiah 
9. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
10. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar  
11. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
 
12.  
Rajya Sabha 
12. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
13. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo 
14. Shri Rathwa Naranbhai Jemlabhai 
15. Shri Ram Shakal 
16. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh 
17. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shr D. R. Shekhar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri. Shilpi Chatterjee  - Director 
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Additional Director 
 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) 
 
1. Shri Nagendra Nath Sinha  - Secretary 
2. Shri Prasant Kumar   - Special Secretary 
3. Shri Gaya Prasad   - Deputy Director General (RH) 
4. Shri Jagdish Kumar   - Joint Director (RH) 
5. Shri Ashish Shinde   - Assistant Commissioner (RH) 
 

64 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee to the 
sitting convened to XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXX  XXXXXX 
XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX take 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development (DoRD) on the 
Subject "Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-Gramin" 
3. XXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX 
4.   After welcoming the witnesses, the Chairperson read out Direction 55(1) of the 
'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. Hon'ble 
Chairperson in his opening remarks highlighted the main aim of the Pradhan Mantri 
Aawas Yojana of providing pucca house with basic amenities to all the rural population 
devoid of proper shelter by the year 2022 and invited the Secretary, Ministry of Rural 
Development to initiate the discussions. 
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development made a Power Point presentation 
on the progress  made under Pradhan Mantri Aawas Yojana-Gramin since its launching 
in the year 2016 and the bottlenecks faced in accomplishing the target fixed in the phase 
-I and phase-II schemes. 
6.  Pursuant to the power-point presentation, Members raised queries which  
inter-alia included issues pertaining to the performance evaluation of the program  
viz-a-viz targets fixed, relaxation in scheme provisions, monetary increase in the 
construction per unit, issue of transfer of deed in case of death of the allottee, reasons for 
the difference in the amount of disbursal under urban and rural schemes, discrepancy in 
identification of beneficiaries  delay in payment of MNREGA wages and money for 
construction of toilet under convergence in PMAY-G  and fixing of responsibility for non-
achievement of targets etc. The Secretary, Department of Rural Development (Ministry of 
Rural Development) elaborately responded to the queries of Members. The Chairperson 
then thanked the representatives of the Ministry for the evidence before the Committee 
and directed that written replies to unanswered queries along with the additional list of 
points may be sent to the Secretariat within 15 days. 
 [The witnesses then withdrew] 
 
7. A Verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

65 
 
     Appendix X I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2020-2021) 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON TUESDAY,  03 AUGUST, 2021 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1555 hrs. in Committee Room. 'B,' 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
Prataprao Jadhav     -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok  Sabha 
 
2. Shri C. N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Rajveer Diler 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
6. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
7. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
8. Shri Narendra Kumar 
9. Shri Janardan Mishra  
10. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
11. Shri Talari Rangaiah 
12. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
13. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
14. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
15. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
16. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
17. Shri Shamsher SIngh Dullo 
18. Shri Iranna Kadadi  
19.  Shri Sujeet Kumar 
20. Shri Rathwa Naranbhai Jemlabhai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
4. Shr D. R. Shekhar  - Joint Secretary 
5. Shri. A. K. Shah   - Director 
6. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Additional Director 
7. Shri Nishant Mehra  - Deputy Secretary 
 

66 
 
 At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the four Draft Action Taken 
Reports on (i) 'Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana - Gramin (PMAY-G) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) (ii) XXX XXX XXX, 
(iii) XXX XXX XXX (iv) XXX XXX XXX. 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Reports without any 
amendment and authorised the Chairperson to present Reports to the House. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________ 
XXX  Not related to the Draft Report 
 