 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2022-2023) 
   
 
     SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for 
Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)'.] 
 
 
THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
33 


 
 
 
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2022-2023) 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)on 'Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development)'.] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.07.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.07.2023 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2023/Shravana, 1945 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 187  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____ 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-2023) ii 
INTRODUCTION iii 
   
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
20 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
49 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
50 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
57 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I Extract of Minutes of the 11th Sitting of the Committee held on 
25.07.2023  
 
58 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj. 
60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2022-2023) 
 
          Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri A.K.P Chinraj 
4. Shri Rajveer Diler 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
7. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
8. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
9. Ms. S. Jothi Mani 
10. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
11. Shri Narendra Kumar 
12. Shri Janardan Mishra 
13. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
14. Dr. Talari Rangaiah 
15. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
16. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
17. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
18. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
19. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
20. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
Rajya Sabha Members 
22. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
23. Shri Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiya 
24. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
25. Dr. Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade 
26. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
27. Shri Ram Shakal 
28. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
29. Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa 
30. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh 
31. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram  - Director 
3. Shri Inam Ahmed   - Executive Officer 
 
  

 
 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj (2022-2023) having been authorised by the Committee to present 
the Report on their behalf, present the 33rd Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (17thLok Sabha) on 
'Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Rural Development). 
2.  The Twenty-Ninth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 14.03.2023 and 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15.03.2023. Replies of the Government to 
all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 07.06.2023. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 25.07.2023. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25 July, 2023 
03 Shravana, 1945 (Saka)    
Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural  
Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2022-
23) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty Ninth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development) for the year 2023-2024. 
1.2  The Twenty Ninth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 
14.03.2023 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15.03.2023. The 
Report contained 21 Observations/Recommendations.  
1.3  Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 21 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been received 
from the Government. These have been examined and categorised as 
follows: -  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
     Serial Nos. 1, 2, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21  
          Total: 16
          Chapter-II 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
      Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL      
        Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
      Serial No. 3, 4, 6, 7, 14       
 Total: 05 
   Chapter-IV   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
      Serial No. NIL        
 Total: NIL 
              Chapter-V 
 

 
 
2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case 
where it is not possible for any reasons to implement the recommendations in 
letter and spirit, the matter shall be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration/merit 
comments.  
I. Reduction of Funds in MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
1.6 With regard to the reduction of Funds in MGNREGA, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:- 
           “The Committee are concerned to note that the Budget 
Estimates for MGNREGS has been reduced by Rs. 29,400 Crore for 
2023-24 when compared to Revised Estimates of 2022-23. The Act 
governing the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme provides ‘Right to Work’ to such deprived sections of the rural 
populace who are willing to work. It is a last resort of succor for the 
jobless section who don’t have any other means to feed them and their 
family members. The role and importance of MGNREGA was visible 
during the corona pandemic times when it acted as a ray of hope for 
the needy in times of distress. The importance of the scheme itself got 
highlighted through the substantially huge increment at the RE stage in 
2020-21 and 2021-22 from Rs. 61,500 Crore to Rs. 1,11,500 Crore and 
Rs. 73,000 Crore to Rs. 99,117.53 Crore respectively to meet the 
increase in demand of work during corona pandemic. Even during the 
ongoing Financial Year 2022-23, the funds for MGNREGA has been 
increased to Rs. 89,400 Crore at RE stage from Rs. 73,000 Crore at 
the BE stage. However, for the Financial Year 2023-24, at the starting 
stage itself, MGNREGA has been allocated Rs. 60,000 Crore against 
the proposed demand of Rs. 98,000 Crore by the Department of Rural 
Development. The Committee are unable to comprehend the rationale 
for reduced allocation of fund under MGNREGA. Since it is very much 
necessary that adequate Budgetary Allocation ought to be made for the 
effective implementation of the Scheme, the Committee strongly feel 
the requirement for the matter of decreased fund allocation to be 
looked afresh. It is an established procedure that MGNREGA being a 
demand driven scheme, the funds can be raised at RE stage 

 
 
3 
 
accordingly. However, Ministry of Finance should have been impressed 
upon as to how the Department of Rural Development arrived at the 
calculation of Rs. 98,000 Crore at proposal level for MGNREGA. Had it 
not been the projections received at the ‘agreed to Labour Stage’, such 
proposal would not have been mooted at the outset by the Department 
of Rural Development. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend 
that the Department of Rural Development apprise themselves of the 
still existing high demand for job under MGNREGA at the ground level 
more realistically and utilise their communications and administrative 
skill to press upon the Ministry of Finance for increased allocation to 
MGNREGA.”  
1.7 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“In the FY 2019-20, BE was Rs.60,000 crore which got revised 
to Rs.71,001.81 crore, for the FY 2020-21, BE was 61,500 crore which 
increased at RE to Rs.1,11,500 crore and for the FY 2021-22, the BE 
of Rs.73,000 crore has revised been to Rs.98,000 crore  and during the 
last Financial Year 2022-23, the BE was Rs.73,000 crore,  which has 
been revised to Rs.89,400 crore. Whenever, additional fund is 
required, Ministry of Finance is requested to provide the funds. Govt. of 
India is committed to release funds for wage and material payments for 
proper implementation of the scheme, as per the provisions of the act 
and guidelines applicable for Central Government as well as State 
Governments.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.8 During the Examination of Demands for Grants (2023-24), the Committee 
found that the funds allocated to MGNREGA at B.E stage was Rs. 60,000/- 
Crore , i.e. a steep reduction by Rs. 29,400/- crore from the RE stage of FY 22-
23. Taking into account the increased demand shown by the Scheme at RE 
stage during 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23 and also considering that the 
proposed demand made by the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) for 
the FY 2023-24 was Rs. 98000 Crore, the Committee had strongly 
recommended the DoRD to not only assess the ground situation regarding 
demand for job under MGNREGA realistically but also impress upon the 
Ministry of Finance for increased allocation to MGNREGA.  In the action taken 
reply submitted by the DoRD, numerical facts regarding the funds allocated to 
MGNREGA at BE&RE stage from 2019-20 onwards have been enumerated,  
and further clarified that the Ministry of Finance is requested to provide the 
funds whenever additional fund is required and that the Government of India is 
committed to release funds for wage and material payments. Taking stock of 
the situation, the Committee find such reply of the Department extremely 
stereotypical and routine in nature. The Department of Rural Development 
neither provided concrete reply to the query of the Committee as to how the 

 
 
4 
 
DoRD arrived at the calculation of Rs. 98,000/-  Crore as the BE for MGNREGA 
at the proposed demand stage, nor it is able to put forward any concrete mode 
of action to deal with the probable dearth of funds under MGNREGA at this 
point of time. The Committee are not satisfied with the approach elicited by the 
DoRD in handling an issue of such importance which could lead to the 
hampering of the work being done under MGNREGA due to fund shortage. 
Such a scenario will not augur well for the poor rural workers under 
MGNREGA as want of funds could stall the projects creating pendency of 
wages, etc. In view of the above, the Committee strongly reiterate their 
recommendation and urge upon the DoRD to handle the fund related aspect of 
MGNREGA with a much informed and robust financial pragmatism through 
better coordination with the Ministry of Finance for seeking requisite allocation 
at BE stage every year rather than resorting to allocation of required funds at 
RE/supplementary stages which may hamper timely payment of wages and 
other payments under the Scheme.  
II. Pending liability of Wages & Material 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
1.9 On the aspect of Pending liability of Wages and Material under the Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), the 
Committee had recommended  as follows:- 
"The Committee are concerned to note the continuous pendency 
in disbursement of Centre’s share of funds under wages and material 
components of the Scheme in respect of many States/UTs. Through 
the information received from the Department of Rural Development it 
has been observed that as on 25.01.2023, Rs. 6,231 Crore in wages 
and Rs. 7,616 Crore in Material component is pending liability on the 
Centre’s Part. The Committee find accrual of such liabilities as severe 
impediments hampering the beneficiaries’ plight. The Committee take 
into account the plausible reasons that have been time and again cited 
by the Department of Rural Development for such types of pendencies 
such as non-receipt of documents etc. However, a scheme of such 
huge proportion like MGNREGA which caters to the nook and corners 
of the country and has millions of beneficiaries enrolled as job card 
holders, such delay in wage payments and material fund release would 
only deter the needy person from availing the benefits under 
MGNREGA and would also cause them further turpitude for non-
receipt of money when the sole intent of the scheme was to provide 
timely relief to poor in times of duress. Hence, the Committee beseech 
upon Department of Rural Development to ensure timely release of 
Centre’s Shares in wages and materials through effective measures 
and better coordination with States. The progress made in dismantling 
liabilities of the Centre towards wages and material components in 

 
 
5 
 
respect of each State/UT should be furnished to the Committee within 
three months."  
1.10 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
  "Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a demand driven wage 
employment program and the release of funds to the State is a 
continuous process. The ministry releases funds to states based on the 
approved labor budget, opening balance, pending liabilities of the 
previous year for the financial year, if any, and overall performance. 
The release of material and administrative item funds is done in 
accordance with the smooth compliance of the financial management 
by the State Government. 
 After the due financial prudence and compliance by the State, 
funds are released." 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.11  Taking due cognizance of the pendency in the liability of wages and 
material share of the Centre under MGNREGA, the Committee had observed 
that, as on 25.01.2023, Rs. 6231/- Crore in wages and Rs. 7616/- Crore in 
material component was pending liability on the Centre’s part.  The Committee 
having noted that such delay in wage payments and material fund release 
would act as deterrence to the needy beneficiaries of MGNREGA from getting 
some sort of relief from their penury,  the Committee recommended to DoRD 
ensure timely release of Centre’s shares in wages and materials through 
effective measures and better coordination with the States.  The Committee 
had also desired to be appraised of the progress made in dismantling the 
liabilities of the Centre towards wages and material component in respect of 
each State/UT within three months. However, to the utter surprise of the 
Committee, the reply furnished by the DoRD is completely silent and no 
specific information regarding the progress made by the Department in the 
reduction of pending liabilities has been furnished in the Action Taken Reply 
as had been sought by the Committee. Instead of elaborating upon the real 
cause and remedy to the problem, the effort solely seem to ‘pass the buck’ on 
the State as it has been submitted that “After the due financial prudence and 
compliance by the State, funds are released.”  The Committee find such reply 
evasive in nature and may lead to lopsided implementation of MGNREGA.  
Therefore, the Committee once again urge the DoRD to not shy away from 
their responsibility and initiate concrete measures to reduce and finally end 
the existence of pendency in the release of wage/material share of the Centre 
through result oriented and concerted efforts. The latest progress/status of 
pending liabilities in terms of wage/material component pertaining to each 
State/UT should be provided to the Committee at the earliest. 
 

 
 
6 
 
III. Modification in Attendance System 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
1.12  In the context of modification in Attendance System under MGNREGA, the 
Committee had recommended as below:- 
“The committee note that, in their constant endeavour to usher 
greater transparency and weed out alleged malpractices associated 
with the process involving attendance of genuine beneficiaries under 
MGNREGA, the Department of Rural Development have implemented 
a new provision of capturing of real time attendance at worksite. This is 
being done through a Mobile App (national Mobile Monitoring System 
App: NMMS) with two time-stamped and geo-tagged photographs of 
the workers in a day. The Committee is not oblivious to the facts 
surrounding the necessity felt by the Department of Rural Development 
for the introduction of a new real-time attendance capturing app and 
are in consonance with the intention of the Department of Rural 
Development in bringing in much required improved governance of the 
scheme. However, the flip side of the innovatory exercise should not 
remain unnoticed and unaccounted or else the intended relief to the 
beneficiaries may not reach them. The entire exercise of capturing two 
real-time photographs in a day hinges upon few key factors such as 
availability of smart-phones, proper internet connectivity and the 
presence of MGNREGA workers on both stipulated times for proverbial 
‘in’ and ‘out’ attendance. Needless to say that the MGNREGA 
beneficiaries belong to extremely deprived sections of the society, 
belonging to different linguistic milieu. Expecting the MGNREGA 
workers to be well versed with the functioning and language of app or 
for that matter even depending upon a nodal human intervention 
perhaps adds to their woes. Moreover, often the fluid timings of work 
site necessitate the workers to keep on waiting there even after the 
completion of work for their image capturing. Adding to this conundrum 
is the issue of availability of internet connectivity at far flung locales of 
MGNREGA work site. In view of the foregoing, and with utmost 
concern, the Committee urge upon the Department of Rural 
Development to review the implementation of attendance app 
holistically while taking into consideration the ground reality and 
challenges being faced by MGNREGA workers and come out with an 
acceptable provision at the earliest.” 
1.13 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD:- 
“NMMS has been introduced for real time attendance at 
worksites of all the beneficiaries present there. As per the provision, 

 
 
7 
 
after the four hours of gap from taking attendance along with first geo-
tagged photograph, second photograph can be taken.  
  
The App is available in five languages which includes English, 
Hindi, Tamil, Telugu and Malayalam. There is an exemption provision 
for taking attendance without using NMMS App in case of internet 
connectivity issue, device malfunction related issues, has been made 
available for District Programme Coordinator. The Ministry takes every 
possible step to resolve the technical issue if any reported, in a real 
time mode. During the Month of April'23 out of the total eligible 
worksites in second fortnight: 4.23 lakhs, attendance using NMMS App 
has been captured in: 3.83 lakhs worksites (90.54%). For remaining 
muster rolls, exemption provision has been made available.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.14 The Committee had noted the introduction of National Mobile Monitoring 
System App, NMMS aimed at the capturing of two time-stamped and geo 
tagged photographs of the MGNREGA workers in a day. It was understood 
that through the introduction of a new attendance system, the Department of 
Rural Development wanted to usher in increased transparency, however, the 
Committee found that the actual success of this app depended upon various 
extraneous variables like availability of smartphones, proper internet 
connectivity and the mandatory presence of MGNREGA workers at both the 
specific times to name a few. Taking note of these areas of concern, the 
Committee had urged upon the DoRD to review the implementation of 
attendance app holistically and after ascertaining the issues being faced by 
the workers, come out with an acceptable provision at the earliest. The 
perusal of replies submitted by the DoRD reveal that exemption provision is 
also present for taking attendance without using NMMS app, in cases of 
internet connectivity issue, device malfunction related issues, and is made 
available to the District Programme Coordinator.  The Committee while taking  
note of this provision would like to put forth the apprehension regarding the 
actual enforcement of this provision at the ground level in view of the 
contradictory information shared with the Committee by various stakeholders. 
Despite the submissions of the DoRD regarding the effectiveness of this app, 
the Committee are concerned to note the complaints from various quarters 
highlighting numerous difficulties being faced by MGNREGA workers in 
making their attendance on this app.  So, in the fitness of things, the 
Committee reiterate the recommendation and implore upon the DoRD to have 
an holistic review of the ground reality regarding the effectiveness of NMMS 
and also ensure that the exemption provision is being complied with in ‘letter 
and spirit’ so that no genuine beneficiary is left behind.  

 
 
8 
 
IV. Increase in Wages and bringing Parity in Wages 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
1.15 Concerning the increase in Wages and bringing Parity in wages under 
MGNREGA, the Committee had made the following recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that in accordance with the Section 6(1) of 
Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, 2005, the Ministry of Rural Development 
notifies Mahatma Gandhi NREGA wage rate every year for States/UTs. 
For providing cover against inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development 
revises the wage rate every year based on the change in the 
Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPIAL). The Committee 
take into account the modalities enumerated under the MGNREG Act, 
2005 and have also gone through the notified wage rate for the 
Financial Year 2022-23. It has been observed that there is no 
uniformity in the wages across the States/UTs and the rate differs from 
Rs. 204 in Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh to Rs. 315/- and Rs. 
331/- in Goa and Haryana respectively. The Committee on earlier 
occasion also have observed categorically about the utmost necessity 
to increase the wage rate commensurate with the inflation and rectify 
the disparity in wages by notifying a uniform wage rate across the 
country. The stance of Department of Rural Development as evinced 
on these issues have pretty much remained the same as produced 
here that “However each State/UT can provide wage over and above 
the wage rate notified by the Central Government”. Such responses 
are adept at typically passing the onus on the State Governments, 
while over a period of time it has been witnessed that the wage rates 
under MGNREGA have hovered on an average between Rs. 200/- to 
Rs. 300/- per day in the different States/UTs. It is necessary that the 
Department of Rural Development examine this issue with humane 
approach and initiate measures for increasing the wages in an 
appropriate manner befitting the rising cost of living. Moreover, linkage 
with the CPI-AL perhaps does not serve the purpose of ascertaining 
the real effect of inflation and the index for calculation needs to be 
changed on an urgent basis for looking at the real picture. It is also 
unfathomable as to why the Ministry is not able to notify a unified wage 
rate under MGNREGA across the country to end the disparity across 
States/UTs for good, particularly when the Scheme is mostly funded by 
the Centre. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development should increase the wage rates 
under MGNREGA by linking it to a suitable pricing index and explore 
the feasibility of notifying a uniform wage rate under MGNREGA for the 
entire country.” 
 

 
 
9 
 
1.16 In regard to the above recommendation, the DoRD in their action taken reply 
have stated as below:- 
            “As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the 
Central Government may by notification specify the wage rate for 
unskilled work for its beneficiaries. Accordingly, the Ministry of Rural 
Development notifies Mahatma Gandhi NREGA wage rate for every 
financial year for States/UTs. To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA workers against inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development 
revises the wage rate every year based on change in Consumer Price 
Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). However, State Government 
can provide wage over and above the wage rate notified by the Central 
Government from its own resources.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.17  Regarding the disparity in wages under MGNREGA in different 
States/UTs and the existence of meagre wage rates ranging from Rs. 204/- to 
Rs. 331/- in different parts of the country, the Committee had noted the long 
standing stance of the DoRD that the State/UTs were allowed to provide wage 
over and above the wage rate notified by the Central Government. The 
Committee did not subscribe to the logic of the DoRD in this context and had 
recommended that the Department should increase the wage rates under 
MGNREGA by linking it to a suitable pricing index while exploring the 
feasibility of notifying a uniform wage rate under MGNREGA for the entire 
country.  However, the action taken reply furnished by the DoRD in this regard 
is still of the same mould as earlier and does not deviate from their rather rigid 
stand.  The Committee find the mere mention of Section 6 (1) of MGNREGA 
and the procedure for the calculation of present wage rates based on 
Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) a repetitive approach 
bereft of  any application or rationale.  The Committee do not find their reply 
befitting the pertinent nature of conundrums surrounding the issue of wage 
rates under MGNREGA and expect a much more cogent response from the 
DoRD.  Disparity of wages and non-increase in wages commensurately with 
inflation is perhaps the most discouraging aspect for labourers to undertake 
MGNREGA works. Therefore, the Committee strongly reiterate the earlier 
recommendation regarding the ‘wage rates’ and disparity of wages in the 
States/UTs of country and beseech upon DoRD to empathetically look into this 
issue for a positive revision of the wages under MGNREGS.        
 
 
 

 
 
10 
 
V. Increase in Number of Days of Guaranteed Work under MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
1.18 With regard to the increase in Number of Days of Guaranteed Work under 
MGNREGA, the Committee had recommended  as under:- 
“The Committee note the another pertinent demand, that has 
been time and again made, is that of increasing of days of guaranteed 
work under MGNREGA from the existing 100 days. The Committee are 
seized of the sentiments of MGNREGA beneficiaries and resonate with 
the pressing need felt by them for increasing the number of guaranteed 
days of work under MGNREGA equitably. MGNREG Act was notified in 
2005 and the entire country was covered by April, 2008. Almost 15 
years have passed since the full implementation of the Act and “much 
water has flown under the bridge” by now. With each passing year, the 
need for change has been felt in the Act so as to keep pace with the 
changing demands of the time. The burgeoning population of the 
country with majority residing in the villages and a huge number of rural 
populace still trying to fulfill the basic necessity, guaranteed days of 
work, perhaps, is a huge solace for such class of society. The 
Committee also find during the examination of Demands for Grants 
2023-24 that Government of India has constituted a Committee under 
Shri Amarjeet Sinha to study the performance of States and the 
governance issues under MGNREGS, which in itself is a clear cut 
indicator that review of basic features of MGNREGS is a long felt 
demand. Increasing the number of days of work at the Central level 
itself will certainly go a long way in providing a stable source of income 
to such poor and destitute class of beneficiaries who don’t have any 
other resort but to take up unskilled work under MGNREGA for their 
survival. Hence, the Committee, with utmost empathy, recommend that 
the Department of Rural Development should relook into the possibility 
of increasing the number of guaranteed days of work under 
MGNREGA and come out with some concrete measures in this 
regard.” 
1.19  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
            “Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGA) is to provide at least 100 days of 
guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every 
household in rural areas of the country whose adult members 
volunteers to do unskilled manual work. In addition to this, there is a 
provision for up to additional 50 days of wage employment in a 
financial year in drought/natural calamity affected notified rural areas. 
As per Section 3 (4) of the Act, the State Governments may make 

 
 
11 
 
provision for providing additional days of employment beyond the 
period guaranteed under the Act from their own funds. 
The Ministry mandates the provision of additional 50 days of 
wage employment (beyond the stipulated 100 days) to every 
Scheduled Tribe Household in a forest area, provided that these 
households have no other private property except for the land rights 
provided under the Forest Rights Acts(FRA),2006.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.20 During the deliberations on Demands for Grants 2023-24, the Committee 
had noted that the Government of India had constituted a Committee under 
Shri Amarjeet Sinha to study the performance of States and the governance 
issues under MGNREGS, which in itself vindicated the long felt demand for the 
review of basic features of MGNREGS. In this context, the Committee had 
resonated a wide spread demand of the possibility of increasing the number of 
guarantee days of work under MGNREGA from the existing hundred days.  It 
can be seen from the action taken reply submitted by the DoRD, that there is 
provision for additional 50 days of wage employment in a financial year in 
drought/natural calamity affected notified rural areas and that as per Section 3 
(4) of the Act, the State Government may make provision providing additional 
days of employment beyond the period guaranteed under the Act from their 
own funds. Moreover, provision of additional 50 days to every Scheduled 
Tribes households in a forest area having no other private property except for 
the land rights provided under the Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006 is also there. 
The Committee while noting the above submissions made by the Department  
still are of the firm view that since MGNREGA is a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme and is governed through a legislation which is being monitored by the 
Central Nodal Agency, DoRD, the ‘wind of change’  must flow from Centre and 
the onus should not be shifted to the States. The yardstick needs to be 
rationalised through the efforts of DoRD and considering the long period since 
the enactment of MGNREGA, perhaps an upward revision in the guaranteed 
number of days of work is much due at the Central level itself. Therefore, the 
Committee reiterate the earlier recommendation and call upon the DoRD to 
relook in the issue and suitably increase the number of guaranteed days of 
work under MGNREGA from the present 100 days.   
VI. Issue of Landless Beneficiaries 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
1.21 On the pertinent issue of Landless Beneficiaries under MGNREGA, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee are perturbed to find that even at this juncture 
when the scheme is approaching its last stage after getting extension 

 
 
12 
 
to March, 2024, there are still 2,93,598 beneficiaries remaining to get 
land/assistance from the State/UT to construct their house under 
PMAY-G. It has been highlighted by the Department of Rural 
Development that it is the responsibility of the States/UT to provide 
land to landless beneficiaries and that the Department of Rural 
Development has been in constant touch with the States/UTs for 
ensuring availability of land to the landless. Despite the efforts of 
Department of Rural Development being cited in the replies to the 
Committees, the Committee find the pace of reaching a logical 
culmination to such issue quite slow. Not much time is remaining for 
the scheme to reach its deadline and impediment of such nature needs 
to be taken care of as early as possible for the successful realisation of 
the target of the scheme. The ‘need of the hour’ is to further press upon 
the State Machinery with a sense of greater clarity and increased 
coordination with all the Stakeholders for expediting the mitigation of 
pendency. Thus, the Committee urge Department of Rural 
Development to increase their momentum of persuasive efforts with the 
concerned States/UTs on ‘war footing’ for attaining timely resolution of 
the issue of allocation of land to the landless beneficiaries under 
PMAY-G.”  
1.22  The DoRD in their action taken reply furnished to the Committee have stated 
as follows:- 
“Providing land to the landless PMAY-G beneficiaries for the 
construction of the houses is of utmost importance since they are the 
most deserving beneficiaries in the Permanent Wait List (PWL) of the 
scheme. Further for achieving the year-wise sub-targets and 
cumulative targets under PMAY-G providing land to such beneficiaries 
is very crucial.  As per the Framework for Implementation of PMAY-G, 
it is the responsibility of the concerned State/UT to provide land to the 
landless beneficiary from the government land or any other land 
including public land (Panchayat common land, community land or land 
belonging to other local authorities). 
The matter of providing land to landless beneficiaries is 
reviewed regularly with the States/UTs and taken up by the 
Government of India with the States /UTs at the highest level. Further, 
the issue of providing land to landless beneficiaries under PMAY-G is 
being regularly taken up with States/UTs in the Review Meetings, 
Zonal Workshops, PRC meetings, EC meetings, Video conferences, 
etc. 
This Ministry is considering the withdrawal of the target 
associated with landless beneficiaries who have been not sanctioned 
houses as of now. Further, the withdrawn target would be re-distributed 

 
 
13 
 
among the well-performing states. In this case, the liability of providing 
land and fund for the construction of houses to such beneficiaries 
existing in PWL of PMAY-G would then entirely be shifted onto the 
concerned State/ UT. 
To efficiently monitor the progress in providing land to landless 
beneficiaries under PMAY-G, an IT module for tagging the landless 
beneficiaries has been developed in AwaasSoft. The construction of 
the multi-story building is allowed under the PMAY-G and the same is 
being encouraged at least where the land is scarcely available or the 
cost of the land is very high.”   
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.23 Issue of landless beneficiaries under PMAY-G  has been a perennial 
challenge since the inception of the Yojana and in this context, the Committee, 
surprisingly found that still 2,93,598 beneficiaries remained to get 
land/assistance from the States/UTs to construct their houses under PMAY-G 
even when the yojana is nearing completion date, i.e. March, 2024.  
Considering paucity of time, the Committee had recommended to DoRD to 
increase their momentum of efforts with the concerned States/UTs so that a 
timely resolution of the issue is brought about and the landless beneficiaries 
also reap the benefits of PMAY-G.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry 
have reiterated their stand, as in earlier cases too, that providing land to the 
landless beneficiaries from the Government land/any other land is the 
responsibility of the concerned State/UT and that the Government of India had 
been consistently taking up the issues with States/UTs at the highest level.  It 
has been further stated that the Ministry is considering the withdrawal of the 
targets associated with the landless beneficiaries who have not been 
sanctioned as of now and that the withdrawal target would be distributed 
among the well performing States so that the liability of providing land and the 
fund for the construction of houses to such beneficiaries existing in 
Permanent Wait List (PWL)  of PMAY-G would then entirely be shifted onto the 
concerned State/UT. Moreover, it has also been submitted that the 
construction of multi-storey building is being encouraged where the land is 
scarcely available. The Committee find the exploration of feasibility of multi-
storey building is in consonance with the recommendation of this Committee 
on Rural Development in the 26th report (16th Lok Sabha) on PMAY-G 
(recommendation no. 11) which ought have been encouraged on a larger scale 
by now so as to mitigate the issue of landlessness to the beneficiaries. On the 
consideration of the withdrawal of the target associated with the landless 
beneficiaries, the committee are apprehensive of future of such landless 
beneficiaries who could remain languishing forever due to the inaction on the 
part of the concerned State/UT Government and recommend that this 
retrograde step should be reconsidered and instead possible ways should be 

 
 
14 
 
found in coordination with those States/UTs for the allotment of land and 
construction of houses for landless beneficiaries.  Thus, the Committee, while 
taking note of the efforts of the Ministry in this regard urge them to keep on 
expediting their consultative machinery with the States/UTs and also devise 
innovative strategies like multi-storey buildings so as to resolve the issue of 
landlessness for the ultimate benefit of the poor beneficiaries under the 
Yojana.  
VII. Increased Load-Bearing Roads and Plying of Heavy Vehicles 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
1.24 In the context of PMGSY, wherein increased Load-Bearing Roads were 
required on account of plying of heavy vehicles on the rural roads constructed under 
PMGSY, the Committee had recommended as below:- 
 “The Committee note that PMGSY roads are generally low 
volume roads and were never meant to bear the load of heavy 
vehicles. The specifications which govern the construction of roads 
under PMGSY did not fathom that heavy vehicles plying on NHAI roads 
would also use the PMGSY roads as last mile connectivity to meet the 
ever growing needs and expansion of industrial projects to the rural 
areas as well. The Committee have taken the cognizance of such 
changing scenario wherein it is almost a necessity for even the heavy 
vehicles to utilise the PMGSY roads. Thus, it becomes absolutely 
essential to devise measures to protect the PMGSY roads from getting 
damaged due to the heavy vehicles that ply on them. Either suitable 
modification of the specifications of PMGSY for constructing heavy 
load bearing roads is done at the earliest or the provision of getting the 
damaged roads repaired by the NHAI authorities is ensured to be 
strictly complied with, else the PMGSY roads would keep on getting 
damaged and will get non-transportable, defeating the intent of the 
Yojana. The Committee also find from the reply of the Department of 
Rural Development that Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have 
been communicated in this regard on 2nd November, 2022 but 
response from their end is still awaited and any further action would be 
taken by Department of Rural Development on the receipt of reply from 
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. The Committee are not 
at all satisfied with the existing situation and lack of concrete action 
being taken/planned by the Department of Rural Development as the 
ongoing practice of plying of heavy vehicles on PMGSY roads would 
keep on damaging the PMGSY roads as reported from different 
quarters. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department of 
Rural Development should take serious view of this matter and come 
out with some concrete and effective solution at the earliest to protect 
the PMGSY roads from getting damaged by heavy vehicles.” 

 
 
15 
 
1.25  In their action taken reply to the above recommendation, DoRD have stated 
as follows:- 
           “PMGSY roads are generally low volume roads and are 
constructed as per the specifications based on the traffic survey of the 
particular roads and the projections of the traffic during its design life. 
Further maintenance/ repair of roads constructed under the programme 
is the responsibility of the State Governments. All PMGSY road works 
are covered by initial five year maintenance contracts to be entered 
into along with the construction contract, with the same contractor, as 
per the Standard Bidding Document. 
With regard to taking action against heavy vehicles plying on 
NHAI roads which also use PMGSY roads as a last mile connectivity 
and cause damage to PMGSY roads, Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways has been communicated the recommendations of the 
Standing Committee and has been asked to submit Action Taken 
Report (ATR) in this regard, vide communication dated 2nd November, 
2022. No response has been received from NHAI. Further action will 
be taken on receipt of ATR from Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways. Further it is the responsibility of the district administration to 
ensure that such heavy vehicle which causes damage to PMGSY 
roads are not allowed to ply on the road and if any damage is caused 
the same may be repaired at the cost of the party who causes such 
damages.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.26 The Committee had noted that PMGSY roads are generally low volume 
roads which are not meant to bear the load of heavy vehicles. Despite this fact, 
it has become the practice that heavy vehicles plying on NHAI roads also use 
the PMGSY roads as last mile connectivity and in the process, more often than 
not, caused damage to the rural roads constructed under PMGSY. The 
recommendation of the Committee had on previous occasion also highlighted 
this issue to the DoRD which was communicated to the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways on 2nd November, 2022, but response from them was 
still awaited. Since the protection of PMGSY roads from getting damaged by 
heavy vehicles was of utmost importance, the Committee had recommended 
to DoRD to come out with some concrete and effective solution at the earliest.  
However, the Committee are constrained to note the reply of the Department 
that no response has been received from NHAI and that further action will be 
taken on receipt of ATR from Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. 
Further, it has also been submitted that it is the  responsibility of the District 
Administration to ensure that plying of heavy vehicles on the PMGSY roads 
are regulated. The committee find such response completely bereft of any 
understanding of the gravity of situation and also lacks accountability towards 

 
 
16 
 
maintenance of quality of roads under the Scheme which is aimed at the 
upliftment of the rural masses through proper connectivity to the main stream.  
The concerned Ministry/Organisations is responsible for furnishing Action 
Taken Reply within three months.  Reply may be sought from NHAI on the 
delay in furnishing Action Taken Reply without further delay even by using 
good offices. In this regard, Committee, while reiterating their recommendation 
beseech upon the DoRD in all earnest to shed their lackadaisical approach in 
the matter and handle the same with utmost alacrity so that the PMGSY roads, 
which are solace for poor rural masses, do not get hampered due to 
unauthorised practices and dilly dally approach of all the stakeholders 
involved.   
VIII.  Increase in Assistance Amount under National Social Assistance 
Program (NSAP) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
1.27 Increase in assistance amount under NSAP has been long overdue, the 
Committee in this regard had recommended  as under:- 
“The Committee note that National Social Assistance 
Programme (NSAP) is a 100% Centrally Funded Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme which has been continued for 15th Finance Commission Cycle 
(2021-26) also. NSAP caters to 3.09 Crore BPL beneficiaries with a 
scheme-wise ceiling/cap for each State/UT on the number of 
beneficiaries (recently revised in September, 2022). Termed as a 
Social Security Programme coming to the aid of old aged, widows, 
disabled persons and bereaved families on death of primary bread 
winner, the amount of assistance in the Components of Indira Gandhi 
National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS), Indira Gandhi National 
Widow Pension Scheme (IGNWPS) and Indira Gandhi National 
Disability Pension Scheme (IGNDPS) ranging from Rs. 200/- to Rs. 
500/- per month lefts much to be desired. The meagre assistance 
amount has been a cause of concern to the Committee for a long 
period of time and the Committee find this abysmally low amount, when 
the cost of living has increased substantially, not acceptable at all. It is 
beyond comprehension as to how can such low assistance provide any 
sort of relief to beneficiaries who belong to extremely marginalised and 
economically distressed section of the society. From the replies of the 
Department of Rural Development, the Committee also observe that 
Task Force under Dr. Mihir Shah (2012), Expert Group under Sumit 
Bose (2016), Evaluation Studies by NITI Aayog (2020) and Department 
of Rural Development (2021) have also emphasized on the need to 
enhance the Pension amounts and a proposal was submitted to the 
Cabinet for the revamp of NSAP, however, the approval for 
continuation of NSAP in its current form was given. The Committee feel 

 
 
17 
 
that there is an urgent requirement of the upward revision in the 
assistance component of NSAP and all efforts should be taken for 
carrying out revamp of the programme. Therefore, with deep concern, 
the Committee recommend that the Department of Rural Development 
should submit a new proposal for the consideration of the Cabinet and 
also utilise their convincing ability in coordinating with the Stakeholders 
involved so that the sentiments of needy beneficiaries do not remain 
unheard of and an upward revision of assistance under all the 
components of NSAP is materialised.” 
1.28 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as below:- 
“The Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution 
enjoin upon the State to undertake within its means a number of 
welfare measures, targeting the poor and the destitute in particular. 
Article 41 of the Constitution of India directs the State to provide public 
assistance to its citizens in case of unemployment, old age, sickness 
and disablement as well as in other cases of undeserved wants, within 
the limit of State’s economic capacity and development (7th Schedule). 
National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) came into effect in the 
direction of fulfilling this Directive Principles of the State Policy.  
Currently, the eligible old aged, widows, and disabled persons of 
BPL families are provided monthly pension ranging from Rs.200/- to 
Rs.500/- p.m. and in the case of death of the breadwinner of such 
family, a lump sum assistance of Rs.20,000/- is given to the bereaved 
family under schemes of NSAP. The programme has undergone many 
changes since inception in terms of the composition, eligibility criterion 
and funding pattern. The last revision in amount was done in 2012. 
In this regard, it is pertinent to mention that social security, 
invalid and old age pensions figure as items 23 and 24 in the 
Concurrent List (7th Schedule) of the Constitution and therefore, both 
the Central Government and States/ UTs have the responsibility for 
working in tandem in rolling out a comprehensive social security 
framework for the country. Accordingly, the State/UTs are encouraged 
to provide top up amounts at least an equivalent amount to the 
assistance provided by the Central Govt. so that the beneficiaries could 
get a decent level of assistance. At present, apart from the aforesaid 
central assistance, the States/UTs are adding top up amounts ranging 
from Rs.50 to Rs.3200 per month per beneficiaries under pension 
schemes of NSAP, as a result, on an average, the NSAP beneficiaries 
are getting monthly pension of Rs.1000 per month in several States, 
making the assistance amount satisfactory one. 

 
 
18 
 
Further, based on various recommendations/ evaluation studies, 
the Department submitted the proposal for revamping of NSAP 
including revision in amount of pension and coverage of beneficiaries. 
The Cabinet, while deciding continuation of the NSAP for the 15th 
Finance Commission cycle (2021-26), has recently considered the 
same. Considering the available financial space, the Cabinet in its 
meeting held on 19th January 2022 approved continuation of NSAP in 
its present form. Hence, it may not be appropriate to bother the Cabinet 
by submitting a new proposal on the same issue on which a considered 
view has recently been taken by it.” 
 Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.29 The continuation of NSAP for 15th Finance Commission Cycle (2021-26) 
was noted by the Committee. Considering the nature of this Social Security 
Programme, which aim at providing aid to old aged, widows, disabled persons 
and bereaved families on death of primary bread winner, the Committee found 
the assistance amount ranging from Rs. 200/- to Rs. 500/- per month under 
IGNOAPS, IGNWPS and IGNDPS very less and requiring upward revision.  The 
Committee had also taken into account the views of the Task Force under Dr. 
Mihir Shah (2012), Expert Group under Sumit Bose (2016), Evaluation Studies 
by NITI Aayog (2020) and DoRD (2021) which also emphasized the need to 
enhance the pension amounts. Consequently, a proposal was submitted to the 
Cabinet for the revamp of NSAP, which was not agreed upon.  Therefore, the 
Committee had recommended the DoRD to submit a new proposal for the 
consideration of the Cabinet and also coordinate with all stakeholders for 
effecting an upward revision of assistance amount under NSAP.  From the 
Action Taken Reply submitted by the DoRD, the Committee find that the last 
revision in amount was done in 2012.  Also, the Department have detailed 
about the existence of social security, invalid and old age pensions figuring as 
items 23 and 24 in the concurrent list (7th Schedule) of the Constitution and 
therefore both the Central Government as well as State Governments have the 
responsibility to work in tandem for rolling out a comprehensive social 
security framework for the country.  It has also been furnished that it may not 
be appropriate to bother the Cabinet with a new proposal on same issue on 
which a view has recently been taken.  The Committee take into account the 
submissions of DoRD and are also in complete agreement with the provisions 
of Directive Principles of State Policies (DPSPs) and the concurrent list 
wherein the role of States cannot be left unaccounted in ensuring social 
security to the poor and destitute.  However, NSAP is a 100 percent Centrally 
funded, Centrally Sponsored Scheme which provide the Committee the 
prerogative to suggest and recommend the changes required in the 
programme at the Central level.  The Sentiments   of the Committee can also 
be conveyed to the States/UTs by the nodal agency, DoRD. Passing the buck 

 
 
19 
 
to the States alone would not suffice the matter as the Committee’s 
recommendations are aimed at increasing suitably the subsistence allowance 
for old aged, widows and disabled persons belonging to below poverty line. In 
this regard, the Department should not shy away from placing the proposal 
before the Cabinet for increasing financial assistance under the Scheme 
according to the recommendation of this Committee.  Further in the light of 
pandemic faced by the whole India and world at large in the recent past, it has 
become inevitable to reconsider and revise National Social Assistance funds 
under the Scheme to extend financial benefits to old, vulnerable and bereaved 
families. Thus, the committee reiterate the earlier recommendation and urge 
the DoRD to relook in the matter of upward revision of the assistance amount 
under NSAP with a fresh perspective and place a new proposal before the 
Cabinet for the upward revision of Central assistance under all the 
components of NSAP.  
 
  

 
 
20 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
2.1 The Committee noted that the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) 
under the aegis of the Ministry of Rural Development have been entrusted with a 
huge responsibility of implementing and overseeing plethora of schemes of the 
Government of India which are aimed at the upliftment of rural masses of our 
country. It is pretty evident that vast population of our country still reside in the 
villages among which a substantial quantum belongs to marginalised and 
economically downtrodden section of our society. Thus, it becomes imperative on 
the part of the Department of Rural Development to ensure that the visionary 
flagship schemes of the Government of India are not left in the lurch for want of 
better manoeuvering and are provided with ample fuel power in terms of finances for 
keeping the schemes healthy and running. The Committee find that Rs. 1,57,545 
Crore have been allocated to the Department of Rural Development at the BE stage 
for 2023-24 which, although is 15.89% more than the funds at BE stage in Financial 
Year 2022-23, it is still much lower than the funds allocated at RE stage of 2022-23, 
i.e. Rs. 1,81,121.80Crore. Moreover, the Department of Rural Development 
demanded an amount of Rs. 1,97,233.34Crore for allocation at BE stage of 2023-24, 
which has been reduced by a substantial volume to the present allocation of Rs. 
1,57,545 Crore at BE Stage by the Ministry of Finance. It has also been observed 
the fund for a Major Scheme like MGNREGA has been drastically reduced and 
barring PMAY-G, fund for other schemes by and large is kept static. Even in terms of 
GDP, the share of Rural Development stands at 0.8% at BE stage for 2023-24 which 
is less than the actual expenditure reported in 2020-21 (1.1% of GDP), 2021-22 
(1.0% of GDP) and at the RE stage of 2022-23 (0.9% of GDP). Role of the 
Department of Rural Development is very vital for the holistic development of rural 
areas of the country and for that purpose adequate budgetary allocation is necessary 
particularly when the popular schemes like PMGSY, PMAY-G are also not immune 
to the inflation and rising cost of raw materials involved. More often than not, the 
reasons cited for stalling of Projects under various schemes emanate due to the 
shortage of funds generally by the second quarter of the Financial Year. By the time 

 
 
21 
 
the funds are replenished to a certain extent, the Schemes and the beneficiaries 
suffer from delays. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department of 
Rural Development should chalk out quarterly and monthly expenditure plans well in 
advance in consultation with Stakeholder particularly the State Governments in 
respect of all of its schemes/programme and should undertake all possible measures 
for the adequacy of fund at each stage of the scheme implementation and ensure 
that no scheme of rural development gets hampered due to shortage of fund while 
also keeping a close monitoring on the availability of funds so as to raise 
supplementary demands or re-appropriate at opportune moment in collaboration with 
the Ministry of Finance. 
     Reply of the Government  
 
2.2 MGNREGA:-Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a demand driven wage employment 
Scheme  and funds are released to the States/UTs on the basis of “agreed to” 
Labour Budget (LB) and performance of the States/UTs during financial year. An 
allocation of Rs.60,000crore has been made under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA during 
2023-24. Fund release to the States/UTs is a continuous process and Central 
Government is committed in making funds available keeping in view the demand for 
work on the ground.   
Whenever, additional fund is required, Ministry of Finance is requested to 
provide the funds.  Ministry of Finance allocates additional funds for the scheme. 
  
PMAY-G:-In order to achieve the target of “Housing for All” in rural areas, the 
Ministry of Rural Development is implementing Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana- 
Gramin (PMAY-G) with effect from 1st April, 2016 to provide assistance to eligible 
rural households with overall target to construct 2.95 crore pucca houses with basic 
amenities by March, 2024. The B.E for the Financial Year 2022-23 was Rs. 20,000 
crore and the RE approved was Rs.48,422crore.  As per the approval of Cabinet for 
continuation of PMAY-G beyond 2021  up-to March 2024, the total financial 
implication for Central Government during the FY 2023-24 is Rs.54,487.00 crore, 
which has totally been approved as BE for the FY 2023-24.   
  
PMGSY:-The budget estimate of PMGSY for the Financial Year 2023-24 is Rs. 
19,000 crore. This amount along with the corresponding state share would be 
enough to meet the expenditure on PMGSY works to be carried by states/UTs during 
the current Financial Year.  No reduction in BE(23-24) has been made over BE & RE 
of 2022-23. 
  
Further, the allocation/release of funds to the States for implementation of 
PMGSY is made on the basis of the fund release proposals received from the states/ 

 
 
22 
 
UTs and it depends, inter-alia, on works in hand, execution capacity of the States/ 
UTs and unspent funds available with the States/ UTs. Quarterly and Monthly Action 
Plans are chalked out in advance in pursuance of  the guidelines of MoF and the 
states are regularly followed up for requirement of funds.  State/ UTs have been 
provided with sufficient funds well on time for implementation of PMGSY scheme.  
  
NRLM:-As far as DAY-NRLM is concerned, BE for the year 2023-24 has been 
increased to Rs.14129.17 Crore from the BE 2022-23 of Rs.13336.42 Crore. This 
Division will closely monitor the expenditure during the current financial year. Annual 
Action Plans for the year 2023-24 of all the States/UTs has been approved by this 
Ministry and quarter-wise physical targets to be achieved during the financial year 
2023-24 has been finalized. This quarter-wise physical targets set to be achieved will 
aid to booking of expenditure on time and claim further instalment from Ministry. 
Therefore, situation like shortage of funds at the State level can be circumvented. 
The increased budget demand for 2023-24 is Rs.14129.17 crore because of 
following interventions is to be carried out during 2023-24. 
  
i. DAY- NRLM aims to cover 10 crore rural households in SHGs under 
DAY- NRLM by 2024;  
ii. Under programme, Capitalization Assistance Fund (Revolving Fund 
and Community Investment Corp.) of Rs. 9564 crores are to be 
provided 
iii. Start- up Village Entrepreneurship Program (SVEP) promotes 
entrepreneurship through capacity building and financial support - 
57808 enterprises to be supported 
iv. Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyojana (MKSP) has been implemented 
for identification and training of women farmers on sustainable agro- 
ecological practices (AEP); - Will train 75 lakh SHG members under 
AEP. 
v. Integrated Agriculture Cluster (IFC) promotion activities are important 
for achieving high level of economic activity; -1500 IFCs to be 
developed  
vi. Producer Enterprise (PE) / Farmer Producer Organization (FPO) / 
Producer Group(PG) - 13 lakh women farmers to be mobilized in PE/ 
FPO/ PG. 
vii. 3572 crores will be provided as interest subvention to SHGs on bank 
loans taken by SHGs across all districts of States except Delhi and 
Chandigarh. 
  
 DDU-GKY:- Under DDU-GKY scheme, the total budget provisioned for the FY 2023-
24 is ₹400 Crores. The quarterly and monthly expenditure plans, as suggested by 
the Committee, for the DDU-GKY scheme have been chalk-out in close consultation 
with all relevant stakeholders viz. States/UTs, etc. The Monthly Expenditure Plan 

 
 
23 
 
(MEP) with Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP) for the DDU-GKY scheme for the FY 
2023-24 are presented below in tabular format: 
 
MEP and QEP for the FY 2023-24 -Rs. In Crores 
Total Q1 Total Q2 Total Q3 Total Q4 Total 
BE April May June   July Aug Sep   Oct Nov Dec   Jan Feb Mar   
400 0 5 10 15 5 12 11 28 72 79.2 88.8 240 46.8 58.5 11.7 117 
  
It may be noted that the funds have been earmarked for each quarter under 
DDU-GKY scheme only after the consultation with states/UTs and according to their 
probable demand of fund quarter wise under the scheme DDU-GKY for FY 2023-24, 
so that the implementation of the scheme DDU-GKY will not get hampered due to 
the shortage of the funds. 
  
Under the scheme of DDU-GKY a close monitoring via. PFMS is being done 
through the concurrent monitoring of expenditure incurred under the scheme at the 
State/UTs level and as well as through the monthly review meeting of the State/UTs 
enabling the Ministry to track the fund utilized and unspent balances lying with the 
State/UTs and forecast of the fund demand to be raised by the State/UTs for the 
relevant quarter. 
  
RSETIs:-  Under RSETI scheme, the total budget provisioned for the FY 2023-24 is 
₹250 Crores. The quarterly and monthly expenditure plans, as suggested by the 
Committee, for the RSETI scheme have been chalk-out in close consultation with all 
relevant stakeholders viz. States/UTs, Sponsoring Banks, NAR, NIRD&PR etc. The 
Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) with Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP) for the 
RSETI scheme for the FY 2023-24 are presented below in tabular format: 
 
MEP and QEP for the FY 2023-24 ₹ in Crore 
Total 
BE 
Q1 Total Q2 Total Q3 Total Q4 Total April May June July Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar 
250 0 0 30 30 15 30 35 80 20 25 35 80 20 20 20 60 
  
It may be noted that sufficient funds have been earmarked for each quarter 
under the RSETI scheme so that the scheme doesn’t get hampered due to paucity of 
funds during the FY 2023-24.  
  
Under RSETI scheme, demand of stakeholders, funds availability and release 
of funds to eligible claims are closely reviewed/monitored at JS/DIR-level on monthly 
basis and at Secretary-level on quarterly basis. 
  
NSAP:-  The total approved budget outlay of NSAP for five years (from 2021-22 to 
2025-26) i.e. upto 15th Finance Commission cycle is Rs.47,808.31 crore. The 

 
 
24 
 
budget allocation for 2022-23 was Rs. 9652.31 crore at BE stage which was kept at 
Rs. 9652.00 crore at RE stage. The full amount of the allocation has been utilized. 
This Department proposed BE of Rs.9652.31 crore for FY 2023-24. However, 
Ministry of Finance has approved allocation of Rs.9636.32 cr. In case of any 
inadequacy of the funds, the demand would be raised at RE stage. Also based on 
the pace of submission of proposals from States/UTs, MEP/QEP has already been 
prepared for NSAP schemes for FY 2023-24.   
  
NIRD&PR:- BE for FY 2022-23 for release of Grants in aid  to NIRD&PR was Rs. 
135.46 crore, whereas the BE for this FY 2023-24 is Rs. 115.00 crore. Further the 
BE of Rs. 135.46 lakh for FY 2022-23 was reduced to Rs. 114.59 crore at its RE 
stage and 100% of the RE was utilized in the FY 2022-23.  
  
In so far adequacy of funds is concerned, it is stated that BE for grants in aid 
to NIRD&PR for FY 2023-24 is Rs. 115.00 crore  and it appears to fulfill the 
requirements of NIRD&PR keeping in view the funds released in previous years (as 
mentioned in table below).  
  
S. No. Financial 
Year 
Funds released towards Grants 
in Aid to SIRDs/ETCs under 
MSRDP Scheme (In Crore) 
Funds released towards 
Grants in aid to 
NIRD&PR (In Crore) 
1. 2019-20 45.23 80.42 
2. 2020-21 28.25 80.43 
3. 2021-22 48.32 105.48 
4. 2022-23 61.92 114.59 
  
SIRD/ETC:- BE for FY 2022-23 towards release of funds to SIRDs/ETCs   under 
MSRDP Scheme was Rs. 95.00 crore, whereas the BE for this FY 2023-24 for  
same Head is Rs. 51.24 crore. Further, in respect of adequacy of fund,  it is informed 
that the BE towards release of funds to SIRDs/ETCs under MSRDP Scheme for FY  
2022-23 amounting Rs. 95.00 crore was reduced to Rs. 60.50 crore at RE stage. All 
the proposals received in te Division were considered and GIA was released.  There 
was a shortfall of appox. Rs. 2.00 crore at the fag end of the FY 2022-23, which was 
met by re-appropriation of funds of Rs. 2.00 Crore from the available saving within 
the Scheme. Out of the available fund of Rs. 62.50 crore, this Division  utilised more 
than 99% of the grant. 
  
The BE for release of fund to SIRDs/ETCs under MSRDP scheme is Rs. 
51.24 crore  in this FY 2023-24. Keeping in view the demands received from 
SIRD/ETC in the previous years. It appears that the BE amounting Rs. 51.24 Crore 
shall be sufficient to fulfil the requirements of SIRDs/ETCs (as mentioned in the table 
below). If additional funds shall require, it would be demanded at RE stage. 
 

 
 
25 
 
SPMRM:-  So  far  SPMRM  is  concerned,  the  allocation  for  BE 2023-24  is  NIL.   
The Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of Finance has given 31/3/2022 
as the sunset date of the Mission. Further,  Department of Expenditure (DoE), 
Ministry of Finance vide letter dated 30/11/2022  has  given  permission  for  release 
of funds up to 15th March, 2023 and  extended  till 31.03.2023 vide OM dated 17th 
March, 2023,  only for  those  works  which  were  ongoing  as  on 31/3/2022.  The 
deadline for all fund releases under SPMRM is over and no further funds are to be 
released in 2023-24. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021- B&A Dated 07.06.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
2.3 The Committee note with concern the omnipresence of unspent balances 
across all the schemes of rural development. The huge volume of unspent amount 
that has accrued so far under PMGSY (Rs. 2,269.631 Crore), DAY-NRLM (Rs. 
4,717.56 Crore), NSAP (Rs. 83,536.39 Lakh), SPMRM (Rs. 664.35 Crore) PMAY-G 
(Rs. 15,50,898.91 Lakh) among others throws a dismal picture of the financial 
prudence of the Department of Rural Development. The storyline has been similar 
over the period of years and a robust mechanism for handling such piquant situation 
is yet to be seen. The Committee take note of the fund sharing pattern between the 
Centre and State in the implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes which has 
its own pitfalls, viz. dependency on timely submission of Utilization Certificates and 
other mandatory paper works for release of tranches of money, non-timely release of 
State Share et. al. Although the Committee acknowledge the gradual reduction in the 
unspent balances over a period of time, still non-liquidation and accrual of huge 
sums does not augur well for the smooth implementation of schemes for desired 
results. Therefore, the Committee, while expecting Department of Rural 
Development to come out with ‘out of the box’ and innovative strategies recommend 
them to devise a more pragmatic approach and a much better fiscal prudence to tide 
over the issue of Government money getting tied up and remaining unspent.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.4 MGNREGA:-Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, fund release to the States/UTs 
is a continuous process depending upon the demand on the ground. Funds released 
towards Material & Admin Component of the programme particularly in the terminal 
month of the financial year becomes unspent balance in some States due to delayed 
available of funds to the State Govt. through RBI, subsequent delay in release by 

 
 
26 
 
State Finance Department to Bank Account of Implementing Agency at State, some 
technical issues come up during the funds transfer order generation at field or 
administrative issues at field.  
  
Ministry ensures release of next instalment, only after utilization of funds 
against pervious central release. 
  
PMAY-G:- During the Financial Year 2022-23, the Ministry of Finance provided 
Rs.13,000 crore as advance from Contingency Fund of India in the month of 
November, 2022 at the request of the Ministry to PMAY-G in addition to BE of 
Rs.20,000 crore. The total funds released under PMAY-G up-to 31.12.2022 was 
Rs.28, 279.12 crore.  The unspent balance also includes interest accrued during the 
FY 2022-23, which shall mandatorily be remitted to the respective consolidated 
funds on pro-rata basis.  The unspent balances are also due to delay on the part of 
State Government to transfer the corresponding State share in to the respective 
State Nodal Accounts.  
  
In  order  to  promote  utilization  of  funds  and  promote  construction  of  
house,  proactive monitoring  has been adopted. The following initiatives are taken: 
i. Regular review meetings of progress achieved. 
ii. Launch of PMAY-G Dashboard for monitoring and supervision of the scheme. 
iii. Regular follow ups with the State to ensure release of central and state share 
of funds and provision of land to landless beneficiaries in rural areas. 
 
PMGSY:-Ministry has been regularly reviewing the position of unspent balances with 
the States in various monthly review meetings. States are not being released further 
central funds unless they spend the funds already available with them up-to a 
reasonable limit which is 75%. States are also being encouraged to speed up the 
pace of works so that funds available with them are utilized in a time bound manner. 
Letters have been written from Hon'ble Minister of Rural Development to Chief 
Ministers of States to speed up the work and complete all pending works. 
  
Due to all these efforts unspent balance has been reduced drastically. At any 
point of time, States/UTs may have some amount of unspent balances as PMGSY 
is neither a DBT scheme nor for reimbursement of expenditure already incurred by 
states. Works taken up under the scheme are deposit works where money is placed 
in the State Nodal Account as an advance for the works to be carried out in the 
coming days. Further, if release of Central Share and corresponding State share 
from State treasury to single nodal account takes some time, States/ UTs have 
always some funds available in their nodal Account    so that no project is hampered 
due to shortage of funds. Hence a minimum balance fund is required to be 
maintained in the single nodal accounts of States/ UTs. 
  

 
 
27 
 
NRLM:-With the implementation of guidelines on “Procedure for Release of funds 
under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and monitoring utilization of the 
funds released” by Ministry of Finance, Government of India (GoI), each instalment 
is now limited to 25% of the allocation and proposal for next instalment can be 
raised only on spending of 75% of the available funds including State Share. In case 
State share is not released, proposal for next instalment cannot be processed. All 
the sub-schemes of DAY-NRLM has been on boarded at PFMS platform in all 
states and all the expenditures is being done through PFMS. This enhances 
transparency in transfer of fund and unspent balances at all levels. 
  
In addition to the above, this Division is now rolling out of a new electronic 
fund management system namely e-FMAS (e-Financial Management and 
Accounting System) through which expenditure position of the State can be 
monitored daily-wise. It will help this Division to monitor State-wise expenditure and 
unspent balance position more vigilantly and guide lagging States for timely 
utilization of funds.  
  
Further, to control the unspent balance, Finance Review Meetings are held 
with States to review the progress of the expenditure and resolve any impediments 
in smooth flow of funds and pace of expenditure. Performance Review Meetings 
with the States are also held regularly at highest level under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (RD) which are attended by the Additional Chief Secretaries /Principal 
Secretaries of all States.  
  
With all the above measures being implemented, it is expected that 
liquidation of unspent balances lying with the States and implementing agencies is 
certain and unspent balance getting accumulated will shrunk. 
  
NSAP:- The actual expenditure under NSAP schemes as on 31.03.2023 is 
Rs.9652.00 crore which is 100% of RE (Rs.9652.00 crore). There is an inbuilt 
mechanism of monitoring unspent balances with States/UTs in NSAP guidelines 
where the unspent balance is reduced from the first instalment to be released to 
States/UTs.  Now, since grants are released in four tranches of 25% each on 
reporting expenditure of 75% of earlier released funds instead of two instalments of 
50% each on reporting 60% expenditure, the issue has largely been addressed.  
Besides, since pensions are released by most of the States/UTs on monthly basis, 
hence there is very little possibility of building up of unspent balance with 
States/UTs. The unspent balance reported for NSAP is mostly the last month 
releases made to the States/UTs. 
  
SPMRM:-  The States started FY 2022-23 with the unspent balance from the funds 
released in the  last  nine  days  of the previous financial year 2021-22 after 
permission of DoE. Therefore States had Rs. 887.16 crore unspent balance of 
previous years. (this includes Rs. 211.64 crore (central + state share)  worth  funds  

 
 
28 
 
released  in  the  last week of FY 2021-22). Thereafter in compliance to the DEA 
order regarding sunset date, the States were not permitted to spend funds till July 
2022. Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance vide letter dated 
12/07/2022 and 30/11/2022 gave permission for release of funds up to 15th March 
2023. Therefore till date Rs. 820.66 crore have been released to States / UTs till  
date. Now the  States  are  utilizing  the  funds  towards completion of ongoing works 
as on 31.03.2022, and achieving  completion  of clusters. It is also submitted that Rs. 
664.35 crore unspent balance for 276 cluster with ongoing works  works  out  to  
average  Rs. 2.40  crore  per  cluster, which will further drop as works are 
completed.  
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
2.5 The Committee are also constrained to note that the non-adherence to the 
provision of delay compensation has cropped up frequently. The provision entailed in 
the MGNREG Act is legally binding and should be mandatorily complied with. In this 
context, the Committee, through their experiences of ground reality and the facts and 
figures apprised to them during study visits are seized of the situation that the State 
Machinery has time and again failed in providing the delay compensation due to 
being late in the payment of wages to the beneficiaries. Schedule II, Para 29 of the 
MGNREG Act categorically outlines the provisions for the wage payments and 
speaks about compensation factor in cases of delay in the payment of wages after 
15 days from the closure of muster roll. Since such delays in timely payment of 
wages to the beneficiaries defeat the very objective of the Act, the Committee 
strongly recommend that timely and hassle free wages to MGNREGA beneficiaries 
should be ensured by the Department of Rural Development. Moreover, the 
Department should ensure stricter execution of the provision of payment of 
compensation in case of delay in the payment of wages and bring onboard all the 
stakeholders for the compliance in ‘letter and spirit’. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.6 The Programme Officer will ensure that compensation claims are settled 
during the prescribed time, i.e. within 15 days of compensation being due, and such 
claims will not be allowed to be accumulated without any decision of acceptance or 
rejection. In all cases of rejection, the Programme Officer shall give detailed 
reason(s) for rejection on NREGASoft and maintain record of the same, in her/ his 
office for future verification. 
  

 
 
29 
 
District Programme Coordinator will monitor this regularly. The State 
Government (District Programme Coordinator and Programme Officer in particular) 
shall be responsible for operationalising the system for payment of compensation for 
delayed wage payments. The details are to be uploaded on NREGASoft so that the 
liability of each functionary/ agency can be determined in case of a delayed 
payment. 
 
               Besides, systematic solutions are also being taken to ensure that wages are 
paid on time. Continuous efforts are being made by the Central Government to 
ensure adequate number of servers for the States. The States/UTs have also been 
directed to ensure the following as well: 
a. Timely submission of Labour Budget, which in turn will affect fund 
release and flow of funds to the States/ districts 
b. Universalisation of e-FMS for booking all types of expenditure (viz. 
wages, material and admin) 
c. Identification of issues relating to internet connectivity and other 
infrastructural bottlenecks and accordingly working out a strategy to 
remove the bottlenecks in a specified timeframe. 
d. Deployment of adequate technical personnel/ Bare Foot Technicians 
so that measurements are taken at the worksite by the authorized 
personnel within three days of closure of the muster roll. 
  
                In addition, the issue of timely payment is regularly discussed by this 
Department with the States/UTs during various meeting and they are also sensitized 
in this regard through letters issued by this Department. It always remained an 
endeavour of this Department to ensure timely payment to the Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS workers. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A  dated 07.06.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
2.7 The Committee note the another pertinent demand, that has been time and 
again made, is that of increasing of days of guaranteed work under MGNREGA from 
the existing 100 days. The Committee are seized of the sentiments of MGNREGA 
beneficiaries and resonate with the pressing need felt by them for increasing the 
number of guaranteed days of work under MGNREGA equitably. MGNREG Act was 
notified in 2005 and the entire country was covered by April, 2008. Almost 15 years 
have passed since the full implementation of the Act and “much water has flown 
under the bridge” by now. With each passing year, the need for change has been felt 
in the Act so as to keep pace with the changing demands of the time. The 

 
 
30 
 
burgeoning population of the country with majority residing in the villages and a huge 
number of rural populace still trying to fulfil the basic necessity, guaranteed days of 
work, perhaps, is a huge solace for such class of society. The Committee also find 
during the examination of Demands for Grants 2023-24 that Government of India 
has constituted a Committee under Shri Amarjeet Sinha to study the performance of 
States and the governance issues under MGNREGS, which in itself is a clear cut 
indicator that review of basic features of MGNREGS is a long felt demand. 
Increasing the number of days of work at the Central level itself will certainly go a 
long way in providing a stable source of income to such poor and destitute class of 
beneficiaries who don’t have any other resort but to take up unskilled work under 
MGNREGA for their survival. Hence, the Committee, with utmost empathy, 
recommend that the Department of Rural Development should relook into the 
possibility of increasing the number of guaranteed days of work under MGNREGA 
and come out with some concrete measures in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.8 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA) is to provide at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in 
every financial year to every household in rural areas of the country whose adult 
members volunteers to do unskilled manual work. In addition to this, there is a 
provision for up to additional 50 days of wage employment in a financial year in 
drought/natural calamity affected notified rural areas. As per Section 3 (4) of the 
Act, the State Governments may make provision for providing additional days 
of employment beyond the period guaranteed under the Act from their own 
funds. 
  
The Ministry mandates the provision of additional 50 days of wage 
employment (beyond the stipulated 100 days) to every Scheduled Tribe Household 
in a forest area, provided that these households have no other private property 
except for the land rights provided under the Forest Rights Acts(FRA),2006. 
  
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
2.9 The Committee note that PMAY-G is one of the marquee scheme of the 
Government of India with the commitment to provide “Housing for All” by 2024. To 

 
 
31 
 
fulfil the objective, under PMAY-G, assistance of Rs. 1,20,000/- in plains and Rs. 
1,30,000/- in hilly States, difficult areas and IAP districts is provided for the 
construction of the house. The scheme has been extended beyond March, 2022 till 
March, 2024 to complete the remaining houses within the cumulative target of 2.95 
Crore houses. It has also been observed that 2.15 Crore houses have been 
completed as on 07.02.2023 and still large number of houses are to be completed by 
the target date. In this context, the Committee have been frequently enlightened 
about the ground reality during their course of examination that the unit assistance 
provided under the scheme is not sufficient and is also one of the reasons for the 
non-completion of houses within time. The inadequacy of assistance component 
comes under the lens more so, due to the rising cost of raw materials and 
infrastructure logistics required for construction of house. It is not a hidden fact that 
inflation does have a telling effect on cost factors and severely hampers the budget 
of beneficiaries under PMAY-G. Thus, it becomes all the more imperative to take into 
account the requirement of increasing the unit assistance under PMAY-G. The 
Committee also find that the hilly terrains are even more challenging for construction 
works and transportation costs are an additional burden at such places. Moreover, till 
the time assistance was rendered under PMAY-U, the amount totalled around Rs. 
2.5 Lakh which reflected non-parity between assistance component of PMAY-G and 
PMAY-U, and belied any logic for such difference in rural and urban sectors. 
Keeping all the considerations under view and taking into account that still a large 
chunk of house is to be constructed, the Committee recommend that the Department 
of Rural Development should revise the per unit assistance under PMAY-G to such 
tune which would cover the rising cost of construction in present times.  
Reply of the Government  
 
2.10 The scheme provides financial Assistance of Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain areas and 
Rs. 1.30 lakhs in hilly states (including North Eastern States and UTs of Jammu & 
Kashmir and Ladakh), difficult areas and Integrated Action Plan (IAP) districts. 
Additional assistance of Rs. 12,000/- is extended for construction of toilets through 
convergence with Swachh Bharat Mission – Gramin (SBM-G), Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) or other dedicated 
source of funding. It is mandatory to provide support of 90/95 person days unskilled 
wage employment at the current rates to a PMAY-G beneficiary for construction of 
his / her house in convergence with MGNREGS. There is also provision of 
convergence with other schemes for provision of basic amenities to beneficiaries of 

 
 
32 
 
PMAY-G:- electricity connection through SAUBHAGYA scheme of Ministry of Power, 
 LPG connection through PMUY of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas & Supply of 
drinking water through Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) of Department of Drinking Water & 
Sanitation, Ministry of Jal Shakti. 
  
In addition, the Ministry has got the approval of the Union Cabinet for 
continuation of the scheme beyond March, 2021 till March, 2024 for completion of 
remaining houses as per existing norms of PMAY-G. The financial implication for 
continuation of scheme till March, 2024 was estimated on basis of the unit 
assistance of Rs. 1.20 lakhs for plain areas and Rs. 1.30 lakhs for difficult areas, IAP 
districts, NE States, H.P., Uttarakhand and UTs of J&K and Ladakh. 
  
At present, there is no proposal for revision in the unit assistance under 
PMAY-G. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
2.11 The Committee note that the Department of Rural Development at present is 
focussing on achieving the target of 2.95 Crore houses by March, 2024. For the 
remaining households in the finalized Awaas+ lists over and above the target of 2.95 
Crore houses, there is no proposal now. The Committee find such reply devoid of 
any empathy and future vision on the part of Department of Rural Development. 
Awaas plus Survey was carried out to ascertain the quantum of leftover eligible 
beneficiaries and no roadmap planned for such households would indeed serve as a 
deterrent in realising the actual objective of “Housing for All’’. Since the scheme 
started with an initial goal of 2.95 Crore houses, realisation of such target would 
theoretically complete the scheme but the future of remaining leftover households 
would be left undecided. The Committee are of the view that since the scheme has 
already received extension to March, 2024 from earlier date of March, 2022, it would 
be perhaps appropriate if efforts are remodelled and strategies revisited to include 
the leftover households also in the ambit of target so that the grievances of leftover 
households are also met. Therefore, the Committee recommend that Department of 
Rural Development should recalibrate their target in consultation with the Ministry of 
Finance and other Stakeholders for the timely inclusion of leftover eligible 
beneficiaries so that the real objective of “Housing for All” is achieved. 
 
  

 
 
33 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.12 The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 8th December, 2021 has approved 
the continuation of PMAY-G beyond March, 2021 to complete the remaining houses 
within cumulative target of 2.95 crore houses by March, 2024. At present, there is no 
proposal for revision in target of 2.95 crore houses under PMAY-G. 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
2.13 The Committee note that a common grievance associated with PMAY-G 
which keeps on cropping up through the ground level experiences of the Members 
and observations during the study visits of the Committee, is that of selection of 
wrong/ineligible beneficiaries under PMAY-G. The base upon which the beneficiaries 
under PMAY-G were identified was the housing deprivation parameters of Socio-
Economic Caste Census (SECC), 2011. Much time has elapsed since the base year 
and it has been widely observed that many eligible beneficiaries have become 
ineligible while a whole lot of eligible beneficiaries have surfaced. Inordinate delay in 
the completion of target of the scheme within the deadline would definitely give rise 
to such precarious situations which would challenge the administrative acumen and 
farsightedness of the Department of Rural Development. Alleged instances of 
arbitrariness at the Gram Panchayat level on issues ranging from fiddling with the 
definition of ‘Kuccha’ & ‘Pucca’ houses on flimsy and whimsical grounds for partiality 
in allotment to the possession of equipment of basic needs as exclusion criteria 
begets anomalies in the inclusion of genuine beneficiaries. Such complaints are 
galore at the ground level and should not be left unheard. The Committee opine that 
there is still ample time-left for the Department of Rural Development to iron out the 
rough patches in the implementation of PMAY-G and create a robust mechanism for 
the redressal of grievances associated with the identification of genuine beneficiaries 
at ground level. Hence, the Committee recommend that the Department of Rural 
Development should adopt stricter measures to earnestly examine the issues 
surrounding eligibility of beneficiaries under PMAY-G so that genuine beneficiaries 
do not remain deprived of the benefits of such a visionary scheme of the 
Government of India. 
  
  

 
 
34 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The beneficiaries under PMAY-G are identified on the basis of housing 
deprivation parameters and exclusion criteria prescribed under Socio Economic 
Caste Census (SECC)-2011. The target of 2.95 crore was arrived at on that basis. 
The auto generated priority list of households from SECC, 2011 database was 
provided to the States/Union Territories for conducting verification by Gram Sabhas 
followed by an appellate process. The number of eligible beneficiaries thus made 
available through SECC database currently stands at 2.08 crore (approx.). 
Thereafter, the Government conducted Awaas+ survey to identify those beneficiaries 
which claimed to have been left out under the 2011 SECC and thus prepared an 
additional list of potential beneficiaries. In order to fill the gap between overall target 
of PMAY-G and beneficiaries available through SECC 2011, Awaas+ data is being 
utilized.  
  
A grievances redressal mechanism has also been set up under PMAY-G for 
redressal of grievances relating to bribe seeking, ineligible households being 
provided assistance under the scheme, etc. The Ministry gets these grievances 
checked through State Government Officials and/or National Level Monitors of 
MoRD. In cases where the complaint against the Officials/ Panchayat Adhikari/ 
Pradhan etc. is found to be true during enquiry by Central Government/ State 
Government team, prompt action is taken against the erring Officials. Following 
actions are suggested by Ministry to the States for immediate action against the 
erring Officials: 
  
i. FIR be filed against the erring Officials immediately. 
ii. Action to be taken against the concerned BDO, who is second signatory of the 
FTOs under PMAY-G and other supervisors who would have certified and 
inspected the works. 
iii. Show cause be served against the Officials and other concerned officials in 
cases where there is delayed action against the erring Officials. 
iv. State/UT to publicize widely the action taken in the matter including on social 
media. 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
2.15 The Committee are perturbed to find that even at this juncture when the 
scheme is approaching its last stage after getting extension to March, 2024, there 
are still 2,93,598 beneficiaries remaining to get land/assistance from the State/UT to 
construct their house under PMAY-G. It has been highlighted by the Department of 
Rural Development that it is the responsibility of the States/UT to provide land to 

 
 
35 
 
landless beneficiaries and that the Department of Rural Development has been in 
constant touch with the States/UTs for ensuring availability of land to the landless. 
Despite the efforts of Department of Rural Development being cited in the replies to 
the Committees, the Committee find the pace of reaching a logical culmination to 
such issue quite slow. Not much time is remaining for the scheme to reach its 
deadline and impediment of such nature needs to be taken care of as early as 
possible for the successful realisation of the target of the scheme. The ‘need of the 
hour’ is to further press upon the State Machinery with a sense of greater clarity and 
increased coordination with all the Stakeholders for expediting the mitigation of 
pendency. Thus, the Committee urge Department of Rural Development to increase 
their momentum of persuasive efforts with the concerned States/UTs on ‘war footing’ 
for attaining timely resolution of the issue of allocation of land to the landless 
beneficiaries under PMAY-G.   
 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 Providing land to the landless PMAY-G beneficiaries for the construction of 
the houses is of utmost importance since they are the most deserving beneficiaries 
in the Permanent Wait List (PWL) of the scheme. Further for achieving the year-wise 
sub-targets and cumulative targets under PMAY-G providing land to such 
beneficiaries is very crucial.  As per the Framework for Implementation of PMAY-G, it 
is the responsibility of the concerned State/UT to provide land to the landless 
beneficiary from the government land or any other land including public land 
(Panchayat common land, community land or land belonging to other local 
authorities). 
  
The matter of providing land to landless beneficiaries is reviewed regularly 
with the States/UTs and taken up by the Government of India with the States /UTs at 
the highest level. Further, the issue of providing land to landless beneficiaries under 
PMAY-G is being regularly taken up with States/UTs in the Review Meetings, Zonal 
Workshops, PRC meetings, EC meetings, Video conferences, etc. 
  
This Ministry is considering the withdrawal of the target associated with 
landless beneficiaries who have been not sanctioned houses as of now. Further, the 
withdrawn target would be re-distributed among the well-performing states. In this 
case, the liability of providing land and fund for the construction of houses to such 
beneficiaries existing in PWL of PMAY-G would then entirely be shifted onto the 
concerned State/ UT. 
  

 
 
36 
 
To efficiently monitor the progress in providing land to landless beneficiaries 
under PMAY-G, an IT module for tagging the landless beneficiaries has been 
developed in AwaasSoft. The construction of the multi-story building is allowed under 
the PMAY-G and the same is being encouraged at least where the land is scarcely 
available or the cost of the land is very high.   
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
2.17 The Committee note that Full Depth Reclamation (FDR) Technology is one of 
the new initiatives being undertaken by the Department of Rural Development in the 
construction of roads under PMGSY in order to achieve the twin target of being 
economical and reduction in carbon footprint of road construction projects. The 
Committee further note that 7,669 km of roads have been sanctioned under FDR 
technology in which 5,459 km is allotted to U.P. alone. Other States are also gearing 
up for the use of this technology. Rural road is a State Subject and PMGSY roads 
are constructed by the State Governments. Although, the role played by State 
Governments in carrying out PMGSY works is paramount, however, PMGSY, being 
a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, the role of Centre goes beyond only the issuance of 
notification and guidelines. The Committee have been apprised during the course of 
their deliberations that usage of FDR technology at ground level is extremely poor 
owing to various shortcomings such as unavailability of sufficient number of 
machines and inordinate delay in the soil testing procedures employed under the 
said technology. The concept envisaged for FDR technology was never meant to 
stall the projects under PMGSY but to hasten the completion of road construction 
projects by the usage of a new and innovative method. Department of Rural 
Development need to have a hawkish mode of surveillance on the actual 
implementation of their methods and technique and not remain satiated only by 
theorising new concepts. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development should ensure that the usage of FDR technology 
takes place as envisaged, and does not remain unimplemented due to lack of intent 
and wherewithal required for availing the benefits of new technology so as to ensure 
speedy completion of road construction projects under PMGSY.  

 
 
37 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 Right now FDR technology is under implementation mainly in the State of 
Uttar Pradesh at a large scale. Other states such as Jharkhand, Bihar, Maharashtra, 
Madhya Pradesh Assam, Tripura & some NE States have also been sanctioned 
works under FDR. Since FDR has been introduced for the first time under PMGSY, 
some teething problems were bound to happen. However as the work progresses, 
adoption of the technology will stabilize and the experiences gained will become 
helpful in ruling out similar problem in future. The experiences gained from 
implementation of FDR in Uttar Pradesh are being shared with other States. Regular 
handholding for FDR is undertaken for the States. Workshops having been 
organised in the State capitals and officials implementing the FDRs have also been 
exposed to FDR works through regular on site visit. Also many good quality 
contractors have shown interest in FDR works, and equipment and machinery is not 
an issue as many equipment being used in FDR works have been mobilised by the 
concerned parties doing the FDR works.  
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
2.19 The committee is fully aware of the mandatory inbuilt mechanism in PMGSY 
for consultation and consideration of the suggestions of the concerned Members of 
Parliament during the finalization of road plans. Despite the strong theoretical 
provision laid down under PMGSY, the Committee find themselves gripped with 
regular complaints from the Members of Parliament regarding the non-compliance of 
the consultative procedures in ‘letter and spirit’. Various type of aberrations are 
noticed which inter-alia comprises of blatant floundering of norms at certain places 
involving non-consultation to merely completion of formalities by obtaining consent of 
the Members without providing proper details/inspections of the ground locations. 
Members of Parliament are single point source of remedy for the grievances of local 
population at the grass root level in constituencies and are fully equipped to provide 
valuable insight and apprise public demands to the nodal authorities who construct 
the roads under PMGSY. Thus, it becomes all the more important to ensure that 
Members of Parliament are always kept informed and their suggestions, even at a 
later stage for inclusion of new roads are required to be considered on merit gauging 
the local needs/demands. Therefore, the Committee in all earnest recommend that 

 
 
38 
 
the Department of Rural Development should ensure the strict compliance of all the 
consultative provisions with MPs while finalizing the road projects under PMGSY by 
impressing upon the States the necessity of the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 As per the extant guidelines of the scheme, the proposals received from the 
Members of Parliament by the stipulated date is to be given full consideration in the 
District Panchayat which would record the reason in each case of non-inclusion. 
Such proposals that cannot be included would be communicated in writing to the 
Members of Parliament with reasons for non-inclusion of such proposals in each 
case. The same has been reiterated to the state Governments vide this Ministry’s 
advisory dated 2nd June, 2020. While forwarding MP references to the states, the 
said advisory is quoted every time and the states are asked to consider the 
proposals following the guidelines of PMGSY and the advisory dated 2nd June, 
2020.  
In order to make sure that the guidelines have been adhered to, the consent 
of MPs and the duly filled MP-I & MP-II proforma are checked by NRIDA and only 
after that, projects are sanctioned by the Ministry. If any complaint is received 
regarding non adherence of the guidelines, immediate action is taken by the Ministry 
to make the concerned state government comply with the relevant provisions of 
PMGSY guidelines regarding consultations with the Public representatives. 
                  (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
2.21 The Committee are concerned to note that the non compliance with the 
provision of inviting all elected representatives of the concerned area to the 
foundation laying and inauguration ceremonies of PMGSY roads. Reportedly, the 
explicit guidelines that the foundation stone for a PMGSY road should be laid and 
the road should also be inaugurated by the Members of Parliament (Lok Sabha) 
does not seem to be adhered to by the concerned authorities at many-a-times. The 
Committee are of the firm view that the presence of Member of Parliament at such 
events are one of the means of ensuring accountability of the executing authorities of 
projects of a Centrally Sponsored Scheme like PMGSY which are aimed at public 

 
 
39 
 
welfare and are constructed through the Government coffers. Representing 
sentiments of large masses of public, the Members of Parliament should never be 
by-passed or neglected. The role of State Government is no doubt much more in 
ensuring non-deviation from the protocol provisions mandated under PMGSY, but, 
the Yojana being a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, the nodal implementing body, 
Department of Rural Development cannot shy away from their responsibility. In view 
of the ongoing deviation from extant provision, the Committee recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development should go beyond citing theoretical provisions and 
look into the matter with utmost seriousness so that Members of Parliament are 
given due recognition befitting their privileges. 
Reply of the Government 
2.22 With a view to ensure effective participation of Hon’ble Members of 
Parliament, the following stipulations have been made with regard to laying of 
foundations stone and inauguration of PMGSY works: - 
  
a.  All elected representatives associated with the programme should be 
duly invited to the foundation laying and inauguration ceremonies; 
b.  The function should be held in a manner befitting social functions 
with due regard to protocol requirements, particularly in relation to 
Hon’ble Union Ministers and Hon'ble Ministers from States; and 
c.  The foundation stone for a PMGSY road should be laid and the road 
should also be inaugurated by the Hon’ble Member of Parliament 
(Lok Sabha) with the function presided over by the local Hon’ble 
Minister or other dignitary, as per the State Protocol. 
  
The above guidelines issued by the Ministry clearly mention that the foundation 
stone is to be laid and the roads are to be inaugurated explicitly by Hon'ble MPs. 
  
These stipulations have been time and again reiterated to the States/ UTs, most 
recently on 3rd February, 2022. 
    
However, the department has been in receipt of complaints regarding Hon’ble 
MPs not being invited in Foundation Stone/ Inauguration ceremonies of PMGSY 
works. Such complaints, whenever received are taken very seriously. Comments are 
sought from the respective States and they are asked to follow the PMGSY 
guidelines regarding inauguration and foundation stone strictly and rectify their 
mistake by holding the ceremony again in presence of Hon’ble MP. In the various 
review meeting with States issues relating to non-adherence of instructions are taken 
up and States are requested to follow the guidelines in letter and spirit.  
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 

 
 
40 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
2.23 The Committee note that National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) is a 
100% Centrally Funded Centrally Sponsored Scheme which has been continued for 
15th Finance Commission Cycle (2021-26) also. NSAP caters to 3.09 Crore BPL 
beneficiaries with a scheme-wise ceiling/cap for each State/UT on the number of 
beneficiaries (recently revised in September, 2022). Termed as a Social Security 
Programme coming to the aid of old aged, widows, disabled persons and bereaved 
families on death of primary bread winner, the amount of assistance in the 
Components of Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS), Indira 
Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme (IGNWPS) and Indira Gandhi National 
Disability Pension Scheme (IGNDPS) ranging from Rs. 200/- to Rs. 500/- per month 
lefts much to be desired. The meagre assistance amount has been a cause of 
concern to the Committee for a long period of time and the Committee find this 
abysmally low amount, when the cost of living has increased substantially, not 
acceptable at all. It is beyond comprehension as to how can such low assistance 
provide any sort of relief to beneficiaries who belong to extremely marginalised and 
economically distressed section of the society. From the replies of the Department of 
Rural Development, the Committee also observe that Task Force under Dr. Mihir 
Shah (2012), Expert Group under Sumit Bose (2016), Evaluation Studies by NITI 
Aayog (2020) and Department of Rural Development (2021) have also emphasized 
on the need to enhance the Pension amounts and a proposal was submitted to the 
Cabinet for the revamp of NSAP, however, the approval for continuation of NSAP in 
its current form was given. The Committee feel that there is an urgent requirement of 
the upward revision in the assistance component of NSAP and all efforts should be 
taken for carrying out revamp of the programme. Therefore, with deep concern, the 
Committee recommend that the Department of Rural Development should submit a 
new proposal for the consideration of the Cabinet and also utilise their convincing 
ability in coordinating with the Stakeholders involved so that the sentiments of needy 
beneficiaries do not remain unheard of and an upward revision of assistance under 
all the components of NSAP is materialised. 
Reply of the Government 
2.24 The Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution enjoin upon the 
State to undertake within its means a number of welfare measures, targeting the 
poor and the destitute in particular. Article 41 of the Constitution of India directs the 

 
 
41 
 
State to provide public assistance to its citizens in case of unemployment, old age, 
sickness and disablement as well as in other cases of undeserved wants, within the 
limit of State’s economic capacity and development (7th Schedule). National Social 
Assistance Programme (NSAP) came into effect in the direction of fulfilling this 
Directive Principles of the State Policy.  
  
Currently, the eligible old aged, widows, and disabled persons of BPL families 
are provided monthly pension ranging from Rs.200/- to Rs.500/- p.m. and in the case 
of death of the breadwinner of such family, a lump sum assistance of Rs.20,000/- is 
given to the bereaved family under schemes of NSAP. The programme has 
undergone many changes since inception in terms of the composition, eligibility 
criterion and funding pattern. The last revision in amount was done in 2012. 
  
In this regard, it is pertinent to mention that social security, invalid and old age 
pensions figure as items 23 and 24 in the Concurrent List (7th Schedule) of the 
Constitution and therefore, both the Central Government and States/ UTs have the 
responsibility for working in tandem in rolling out a comprehensive social security 
framework for the country. Accordingly, the State/UTs are encouraged to provide top 
up amounts at least an equivalent amount to the assistance provided by the Central 
Govt. so that the beneficiaries could get a decent level of assistance. At present, 
apart from the aforesaid central assistance, the States/UTs are adding top up 
amounts ranging from Rs.50 to Rs.3200 per month per beneficiaries under pension 
schemes of NSAP, as a result, on an average, the NSAP beneficiaries are getting 
monthly pension of Rs.1000 per month in several States, making the assistance 
amount satisfactory one. 
Further, based on various recommendations/ evaluation studies, the 
Department submitted the proposal for revamping of NSAP including revision in 
amount of pension and coverage of beneficiaries. The Cabinet, while deciding 
continuation of the NSAP for the 15th Finance Commission cycle (2021-26), has 
recently considered the same. Considering the available financial space, the Cabinet 
in its meeting held on 19th January 2022 approved continuation of NSAP in its 
present form. Hence, it may not be appropriate to bother the Cabinet by submitting a 
new proposal on the same issue on which a considered view has recently been 
taken by it. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
 
42 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
2.25 The Committee note that one of the key components of the DAY-NRLM is the 
creation of Self Help Groups of women for the achievement of Universal Social 
Mobilization of rural poor households. The idea of SHGs is indeed a very noble one 
at core with upliftment and empowerment of rural women being the target. However, 
the Committee note that during the ongoing financial year 2022- 23, the number of 
households mobilized into SHGs upto December, 2022 stands at 50% of the annual 
target and the other key performance indicator like number of Mahila Kisans 
Supported (65%), amount of bank credit accessed (68%), number of entrepreneurs 
supported (66%) are also observed to be lagging behind. The Committee is aware of 
the importance of the objectives of DAYNRLM and desire that a scheme of such 
importance does not fall back, rather, picks up the momentum and move forward in 
achieving the target of Social Inclusion and human development. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Department of Rural Development should spruce up 
their efforts and ensure that all corrective methods are taken for expediting the 
performance of the scheme so that the noble aim of development of rural women 
keep on marching forward.  
Reply of the Government 
2.26 The progress on Household mobilization and SHG formation for FY 22-23 till 
March 23 against the annual plan is as follows -  
  
Indicator 
Annual 
Plan 22-23 
Progress till 
March  23 
% 
Achievement 
HH Mobilization 10677916 8173293 77 
SHG Formation 826690 844502 102 
  
  
NRLM has taken several efforts to expedite the mobilization and SHG 
formation. All States has been asked to plan and prepare strategies to complete 
saturation by the end of the FY 23-24. In this regard, fortnightly review is being 
conducted by JS,RL and monthly review is being done with Principle Secretaries of 
all States by SRD, Secretary, DoRD Further, Social mobilization campaign has been 
launched from 18th April – 30th June, 2023 to be conducted in all States in order to 
expedite mobilization.  
 

 
 
43 
 
 In the financial Year 2022-23, the achievement of Mahila Kisan is 100% 
against the target. 
 SHG Bank Linkage progress in FY 22-23: Against the annual target of 
42.67 lakh SHGs, 51.11 lakh SHGs were provided Bank credit. An amount 
of Rs. 1.55 lakh crore was disbursed against the target of Rs. 1.39 lakh 
crore. The achievement against the targets is more than 100%. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
 
2.27 The Committee acquainted during the course of examination of Demands for 
Grants (2023-24) that the reason for zero allocation at BE level to SPMRM for 2023-
24 is that the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of Finance had 
declared 31st March, 2022 as the closing date for the Mission and as per the DoE 
OM dated 12.07.2022 and 30.11.2022, permission has been granted only for the 
completion of already committed liability as on 31.03.2022 through one time 
permission for the release of funds till 15th March, 2023. At this point, the Committee 
reminisce that SPMRM was launched in 2016 to develop 300 Clusters in 28 State 
and 6 UTs which would act as rural growth centres having urban amenities and 
services. However, only 3 clusters have been completed as on 31.01.2023 
(Revapar, Gujarat; Vevaji, Maharashtra and Aibawk, Mizoram) while 270 cluster 
completion target is to be achieved till March, 2023. The Committee are not happy 
with the manner with which the Department of Rural Development is handling such a 
visionary programme that there is a probability of vast majority of the clusters 
remaining incomplete. It seems extremely difficult to complete the pendency within 
such short span when the funds are available only till 15th March, 2023. It is a matter 
of concern that the goals for which the Scheme was mooted remain unfulfilled. Thus, 
the Committee feel that the Department of Rural Development should take concrete 
steps for the completion of targets. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development to act on ‘war footing’ for the utilisation of funds 
against SPMRM while also initiating their diplomatic channels for obtaining some 
extra time for the completion of projects.  
 
  

 
 
44 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.28 “In line with the one-time permission by DoE for release of funds under the 
Mission only upto 31st March 2023, Ministry has released Rs. 820.66 crore to all 
States/UTs against the permission for release of Rs. 986.56 crore. Some of the 
States have confirmed that they do not require more funds for completion of works. 
The States are allowed to utilize the released funds for completion of works and 
achieving cluster completion. Ministry is closely following up with all States for faster 
completion of works. However, owing to the nature of works such as long gestation 
civil works, long lead time procurement, quality considerations for works, weather 
related constraints States have requested for more time for completion of works. The 
States have committed to completed the 278 clusters with ongoing works by 
December 2023. Ministry will continue to closely track progress with States for faster 
completion.”                       (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
 
2.29 The Committee are concerned to note that only 60.82% of the projects are 
shown to be completed under SAGY. The primary reason has been stated to be loss 
of interest in the programme due to lack of special funding and that of district 
administration being not so proactive in the implementation of the programme. The 
Committee note that SAGY was launched on 11 October, 2014 with the aim of 
creating developed model gram panchayats across the country which would act as a 
guiding light for the other gram panchayats to follow, leading to a holistic 
development across the country. No special funding mechanism was envisaged for 
this Yojana as it has to be run through prioritising and convergence of already 
applicable welfare schemes of the Government of India. The Committee have been 
highly impressed with the concept of SAGY and are surprised to observe the sort of 
bottlenecks being faced by the Yojana. Such futuristic vision which incorporates 
dovetailing of various ongoing schemes and expedites their prioritisation, needs to 
be actively pursued with, so that a definite Gram Panchayat develops into a model 
one without any extra funding. In view of the foregoing, the Committee urge upon the 
Department of Rural Development to increase their effort for revitalizing the concept 
of SAGY through effective coordination of all Stakeholders involved at State/District 
level and also try to popularise the concept even further for the concrete utilisation of 
Government fund of different Schemes through prioritisation in a specific channel. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.30  1 Under Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY), the Gram Panchayats 
(GPs) prepare their Village Development Plans (VDPs) containing various activities 

 
 
45 
 
for the holistic development so as to transform the GPs into Adarsh Grams and also 
inspire the neighbouring GPs. The Activities proposed/included in VDPs are 
implemented through various schemes of the Government of India as well as the 
State Governments in convergence mode. Some of the major activities that are 
required to be saturated in the SAGY GPs are as under: 
i. Total Road Connectivity 
ii. Complete Digitization 
iii. Water connection and self sufficiency 
iv. Organic farming 
v. Solid Liquid Waste management 
vi. Renewable Energy 
vii. 100% enrolment in school education 
viii. Access to Health service 
ix. 100% enrolment under social security schemes 
x. Afforestation programme 
2. As on date, 3176 Saansad Adarsh Grams (SAGs) have been identified by 
Hon'ble MPs, out of which 2,655 SAGs have uploaded their VDPs on the 
SAGY portal (www.saanjhi.gov.in). Further, a total of 2,35,305 projects have 
been planned under the VDPs, out of which 1,68,272 projects (70%) have 
been completed.  The Ministry has taken various measures for 
implementation of the Scheme. The details of these measures are elaborated 
as under:-  
i. The Ministry has brought out a compilation of 127 Central Sector and 
Centrally Sponsored and 1806 State Schemes for convergence under 
SAGY. This document serves as a ready reckoner especially for the 
Members of Parliament, District and Village level officials about the 
different schemes for possible convergence at the GP level. This 
document is available on SAGY website (saanjhi.gov.in) and is updated 
periodically. 
ii. 17 Ministries of Government of India have issued appropriate advisories 
to accord priority to SAGY in 26 Schemes administered by them. 
iii. Further, the Ministry has issued advisory to States /UTs on 1st March 
2023 to add / saturate ten major activities for holistic development of 
SAGY GPs. 
iv. SAGY is reviewed by the National Level Committee (NLC) on Saansad 
Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) headed by Secretary, Rural Development 
with representatives from 20 Ministries/Departments to identify 
bottlenecks, monitor, review, facilitate cross-learning and initiating 
remedial action wherever necessary including changes to the guidelines 
of their respective schemes/ programmes. In the fourth meeting of NLC 
held on 28th June, 2021, the representatives of the concerned Ministries/ 
Departments were requested to saturate SAGY GPs, while implementing 
their schemes. 
v. The States are required to conduct the State Level Empowered 
Committee (SLEC) meetings headed by the Chief Secretary, once in a 
quarter, to review the implementation process and to ensure seamless 

 
 
46 
 
convergence of schemes among different State Government 
Departments.  
vi. The Ministry organized an orientation programme for the newly elected 
MPs of 17th Lok Sabha on SAGY on 3rd December, 2019.  The Minister 
of Rural Development has also written to all Chief Ministers vide letter 
dated 17th June, 2021 to organize similar Workshops for orientation of 
MPs in their States/UTs. 
vii. The Ministry provides training to the Charge Officers and other 
stakeholders of the State on preparation of VDP and the various 
approaches of convergence of schemes. Capacity building programmes 
for the State Nodal Officers, State Team of Trainers and Charge Officers 
of SAGY Gram Panchayats are organized periodically through National 
Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj, Hyderabad. 
viii. At the national level, a separate web-based MIS is made available at 
SAGY website http://saanjhi.gov.in for scheme monitoring by stakeholders 
and regular update of implementation of VDPs by States/ UTs. 
ix. The SAGY website has also been revamped with more pertinent 
information related to the scheme for comprehensive view by the public. 
The website contains detailed information, extensive reports, graphs and 
maps on the progress of the scheme. Also, the portal is linked with 
Mission Antyodaya website through API to provide ranking and gap of 
SAGY GPs with regard to public service delivery systems and availability 
of infrastructure facilities.  
x. An exclusive MP Dashboard has been developed on SAGY website 
wherein centrality of Hon'ble MPs is more visible. They can log-in and 
check the progress of the selected GPs and review it. They can also 
access the MA score to assess the progress. Further, the concerns/views 
given in the comments section by the user from the GP will be visible to 
the Hon’ble MP, District Collector, Charge officer for necessary action. 
xi. The dynamic ranking of SAGY Gram Panchayats on the basis of 
parameters relating to scheme implementation process has been 
developed and placed on the portal so as to instill competition amongst 
the selected SAGY GPs.  
xii. MoRD has organized five batches of orientation workshops (held on 21st 
and 22nd December 2021, 27th January 2022, 4th and 5th August 2022) 
of representatives of Hon'ble MPs to build their capacities for better 
coordination with State Governments in implementation of SAGY 
programme.  
xiii. The Ministry has organized a CSR conclave on 20th December 2022 with 
Corporates and PSUs in collaboration with Transforming Rural India 
Foundation (TRIF) to leverage funds for SAGY GPs. 
xiv. The Ministry organized AchhiAadat Campaigns in 5 SAGY GPs in Uttar 
Pradesh and Jharkhand since February 2023 under the Chairmanship of 
concerned Hon'ble MPs and JS (SAGY) to inculcate hygienic behaviour 
and practices among the villagers of SAGY GPs. 
xv. The Ministry has also started periodical bulk SMS service to remind all 
stakeholders of SAGY about their respective responsibilities in 
implementation of the programme. 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 

 
 
47 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
2.31 The Committee are aware of the fact that the District and State level DISHA 
meetings are to be conducted once in 3 months and 6 months respectively to keep 
an hawkish eye over the implementation of various schemes of the Government and 
to have a close-up of their progress through the interaction of public representatives 
and the Government Officials. The sole aim of such meetings is overseeing the 
effective utilisation of Government money for the welfare of the commons masses 
and as such these meetings assume paramount importance and a tool of great 
value. However, on umpteen occasions, the Committee have been made aware of 
the glaring irregularity and casual approach elicited by the District/State authorities in 
the mandated regular holding of DISHA meetings. The Members of Parliament are 
left ‘high and dry’ on various occasions as their repeated plea for holding DISHA 
meetings and their effective follow up falls on ‘deaf ears’. Moreover, concerned 
Officials also bypass these meetings and instead send junior level officers in their 
place who are not much aware of the developments around the schemes being 
implemented in the area. As on 30th January, only 937 meetings at District Level, 
while as low as only 10 meetings at the State level have been conducted for the year 
2022-23. Since it is very much necessary the Members of Parliament review the 
status of implementation of schemes of the Government of India in their 
constituencies, the Committee strongly recommend that the Department of Rural 
Development should devise a robust mechanism for holding of DISHA meetings on 
regular basis with the attendance of concerned Officers and accountability may be 
fixed on the erring officials.   
Reply of the Government 
2.32 Department is actively pursuing with the State Governments and district 
administrations to convene meetings as per the Guidelines. In addition, follow-up 
action with states/ districts has also been undertaken at other levels such as 
reminding nodal officers at district level about overdue DISHA meetings through 
social media groups, message services and phone calls. As a result of such efforts, 
the frequency of DISHA meetings has improved in 2022-23 as compared to the 
previous years. Following remedial measures have been taken to increase and 
optimize the number of DISHA meetings:- 
  
(i)   Department of Rural Development has setup a National Level DISHA 
Monitoring Cell which is proactively pursuing on daily basis with the 
State Governments and District administrations to convene meetings 
as per the Guidelines.  

 
 
48 
 
 (ii)   Letters have been written from Secretary, Ministry of Rural 
Development to the Chief Secretaries of the States on 31.08.2022 and 
07.12.2022 to constitute State level DISHA Committees where they 
have not yet been constituted and also to increase the frequency of 
DISHA meetings at both State and District levels. 
 (iii)   A letter from Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has been written to 
29 M.P.s on 15.02.2023 to hold District level DISHA meetings in the 
Committees in which they have been appointed as Chairperson as no 
meetings have been held in these Districts. 
 (iv)   A letter from Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has been written to 
58 M.P.s on 16.11.2022 to hold meetings of the District level DISHA 
Committees in which they have been appointed as Chairperson as no 
meetings have been held in these Districts. 
 (v)   Chairpersons have been nominated with the approval of Hon’ble 
Minister of Rural Development in 53 newly formed districts vide letter 
dated 8th February, 2023. 
 (vi)  DISHA Guidelines has been amended to increase the participation of 
elected representatives in State and District level DISHA Committees. 
  
During 2022-23 total of 1076 meeting held at District Level, however Ministry 
has noted the concern raised by the Standing Committees and make efforts at the 
highest level to achieve better results in this direction. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
 
 
  

 
 
49 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Department of Rural Development O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
 
  

 
 
50 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
4.1 The Committee are concerned to note that the Budget Estimates for 
MGNREGS has been reduced by Rs. 29,400 Crore for 2023-24 when compared to 
Revised Estimates of 2022-23. The Act governing the Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme provides ‘Right to Work’ to such deprived 
sections of the rural populace who are willing to work. It is a last resort of succour for 
the jobless section who don’t have any other means to feed them and their family 
members. The role and importance of MGNREGA was visible during the corona 
pandemic times when it acted as a ray of hope for the needy in times of distress. The 
importance of the scheme itself got highlighted through the substantially huge 
increment at the RE stage in 2020-21 and 2021-22 from Rs. 61,500 Crore to Rs. 
1,11,500 Crore and Rs. 73,000 Crore to Rs. 99,117.53 Crore respectively to meet 
the increase in demand of work during corona pandemic. Even during the ongoing 
Financial Year 2022-23, the funds for MGNREGA has been increased to Rs. 89,400 
Crore at RE stage from Rs. 73,000 Crore at the BE stage. However, for the Financial 
Year 2023-24, at the starting stage itself, MGNREGA has been allocated Rs. 60,000 
Crore against the proposed demand of Rs. 98,000 Crore by the Department of Rural 
Development. The Committee are unable to comprehend the rationale for reduced 
allocation of fund under MGNREGA. Since it is very much necessary that adequate 
Budgetary Allocation ought to be made for the effective implementation of the 
Scheme, the Committee strongly feel the requirement for the matter of decreased 
fund allocation to be looked afresh. It is an established procedure that MGNREGA 
being a demand driven scheme, the funds can be raised at RE stage accordingly. 
However, Ministry of Finance should have been impressed upon as to how the 
Department of Rural Development arrived at the calculation of Rs. 98,000 Crore at 
proposal level for MGNREGA. Had it not been the projections received at the 
‘agreed to Labour Stage’, such proposal would not have been mooted at the outset 
by the Department of Rural Development. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Department of Rural Development apprise themselves of the 
still existing high demand for job under MGNREGA at the ground level more 

 
 
51 
 
realistically and utilise their communications and administrative skill to press upon 
the Ministry of Finance for increased allocation to MGNREGA. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 “In the FY 2019-20, BE was Rs.60,000 crore which got revised to 
Rs.71,001.81 crore, for the FY 2020-21, BE was 61,500 crore which increased at RE 
to Rs.1,11,500 crore and for the FY 2021-22, the BE of Rs.73,000 crore has revised 
been to Rs.98,000 crore  and during the last Financial Year 2022-23, the BE was 
Rs.73,000 crore,  which has been revised to Rs.89,400 crore. Whenever, additional 
fund is required, Ministry of Finance is requested to provide the funds. Govt. of India 
is committed to release funds for wage and material payments for proper 
implementation of the scheme, as per the provisions of the act and guidelines 
applicable for Central Government as well as State Governments.” 
 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
4.3 The Committee are concerned to note the continuous pendency in 
disbursement of Centre’s share of funds under wages and material components of 
the Scheme in respect of many States/UTs. Through the information received from 
the Department of Rural Development it has been observed that as on 25.01.2023, 
Rs. 6,231 Crore in wages and Rs. 7,616 Crore in Material component is pending 
liability on the Centre’s Part. The Committee find accrual of such liabilities as severe 
impediments hampering the beneficiaries’ plight. The Committee take into account 
the plausible reasons that have been time and again cited by the Department of 
Rural Development for such types of pendencies such as non-receipt of documents 
etc. However, a scheme of such huge proportion like MGNREGA which caters to the 
nook and corners of the country and has millions of beneficiaries enrolled as job card 
holders, such delay in wage payments and material fund release would only deter 
the needy person from availing the benefits under MGNREGA and would also cause 
them further turpitude for non-receipt of money when the sole intent of the scheme 
was to provide timely relief to poor in times of duress. Hence, the Committee 
beseech upon Department of Rural Development to ensure timely release of 
Centre’s Shares in wages and materials through effective measures and better 

 
 
52 
 
coordination with States. The progress made in dismantling liabilities of the Centre 
towards wages and material components in respect of each State/UT should be 
furnished to the Committee within three months. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4  “Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a demand driven wage employment program 
and the release of funds to the State is a continuous process. The ministry releases 
funds to states based on the approved labour budget, opening balance, pending 
liabilities of the previous year for the financial year, if any, and overall performance. 
The release of material and administrative item funds is done in accordance with the 
smooth compliance of the financial management by the State Government. 
  
After the due financial prudence and compliance by the State, funds are 
released.” 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
4.5 The committee note that, in their constant endeavour to usher greater 
transparency and weed out alleged malpractices associated with the process 
involving attendance of genuine beneficiaries under MGNREGA, the Department of 
Rural Development have implemented a new provision of capturing of real time 
attendance at worksite. This is being done through a Mobile App (national Mobile 
Monitoring System App: NMMS) with two time-stamped and geo-tagged 
photographs of the workers in a day. The Committee is not oblivious to the facts 
surrounding the necessity felt by the Department of Rural Development for the 
introduction of a new real-time attendance capturing app and are in consonance with 
the intention of the Department of Rural Development in bringing in much required 
improved governance of the scheme. However, the flip side of the innovatory 
exercise should not remain unnoticed and unaccounted or else the intended relief to 
the beneficiaries may not reach them. The entire exercise of capturing two real-time 
photographs in a day hinges upon few key factors such as availability of smart-
phones, proper internet connectivity and the presence of MGNREGA workers on 
both stipulated times for proverbial ‘in’ and ‘out’ attendance. Needless to say that the 
MGNREGA beneficiaries belong to extremely deprived sections of the society, 
belonging to different linguistic milieu. Expecting the MGNREGA workers to be well 

 
 
53 
 
versed with the functioning and language of app or for that matter even depending 
upon a nodal human intervention perhaps adds to their woes. Moreover, often the 
fluid timings of work site necessitate the workers to keep on waiting there even after 
the completion of work for their image capturing. Adding to this conundrum is the 
issue of availability of internet connectivity at far flung locales of MGNREGA work 
site. In view of the foregoing, and with utmost concern, the Committee urge upon the 
Department of Rural Development to review the implementation of attendance app 
holistically while taking into consideration the ground reality and challenges being 
faced by MGNREGA workers and come out with an acceptable provision at the 
earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 “NMMS has been introduced for real time attendance at worksites of all the 
beneficiaries present there. As per the provision, after the four hours of gap from 
taking attendance along with first geo-tagged photograph, second photograph can 
be taken.  
  
The App is available in five languages which includes English, Hindi, Tamil, 
Telugu and Malayalam. There is an exemption provision for taking attendance 
without using NMMS App in case of internet connectivity issue, device malfunction 
related issues, has been made available for District Programme Coordinator. The 
Ministry takes every possible step to resolve the technical issue if any reported, in a 
real time mode. During the Month of April'23 out of the total eligible worksites in 
second fortnight: 4.23 lakhs, attendance using NMMS App has been captured in: 
3.83 lakhs worksites (90.54%). For remaining muster rolls, exemption provision has 
been made available..” 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
4.7 The Committee note that in accordance with the Section 6(1) of Mahatma 
Gandhi NREG Act, 2005, the Ministry of Rural Development notifies Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA wage rate every year for States/UTs. For providing cover against 
inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development revises the wage rate every year based 
on the change in the Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPIAL). The 
Committee take into account the modalities enumerated under the MGNREG Act, 
2005 and have also gone through the notified wage rate for the Financial Year 2022-
23. It has been observed that there is no uniformity in the wages across the 

 
 
54 
 
States/UTs and the rate differs from Rs. 204 in Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh to 
Rs. 315/- and Rs. 331/- in Goa and Haryana respectively. The Committee on earlier 
occasion also have observed categorically about the utmost necessity to increase 
the wage rate commensurate with the inflation and rectify the disparity in wages by 
notifying a uniform wage rate across the country. The stance of Department of Rural 
Development as evinced on these issues have pretty much remained the same as 
produced here that “However each State/UT can provide wage over and above the 
wage rate notified by the Central Government”. Such responses are adept at 
typically passing the onus on the State Governments, while over a period of time it 
has been witnessed that the wage rates under MGNREGA have hovered on an 
average between Rs. 200/- to Rs. 300/- per day in the different States/UTs. It is 
necessary that the Department of Rural Development examine this issue with 
humane approach and initiate measures for increasing the wages in an appropriate 
manner befitting the rising cost of living. Moreover, linkage with the CPI-AL perhaps 
does not serve the purpose of ascertaining the real effect of inflation and the index 
for calculation needs to be changed on an urgent basis for looking at the real picture. 
It is also unfathomable as to why the Ministry is not able to notify a unified wage rate 
under MGNREGA across the country to end the disparity across States/UTs for 
good, particularly when the Scheme is mostly funded by the Centre. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the Department of Rural Development should 
increase the wage rates under MGNREGA by linking it to a suitable pricing index 
and explore the feasibility of notifying a uniform wage rate under MGNREGA for the 
entire country.  
Reply of the Government 
 4.8 “As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the Central Government may by 
notification specify the wage rate for unskilled work for its beneficiaries. Accordingly, 
the Ministry of Rural Development notifies Mahatma Gandhi NREGA wage rate for 
every financial year for States/UTs. To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA 
workers against inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development revises the wage rate 
every year based on change in Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-
AL). However, State Government can provide wage over and above the wage rate 
notified by the Central Government from its own resources.” 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.G-20011/3/2021-B&Adated 07.06.2023) 
 

 
 
55 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
4.9 The Committee note that PMGSY roads are generally low volume roads and 
were never meant to bear the load of heavy vehicles. The specifications which 
govern the construction of roads under PMGSY did not fathom that heavy vehicles 
plying on NHAI roads would also use the PMGSY roads as last mile connectivity to 
meet the ever growing needs and expansion of industrial projects to the rural areas 
as well. The Committee have taken the cognizance of such changing scenario 
wherein it is almost a necessity for even the heavy vehicles to utilise the PMGSY 
roads. Thus, it becomes absolutely essential to devise measures to protect the 
PMGSY roads from getting damaged due to the heavy vehicles that ply on them. 
Either suitable modification of the specifications of PMGSY for constructing heavy 
load bearing roads is done at the earliest or the provision of getting the damaged 
roads repaired by the NHAI authorities is ensured to be strictly complied with, else 
the PMGSY roads would keep on getting damaged and will get non-transportable, 
defeating the intent of the Yojana. The Committee also find from the reply of the 
Department of Rural Development that Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
have been communicated in this regard on 2nd November, 2022 but response from 
their end is still awaited and any further action would be taken by Department of 
Rural Development on the receipt of reply from the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways. The Committee are not at all satisfied with the existing situation and lack 
of concrete action being taken/planned by the Department of Rural Development as 
the ongoing practice of plying of heavy vehicles on PMGSY roads would keep on 
damaging the PMGSY roads as reported from different quarters. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Department of Rural Development should take 
serious view of this matter and come out with some concrete and effective solution at 
the earliest to protect the PMGSY roads from getting damaged by heavy vehicles. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.10 “PMGSY roads are generally low volume roads and are constructed as per 
the specifications based on the traffic survey of the particular roads and the 
projections of the traffic during its design life. Further maintenance/ repair of roads 
constructed under the programme is the responsibility of the State Governments. All 

 
 
56 
 
PMGSY road works are covered by initial five year maintenance contracts to be 
entered into along with the construction contract, with the same contractor, as per 
the Standard Bidding Document. 
  
With regard to taking action against heavy vehicles plying on NHAI roads 
which also use PMGSY roads as a last mile connectivity and cause damage to 
PMGSY roads, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has been communicated 
the recommendations of the Standing Committee and has been asked to submit 
Action Taken Report (ATR) in this regard, vide communication dated 2nd November, 
2022. No response has been received from NHAI. Further action will be taken on 
receipt of ATR from Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. Further it is the 
responsibility of the district administration to ensure that such heavy vehicle which 
causes damage to PMGSY roads are not allowed to ply on the road and if any 
damage is caused the same may be repaired at the cost of the party who causes 
such damages.” 
(DoRD O.M. No.G-20011/3/2021-B&Adated 07.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
  

 
 
57 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Department of Rural Development O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25 July, 2023 
03 Shravana, 1945 (Saka)    
Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural  
Development & Panchayati Raj 
 

 
 
58 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2022-2023) 
EXTRACT OF THE MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON TUESDAY, 25th JULY, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1520 hrs. in Committee Room No. 3, 
Parliament House Annexe Extension, (EPHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi     - Chairperson 
       MEMBERS 
 
       Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri A.K.P Chinraj 
3. Shri Rajveer Diler 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
6. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
7. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
8. Ms. S. Jothi Mani 
9. Shri Janardan Mishra 
10. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
11. Dr. Talari Rangaiah 
12. Smt Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
13. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
14. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
15. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
16. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
Rajya Sabha  
17. Shri Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiya 
18. Smt Shanta Chhetri 
19. Shri Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade 
20. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
21. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
22. Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram  - Director 
3. Shri Vinay P. Barwa  - Deputy Secretary 
 

 
 
59 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of draft reports on 
XXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXX Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the 29th Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) 
pertaining to the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) 
XXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX. The 
Committee considered and adopted the draft reports without any amendment and 
authorized the Chairperson to present the Reports to the House.  
 
3.   XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXX. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
 
  

 
 
60 
 
ANNEXURE II 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-NINTH REPORT (17TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:              21
        
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 1, 2, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21  
          Total:16
                Percentage: - 76%
    
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL          
          Total: NIL 
                Percentage:- 0%      
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 3, 4, 6, 7, 14       
Total: 05 
        Percentage: - 24% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
Total: NIL 
           Percentage:- 0%      
 
 
 