 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2023-2024) 
   
 
     SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT   
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Pradhan Mantri 
Gram Sadak Yojana - (PMGSY)” (2022-23) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)'.] 
 
 
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
36 


 
 
 
 
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2023-2024) 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) (2022-23) 
of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.12.2023 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CRD No.190   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____ 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-2024) ii 
INTRODUCTION iii 
   
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
24 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
50 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
51 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
58 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I Extract of Minutes of the 4 th Sitting of the Committee held on 
12.12.2023  
 
59 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj. 
61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2023-2024) 
 
          Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri A.K.P Chinraj 
4. Shri Rajveer Diler 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
7. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
8. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
9. Ms. S. Jothi Mani 
10. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
11. Shri Narendra Kumar 
12. Shri Janardan Mishra 
13. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
14. Dr. Talari Rangaiah 
15. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
16. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
17. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
18. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
19. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
20. Shri Arjun Singh 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
Rajya Sabha Members 
22. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
23. Shri Desai Babubhai Jesangbhai 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Dr. Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade 
26. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
27. Shri Ram Shakal 
28. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
29. Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa 
30. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh 
31. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram  - Director 
3. Shri Vinay P. Barwa   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Inam Ahmed   - Executive Officer 

 
 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj (2023-2024) having been authorised by the Committee to present 
the Report on their behalf, present the 36th Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (17thLok Sabha) on 
'Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)’ (2022-23) of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development). 
2.  The Thirty-Second Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 27.07.2023 
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 27.07.2023. Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 
26.10.2023. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 12.12.2023. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
12 December, 2023 
21 Agrahayana,1945 (Saka)    
Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural  
Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2023-24) deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Thirty-Second Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)’ 
of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) for 
the term 2022-2023. 
1.2  The Thirty-Second Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 
27.07.2023 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 27.07.2023. The 
Report contained 30 Observations/Recommendations.  
1.3  Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 30 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been received 
from the Government. These have been examined and categorised as 
follows: -  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
     Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,   
                        23, 24, 26, 28, 29       
           
          Total: 24
          Chapter-II 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
      Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL      
        Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
      Serial No. 7, 9, 13, 25, 27, 30       
 Total: 06 
   Chapter-IV   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
      Serial No. NIL        
 Total: NIL 
              Chapter-V 

 
 
2 
 
 
1.4  The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case 
where it is not possible for any reasons to implement the recommendations in 
letter and spirit, the matter shall be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration/merit 
comments.  
I. Quality of Construction of roads under PMGSY 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
1.6 With regard to the Quality of Construction of roads under PMGSY, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
           “The Committee are constrained to note that the quality of road 
construction under PMGSY is an important issue affecting the entire 
country. This glaring issue, which casts aspersions on the marquee 
scheme of the Central Government, has wider ramification on the 
hopes of rural populace of the country. Building roads build nations as 
quality roads serve in manifold ways for the prosperity of a country in 
terms of economic strengthening via boost in domestic trade 
and commerce, providing employment opportunities and ultimately 
achieving the goals of development associated with better livelihoods 
of people. The scheme was launched by the Government with various 
welfare oriented goals in foresight and has been one of the flagship 
rural development schemes over the years. On this note, the 
Committee find the compromise in the quality of construction of roads 
completely unacceptable and consider this as a punitive act. Instances 
are galore wherein the attention of the Committee have been drawn 
towards the poor road materials used in the construction of roads at 
many places which are not able to sustain the rigours of weather and 
traffic volume even for one season and are washed away with the 
onset of monsoon. The Members of the Committee having ground 
reality experience of their constituencies have time and again raised 
the nagging issue of poor quality of roads at many locations. Therefore, 
the Committee beseech upon DoRD to entail stronger measures to 
ensure that the quality of roads constructed under PMGSY do not get 
compromised on account of utilization of poor raw materials or other 
associated reasons so that the noble objective of the scheme to 

 
 
3 
 
provide all weather road to rural habitation is achieved without any 
compromise.”  
1.7 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“Ensuring the quality of PMGSY works is the responsibility of the 
State Governments, who are implementing the programme. A three-
tiered Quality Control mechanism is in place under PMGSY for 
ensuring construction of quality road works and durability of road 
assets under PMGSY including the works undertaken by sub-
contractors. 
Guidelines to regulate the quality control process have been 
issued to States from time to time. In order to ensure that people 
engaged in quality check are adequately proficient and well trained, 
NRIDA has been conducting proficiency tests of NQMs, SQMs, PIU 
etc. It has been made mandatory for all personnel engaged as 
NQM/SQM to pass the proficiency test. Further, their skills are also 
developed through webinars, seminars or by sending them to various 
training institutions etc. 
To strengthen the quality check mechanism, establishment of 
field Lab has been made compulsory. These labs are also to be geo-
tagged. Unless these are ensured, no payment is allowed to be made 
against such roads. Also, new version of Quality Monitoring System 
App has been developed to include e-forms and other initiatives which 
has strengthened quality monitoring systems. Consequent upon 
introduction of e-Marg, payment on account of maintenance to the 
contractor, during the defect liability period, is made commensurate 
with the quality of roads maintained by him/her through a performance 
based contract management system.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.8 Quality of Construction of roads under PMGSY is an important issue 
which has a lasting effect on the performance of the Yojana on ground level.  
The overall achievement of the desired goals of PMGSY primarily depends on 
the longevity of the roads constructed under the Yojana. Thus, taking into 
account the nagging issue of poor quality of roads at many locations, the 
Committee had recommended the Department of Rural Development to entail 
stronger measures to ensure that the quality of roads constructed under 
PMGSY do not get compromised due to the utilisation of poor raw materials or 

 
 
4 
 
other associated reasons so that the noble objectives of the scheme are 
achieved. However, from the perusal of the action taken reply furnished by the 
DoRD, the Committee find that an oft-repeated generic response has been 
submitted by the Department which, primarily, highlights the responsibility of 
the State Governments for ensuring the quality of PMGSY works as they are 
the implementing authorities. The reply also enumerates various quality 
control processes formulated and issued to States from time to time along 
with the provision of compulsory establishment of field Labs. The Committee 
while noting the primary role of the States in the implementation of the Yojana, 
expects that the nodal Ministry play pivotal role in ensuring all the quality 
control processes so as to ensure that quality of road construction is not 
compromised and all the theoretical provisions are being implemented 
scrupulously at the ground level. Therefore, the Committee while reiterating 
the recommendation on this aspect urge the DoRD to tighten their grip over 
monitoring the quality of construction of roads under PMGSY. In this regard, 
the Ministry should review the issues pertaining to quality of construction in 
every State/UT and take appropriate measures to ensure that quality 
parameters are adhered to by the implementing agencies at State/UT level. 
II. Issues of Down-Tendering – Bidding of Tenders 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
1.9 On the issues of Down-Tendering-Bidding of Tenders, the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
"The Committee note that bidding through tenders for obtaining 
projects for construction of roads under PMGSY is an integral part of 
the scheme as learnt by the Committee while scrutinizing the 
modalities of the scheme. The contractors who are awarded 
construction contracts through tenders are, perhaps, the central figures 
who through their activities more often than not determine the quality of 
roads constructed under PMGSY. In this context, various reliable 

 
 
5 
 
sources and the Members of the Committee have brought to fore the 
practice of low- tendering, in order to win the bid for acquiring the rights 
for the construction of projects, under PMGSY. Contractors are 
expected to render yeoman service to the nation for the welfare of 
people. Bad quality of works under PMGSY is set in motion from here 
onwards and the contractor compromise with the quality of work after 
getting contracts at low quotations. The roads so constructed suffer 
from early ‘wear and tear’ and becomes rough for use of the people. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend DoRD to devise even stronger 
mechanisms/provisions in the bidding processes, besides the extant 
ones, to further negate the effect of low bidding, so that quality of road 
construction does not get compromised in the hands of contractors. 
Moreover, rigorous monitoring mechanism should be put in place to 
ensure the quality of road construction as per the specifications 
mentioned in the contracts."  
1.10 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
  "In the interest of the quality of roads being built under PMGSY 
and for protection against Abnormally Low Bids (ALBs), provisions of 
taking the additional performance security from the contractor have 
been made in the Standard Bidding Documents (SBD). All States have 
been advised to deal with cases of ALBs as per SBD provisions which 
are enumerated as under. 
  
A. Qualification of the Bidder:  
 
To make sure that contractors who are bidding for the works have 
sufficient backgrounds in execution of good quality works, the following 
Qualification criteria are laid down in clause 4 of the SBD :- 
  
(a) Contractor to provide the aggregate monetary value of civil 
construction projects executed in each of the preceding five years. 
(b) Furnish a record of past involvement in projects similar in nature 
and scale for each of the past five years. Additionally, include 
particulars of ongoing or contracted projects, along with endorsements 
from a relevant authority not lower than the rank of an Executive 
Engineer or its equivalent.  
(c) Present comprehensive information regarding the technical 
personnel slated for engagement in the project.  
(d) Confirm that the contract aligns with the qualifications specified in 
Clause 4.4 B(b) (ii) of ITB for the construction.  
(e) Submit a proposed schedule for construction activities and a Quality 
Management Plan outlining the anticipated timeline for project 

 
 
6 
 
completion in adherence to technical specifications and the stipulated 
completion period. 
 
B. Additional Bank Guarantee 
 
As per the clause 46, sub clause 46.1 and 46.2 of the SBD, the 
Performance Security equal to 5% (five percent) of the Contract Price 
and additional Security for unbalanced bids shall be provided to the 
Employer. 
 
C. Blacklist/Termination of Contract 
  
As per the clause 52, sub clause 52.1 and 52.2 the Employer can 
terminate the Contract if the Contractor commits a major breach of 
contract in terms of quality and other contractual commitments i.e. 
Failure to correct a specified Defect promptly, Non-maintenance of 
required Security, Delaying project completion beyond allowable 
liquidated damages period and Not completing a specified portion of 
work on time. 
It may be noted that SBD already has strict provisions to ensure that 
good quality contractors are engaged for execution of PMGSY works; 
however the States/UTs have been further advised to ensure strict 
technical evaluation during the technical scrutiny of bids." 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.11  The Committee note that bidding through tenders for obtaining projects 
for construction of roads under PMGSY is an integral part of the scheme. 
Thus, practice of low-tendering for winning the bid, more often than not leads 
to compromise in the quality of work resulting in the early ‘wear and tear’ of 
the roads. In view of such reported instances, the Committee had 
recommended the DoRD to devise even stronger mechanisms/provisions in 
the bidding processes, besides the extant ones, to further negate the effect of 
low bidding alongwith rigorous monitoring mechanism for ensuring the quality 
of road construction.  In their Action Taken Reply furnished by the DoRD, the 
provisions for protection against Abnormally Low Bids (ALBs) as made in the 

 
 
7 
 
Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) have been provided in detail.  Going 
through the details, the Committee find the provisions more or less adequate 
in terms of their being written down in the SBD, such as those of Additional 
Bank Guarantee, Blacklist/Termination of Contract, etc. Despite of such 
stringent provision put in place by the Ministry, the Committee are concerned 
to note the instances of poor quality and early deterioration of roads under 
PMGSY. In this regard, it is expected that these provisions are implemented 
scrupulously at the ground level.  Provisions confined to the manuals alone 
would perhaps not serve any purpose unless they are being followed in letter 
and spirit. Therefore, the Committee reiterate the earlier recommendation and 
further recommend that the DoRD should look into the implementation aspect 
of their provisions with greater focus and ensure their compliance at ground 
level for the success of the PMGSY. 
III. Subletting to Petty Contractors 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
1.12  In the context of Subletting to Petty Contractors, the Committee had 
recommended as below:- 
“The Committee note the provision under PMGSY, as informed 
by the DoRD during evidence, about the sub-letting of works to petty 
contractors by the main contractor. Acknowledging the intent of 
creating a wider resource pool for future through this percolation of 
works to other personnel who gain valuable experience, the Committee 
through their experience and the information shared with them have 
acquiesced themselves to the flip side of this practice also. The petty 
contractors who come into the picture by way of multiple sub-lettings 
are sometimes not able to maintain the quality of construction and the 
goals of the scheme. Such practices results in poorly constructed 
roads, devoid of standard protocols and have adverse effect on the 
project. Quality check on the working of such petty contractors is the 
‘need of the hour’ and proper drafting of norms along-with their 
implementation for ensuring that the petty contractors work properly is 
required. Hence, the Committee recommend DoRD to review the 

 
 
8 
 
provision of sub-letting and take corrective measures as per manual in 
this regard. ” 
1.13 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD:- 
“As per Standard Bidding Document, for PMGSY works, the 
Contractor may subcontract part of the construction work with the 
approval of the Employer in writing, up to 25 percent of the contract 
price. However, the ultimate liability for delivery of good quality roads 
lies with the main contractor. The main contractor shall, at all times, be 
responsible and liable for all his obligations under the Agreement 
notwithstanding anything contained in the agreements with his Sub-
contractors or any other agreement that may be entered into by the 
Contractor and no default under any such agreement shall exempt the 
Contractor from his obligations or liability towards the contract. The 
overall responsibility of maintaining the quality lies with the main 
contractor and all works are executed following similar quality 
standards following a three tier quality monitoring system. Based on 
the periodic monitoring of quality of roads under the 3-tier mechanism, 
corrective measures, wherever necessary, are taken by the State 
Governments.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.14 While acknowledging the intent of creating a wider resource pool for 
future through subletting to petty contractors under PMGSY, the Committee 
also acquiesced themselves of the issues surrounding the letting down in the 
quality aspect of construction due to such prevalent practice.  Concerned 
about the proper accountability of these petty contractors, the Committee 
recommended the DoRD to review the provision of sub-letting and take 
corrective measures as per manual.  In their Action Taken Reply submitted by 
the DoRD, it has been categorically mentioned that as per SBD guidelines for 
PMGSY works, the contractor may subcontract up to 25 per cent of the 
contract price of the construction work with the approval of the employer in 
writing.  It has also been stated that ultimately the main contractor shall be 
responsible and liable for the quality of work.  The Committee take into 

 
 
9 
 
account the extant modalities and safeguards for ensuring the accountability 
of the main contractor who sub-lets to the petty contractor as per norms and 
find the existing procedural mechanisms adequate enough. Even though the 
periodic monitoring of the quality of roads under the 3-tier mechanisms are 
steps in right direction, the Committee feel that it is necessary for DoRD to 
persuade the State Governments to instruct the main contractors to use only 
the services of competent petty contractors so as to ensure the quality of 
construction. In this regard, the Committee recommend that DoRD should 
initiate necessary steps in coordination with State/UT Governments for proper 
enlisting of such competent petty contractors, which may, serve the interest 
of the scheme much better in terms of increased accountability and 
familiarisation with the ethics of welfare oriented work required under 
PMGSY.   
IV. Plying of Heavy vehicles/increase in the thickness of roads 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
1.15 In the connection of Plying of Heavy vehicles/increase in the thickness of 
roads, the Committee had made the following recommendation:- 
“The Committee opine that PMGSY roads are built under such 
guidelines which do not take into account plying of heavy tonnage 
vehicles which nowadays cause immense damage to the rural 
connectivity roads. In this era of modernization when industrial setups 
at far flung locales and the construction works of highways often 
necessitate movement of heavy load bearing vehicles, particularly 
those of NHAI to also utilise the roads built under PMGSY. Such heavy 
vehicles cause irreversible damages to the rural roads under PMGSY 
which are of the mandated thickness of 20 mm. It, thus, becomes 
imperative to protect and get repaired the existing roads under PMGSY 
from the damaging NHAI vehicles and increasing the thickness of 
roads under PMGSY to 30 mm for bearing the load of heavy vehicles 
that would keep on plying on them in future. In view of the above, the 
Committee urge DoRD to have urgent meaningful dialogue with the 
NHAI to ensure that the PMGSY road damage by NHAI vehicles get 

 
 
10 
 
mitigated and the damages are repaired by NHAI in accordance with 
the provisions of PMGSY. Moreover, the need of increasing the 
thickness of the PMGSY road from the existing 20 mm to 30 mm 
should also be looked into pragmatically by the DoRD.” 
1.16 In regard to the above recommendation, the DoRD in their action taken reply 
have stated as below:- 
            “Rural roads are designed for 10 years of design life and future 
traffic annual growth rate is also taken into consideration while 
designing the pavement crust. Roads built under PMGSY follows the 
specifications of IRC especially IRC SP 72:2015 to design the rural 
roads, IRC SP 72:2015 limits the design traffic to 2 MSA. Load carried 
by standard axle (single axle, dual wheel) is 8.16 tonnes and tandem 
axle is 14.9 tonnes. Fully loaded Heavy Commercial Vehicle (HCV) 
have a rear axle load of 10.2 tonnes and a front axle load half the rear 
axle load i.e. 5 tonnes and 20 % overloading is considered if overload 
vehicles are present. Heavier loads than this is not considered in 
design. 
 As per IRC SP 72:2015 the surface course recommended is 20 mm 
OGPC only for higher traffic, The surfacing course (layer) is the upper 
layer of the flexible pavement and provides the smooth, durable, 
abrasion-resistant characteristics of a good roadway, retaining 
adequate friction for road safety. It is normally made from bitumen 
bound aggregate – asphalt concrete. It will be waterproof and prevent 
ingress of water into the lower pavement layers, which would adversely 
affect their strength. These layers must be strong enough not to rut 
under the action of traffic.  
Since the main load bearing layers are the Binder course, Base course 
and Sub base course, thickness of these layers are more determining 
factors for the distresses caused in the pavement when heavy vehicles 
ply over it.  
The issue regarding damage of PMGSY roads by heavy vehicles 
coming from NHAI roads has been taken up with Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways firstly by Secretary vide DO letter dated 
08.08.2023 and further by Minister (Rural Development) vide DO letter 
27.09.2023. Copies of DO letters are attached.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.17  The Committee are concerned with the issue of damage caused to the 
PMGSY roads due to the plying of heavy vehicles particularly those from NHAI 
roads.  Roads constructed under PMGSY to achieve rural connectivity are of 
utmost importance and as such the damages caused to them by the heavy 

 
 
11 
 
vehicles need to be mitigated/taken care of. Taking this aspect into account, 
the Committee had urged the DoRD to communicate with NHAI to ensure the 
repairs of roads damaged through their vehicles and also to increase the 
thickness of roads from the existing 20 mm to 30 mm thickness.  Regarding 
the thickness, the DoRD have provided in their action taken reply the 
calculation methods for determining the load carrying capacity of the roads 
built under PMGSY.  PMGSY roads follow the specifications which limits the 
design traffic to 2 MSA and heavier loads more than about 18 tonnes are not 
considered in their design.  In regard to the damage caused to PMGSY road by 
the heavy vehicles from NHAI roads, the Ministry has taken up the matter with 
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) first at the Secretary 
level and then at the Minister level.  After going through the reply furnished by 
the DoRD, the Committee find that loads plying on the roads and future traffic 
annual growth rate has been taken into account while determining the 
thickness of the roads under PMGSY. However, the Committee are still of the 
view that the present situation regarding the necessity for augmenting the load 
bearing capacity of the road need to be looked afresh and any revision in the 
specification, if needed, can be incorporated for protecting the roads. DoRD 
have been pursuing the matter of damage caused by heavy vehicles from NHAI 
roads with the concerned Ministry as well. In this regard, the Committee feel 
that a stronger push with more vigour is required through the communicating 
channels with the MoRTH for reaching to any logical settlement regarding their 
role in repair and damage reduction of PMGSY roads due to the heavy vehicles 
from NHAI roads. Therefore, the Committee, while taking note of the efforts of 
the DoRD in this regard further implore them to increase their momentum for 

 
 
12 
 
finding result with the MoRTH. The Committee also hope that MoRTH would 
furnish their action taken reply on the recommendation of the Committee. A 
copy of this recommendation may also be sent by DoRD to MoRTH for 
expeditious action at their end.   
V. Inclusion of Road of length 2 Km. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
1.18 With regard to the Inclusion of Road of length 2 Km., the Committee had 
recommended  as under:- 
“The Committee note that presently road lengths of minimum 3 
km are taken up as eligible roads under PMGSY-III. The attention of 
the Committee was drawn towards demand from various quarters 
regarding the inclusion of roads of even 2 km as eligible roads under 
PMGSY-III. The requirement has been felt on account of relevant 
thorough fare locations getting missed due to the strengthening of 
minimum 3 km roads uptake for making the main candidate road as 
minimum 5 km. At this juncture when PMGSY-III has been started, 
suitable review can be undertaken to meet a populist public demand 
through minor tweaking of provisions by the DoRD. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend DoRD to relook into the matter of selection of 
appropriate road length by reducing the minimum to 2 km and bring 
about review in their guidelines accordingly so as to provide last mile 
connectivity to rural habitations.” 
1.19  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
            “PMGSY-III envisages consolidation of the existing Rural Road 
Network by upgradation of existing Through Routes and Major Rural 
Links that connect habitations to Gramin Agricultural Markets (GrAMs), 
Higher Secondary Schools, Hospitals.  
  
Links can be made up of two or more roads of variable lengths which 
can be merged into single candidate road if it makes TR/MRL and 
gives access to most of the facilities to the majority of the benefitted 
population. PMGSY-III guidelines specifically state that candidate 
roads shall preferably be of length not less than 5 kms. Proposing a 
single road of length 2 km and below is avoided as it mostly benefits 
only a single habitation thus forming a dead end.” 
 
 

 
 
13 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.20 The Committee had noted that road lengths of minimum 3 km are taken 
up as eligible roads under PMGSY-III.  Responding to the demands from 
various quarters that the roads of even 2 km be made eligible under PMGSY-III 
for greater linkage, the Committee had recommended the DoRD to relook into 
the matter of selection of appropriate road length by reducing the minimum to 
2 km so as to provide last mile connectivity to rural habitations.  The 
Committee find the reply furnished by the DoRD in this regard, that “proposing 
a single road of length 2 km and below is avoided as it mostly benefits only a 
single habitation thus forming a dead end”, unsatisfactory in nature and 
devoid of due diligence. Even if the contention of the DoRD is that lengths of 2 
km and below would mostly benefit only a ‘single habitation’, it has perhaps 
not taken into account that the ‘single habitation’ may comprise of numerous 
households which would be deprived of the benefits of a connecting road to 
their shelter. Rural connectivity through PMGSY-III is a wonderful vertical 
which aims at consolidation of the existing rural road network inside the 
villages. In case, such parameters are being followed, then the pieces of road 
length under 3 kms shall remain unconstructed, in their already dilapidated 
condition as before. At this moment, when the consolidation work is going on, 
it is perhaps in the fitness of things, if such patches are also covered and 
linked to proper road network.  Thus, the Committee, reiterate their 
recommendation and beseech upon DoRD to have a rationale and pragmatic 
view in order to revise and include the roads of lengths of even 2 km under the 
ambit of PMGSY-III. Further, in this regard, the Committee recommend that the 
rationale for road length under PMGSY-III should be State specific as per the 

 
 
14 
 
requirements and necessities of the different States/UTs rather than a uniform 
national formula. 
VI. Post Construction Maintenance of PMGSY Roads 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
1.21 Regarding the issue of Post Construction Maintenance of PMGSY Roads, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The examination of the subject brought to fore a pertinent issue 
associated with the PMGSY roads being the post-construction 
maintenance. The Committee find that the usual design life of roads 
constructed under PMGSY is 10 years and as per the programme 
guidelines, onus of the maintenance of roads within Defect Liability 
Period (DLP) (initial 5 years) falls on the Contractor, while post DLP 
(next 5 years) is the responsibility of the concerned State Government 
and the funds for the same need to be provided by the concerned State 
Governments. Here comes the real issue associated with the 
maintenance and upkeep of PMGSY roads across the nation. The 
contractors, despite the maintenance provision elucidated in detail in 
Clause 43 of standard Bidding Document (SBD), more often than not 
do not pay heed to the enabling provisions and there are abundant 
instances, wherein non-adherence to the maintenance provision have 
resulted in the shabby and damaged condition of the PMGSY roads. 
Having gone through the clauses and other provisions of the scheme, 
the Committee are of the firm view that mere theoretical presence of 
such articulated provisions does not seem to deter the erring 
contractors. The situation demands an iron-fisted approach for stricter 
implementation of such provisions of PMGSY concerning the post 
constructed maintenance of PMGSY roads. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommend to DoRD to ensure that the provisions of SBD 
governing post construction maintenance of roads of PMGSY are 
complied with in ‘letter and spirit’ so that the roads do not get 
deteriorated at an early stage, rather serve the purpose of connectivity 
for a longer period of time. Erring contractors should be short-listed and 
strict action should be taken to declare them black-listed.”  
1.22  The DoRD in their action taken reply furnished to the Committee have stated 
as follows:- 
“eMARG is implemented for five years after construction for 
online monitoring of maintenance of PMGSY roads. Rigorous 
monitoring of eMARG implementation during review meetings, pre-EC, 
EC meetings with States is being done & extension of 5 Year Defect 

 
 
15 
 
Liability Period (DLP) in case of poor maintenance of roads has been 
made mandatory. 
For the Post 5 year period i.e. another 5 years after DLP i.e. for 
a total period of 10 years, eMARG module has been developed, which 
all States have to follow. The State of Madhya Pradesh has already 
spent Rs. 644.23 Cr on Post 5 Year Renewal & Maintenance through 
the module. This will ensure stricter compliance of post construction 
maintenance.”   
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.23 A very important area under PMGSY which attracted the attention of the 
Committee was that of Post Construction Maintenance of PMGSY roads.  
Numerous instances of non-adherence to the post construction maintenance 
provision have been kept on being reported. While the clause 43 of SBD 
elaborately detail the maintenance provision in the initial 5 years and 
subsequent 5 years of the construction, contractors/State Government often 
do not comply with such provision strictly. Thus, the Committee had 
recommended for compliance with the provision of SBD governing post 
construction maintenance in letter and spirit and that action be initiated 
against erring contractors.  As per Reply of the DoRD, the States have to 
follow the eMARG module. Rigorous monitoring of eMARG implementation is 
being done and extension of 5 years Defect Liability Period (DLP) in the case 
of poor maintenance of roads has been made mandatory. A case example of 
the State of Madhya Pradesh has also been cited which has already spent Rs. 
644.23 Crore through this module on post 5 years renewal and maintenance. 
The Committee find that the measures being taken by the DoRD are in the right 
direction and firmly believe that such steps need to be consistently followed 
through without any callousness.  The Committee further urge the DoRD to 
keep up with their efforts and also ensure that other States/UTs also follow 

 
 
16 
 
suit with the same seriousness for ensuring a stricter adherence to the post 
construction maintenance of roads through the eMARG module. 
VII. Post Construction Maintenance Fund 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
1.24 In the context of Post Construction Maintenance Fund, the Committee had 
recommended as below:- 
 “The Committee note the replies submitted by the DoRD that the 
15th Finance Commission had recommended for the provisioning of 
funds for maintenance of rural roads to the States for easing the 
burden on them. The Committee note that fund release for 
maintenance of roads post construction is a glaring issue compounded 
with the hesitancy of States in releasing the maintenance funds. 
However, the Committee find that the request of the Ministry of Rural 
Development to the Ministry of Finance remained unheeded as the 
Finance Ministry had stated that the Government will give due 
consideration to sectors identified by the Commission while formulating 
and implementing existing and new Centrally sponsored and Central 
Sector schemes. In the wake of the non-acceptance of the 
recommendation, the entire onus now lies on States to ensure that 
maintenance funds are released and spent timely so that the PMGSY 
roads post construction do not get deteriorated for want of 
maintenance due to dearth of adequate maintenance fund. Thus, the 
Committee urge upon the DoRD to continue their communication with 
the Ministry of Finance for the actualization of the recommendation of 
15th Finance Commission on the one hand while keeping a proper 
oversight with the State governments for the release of adequate funds 
to ensure the maintenance of PMGSY roads.” 
1.25  In their action taken reply to the above recommendation, DoRD have stated 
as follows:- 
           “Ministry has been regularly taking up the issue at appropriate 
forum with Ministry of Finance for providing maintenance funds for the 
roads constructed under the scheme. Various correspondence have 
been made at the level of Hon’ble Minister for Rural Development and 
Secretary, Rural Development. Besides, the states are also 
encouraged to pay proper attention towards these aspects. In order to 
ensure that states release timely required maintenance funds, a 
condition has been added in the programme guidelines that the second 
installment of programme fund will be released only when State has 
incurred requisite expenditure on maintenance work. 

 
 
17 
 
Further, as a measure of further enhancing the focus on maintenance 
of roads during the defect liability period (DLP) and also streamlining 
the delivery of routine maintenance of PMGSY roads, Electronic 
Maintenance of Rural Roads (eMARG) was launched as a simple yet 
an extremely effective solution to these problems. Conceptualized on 
Performance Based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC), eMARG sets up 
a blue-print on how maintenance of infrastructure can be solved across 
government departments with smart IT & Contract Management. 
PBMC is a type of contract in which payment to the contractor is made 
based on the minimum condition of road, its cross drainage works and 
traffic assets that have to be met by him/her. Payments are based on 
how well the contractor manages to comply with the performance 
standards or service levels defined in the contract, and not on piece 
work. E-Marg is being further strengthened to capture Post DLP 
maintenance expenditure also.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.26 Taking cognizance of the fact that fund release for maintenance of roads 
post construction is a huge issue on part of the States and that the 15th 
Finance Commission had recommended for the provisioning of funds for 
maintenance of rural roads to the States, the Committee had recommended the 
DoRD to keep up with their communication with the Ministry of Finance for the 
actualisation of the recommendation of the 15th Finance Commission. The 
DoRD, in their reply have submitted that the issue is regularly being taken up 
at appropriate forums with the Ministry of Finance and various 
correspondences have been made at the level of Hon’ble Minister and 
Secretary, Rural Development. Other actions being taken for ensuring post 
construction maintenance by the States have also been elaborated upon such 
as non-release of second instalment on account of non-incurring of requisite 
expenditure of maintenance and provision of eMARG etc. The Committee after 
going through the reply thoroughly find the efforts of the DoRD positive and 

 
 
18 
 
encouraging in nature. Post construction maintenance is indeed a burning 
issue which needs a logical redressal.  So, the Committee are of firm opinion 
that the recommendation of 15th Finance Commission regarding provisioning 
of funds for maintenance of rural roads to the States assume paramount 
importance and thus, further stress upon the DoRD to sustain their good 
efforts in this direction while also increase their dialogues at the highest level 
to impress upon the Ministry of Finance for expediting the provisioning of post 
construction maintenance fund. The Committee also urge upon the Ministry of 
Finance to take a positive decision in the matter. DoRD may send a copy of 
this recommendation to that Ministry for their action taken reply. 
VIII.  Prompt Redressal of Grievances raised by the Members 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25) 
1.27 With regard to Prompt Redressal of Grievances raised by the Members, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note the critical complaint raised time and again 
by the Members of Parliament about the casual approach elicited by 
the Department of Rural Development in promptly taking up and 
redressing the grievances regarding the inaction/irregularities in the 
works of PMGSY highlighted by them. The Committee feel that this 
approach of DoRD needs to be rectified immediately. Members of 
Parliament are constitutional figures and represent the voices/concerns 
of major chunk of population. Through them, the issues of common 
man are heard by the authorities at top echelons. Hence, it is 
imperative that the genuine concern/plight of the scheme at ground 
level highlighted by a Member of Parliament needs to be taken up on 
‘war footing’ and redressal of such complaints needs to be done on 
priority basis with due information to the concerned Members. Hence, 
the Committee urge the Department of Rural Development to sort out 
the areas of grievance raised by Members and ensure their prompt 
disposal.” 
  

 
 
19 
 
1.28 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as below:- 
“The Ministry follows the guidelines laid down for handling of all 
references received from public representatives and strictly adheres to 
the prescribed timelines. Utmost priority is given to settle the 
references/grievances received from Member of Parliament. However, 
in some cases delay occurs due to non receipt of inputs from 
concerned State Government. In some cases team of National Quality 
Monitors (NQMs) need to be deputed to carry out the inspection of 
roads work against which complaint has been made. All these 
processes take some time and hence delay may occur. However, the 
Ministry makes all efforts to minimize the delay.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.29 The issue of non-serious take up of the grievances raised by the 
Members of Parliament (MPs) regarding the inaction/irregularities in the works 
of PMGSY by the DoRD is an area of deep concern to the Committee.  
Highlighting this casual approach of the Department towards the genuine 
concerns raised by the MPs, the Committee urged the DoRD to sort out the 
areas of grievances raised by the Members and ensure their prompt disposal.  
The Action Taken Reply furnished by the DoRD in this regard more or less 
vindicate the issue raised by the Committee. While on one hand it states that 
the Ministry follows the guidelines laid down for handling of all references 
received from public representatives and strictly adheres to the prescribed 
timelines, on the other hand, the same reply shifts the onus of delay on the 
State Governments citing the non-receipt of inputs from concerned State 
Government. Procedural delay aspect in the inspection of NQMs have been 
also talked about. The Committee is clueless from the reply as to strict 
adherence to which ‘timeline’ is being referred to. If there are inordinate delays 
in handling of the complaints of the MPs, the plight of common man’s 
complaints leaves nothing to the imagination. Therefore, the Ministry should 
bring transparency in this aspect and is expected to bring to fore their 

 
 
20 
 
prescribed timelines for sorting the grievances raised.  All the above 
foregoings necessitate that the DoRD strengthen further their efforts and 
spruce up their grievance redressal mechanism for getting the desired results. 
Therefore, the Committee while reiterating the earlier recommendation further 
impresses upon the DoRD to issue stricter guidelines to all the agencies 
involved for the prompt redressal of grievances/complaints raised by the MPs 
within a definite timeline.  
IX.  Increased usage of Green Technology 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27) 
1.30 With regard to Increased usage of Green Technology, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:- 
“The Committee pleasantly find the gradual increase in the 
usage of green technology for the construction of roads under PMGSY 
and acknowledge the positive efforts being undertaken by the 
Department of Rural Development in this regard. In this era of 
modernization, it is in the best interest of the environment that by 
ushering in green technologies, a sustainable platform is being 
provided to the infrastructure projects by shifting from the conventional 
methods. Notable among other techniques is the usage of plastic in the 
road construction activities. The Committee are a bit concerned over 
the usage of plastic in terms of its biodegradability and the hazard it 
poses to the environment in general. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department of Rural Development should conduct 
a study on the possible environmental hazards of the usage of plastic 
for road construction and take appropriate steps thereon on the basis 
of outcome of that study.” 
1.31 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as below:- 
“Waste Plastic itself is a huge problem for environment as they 
are non degradable, keeping in view that aspect in mind it was decided 
to use waste plastic in Rural roads. These waste plastic are shredded 
and made as a powdery substance and mixed in the hot bitumen. The 
study on use of waste plastic in construction of rural road has been 
carried out by IIT Chennai and it was found that plastic paved roads 
have higher resistance to deformation and water induced damaged. As 
regards concern about the toxicity and environmental suitability of 

 
 
21 
 
adding plastic, separate studies have not been carried out. The 
recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance.” 
  Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.32 Green Technology is the need of hour is almost every sphere of life.  So, 
the gradual increase in the usage of green technology for the construction of 
roads under PMGSY has been pleasantly acknowledged by the Committee.  
However, the Committee are concerned over the usage of plastic in the road 
construction activities. Therefore, the Committee had recommended the DoRD 
to conduct a study on the possible environmental hazards of the usage of 
plastic for road construction and take appropriate steps thereon on the basis 
of the outcome of the study. In their Action Taken Reply, the DoRD have stated 
about the rationale for using waste plastic in rural roads construction based 
on the study carried out by IIT Chennai. However, it has also been submitted 
that no separate studies have been carried out so far to ascertain the toxicity 
and environmental suitability of adding plastic in the construction of roads.  
This precise aspect was highlighted through the recommendation of the 
Committee as the Committee are of the view that usage of plastic need to be 
continued after taking into account all facets involved around it and as such 
the Committee reiterate their recommendation for conducting study on the 
possible environmental hazards of the usage of plastic for road construction 
under PMGSY. The study be conducted at the earliest under due intimation to 
the Committee. 
X.  Convergence with Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee  
Act (MGNREGA) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 30) 
1.33 With regard to Convergence with Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 

 
 
22 
 
“The possibility of dovetailing of different schemes of the 
Government for a systematic approach towards development through 
prudent economic utilization has always drawn the attention of the 
Committee. In this backdrop, the Committee find that one such 
scheme, Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) can be effectively merged with PMGSY for better 
utilization of Government’s fund. The unskilled labour component of 
MGNREGA can be used for the earthen works required in the 
construction of roads under PMGSY. On the one hand, the unskilled 
labourers of MGNREGA would get their workdays while the PMGSY 
construction work would be collaterally taken up, thus saving its fund. 
Such or similar exercises may be taken up through review of 
administrative modules and in consultation with the Departments or 
State bodies involved. Therefore, the Committee recommend the 
Department of Rural Development to explore the proposal of 
convergence of MGNREGA with PMGSY earnestly in order to have a 
rationalized Government fund utilisation.” 
1.34 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as below:- 
“The PMGSY roads are inter-habitation/inter-village roads while 
under MGNREGA connectivity within a village is supported.  Further, 
there would be challenges in terms of availability of labour during the 
construction season, tendering process of material component, etc. 
which makes the convergence in construction of rural roads further 
difficult. 
However, convergence of MGNREGA funds with PMGSY for 
raising of plantation alongside PMGSY roads has been started. ” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.35 Through dovetailing of different schemes of the Government, prudent 
economic utilisation of Government funds can be brought about. Keeping this 
logic under consideration, the Committee had recommended the DoRD to 
explore the proposal of convergence of MGNREGA with PMGSY. In this 
context, the Action Taken Reply of the DoRD has elicited the challenges in 
terms of availability of labour during the construction season, tendering of 
material component etc. as the reasons for making the convergence of 
MGNREGA with PMGSY difficult. The Committee note the reply and take into 

 
 
23 
 
account the challenges enumerated by the DoRD in this regard. However, the 
Committee feel that the reply primarily shrugs aside the intent of the 
recommendation behind the convergence proposal by citing the bottlenecks.  
The Committee appreciate the fact that atleast bottlenecks have been 
identified in carrying out convergence of MGNREGA with PMGSY. This in itself 
is the first step towards ultimate concretisation of any futuristic strategy if 
there is adequate wherewithal to do so on the part of DoRD. Therefore, the 
Committee reiterate the earlier recommendation and urge upon the DoRD to 
relook into the proposal of convergence of MGNREGA with PMGSY with a 
fresher perspective and explore feasibilities of possible fructification of the 
convergence aspect.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
24 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
2.1 The Committee note that one of the most important aspect associated with 
the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) is the Centre-State coordination, 
which act as the fulcrum, for the performance of this scheme. The scheme was 
started in the year 2000 as a 100% centrally sponsored scheme with a onetime 
intervention of the Centre in realizing the objective of providing all weather durable 
rural road connectivity to the habitations (500 plus population in plain and 250 plus in 
Himalayan and North Eastern States). However, the funding pattern was revised to 
60:40 ratio between Centre and State from the financial year 2015-16, in all the 
States barring eight North Eastern States and two Himalayan States (Himachal 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand) and UT of J&K where it is 90:10 ratio. It is 100% Central 
share for other Union Territories (UTs). Thus, the seamless flow of funds for the 
timely completion of projects under PMGSY assumes utmost paramountcy. Although 
the issue of fund release is primary, rural roads being a State subject, the onus of 
effective implementation also depends upon various other factors which require the 
pro-activeness of the State machinery. In this context, the Committee find that 
various projects in many States get delayed or stalled due to logistics issue or non-
timely fund release being the main culprit among others, which can be sorted out at 
the State Government level. 
It is pretty much clear that for the effective implementation of the scheme, both 
Centre and State nodal agencies need to come up with a joint and harmonious 
approach without shying away from fulfilling their own responsibilities. Hence, the 
Committee recommend the Department of Rural Development to ensure that the 
projects under PMGSY do not get hampered due to lack of coordination between 
Centre and State rather a better cohesive mode of coordination may be devised for 
providing a positive impetus to the scheme. 
     Reply of the Government  
 
2.2 Various Institutional mechanisms are already in place for effective 
coordination between the States/UTs for implementation of the schemes. The 
progress of the scheme is regularly reviewed by the Ministry by way of Regional 

 
 
25 
 
Review Meetings (RRMs), Performance Review Committee (PRC) Meetings, Pre-
Empowered/ Empowered Committee Meetings with the States. At District level, the 
District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA) headed by 
Hon’ble Member of Parliament (LS) monitors the implementation of various schemes 
of Government of India including PMGSY. Besides above, special review 
meetings/monthly review meetings are also held by Secretary/Additional 
Secretary/Joint Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development with Chief 
Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of the States to take stock of the progress of the 
scheme and remove the bottlenecks, if any. Whenever States point out any difficulty 
in implementation of the scheme, the same is taken care of and issues are flagged at 
appropriate level to the concerned agencies for positive outcome. 
PMGSY has an unbroken chain of fund release and no work has been hampered on 
account of non-availability of funds. Sometimes fund released from Central 
Government does get stuck up for a longer period than the permissible time limit in 
the State treasury, however, of late, this problem has also been addressed due to 
constant interaction with the concerned State Governments. 
 (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
  
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
2.3 The Committee firmly believe that the vital parameter which portrays 
the performance of any scheme is the amount of fund lying as unspent balance. 
Even though the Committee notice the fact that the volume of unspent balance 
accrued over the years has gone down and acknowledge the positive efforts of the 
Ministry in this regard, an unspent balance of Rs. 2269.631 Crore as on 20.01.2023 
is a matter of concern. Two verticals of PMGSY (I & II) are almost on the verge 
of completion (as per the sunset date outlined by the Ministry) and the 
remaining components of the scheme are also not much far away from their target 
date of completion, the accumulation of such large quantum of unspent balance is 
not acceptable to the Committee. The ‘need of the hour’ is expeditious utilisation 
of available finances for the faster completion of the projects, particularly in 
those States which are lagging behind in implementation of the Scheme. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that the DoRD should increase the tempo of their 
ongoing efforts so as to ensure that the amounts under the head ‘unspent balances’ 
get wiped out on a faster rate and the projects under PMGSY are executed in a 
time bound manner. 
 

 
 
26 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.4 In PMGSY funds are transferred to States as an advance against the value of 
projects sanctioned to the states.  As such, some amount of funds will always be 
available with the State so as to maintain the unbroken chain of fund release. 
Ministry ensures that the States/UTs are released further funds only upon utilization 
of 75% of the available funds in the Single Nodal Account (SNA) of the scheme in 
the state. This limit of 75% has been brought as per the instruction of Ministry of 
Finance. The process is underway to ensure just in time release to States/UTs. 
Various recent instructions issued by Ministry of Finance do take care of the fact that 
unnecessary floats are not available with the States, for that purpose various 
instruments under Public Finance Management Systems (PFMS) are already in 
operation. 
  
          (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
2.5 The Committee with utmost concern note the inordinate delay in the 
completion of targets envisaged under PMGSY–I & II. While PMGSY-I was initiated 
way back in the year 2000 with the target of connecting 1,78,184 eligible habitations 
with the construction of 6,45,590 km of sanctioned roads and PMGSY-II was 
launched in 2013 with a target of upgradation of 50000 Km. After obtaining the final 
extension, both the verticals were supposed to be finally completed by September, 
2022. However, 96.24% under PMGSY-I and 97.01% under PMGSY-II of the targets 
fixed have been achieved as on 31st January, 2023. Much time has elapsed than 
could have been ever thought about at the start of each vertical and the phases, 
specifically PMGSY-I has witnessed inordinate delay in completion of entire 
sanctioned length of road. Needless to say that the sufferers of such delay are the 
rural populace of the country who wait with bated breath for the construction of roads 
so that they can also expect a rise in economic/developmental activities around their 
habitation for finding a better avenue of livelihood generation. Rural roads are akin to 
the arteries of the body which connect the hinterland of the vast stretch of the 
country with the cycle of ongoing development in every sphere of the society. The 
Committee firmly believe that ‘no stone should be left unturned’ in the efforts of the 
DoRD to ensure that the remaining pendency in the PMGSY-I & II are completed on 
‘war footing’ and the progress in this regard should be intimated to the Committee. 
DoRD could further utilise their administrative skills in the timely completion of 

 
 
27 
 
RCPLWEA and PMGSY-III as well. The Committee recommend that concrete 
measures should be initiated for the timely completion of RCPLWEA and PMGSY-III 
projects on the basis of experience gained in implementation of PMGSY-I & II so that 
the necessity of resorting to time extensions does not arise for the completion of 
projects under RCPLWEA and PMGSY- III. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.6 Under  PMGSY-I , II & RCPLWEA 7227 Km, 689 Km & 3852 Km respectively, 
of road work is balance for completion as on 25th September, 2023. The Ministry has 
been reviewing the progress of these works on monthly basis. As per the Action plan 
given by the concerned state government, Ministry is hopeful that all these balance 
works would get completed before the end of timeline i.e. March, 2024 as the pace 
of work is likely to pick up after the end of the monsoon season. 
  
Under PMGSY III out of 1,25,000 Km of targeted length, 1,06,911 road length has 
been sanctioned and 64,874 Km road length completed as on 25th September, 
2023.  The balance target length is proposed to be sanctioned by the end of the 
current financial year. Seeing the pace of construction PMGSY-III, Ministry is hopeful 
that all the sanctioned work would get completed end of timeline i.e. March, 2025. 
Further, Since PMGSY –III is the up-gradation of existing road network hence the 
issue regarding the land acquisition, forest clearance and other related issues are 
not likely to  hamper the progress. 
  
For RCPLWEA, Ministry is in constant touch with the implementing States, and all, 
except Chhattisgarh, have given their action plan for completion of balance works by 
March, 2024. Ministry has flagged the issue of unsatisfactory progress of balance 
work of RCPLWEA in Chhattisgarh with Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). MHA is 
actively reviewing RCPLWEA works of  Chhattisgarh and necessary handholding is 
being done to ensure that bottle necks, if any  which are coming in the way of 
progress are removed. 
  
          (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
2.7 The Committee are not oblivious to an inherent quagmire, associated with the 
infrastructure projects which overshoot their deadline and result in cost overrun, 
especially the escalation of cost of raw material and labour component. In this 
scenario, the Committee fail to comprehend the measures adopted by the DoRD to 
prevent such collateral damage arising out of the delay/stalling of projects under 

 
 
28 
 
PMGSY. It is necessary to quantify the exact detrimental effect of the escalation in 
cost factor on innumerable projects which have lingered over for years. The 
Committee found during deliberations with the representatives of the Department 
and through the on ground reality witnessed during the study visits, the presence of 
umpteen cases wherein the contractor left the project mid-way or just after start, due 
to the rising cost of construction owing to delay in projects on account of various 
logistical issues ranging from non-availability of land clearance to non-release of 
funds. It is quite perplexing to understand as to how the cost escalation that might 
have cropped up due to the delay in the completion of projects could be offset 
against the original quotations at the time of bidding of tender. Although “much water 
has flown under the bridge” by now, such occurrences need to be examined carefully 
for ensuring that the future/ongoing endeavours of the DoRD under PMGSY do not 
suffer the same fate. Thus, in the fitness of things, the Committee recommend that 
DoRD should make tangible efforts to envisage any kind of delays that may crop up 
during the execution of projects and to guarantee a mechanism of inflation proof 
costing system under PMGSY constructions even over a longer period of time so as 
to ensure that the PMGSY projects are completed as per scheduled time period 
without any cost escalation. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.8 As per the PMGSY guidelines, no extra funds are provided by the Central 
Government on account of time and cost overrun as well as tender premium. States 
prepare Detailed project Reports (DPRs) based on the prevailing schedule of rates 
(SoR). Accordingly Ministry sanctions the proposals based on the cost estimate 
arrived at by the States based on the SoR. These SoRs are revised from time to time 
keeping in view the existing market trends. Once project is sanctioned, there is no 
provision for payment of cost escalation on account of time overrun under the 
scheme. Timeline has been clearly laid down for completion of roads/ bridges in the 
guidelines and the same has to be adhered to by the States as there is fixed timeline 
for completion of projects sanctioned under PMGSY. If cost increases on account of 
time overrun, States have the responsibility to bear the extra cost which acts as a 
disincentive against time and cost overruns. 
  
         (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
  

 
 
29 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
2.9 The Committee note that RCPLWEA, a very important vertical under PMGSY, 
was launched in 2016 with the primary goal of ensuring socio-economic 
development of the areas affected by left wing extremism in such States of the 
country. The deadline for the completion of this component under PMGSY is March, 
2023. In this regard, the Committee are concerned to note that only about 55.61 
percent of the work has been completed as on 31.01.2023 and as such the vertical is 
poised to miss its deadline. While trying to grasp the peculiarity of such delay, the 
Committee have taken into account the unique nature of challenge that LWE areas 
throw in terms of insurgency, difficult terrain etc. Still, the Committee feel that such 
bottlenecks in themselves are all the more potent reasons as to why road 
connectivity to the mainland from such areas are of utmost importance. The more 
delay caused in bringing the affected population to mainstream via the connectivity, 
the situation would take even longer to be controlled and developed for good. 
Special efforts and perhaps area specific professionals who are skilled to work in 
combat and insurgent zones such as Border Roads Organization (BROs) might 
serve as a boost to the lagging projects under RCPLWEA. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that DoRD should envisage a few ‘out of box’ solutions and guide the 
concerned States accordingly so as to ensure that the projects under RCPLWEA do 
not suffer delay and are completed on a faster basis for the time-bound realization of 
the objectives of this vertical. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.10 Works sanctioned under RCPLWEA are regularly reviewed both by Ministry 
as well as MHA. Ministry is in constant touch with the implementation states, and all 
except Chhattisgarh have given their action plan for completion of balance work by 
March, 2024. Ministry has flagged the issue of unsatisfactory progress of balance 
work of RCPLWEA in Chhattisgarh with Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). MHA is 
actively reviewing RCPLWEA works of  Chhattisgarh and necessary handholding is 
being done to ensure that bottle neck, if any  which are coming in the way of 
progress is removed.  Efforts are being made to ensure that all the sanctioned works 
are completed by the extended timeline which is March, 2024. 
  
As on 25.09.2023, 630 roads of 3,853 km and 391 bridges remain balance for 
completion under RCPLWEA. Hence, the States/UTs are well placed to complete the 
works under RCPLWEA within the stipulated timeline. 
  

 
 
30 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
2.11 The Committee note that the latest component of PMGSY is its third phase 
i.e. PMGSY-III which was launched in 2019 with the objective of consolidation of   
the existing through routes and major rural links so that rural habitations are 
connected to gramin agricultural markets, higher secondary schools and hospitals. 
With the timeline for completion being March, 2025, 96,950 km of road length have 
been sanctioned till 31.01.2023 out of the total target of 1,25,000 km road proposed 
to be laid under this phase. Despite the passage of a substantive period of time 
since its launch, even the sanctioning of the entire targeted length of road to the 
States has not been completed so far. This does not augur well for the future of the 
vertical as the deadline for completion is not very far. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that DoRD should enrich themselves from the past experiences 
and take immediate appropriate steps with the participation of all the stakeholders 
involved to expedite the groundwork for start of work on the remaining targeted 
length of PMGSY-III and also for the timely completion of road length already taken 
up for execution so as to achieve the target of existing 1,25,000 km of road by 
March, 2025 without any time and cost overrun. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.12 PMGSY-III works have been sanctioned to only those states which have 
either fully completed PMGSY-I & II works or are on the verge of completion. This 
has been done to ensure that their execution capacity is not overstretched otherwise 
their would be further delay in the completion of balance PMGSY-I & II works. 
  
Under PMGSY III out of 1,25,000 Km of targeted length, 1,06,911 road length has 
been sanctioned and 64,874 Km road length completed as on 25th September, 
2023.  The balance target length is proposed to be sanctioned by the end of the 
current financial year. Seeing the pace of construction PMGSY-III, Ministry is hopeful 
that all the sanctioned work would get completed end of timeline i.e. March, 2025. 
  
Further, Since PMGSY–III is regarding up-gradation of existing road network, hence 
the issue regarding the land acquisition, forest clearance and other related issues do 
not hamper the progress. 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 

 
 
31 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
2.13 The Committee note that there exists the mandatory provision of laboratories 
at the ground level which serve as the first tier of the quality control of the 
programme implementation unit. These on-site labs are meant for the assessment of 
the quality of roads, the stones that have been used, etc. The Committee take into 
account such valuable component of quality check at the fundamental stage of road 
construction. However, the Committee are surprised on being informed about the 
alleged non-existence or non-functioning of these labs at many locations through the 
first hand ground experience of the Members. Since this important provision for 
quality monitoring of the construction needs to be scrupulously implemented as 
violation of this provision can derail the entire project of the specific site, the 
Committee recommend DoRD should take this matter seriously and carry out 
thorough evaluation of the sites for ensuring stricter compliance with the presence of 
labs at the construction sites for maintaining the quality of raw materials and roads. 
The action initiated in this regard should be intimated to the Committee. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.14 As per the Programme Guidelines, a site quality control laboratory has to be 
set up by the contractor for each package. Payments are made to the contractors 
only after quality control laboratory has been set up. Project Implementation Units 
(PIUs) has been instructed to verify the field lab and upload geo tagged photograph 
on OMMAS, containing photograph of lab with head of PIU. State Quality Controller 
(SQC) has been mandated to upload a pdf copy of Quality Control (QC) registers 
part-I in online management monitoring and accounting system (OMMAS) through 
his login for all the projects after getting it evaluated and rated by the concerned 
Superintending Engineer (SE) of the circle. NRIDA has mandated the requirement of 
maintaining Quality Control Registers (QCR) for each work. Moreover, National 
Quality Monitors (NQMs) and State Quality Monitors (SQMs) while visiting the site do 
cross check the establishment of field lab and record their observations on OMMAS. 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
2.15 The Committee note the provision under PMGSY, as informed by the DoRD 
during evidence, about the sub-letting of works to petty contractors by the main 
contractor. Acknowledging the intent of creating a wider resource pool for future 
through this percolation of works to other personnel who gain valuable experience, 

 
 
32 
 
the Committee through their experience and the information shared with them have 
acquiesced themselves to the flip side of this practice also. The petty contractors 
who come into the picture by way of multiple sub-lettings are sometimes not able to 
maintain the quality of construction and the goals of the scheme. Such practices 
results in poorly constructed roads, devoid of standard protocols and have adverse 
effect on the project. Quality check on the working of such petty contractors is the 
‘need of the hour’ and proper drafting of norms along-with their implementation for 
ensuring that the petty contractors work properly is required. Hence, the Committee 
recommend DoRD to review the provision of sub-letting and take corrective 
measures as per manual in this regard.    
 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 As per Standard Bidding Document, for PMGSY works, the Contractor may 
subcontract part of the construction work with the approval of the Employer in 
writing, up to 25 percent of the contract price. However, the ultimate liability for 
delivery of good quality roads lies with the main contractor. The main contractor 
shall, at all times, be responsible and liable for all his obligations under the 
Agreement notwithstanding anything contained in the agreements with his Sub-
contractors or any other agreement that may be entered into by the Contractor and 
no default under any such agreement shall exempt the Contractor from his 
obligations or liability towards the contract. The overall responsibility of maintaining 
the quality lies with the main contractor and all works are executed following similar 
quality standards following a three tier quality monitoring system. Based on the 
periodic monitoring of quality of roads under the 3-tier mechanism, corrective 
measures, wherever necessary, are taken by the State Governments.   
  
(O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
2.17 The Committee opine that PMGSY roads are built under such guidelines 
which do not take into account plying of heavy tonnage vehicles which nowadays 
cause immense damage to the rural connectivity roads. In this era of modernization 
when industrial setups at far flung locales and the construction works of highways 
often necessitate movement of heavy load bearing vehicles, particularly those of 
NHAI to also utilise the roads built under PMGSY. Such heavy vehicles cause 

 
 
33 
 
irreversible damages to the rural roads under PMGSY which are of the mandated 
thickness of 20 mm. It, thus, becomes imperative to protect and get repaired the 
existing roads under PMGSY from the damaging NHAI vehicles and increasing the 
thickness of roads under PMGSY to 30 mm for bearing the load of heavy vehicles 
that would keep on plying on them in future. In view of the above, the Committee 
urge DoRD to have urgent meaningful dialogue with the NHAI to ensure that the 
PMGSY road damage by NHAI vehicles get mitigated and the damages are repaired 
by NHAI in accordance with the provisions of PMGSY. Moreover, the need of 
increasing the thickness of the PMGSY road from the existing 20 mm to 30 mm 
should also be looked into pragmatically by the DoRD. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 Rural roads are designed for 10 years of design life and future traffic annual 
growth rate is also taken into consideration while designing the pavement crust. 
Roads built under PMGSY follows the specifications of IRC especially IRC SP 
72:2015 to design the rural roads, IRC SP 72:2015 limits the design traffic to 2 MSA. 
Load carried by standard axle (single axle, dual wheel) is 8.16 tonnes and tandem 
axle is 14.9 tonnes. Fully loaded Heavy Commercial Vehicle (HCV) have a rear axle 
load of 10.2 tonnes and a front axle load half the rear axle load i.e. 5 tonnes and 20 
% overloading is considered if overload vehicles are present. Heavier loads than this 
is not considered in design. 
  
As per IRC SP 72:2015 the surface course recommended is 20 mm OGPC only for 
higher traffic, The surfacing course (layer) is the upper layer of the flexible pavement 
and provides the smooth, durable, abrasion-resistant characteristics of a good 
roadway, retaining adequate friction for road safety. It is normally made from bitumen 
bound aggregate – asphalt concrete. It will be waterproof and prevent ingress of 
water into the lower pavement layers, which would adversely affect their strength. 
These layers must be strong enough not to rut under the action of traffic.  
Since the main load bearing layers are the Binder course, Base course and Sub 
base course, thickness of these layers are more determining factors for the 
distresses caused in the pavement when heavy vehicles ply over it.  

 
 
34 
 
The issue regarding damage of PMGSY roads by heavy vehicles coming from NHAI 
roads has been taken up with Ministry of Road Transport and Highways firstly by 
Secretary vide DO letter dated 08.08.2023 and further by Minister (Rural 
Development) vide DO letter 27.09.2023. Copies of DO letters are attached.  
 
  (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
2.19 The Committee note with concern the non-presence of earthen/soil flanks on 
either side of the PMGSY roads at many locations which cause major inconvenience 
to on-footers and bicycle riders/two wheeler riders in such areas. Existence of 
earthen flanks adjacent to roads are integral for the rural areas and a practical 
aspect which ought to be taken into consideration seriously. The on-footers and 
bicycle riders are always accident-prone while commuting on cemented roads due to 
speeding vehicles. Stricter compliance with such provision at the time of construction 
of PMGSY roads should be ensured and stressed upon. Hence, the Committee 
recommend the DoRD to relook into the matter by taking into account the plight of 
the daily commuters and issue guidelines for mandatory earmarking of the earthen 
flank areas adjacent to either side of PMGSY roads. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 Flanks/ shoulders are provided while constructing PMGSY roads. 
Requirement of shoulders is a mandatory clause of IRC:SP:72-2015. Generally, 
earthen/hard shoulder requirement is fulfilled for construction of PMGSY road 
(clause 9.2 of IRC:SP:72-2015). However, since appropriate land is not available 
alongside the roads and also Central Government does not pay for land acquisition, 
in some cases earthen flanks may not be available appropriately. However 
recommendation of the committee has been noted and will be shared with the States 
for mandatory compliance. 
            (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 

 
 
35 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
2.21 Another important area of concern that was brought to the notice of the 
Committee during their deliberations was the uneven sloping and substantial height 
difference between the roads constructed under PMGSY and the arterial sub-road or 
path leading to the villages. The Committee note that vehicles joining the road or 
leaving the road of PMGSY had to manoeuvre a substantial gradient which had 
emerged due to non-formation of a decent slope at the time of construction or due to 
the slope being washed away owing to its non-concretized nature. During darkness 
or even in daylight there have been cases of vehicles overturning causing harm to 
the riders who have to negotiate such difficulty on daily basis. Construction of a 
permanent gentle slope at the meeting places of PMGSY roads with main roads is 
necessary for the accident free passage of PMGSY road users. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that DoRD should ensure identification of such locations and 
course-correction steps are taken for the existing meeting places where such slopes 
are missing while this concern is kept in design and complied with in all future 
construction of rural roads under PMGSY to ward off accidents. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.22 Programme guidelines of PMGSY provide that while preparing the DPR, PIU 
will ensure that the Rural Roads constructed under PMGSY-III must meet the 
technical specifications and geometric design standards given in the MoRD's 
Specifications for Rural Roads, Rural Roads Manual of the IRC (IRC: SP:20) and 
also, where required, the Hill Road Manual (IRC: SP:48) and other IRC Codes, 
Manuals relating to Road Signs, Pavement Markings, Crash Barriers, Safety in 
construction zones etc. 
DPRs of the roads sanctioned under PMGSY are prepared by concerned 
Programme Implementation Units (PIU) and they are expected to take into account 
these type of special needs. The DPRs are also vetted by State Technical Agencies 
(STAs) and Principal Technical Agencies (PTAs). They are the institutions of repute 
and are expected to look into such aspect. However, the recommendations of the 
committee have been noted and it will be shared with all the concerned agencies to 
take into account while preparing DPRs.  
  
          (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
 

 
 
36 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
2.23 The Committee are of the view that construction of rural roads is an ongoing 
process and there is always scope for improvement and inclusion of better ideas for 
bolstering the rural connectivity much more holistically. One such suggestion which 
drew the Committees’ attention during their deliberation over the subject was that of 
choosing Gram Panchayats as reference point/unit for providing connectivity rather 
than utilizing the population criteria of a habitation. The provision may be 
conceptualized in terms of connecting all the villages under a specific Gram 
Panchayat and so on. This would ensure that all GPs are covered step by step which 
inter-alia would cover all the habitations/villages automatically. The Committee feel 
that any change in approach, if it serves the rural populace in a better way, should 
be welcomed and merit a thorough analysis for present modification as well as future 
endeavours. Therefore, the Committee recommend the DoRD to be amenable to 
changes in a positive way and explore the feasibility of picking up Gram Panchayats 
as reference points/units for providing rural connectivity so as to incorporate the 
concept at certain stage of rural connectivity mission in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.24 The mandate of PMGSY-I was to provide connectivity to habitations and its 
completion time is March, 2024 as such no such proposal can be considered at this 
stage when all the work of this vertical has already been sanctioned. However the 
recommendation of the committee has been noted and due consideration is given as 
and when any new vertical to provide new connectivity under PMGSY is launched.  
  
While PMGSY-I mandate is on connectivity of habitations, there exist provisions in 
PMGSY-I guidelines which involve gram panchayat level functionaries for smooth 
functioning of the scheme. For instance, at the stage of preparing DPRs, the DPIU 
conducts a transect walk along the road alignment, involving the local panchayat. 
State Governments are required to arrange joint inspection of ongoing as well as 
completed works under PMGSY by Hon’ble MPs, Hon’ble MLAs and representatives 
of Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
  
For maintenance management of rural roads, State Governments are stipulated to 
take steps to build up capacity in the District Panchayats and endeavour to devolve 
funds and functionaries onto these Panchayats in order to enable them to manage 
maintenance contracts for rural roads. However, till such time as District Panchayats 
take over maintenance functions, the PIUs will continue to be responsible for 

 
 
37 
 
administration of post-construction and zonal maintenance contracts of PMGSY 
roads. 
          (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
2.25 The Committee note that one of the perennial challenges associated with the 
construction of unified stretch of roads under PMGSY crops up due to the falling of 
bridges in the mid-way of roads at various locations. The Committee have been 
apprised that normally when a bridge comes in between two segments of roads, the 
agency carrying on the PMGSY works do not undertake bridge work citing it as the 
work of other specific division. As a result, the construction of roads on either side of 
the bridge site is rendered unusable due to non-construction of bridge work. The 
entire stretch suffers and the public money gets wasted as an outcome. The 
Committee feel that a synergy and coordinated action by the different agencies could 
pave the way for simultaneous construction of roads and bridges at many such 
locations, thus bringing a much needed relief to the nearby rural habitations. 
Perhaps, a bit of policy revision and constructive interaction between the 
stakeholders could bring about a practical change in approach, good enough for the 
remedial measures required for pushing such projects to completion in a holistic 
manner. Thus, the Committee recommend to DoRD to look into such issues in a 
pragmatic way and come out with a suitable mechanism for symbiotic association of 
different nodal infrastructure agencies. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.26 The primary objective of the PMGSY is to provide Connectivity, by way of an 
All-weather Road (with necessary culverts and cross drainage structures, which is 
operable throughout the year), to the eligible unconnected Habitations in rural areas. 
Roads constructed under PMGSY thus have all the required culverts and cross 
drainage works including bridges at appropriate places as per the site requirement. 
As per the scheme guidelines, if the length of the bridges is more than 15m, 
separate DPR is prepared. The scheme guidelines provide sanctioning of required 
bridges. The only condition is that these bridges should fall on the same alignment of 
the road being constructed. Thus, PMGSY has sanctioned many bridges to different 
states as per the site requirement. Since, DPR is prepared by the State government, 
they have to make provisions for cross drainage of bridges depending upon the 
requirement. The scheme doesn’t provide sanctioning of Stand alone bridges. 

 
 
38 
 
Moreover, the suggestion given has been noted and will be shared with all the 
State Governments to take into account while preparing DPRs in future cases. 
             (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
 
2.27 The examination of the subject brought to fore a pertinent issue associated 
with the PMGSY roads being the post-construction maintenance. The Committee 
find that the usual design life of roads constructed under PMGSY is 10 years and as 
per the programme guidelines, onus of the maintenance of roads within Defect 
Liability Period (DLP) (initial 5 years) falls on the Contractor, while post DLP (next 5 
years) is the responsibility of the concerned State Government and the funds for the 
same need to be provided by the concerned State Governments. Here comes the 
real issue associated with the maintenance and upkeep of PMGSY roads across the 
nation. The contractors, despite the maintenance provision elucidated in detail in 
Clause 43 of standard Bidding Document (SBD), more often than not do not pay 
heed to the enabling provisions and there are abundant instances, wherein non-
adherence to the maintenance provision have resulted in the shabby and damaged 
condition of the PMGSY roads. Having gone through the clauses and other 
provisions of the scheme, the Committee are of the firm view that mere theoretical 
presence of such articulated provisions does not seem to deter the erring 
contractors. The situation demands an iron-fisted approach for stricter 
implementation of such provisions of PMGSY concerning the post constructed 
maintenance of PMGSY roads. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend to 
DoRD to ensure that the provisions of SBD governing post construction maintenance 
of roads of PMGSY are complied with in ‘letter and spirit’ so that the roads do not get 
deteriorated at an early stage, rather serve the purpose of connectivity for a longer 
period of time. Erring contractors should be short-listed and strict action should be 
taken to declare them black-listed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.28 eMARG is implemented for five years after construction for online monitoring 
of maintenance of PMGSY roads. Rigorous monitoring of eMARG implementation 
during review meetings, pre-EC, EC meetings with States is being done & extension 

 
 
39 
 
of 5 Year Defect Liability Period (DLP) in case of poor maintenance of roads has 
been made mandatory. 
For the Post 5 year period i.e. another 5 years after DLP i.e. for a total period of 10 
years, eMARG module has been developed, which all States have to follow. The 
State of Madhya Pradesh has already spent Rs. 644.23 Cr on Post 5 Year Renewal 
& Maintenance through the module. This will ensure stricter compliance of post 
construction maintenance.                      
             (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
 
2.29 The Committee note the replies submitted by the DoRD that the 15th Finance 
Commission had recommended for the provisioning of funds for maintenance of rural 
roads to the States for easing the burden on them. The Committee note that fund 
release for maintenance of roads post construction is a glaring issue compounded 
with the hesitancy of States in releasing the maintenance funds. However, the 
Committee find that the request of the Ministry of Rural Development to the Ministry 
of Finance remained unheeded as the Finance Ministry had stated that the 
Government will give due consideration to sectors identified by the Commission 
while formulating and implementing existing and new Centrally sponsored and 
Central Sector schemes. In the wake of the non-acceptance of the recommendation, 
the entire onus now lies on States to ensure that maintenance funds are released 
and spent timely so that the PMGSY roads post construction do not get deteriorated 
for want of maintenance due to dearth of adequate maintenance fund. Thus, the 
Committee urge upon the DoRD to continue their communication with the Ministry of 
Finance for the actualization of the recommendation of 15th Finance Commission on 
the one hand while keeping a proper oversight with the State governments for the 
release of adequate funds to ensure the maintenance of PMGSY roads. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.30 Ministry has been regularly taking up the issue at appropriate forum with 
Ministry of Finance for providing maintenance funds for the roads constructed under 
the scheme. Various correspondence have been made at the level of Hon’ble 
Minister for Rural Development and Secretary, Rural Development. Besides, the 
states are also encouraged to pay proper attention towards these aspects. In order 
to ensure that states release timely required maintenance funds, a condition has 

 
 
40 
 
been added in the programme guidelines that the second installment of programme 
fund will be released only when State has incurred requisite expenditure on 
maintenance work. 
Further, as a measure of further enhancing the focus on maintenance of roads 
during the defect liability period (DLP) and also streamlining the delivery of routine 
maintenance of PMGSY roads, Electronic Maintenance of Rural Roads (eMARG) 
was launched as a simple yet an extremely effective solution to these problems. 
Conceptualized on Performance Based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC), eMARG 
sets up a blue-print on how maintenance of infrastructure can be solved across 
government departments with smart IT & Contract Management. PBMC is a type of 
contract in which payment to the contractor is made based on the minimum condition 
of road, its cross drainage works and traffic assets that have to be met by him/her. 
Payments are based on how well the contractor manages to comply with the 
performance standards or service levels defined in the contract, and not on piece 
work. E-Marg is being further strengthened to capture Post DLP maintenance 
expenditure also.  
 
          (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
2.31 The Committee learn from the Standard Bidding Document (SBD) Clause 
43.4 that ample provisions are in place for holding the accountability of such 
contractors who do not comply with the routine maintenance as per the contract in 
force and that such contractors can be penalized with an additional 20 per cent 
amount as penalty while they can also be blacklisted. Taking into cognizance the 
existence of such provisions, the Committee are of the view that the contractors and 
supervisory engineers are together involved in cases of poor quality of construction 
and non-maintenance of roads constructed under PMGSY. It is essentially required 
to overcome the situation by taking suitable corrective actions in this regard. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that DoRD should ensure the stricter 
compliance of the enabling provisions in Clause 43 of SBD. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.32 Maintenance of rural roads is the responsibility of the concerned state 
government. However, Ministry is seized with the issue relating to complaints of poor 
maintenance of roads under Defect Liability Period (DLP). NRIDA deploys teams of 
NQMs to carry out inspection of such roads when specific complaints are received 

 
 
41 
 
from Hon’ble MPs and also from other agencies. Based on the inquiry report, States 
are asked to take necessary action against concerned contractor. Also, after 
implementation of eMarg, which is primarily performance based maintenance 
contract, it has become possible for NRIDA to monitor all such roads visually. If any 
roads fails to get desired grading, maintenance payments are not released. Further, 
DLP period of such roads also stand extended for the period for which the road has 
failed to get desired grading. Hence, Ministry has always been trying to find out ways 
and means to strengthen the oversight mechanism for ensuring better roads 
maintenance.  
 
             (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
2.33 The Committee note that there is a well structured monitoring mechanism 
under PMGSY. The paraphernalia include Online Management Monitoring and 
Accounting System (OMMAS), Project Management Information System (PMIS), 
Citizen Information Board, Common Review Mission (CRM), National Level Monitors 
(NLM), Regional Review Meetings (RRM) among others. Meri Sadak App has also 
been launched through which any person can register the complaint relating to slow 
pace of work, abandoned work, poor quality, ensuring on-ground 
monitoring of road construction on a real time basis. The Committee take due note of 
all the existing systems of monitoring of PMGSY projects but are still not satisfied 
with the effectiveness of such monitoring mechanisms. The tools are always present, 
how efficiently these can give results depends on the actual wherewithal and 
acumen of the user i.e. the nodal agency, DoRD. Through the on-ground 
experiences of the Members and the insight gained by the Committee during their 
study visits, startling revelations of by-passing the monitoring mechanism by the 
erring stakeholders involved in PMGSY projects can be found out. Poor condition of 
PMGSY roads both in terms of construction quality and maintenance aspect can be 
noticed even after all such monitoring mechanisms in place. It is evident that 
monitoring needs to be tighter. Therefore, the Committee recommend that DoRD 
should entail newer and innovative measures like uploading of real time videos of 
roads at the duration of every six months, increase in surprise inspections during the 
Defect Liability Period specifically along with concerned Members of Parliament 
among others need to be explored on priority basis. 
 
 

 
 
42 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.34 In order to effectively monitor the entire Programme and bring about greater 
efficiency, accountability and transparency in implementation, a modern web based 
On-line Management, Monitoring and Accounting System (OMMAS) has been set up 
for PMGSY. Implementation of all sanctioned works is being monitored through 
OMMAS on real time basis to ensure that the physical and financial progress is in 
sync with the overall targets given to states. Progress of all roads uploaded on 
OMMAS is monitored on real time basis with the provision of Geotech Photographs. 
Further Project Management Information System (PMIS) has been developed for 
better management of construction activities of each road sanctioned under PMGSY-
III. To enhance transparency during road construction it has been made mandatory 
to install Global Positioning System (GPS) enabled Vehicle Tracking System (VTS) 
on all vehicles/ machinery/ equipment deployed by the contractor/ PIUs for execution 
of PMGSY works. This helps in assessing the proper operation of these machinery/ 
equipment for a specified period which is very essential for achieving the specified 
quality of the roads being constructed. Further, as a measure of further enhancing 
the focus on maintenance of roads during the defect liability period and also 
streamlining the delivery of routine maintenance of PMGSY roads, Electric 
Maintenance of Rural Roads (eMARG) has been introduced, which is conceptualized 
on Performance Based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC). Payment to the contractor 
is now made through eMARG which is based on the minimum condition of road, its 
cross drainage works and traffic assets. Payments are based on how well the 
contractor manages to comply with the performance standards or service levels 
defined in the contract, and not on piece work. 
  
PMGSY roads are constructed by the State Governments with a design life of at 
least 10 years. As per PMGSY guidelines, maintenance of roads constructed under 
the programme is the responsibility of the State Governments. All PMGSY road 
works are covered by initial five year maintenance contracts to be entered into along 
with the construction contract, with the same contractor, as per the Standard Bidding 
Document. Maintenance funds to service the contract are required to be budgeted by 
the State Governments and placed at the disposal of the State Rural Roads 
Development Agencies (SRRDAs) in a separate maintenance account. On expiry of 
this 5 year post construction maintenance, PMGSY roads are required to be placed 
under Zonal maintenance contracts consisting of 5 year maintenance including 
renewal as per cycle, from time to time. 
 
             (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
2.35 The Committee believe that monitoring mechanism, howsoever robust, is 
bound to fail if it is not followed in ‘letter and spirit’ while ensuring that the monitoring 
is of continuous nature. Keeping tab on the functioning of all monitoring mechanism 
through regular follow-up with the State Government’s nodal agencies is perhaps the 
key to an effective monitoring. The DoRD should entail all possible measures to 
maintain a sustained mode of the monitoring of the progress of the scheme without 

 
 
43 
 
any retarding factor. Along with the above, it is also of paramount importance that 
there is seamless flow of funds from the Centre to the State so that the projects do 
not get delayed on account of non-timely release of funds by the Centre to the 
States. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the DoRD should consistently 
and continually monitor the progress of the scheme through regular follow-up with 
the State Governments and also ensure that the Central share of funds are timely 
released to the State Governments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.36 To make the programme transparent and also to ensure ease of access for 
monitoring the programme in terms of planning/implementation, a web based 
programme Monitoring Information System named Online Monitoring, Management 
and Accounting System (OMMAS) has been developed. The implementation of all 
sanctioned works is monitored through OMMAS on real time basis. Data on OMMAS 
is also available in public domain. 
Ministry has been monitoring this issue at various level including at Minister and 
Chief Secretary level besides regular interaction with other officials. Due to all such 
efforts there is mark improvement in the timely release of state share. Delay in 
release mainly occurs due to non- fulfilment of certain pre-conditions either imposed 
by Ministry of Finance or as mentioned in the programme guidelines. However, if 
such eventualities arise, matter is escalated to higher levels and resolved.  
 
             (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22) 
2.37 The Committee are of the firm view that for a flagship scheme such as 
PMGSY having a pan-India coverage, adequate manpower is a must for the 
smoother implementation and redressal of grievances. In this context, the Committee 
have been briefed about the shortage of the requisite number of engineers in each 
district. This shortage is having a telling effect on the supervision of ongoing works of 
PMGSY as limited number of staff cannot cater to the workload of examining sites at 
far flung locales simultaneously. Moreover, the rising trend of appointing Civil 
Engineers on contract basis is also not serving any good as the contractual 
employee is only for a short period of time and cannot be held accountable at later 
stages. Also, there is always a lack of authority that can be exercised by a 
contractual employee in comparison to the regular/permanent post holder. The 
Committee acknowledge that the appointment of engineers lies in the domain of 
States, but having said that, it is also a fact that their non-presence is having a 

 
 
44 
 
detrimental effect on the Centre’s scheme. Thus, the Committee recommend to 
DoRD to ensure that the matter of shortage of staff is duly taken up with the 
concerned State Governments and they are brought on-board in understanding the 
gravity of the situation arising due to non-availability of adequate manpower so that 
the projects of PMGSY get ample technical supervision.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.38 The issue of shortage of manpower is regularly reviewed at various levels 
including the monthly review meeting with the states. States are sensitized about the 
need to provide adequate manpower for better supervision as well as 
implementation of the schemes. States have been taking action in this regard. As per 
the data collected by the Ministry, only few States have reported shortage of staff 
and Hon’ble Minister during his interactions with his counterparts in the State 
Governments has raised the issues and asked them to provide adequate manpower. 
 
             (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23) 
2.39 The Committee note that the inspection of construction of roads under 
PMGSY is the most vital component of monitoring under the scheme. Infrastructure 
projects such as these, upon which rests the rural development of the country, 
require utmost attention to oversee the meeting of requisite engineering 
requirements. In this context, the Committee have been regularly informed of the 
existing in-built provisions within the scheme regarding the mandatory involvement of 
area specific concerned Members of Parliament during the routine inspection twice a 
year along with redressal of grievances/matters raised by the Members during 
DISHA Committee meetings. Despite the presence of clear cut theoretical provisions 
in the scheme, the Committee are concerned to note the non-compliance of these 
provisions in ‘letter and spirit’. More often than not, the prior information to the 
Members regarding inspection of sites which are carried out by the State 
Government officials and the National Quality Monitors are not received by the 
concerned Members and the information about inspection team’s departure or their 
non-arrival reaches the Members. It has been time and again repeated by the 
Committee that the privileges of the Members of Parliament should not at all be 
taken casually. It is imperative for the nodal agency of the scheme, Department of 
Rural Development, to ensure that the mandatory provision mentioned under the 

 
 
45 
 
scheme regarding the involvement of Members of Parliament in carrying out 
inspection of construction sites are complied without any laxity. Moreover, the 
information to the concerned Members of Parliament about the arrival of inspection 
teams from Centre or State should be disseminated to them through all possible 
modes of communication at least one week in advance so that they can make 
themselves available for the inspection of construction sites. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the Department of Rural Development should look into this 
important issue with utmost earnest and ensure the strictest compliance of the 
provisions of PMGSY for the active involvement of Members of Parliament during the 
inspection of PMGSY sites. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.40 PMGSY programme guidelines provides for joint inspection of projects with 
public representatives. In addition to the joints inspections by assistant engineer and 
executive engineer with Sarpanch and MLA/ Chairperson of the Intermediate 
Panchayat respectively, the Superintending Engineer concerned of the zone/region 
has to request the MP and Zilla Pramukh representing that zone/region once in six 
months to select any PMGSY project(s) for joint inspection.  
 
In this regard, a circular has been issued by Ministry vide which it has been intimated 
to all states that deputation of NQMs would be communicated to the Hon’ble MPs by 
the SQCs well before their visits.  
 
Further, the Ministry has also circulated an advisory regarding joint inspection of 
PMGSY works by elected representative and officials of SRRDA/PIUs. Regarding 
the complaints received from the Hon’ble Member of Parliament, another advisory 
has been issued by the Ministry which stipulates that the concerned National Quality 
Monitor (NQM) will intimate the visit details to the Hon’ble Members of Parliament 
with a request for either joining the inspection or sending his/her representative. This 
provision is being scrupulously followed by all NQMs. 
 
 
            (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24) 
2.41 The Committee are concerned to note that adequate attention is not given to 
the provision under the scheme that the suggestions given by the Members of 
Parliament are to be given due consideration while sanctioning roads for 
construction under the scheme. In this regard, Members of Parliament have 
expressed their concern that even though there is explicit role assigned to them 

 
 
46 
 
under the scheme relating to the finalization of road projects, this rule is not given 
due sanctity by the implementing agencies. The Committee duly understand the 
nitty-gritties involved at the ground level before any specific road is sanctioned by the 
involved agencies. However, the Committee would like to revisit the rationale behind 
the implementation of a Welfare Scheme like PMGSY which is primarily aimed at 
meeting the local population needs. Members of Parliament are one point source for 
highlighting and airing of the local demands of any constituency. Thus, if they, on 
merit, gauging the requirement felt by the locals, place their suggestions for inclusion 
of such roads/sites under PMGSY, then the Department of Rural Development must 
look into the request with alacrity and should explore the feasibility of inclusion of 
such suggestions which could assuage the concerns of local rural populace, even at 
a later stage. Therefore, the Committee recommend that Department of Rural 
Development should take into account the preference of roads suggested by the 
Members and utilize their manoeuvring skills under the scheme for effective inclusion 
of such suggestions on priority basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.42 Priority is given to the recommendations made by Hon’ble MPs subject to 
condition that, they should meet the guidelines and objectives of PMGSY-III. In this 
respect an advisory has been issued by the Ministry vide letter dated 2nd June, 2020 
where detailed role of Hon’ble MPs and other elected members in planning and 
implementation of road work under PMGSY has been laid out.  
  
The same has been reiterated again vide Ministry’s letter dated 23rd June, 2023, to 
all the States on Role of Hon’ble MPs in Planning and selection of road works under 
PMGSY-III. The Ministry has been making all efforts to accommodate the views of 
the Member of Parliament in planning and selection of roads to be taken up under 
the scheme. 
             
          (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26) 
2.43 The Committee have been frequently informed about the violation of norms of 
PMGSY pertaining to the protocol to be adhered to in cases of stone laying of any 
project under PMGSY and later at the time of inauguration of the constructed roads 
vis-à-vis involvement of the Member of Parliament of the concerned District. This is 
yet another area of concern wherein the reality of the role that should have been 
played religiously by the MPs and the facts on ground are completely different on 

 
 
47 
 
numerously reported occasions. Even though this was highlighted by the Committee 
through the previous recommendations, continuous prevalence of non-adherence to 
these norms are matter of concern to the Committee. Thus, the Committee 
recommend to Department of Rural Development to revisit norms/provisions in this 
regard to ensure that the Members of Parliament are not neglected at the time of 
stone laying ceremonies and inauguration function of the PMGSY projects. 
Authorities at State level should also be impressed upon to scrupulously adhere to 
these norms/provisions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.44 Regular advisories are issued/re-iterated to state to ensure that the guidelines 
laid down for foundation as well as inauguration of roads by Member of Parliament 
are strictly complied with. The same is reiterated in the various review meetings held 
with States from time to time. In case any specific complaint is received the same is 
taken up with the concerned State government for compliance.  
 
             (O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 28) 
2.45 The Committee note that Full Depth Reclamation (FDR) technique is another 
notable novel approach being adopted by the Department of Rural Development in 
the construction of PMGSY roads. However, the Committee came across during the 
deliberations about the flip side of its usage at the ground level wherein non-
availability of FDR machines in requisite numbers are stalling/delaying the projects. 
Reportedly, substantial lengths of roads have been sanctioned in Uttar Pradesh 
State alone for road construction using this technology. However, it is informed that 
the delays occur primarily due to non-availability of functional machines at all the 
sites, monopolization of agencies providing the machines and the time consuming 
process of soil study required for this technology. These areas of concern are 
defeating the purpose for which the technology was ushered in and need to be 
seriously taken up for redressal by the Department of Rural Development. The claim 
at the sites that the soil samples have been sent for analysis for a long period of time 
(at few places, for more than six months in a stretch) certainly warrant a serious 
push. In view of the intent and usefulness of the FDR technology, the Committee 
recommend that the Department of Rural Development should take up the issue of 
availability of sufficient number of FDR machines and the speedier completion of 

 
 
48 
 
formalities like soil testing so that the roads may be constructed using this technique 
at faster pace in reality.   
 
Reply of the Government 
2.46 The pavement problems may lie within the surface layer, but more often can 
be found in the layers beneath the surface. Base, Sub-base and subgrade layers can 
be held accountable for a majority of the problems we see in pavements. Full-depth 
reclamation of asphalt pavement is a rehabilitation method that involves recycling of 
the existing distressed bituminous layers of an existing asphalt pavement along with 
a predetermined thickness of the underlying granular (Water Bound Macadam or 
WBM, Wet Mix Macadam or WMM and Granular Sub Base or GSB) layer(s) into a 
new base layer. Hence FDR Technology can be better utilized to reclaim the existing 
distressed pavement layers into new pavement which will result in saving of natural 
resources and will give durable pavement at the same time.   
  
The recommendation of the committee has been noted and the States will be 
advised by the Ministry to maintain availability of sufficient number of FDR machines 
and the speedier completion of formalities like soil testing and job mix formulation. 
The Ministry has been hand-holding the States for technical know-how of the 
FDR process by conducting workshops and organizing exposure visits to the 
States conducting FDR.  
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 29) 
2.47 The Committee find that the habitations taken up for PMGSY projects are 
based on the population figures of Census 2001. Much time has elapsed since the 
Census 2001 and as such newer and eligible areas of habitations with growing 
population are left out of the ambit of PMGSY. As a result, the habitations which 
could have also benefitted as per 2011 Census figures are bereft of the benefit of 
this welfare scheme. This certainly seems to be a grey area and merits a pragmatic 
and practical solution. The Committee firmly believe that the objective of the 
scheme will remain unfulfilled if habitations remained left behind after the culmination 
of this scheme. Hence, it becomes necessary that the Department of Rural 
Development ponders over this issue and review their policy while approaching the 
Ministry of Finance to introduce a suitable new vertical in their domain for the 
inclusion of habitations as per 2011 Census. Thus, the Committee urge the 
Department of Rural Development to seriously consider the requirement of inclusion 
of habitations according to 2011 Census and involve all the stakeholders for chalking 
out a robust strategy in this regard. 

 
 
49 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.48 In order to provide connectivity to the eligible habitations as per 2011 census, 
an EFC note was circulated by the Ministry in the year 2020 amongst various stake 
holders including Ministry of Finance. The proposal was however not agreed to by 
the Ministry of Finance due to the prevailing economic conditions owing to COVID-19 
pandemic. The Department has been seized with this issue. As and when any 
decision is taken to launch any further vertical under PMGSY, the issue will be given 
due consideration. 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
50 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(DoRD O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
  

 
 
51 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
4.1 The Committee are constrained to note that the quality of road construction 
under PMGSY is an important issue affecting the entire country. This glaring issue, 
which casts aspersions on the marquee scheme of the Central Government, has 
wider ramification on the hopes of rural populace of the country. Building roads build 
nations as quality roads serve in manifold ways for the prosperity of a country in 
terms of economic strengthening via boost in domestic trade and commerce, 
providing employment opportunities and ultimately achieving the goals of 
development associated with better livelihoods of people. The scheme was launched 
by the Government with various welfare oriented goals in foresight and has been one 
of the flagship rural development schemes over the years. On this note, the 
Committee find the compromise in the quality of construction of roads completely 
unacceptable and consider this as a punitive act. Instances are galore wherein the 
attention of the Committee have been drawn towards the poor road materials used in 
the construction of roads at many places which are not able to sustain the rigours of 
weather and traffic volume even for one season and are washed away with the onset 
of monsoon. The Members of the Committee having ground reality experience of 
their constituencies have time and again raised the nagging issue of poor quality of 
roads at many locations. Therefore, the Committee beseech upon DoRD to entail 
stronger measures to ensure that the quality of roads constructed under PMGSY do 
not get compromised on account of utilization of poor raw materials or other 
associated reasons so that the noble objective of the scheme to provide all weather 
road to rural habitation is achieved without any compromise. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 Ensuring the quality of PMGSY works is the responsibility of the State 
Governments, who are implementing the programme. A three-tiered Quality Control 
mechanism is in place under PMGSY for ensuring construction of quality road works 
and durability of road assets under PMGSY including the works undertaken by sub-
contractors. 

 
 
52 
 
Guidelines to regulate the quality control process have been issued to States from 
time to time. In order to ensure that people engaged in quality check are adequately 
proficient and well trained, NRIDA has been conducting proficiency tests of NQMs, 
SQMs, PIU etc. It has been made mandatory for all personnel engaged as 
NQM/SQM to pass the proficiency test. Further, their skills are also developed 
through webinars, seminars or by sending them to various training institutions etc. 
To strengthen the quality check mechanism, establishment of field Lab has been 
made compulsory. These labs are also to be geo-tagged. Unless these are ensured, 
no payment is allowed to be made against such roads. Also, new version of Quality 
Monitoring System App has been developed to include e-forms and other initiatives 
which has strengthened quality monitoring systems. Consequent upon introduction 
of e-Marg, payment on account of maintenance to the contractor, during the defect 
liability period, is made commensurate with the quality of roads maintained by 
him/her through a performance based contract management system. 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
4.3 The Committee note that bidding through tenders for obtaining projects for 
construction of roads under PMGSY is an integral part of the scheme as learnt by 
the Committee while scrutinizing the modalities of the scheme. The contractors who 
are awarded construction contracts through tenders are, perhaps, the central figures 
who through their activities more often than not determine the quality of roads 
constructed under PMGSY. In this context, various reliable sources and the 
Members of the Committee have brought to fore the practice of low- tendering, in 
order to win the bid for acquiring the rights for the construction of projects, under 
PMGSY. Contractors are expected to render yeoman service to the nation for the 
welfare of people. Bad quality of works under PMGSY is set in motion from here 
onwards and the contractor compromise with the quality of work after getting 
contracts at low quotations. The roads so constructed suffer from early ‘wear and 
tear’ and becomes rough for use of the people. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend DoRD to devise even stronger mechanisms/provisions in the bidding 
processes, besides the extant ones, to further negate the effect of low bidding, so 
that quality of road construction does not get compromised in the hands of 
contractors. Moreover, rigorous monitoring mechanism should be put in place to 

 
 
53 
 
ensure the quality of road construction as per the specifications mentioned in the 
contracts. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4  In the interest of the quality of roads being built under PMGSY and for 
protection against Abnormally Low Bids (ALBs), provisions of taking the additional 
performance security from the contractor have been made in the Standard Bidding 
Documents (SBD). All States have been advised to deal with cases of ALBs as per 
SBD provisions which are enumerated as under. 
  
A. Qualification of the Bidder:  
 
 To make sure that contractors who are bidding for the works have sufficient 
backgrounds in execution of good quality works, the following Qualification criteria 
are laid down in clause 4 of the SBD :- 
  
(a) Contractor to provide the aggregate monetary value of civil construction projects 
executed in each of the preceding five years. 
(b) Furnish a record of past involvement in projects similar in nature and scale for 
each of the past five years. Additionally, include particulars of ongoing or contracted 
projects, along with endorsements from a relevant authority not lower than the rank 
of an Executive Engineer or its equivalent.  
(c) Present comprehensive information regarding the technical personnel slated for 
engagement in the project.  
(d) Confirm that the contract aligns with the qualifications specified in Clause 4.4 
B(b) (ii) of ITB for the construction.  
(e) Submit a proposed schedule for construction activities and a Quality 
Management Plan outlining the anticipated timeline for project completion in 
adherence to technical specifications and the stipulated completion period. 
 
B. Additional Bank Guarantee 
 
 As per the clause 46, sub clause 46.1 and 46.2 of the SBD, the Performance 
Security equal to 5% (five percent) of the Contract Price and additional Security for 
unbalanced bids shall be provided to the Employer. 
 
C. Blacklist/Termination of Contract 
  
 As per the clause 52, sub clause 52.1 and 52.2 the Employer can terminate 
the Contract if the Contractor commits a major breach of contract in terms of quality 
and other contractual commitments i.e. Failure to correct a specified Defect 
promptly, Non-maintenance of required Security, Delaying project completion 

 
 
54 
 
beyond allowable liquidated damages period and Not completing a specified portion 
of work on time. 
It may be noted that SBD already has strict provisions to ensure that good quality 
contractors are engaged for execution of PMGSY works; however the States/UTs 
have been further advised to ensure strict technical evaluation during the technical 
scrutiny of bids. 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
4.5 The Committee note that presently road lengths of minimum 3 km are taken 
up as eligible roads under PMGSY-III. The attention of the Committee was drawn 
towards demand from various quarters regarding the inclusion of roads of even 2 km 
as eligible roads under PMGSY-III. The requirement has been felt on account of 
relevant thorough fare locations getting missed due to the strengthening of minimum 
3 km roads uptake for making the main candidate road as minimum 5 km. At this 
juncture when PMGSY-III has been started, suitable review can be undertaken to 
meet a populist public demand through minor tweaking of provisions by the DoRD. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend DoRD to relook into the matter of selection of 
appropriate road length by reducing the minimum to 2 km and bring about review in 
their guidelines accordingly so as to provide last mile connectivity to rural 
habitations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 PMGSY-III envisages consolidation of the existing Rural Road Network by 
upgradation of existing Through Routes and Major Rural Links that connect 
habitations to Gramin Agricultural Markets (GrAMs), Higher Secondary Schools, 
Hospitals.  
  
 Links can be made up of two or more roads of variable lengths which can be 
merged into single candidate road if it makes TR/MRL and gives access to most of 
the facilities to the majority of the benefitted population. PMGSY-III guidelines 
specifically state that candidate roads shall preferably be of length not less than 5 
kms. Proposing a single road of length 2 km and below is avoided as it mostly 
benefits only a single habitation thus forming a dead end.  

 
 
55 
 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25) 
4.7 The Committee note the critical complaint raised time and again by the 
Members of Parliament about the casual approach elicited by the Department of 
Rural Development in promptly taking up and redressing the grievances regarding 
the inaction/irregularities in the works of PMGSY highlighted by them. The 
Committee feel that this approach of DoRD needs to be rectified immediately. 
Members of Parliament are constitutional figures and represent the voices/concerns 
of major chunk of population. Through them, the issues of common man are heard 
by the authorities at top echelons. Hence, it is imperative that the genuine 
concern/plight of the scheme at ground level highlighted by a Member of Parliament 
needs to be taken up on ‘war footing’ and redressal of such complaints needs to be 
done on priority basis with due information to the concerned Members. Hence, the 
Committee urge the Department of Rural Development to sort out the areas of 
grievance raised by Members and ensure their prompt disposal. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 4.8 The Ministry follows the guidelines laid down for handling of all references 
received from public representatives and strictly adheres to the prescribed timelines. 
Utmost priority is given to settle the references/grievances received from Member of 
Parliament. However, in some cases delay occurs due to non receipt of inputs from 
concerned State Government. In some cases team of National Quality Monitors 
(NQMs) need to be deputed to carry out the inspection of roads work against which 
complaint has been made. All these processes take some time and hence delay may 
occur. However, the Ministry makes all efforts to minimize the delay. 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27) 
4.9 The Committee pleasantly find the gradual increase in the usage of green 
technology for the construction of roads under PMGSY and acknowledge the 

 
 
56 
 
positive efforts being undertaken by the Department of Rural Development in this 
regard. In this era of modernization, it is in the best interest of the environment that 
by ushering in green technologies, a sustainable platform is being provided to the 
infrastructure projects by shifting from the conventional methods. Notable among 
other techniques is the usage of plastic in the road construction activities. The 
Committee are a bit concerned over the usage of plastic in terms of its 
biodegradability and the hazard it poses to the environment in general. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Rural Development should 
conduct a study on the possible environmental hazards of the usage of plastic for 
road construction and take appropriate steps thereon on the basis of outcome of that 
study. 
Reply of the Government 
4.10 Waste Plastic itself is a huge problem for environment as they are non 
degradable, keeping in view that aspect in mind it was decided to use waste plastic 
in Rural roads. These waste plastic are shredded and made as a powdery substance 
and mixed in the hot bitumen. The study on use of waste plastic in construction of 
rural road has been carried out by IIT Chennai and it was found that plastic paved 
roads have higher resistance to deformation and water induced damaged. As 
regards concern about the toxicity and environmental suitability of adding plastic, 
separate studies have not been carried out. The recommendation of the committee 
has been noted for compliance.  
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 30) 
4.11 The possibility of dovetailing of different schemes of the Government for a 
systematic approach towards development through prudent economic utilization has 
always drawn the attention of the Committee. In this backdrop, the Committee find 
that one such scheme, Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) can be effectively merged with PMGSY for better utilization of 
Government’s fund. The unskilled labour component of MGNREGA can be used for 
the earthen works required in the construction of roads under PMGSY. On the one 
hand, the unskilled labourers of MGNREGA would get their workdays while the 
PMGSY construction work would be collaterally taken up, thus saving its fund. Such 

 
 
57 
 
or similar exercises may be taken up through review of administrative modules and 
in consultation with the Departments or State bodies involved. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the Department of Rural Development to explore the 
proposal of convergence of MGNREGA with PMGSY earnestly in order to have a 
rationalized Government fund utilisation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.12 The PMGSY roads are inter-habitation/inter-village roads while under 
MGNREGA connectivity within a village is supported.  Further, there would be 
challenges in terms of availability of labour during the construction season, tendering 
process of material component, etc. which makes the convergence in construction of 
rural roads further difficult.  
 
 However, convergence of MGNREGA funds with PMGSY for raising of 
plantation alongside PMGSY roads has been started.  
 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.35 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
  

 
 
58 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(DoRD O.M. No. P-17017/6/2019-RC dated 27.10.2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
12 December, 2023 
21 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)    
Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural  
Development & Panchayati Raj 
 

 
 
59 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2023-2024) 
EXTRACT OF THE MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON TUESDAY, 12 DECEMBER 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1530 hrs to 1550 hrs in Committee Room C, 
Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi     - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri AKP Chinraj 
3. Shri Rajveer Diler 
4. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Narendra Kumar 
7. Ms S. Jothi Mani 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
10. Dr Talari Rangaiah  
11. Smt Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
12. Smt Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
13. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
15. Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa 
16. Shri Desai Babubhai Jesangbhai 
17. Shri Samirul Islam 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram  - Director 
3. Shri Vinay P. Barwa  - Deputy Secretary 
 
  

 
 
60 
 
 At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee convened to consider and adopt draft action taken report on the 
recommendations contained in the 32nd Report on Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak 
Yojana (PMGSY) pertaining to the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of 
Rural Development). 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the draft action taken report without 
any amendment and authorized the Chairperson to present the report to the House.  
 
3.  XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
_____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report 
 
  

 
 
61 
 
ANNEXURE II 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SECOND REPORT (17TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:              30
        
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,  
                        22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 29  
          Total:24
                Percentage: - 80%
    
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL          
          Total: NIL 
                Percentage:- 0% 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 7, 9, 13, 25, 27, 30       
Total: 06 
        Percentage: - 20% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
Total: NIL 
           Percentage:- 0%      
 
 
 