 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2021-2022) 
      
 
        SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
   
 
 
[Action taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Twenty Fourth Report on  
 'Demands for Grants’ (2022-23) pertaining to Ministry of Panchayati Raj.] 
 
 TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
28 


 
 
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2021-2022) 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Twenty Fourth Report on  
 'Demands for Grants’ (2022-23) pertaining to Ministry of Panchayati Raj.] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2022 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2022 / Shravana, 1944 (Saka) 


 
 
CRD No 182 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____ Edition) 
and Printed by __________________. 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-2022)   ......................................        (ii)   
 
INTRODUCTION      …....................................        (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report   ..........................................................................       1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ...........................................................................      25     
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies………….............................................................................       43 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee ............................................................................       44 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ......................................       55   
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 9 December, 
2016………………......      19 
 
 I. Minutes of the 12th Sitting of the Committee held on 23.06.2022…………………………            56 
 
II. Extract of Minutes of the Sitting 14th of the Committee held on 28.07.2022*……………...           60                                             
 
 III.     Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the       
Twenty Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development 
 and Panchayati Raj.        ……..           62 
 
 
________ 
* Not Attached 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2021-2022) 
          Shri Prataprao Jadhav  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri C. N. Annadurai 
4. Shri A.K.P Chinraj 
5. Shri Rajveer Diler 
6. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
7. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
10. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
11. Shri Narendra Kumar 
12. Shri Janardan Mishra 
13. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
14. Shri Talari Rangaiah 
15. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
16. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
17. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
18. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
19. Shri Kumbakudi Sudhakaran 
20. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
21. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiya 
23. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
24. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
25. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
26. Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa 
27. Shri Ram Shakal 
28. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
29. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh 
30. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
31. –vacant- 
Secretariat 
 
 
1.   Shri D. R. Shekhar  -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar  -  Additional Director 
3.  Shri Nishant Mehra              -  Deputy Secretary 
4.         Shri Arjun Choudhary             -          Committee Officer 
     
(ii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj  
(2021-2022) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the 
28th Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
2.  The Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 16th March 2022 and was laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on the same date. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 09.06.2022. Since, the replies of the Ministry to the recommendation nos. 8 to 11 
of the Committee were found vague and evasive, the Committee had asked the Ministry to revise its replies 
related to recommendation nos. 8 to 11 and received revised replies on 17.06.2022. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 28.07.2022. 
  
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-III. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     PRATAPRAO JADHAV 
   28 July, 2022                                                                                   Chairperson, 
             06 Shravana, 1944 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2021-22) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty Fourth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants’ (2022-23) pertaining to Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj'. 
 
2. The Twenty Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 16th March 2022 
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 
18 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government. These have 
been examined and categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 
 Total:   12 
Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the Government: NIL 
    Total:  NIL 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: Serial Nos. 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 
Total:     6 
  Chapter-IV 
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited: NIL 
Total:  NIL 
Chapter-V 

2 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation of 
the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for 
any reasons to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter shall be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire 
that Final Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
Chapter I of this Report may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
I.  Discrepancy between approved plans and released funds under Rashtriya Gram 
Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
6.         With regard to discrepancy between approved plans and released funds under RGSA, 
the Committee had recommended as under:- 
         “Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) is flagship scheme of Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj, aimed at strengthening PRIs for achieving Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) with main thrust on convergence with Mission 
Antyodaya and emphasis on strengthening PRIs in the 117 Aspirational Districts. 
The Committee note that the scheme has both State and Central components. 
Sharing pattern is in the ratio of 60:40 except NE and Hilly States and UT of J&K 
where Central and State Ratio is in the proportion of 90:10. For other UTs, it is 
100% centrally funded. The Central component is 100% funded by Centre. 
However, analysis of release of funds to the States/UTs reflects a grim picture of 
apathy towards its objectives. There has been a huge gap in the approved plans 
vis-a-vis released funds under this scheme. Data provided by the Ministry shows 
that 432.90 crore fund has been released against 3213.13 crore approved in the 
year 2019-20, further 499.93 crore has been released against 3337.87 crore 
approved in 2020- 21 and 518.06 crore has been released against 4480.22 crore 
in 2021-22. The Committee is concerned to note that non-release/untimely 
release of the sanctioned funds to the States/UTs after approval of their annual 
action plans (AAPs) by the Central Empowered Committee defeats the very 
purpose of the RGSA to make Panchayati Raj Institutions efficient, effective and 
transparent grass roots institutions. The Committee is given to understand that 
the Ministry has observed laxity and reluctance on the part of States in fulfilling 
conditions (in which non-release of corresponding share by the States is one of 
them) attached to release of funds result in delayed or non-release of funds to 
States/UTs. The Committee, however, note that the Ministry has not even 
released amount in previous years of 2019-20, 2020-21 & 2021-22 to the UTs 

3 
 
such as Andaman & Nicobar Islands where 100 per cent share is from Central 
Government. Under the current set-up, the Committee observe that fund for 
RGSA has been grossly underutilized. Considering the importance of the 
scheme the Committee recommend that to achieve the objectives of RGSA, 
Ministry should take proactive measure in streamlining the paperwork by 
reducing the number of requirement of documents and simplify the procedure of 
releasing funds to the States/UTs. The Committee are of the firm view that in 
order to achieve the basic objectives of the RGSA, the Ministry should take a 
lenient approach and proactive measures to release adequate funds. The 
Committee is given to understand that the scheme of RGSA is demand driven in 
nature and its release of funds remained depend on timely submission of Annual 
Action Plans, liquidation of unspent balance, submission of requisite documents, 
State share release etc by the States/UTs. The committee are of the view that in 
further extension of RGSA several reforms are needed. One of these reforms 
may be active Involvement of local Members of Parliament. Needless to mention 
here that Members of Parliament are representatives of people, well versed with 
local needs of their areas. They are critical in providing crucial inputs regarding 
local needs for policy formulation. Their active involvement in 
programmes/schemes of Ministry of Panchayati Raj will make these 
programmes effective and catering to the local needs. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.” 
 
7.   The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
           “It is submitted that the quantum of release of funds under the scheme 
of RGSA during 2021-22 depended on the unspent balance available with the 
State, utilization certificate and physical-financial progress reports furnished 
etc. and also on compliance of Department of Expenditure instruction dated 
23rd March, 2021 regulating the release of funds under the Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes and further instruction thereupon. During the large period 
of the year States/UTs were under the process to comply the said DoE 
instructions. The States/UTs which had unspent balances could not get full 
funds, thus resulting in the huge gap between sanctioned and released 
amounts. The funds to the UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands could not be 
released due unspent balance of previous year exceeding the releasable 
amount. The Ministry appreciates the view expressed by the esteemed 
Committee about the involvement of Members of Parliament etc. in the 
programmes/schemes of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in making them 
effective. It is worthwhile to note that the National Steering Committee 
constituted for providing overall guidance and policy directions for the scheme 
of RGSA/Revamped RGSA includes Ministers of different Central Ministries as 
well as Minister of State Panchayati Raj Departments, eminent person working 
in the field of Panchayati Raj, Elected Representatives of Panchayats etc. 
Further, the State Advisory Committee to be constituted in the States for 
periodical review of implementation of the scheme in the respective states will 
inter alia include Ministers of line Departments in the States eminent person 
working in the field of Panchayati Raj, Elected Representatives of Panchayats 

4 
 
etc. It may be observed there from, that there is ample provision for taking into 
account the feedback of Public Representatives in Implementation of the 
scheme.” 
 
8.  The Ministry of Panchayati  Raj in their reply  have simply outlined the  reason for 
the huge gap between sanctioned and released amounts  for  Rashtriya Gram Swaraj 
Abhiyan (RGSA) scheme due to unspent balance without delineating the possible 
means to address the issue. The Committee feel that the reasons should have been 
analyzed to take suitable corrective measures accordingly. Moreover, the Committee 
are surprised that reply of the Ministry is completely silent on the issue with regard to 
streamlining of paperwork and the simplification of the procedure for release of 
adequate funds to the States/UTs which the Committee had raised in their Report. The 
Committee are of the view that as there has been grossly underutilization of funds, it 
becomes more imperative that the Ministry need to introspect  their role as a facilitator 
and enabler to address the issue but unfortunately this has not been done. While 
observing that RGSA  being the  flagship scheme of  the Ministry with vital components 
such as construction of Panchayat Bhawans, Computerization, deployment of technical 
human resource, etc. the Committee recommend that the Ministry ought to exhibit 
better approach and seriousness in the matter as the impactful implementation of this 
scheme means strengthening  democracy at the grass- root level.  
II. Construction of Gram Panchayat Bhawans under RGSA 
(Recommendation Serial No.5) 
9.        Regarding the construction of Gram Panchayat Bhawans under RGSA, the Committee 
had recommended as under:- 
           “Restructured RGSA scheme is aimed at capacity building of Panchayati 
Raj Institutions. Under RGSA, Ministry of Panchayati Raj supplements the efforts 
of the States, through its scheme of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) on 

5 
 
limited scale. The Committee note that Ministry in its reply has informed that 
around 50917 GPs/Traditional Bodies are without GP Bhawan out of 271179 
GPs/Traditional Bodies. The Committee are of the view that Gram Panchayat 
Bhawans are basic infrastructural prerequisite for any Gram Panchayats to 
function as an effective tools of participatory democracy. However, the 
Committee are distressed to note that the still significant number of Gram 
Panchayat have to function without any basic infrastructure like Panchayat 
Bhawans. The Committee, has time and again emphasized the need to construct 
Panchayat Bhawans and therefore, recommend that top priority should be given 
to the Construction of Panchayat Bhawans in those Gram Panchayats which are 
working without Bhawans. Considering the importance of the project, the 
Committee strongly recommend that adequate funding with an advance 
roadmap should be made with yearly targets fixed and constant monitoring to 
have a Gram Panchayat Bhawan at each village left-out. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
10.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  
 
      “The Ministry in all earnestness is seized of the concern expressed by the 
esteemed Committee to provide each Gram Panchayat / Rural Local Body a 
building of its own. The Ministry has also been making all out efforts to provide 
financial assistance to the maximum possible limit to States / UTs for this 
purpose. Under the scheme of RGSA, constructions of approximately 9,273 GP 
Bhawans were approved. It is also worthwhile to mention that construction of 
Gram Panchayat Bhawan was also taken up as a component of Garib Kalyan 
Rozgar Abhiyan (GKRA) launched by the Government for employment 
generation and creation of durable infrastructure in rural areas in the States of 
Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. As 
per reports available, a total of 1,347 GP Bhawans have been constructed during 
GKRA period. Further, as per information received from the State of Uttar 
Pradesh, against the requirement of 58189 Gram Panchayats in the State prior 
to June 2020, a total of 33577 Gram Panchayat Bhawans existed. After June 
2020, including the GKRA period, the State Government has constructed 21900 
Panchayat Bhawans. As such, as on date, 55477 Panchayat Bhawans now exist 
in the State and efforts are being made by the State Government for construction 
of remaining 2712 Panchayat Bhawans. Similarly, all the States have been 
asked to bridge the entire deficits of Panchayat Bhawans. 
In addition, the Untied Grants of the Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV 
FC) can be utilized for all felt needs under the 29 subjects enshrined in the 
Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution and thus it would also cover construction 
and repair of GP Bhawans in the rural areas, as one of the permissible activities 
under XV FC mandated activities by Rural Local Bodies (RLBs). XV FC Tied 
Grants can also be utilised for water and sanitation related works for Panchayat 
Bhawans.  
  With a view to expedite saturation in this direction, a Joint Advisory was 
issued to States / UTs by Secretary of this Ministry and that of Ministry of Rural 

6 
 
Development on 10.06.2020 requesting for construction of GP Bhawans utilizing 
various resources under convergence mode viz. Unspent 14th Finance 
Commission, 15th Finance Commission untied grants, MGNREGS funds and 
other funds from State Finance Commission (SFC) / Own Source Revenue 
(OSR) etc. In furtherance, vide D.O. letter dated 07.01.2021 of this Ministry, all 
States/UTs have also been requested to undertake / concerted efforts to bridge 
the infrastructure deficit regarding GP Bhawans by utilizing various resources at 
their level. States/UTs have also been advised to examine the possibility of 
creating a cluster of contiguous GPs for construction of GP Bhawans where the 
size of GPs is small. It has also been advised to States that while creating new 
GPs, the States should simultaneously make provision for creation of GP 
Bhawan also through available resources under central schemes or from the 
State Budget or OSR of the Panchayats. Further, under the Revamped scheme 
of RGSA provision has also been made for providing financial assistance to 
States/ UTs for construction of new GP building with/ and community hall with 
focus on North Eastern States.  
With the above mentioned approaches, it is expected that the deficit in GP 
Bhawans is likely to be abridged to a great extent.” 
  
11. The Committee has time and again emphasized the need to provide each Gram 
Panchayat a building of its own and have strongly recommended that all out effort  
have to made to bridge the infrastructural deficits by expediting construction of 
Panchayat Bhawans in the Gram Panchayats that  are still to have  Panchayat Bhawans. 
While appreciating the various measures taken by the Ministry to overcome the deficit, 
yet the Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that there are still significant 
number of Panchayat Bhawans which are yet to see light of the day. The Committee, 
feel that Ministry cannot feel to be contented till last Panchayat Bhawan is constructed 
and be made operational in all respect and therefore, recommend that concerted effort 
be made  to review the deficits in all States and take suitable corrective measures to 
ensure its timely completion and to make Panchayats self reliant.  
      The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that a Joint Advisory has been 
issued to States/UTs by Secretary of Ministry of Panchayati Raj and that of Ministry of 
Rural Development on 10 June 2020 requesting for construction of GP Bhawans 

7 
 
utilizing various resources under convergence mode viz. Unspent 14th Finance 
Commission, 15th Finance Commission untied grants, MGNREGS funds and other funds 
from State Finance Commission (SFC)/Own Source Revenue (OSR) etc. In furtherance, 
in January 2021 all States/UTs have also been requested to undertake concerted efforts 
to bridge the infrastructure deficit regarding Gram Panchayat Bhawans by utilizing 
various resources at their level.  Besides, States/UTs have also been advised to 
examine the possibility of creating a cluster of contiguous GPs for construction of  
Gram Panchayat   Bhawans where the size of Gram Panchayats  are small. The 
Committee would like to be informed of the outcome of these initiatives. 
 
III. Allocation of funds and number of awards under ‘Incentivization of Panchayats’ 
 
(Recommendation Serial No.6) 
 
12.      With regard to allocation of funds and number of awards under ‘Incentivization of 
Panchayats’, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
         “The Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has been incentivizing best 
performing Panchayats/States/UTs since the year 2011 on the basis of 
developed evaluation criteria/parameters under the Incentivization of Panchayats 
Scheme. It provides awards in different categories to the Panchayats for their 
initiatives and achievements on set criteria. These initiatives undertaken by the 
Gram Panchayats and their achievements should be well publicised so that other 
Gram Panchayats are also motivated to launch similar initiatives. It will also 
enhance healthy competition among the Gram Panchayats. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Information dissemination of best practices and 
initiatives of Gram Panchayats should be given wide publicity so that other Gram 
Panchayats can follow. The Committee are constrained to note that the funds for 
Incentivisation of Panchayats given in recognition to their good work done for 
improving of delivery of services and public goods has been stagnant and the 
level of number of awards given has hardly increased during the last three years 
i.e. 2020-21 onwards from Rs. 47.00 crore to Rs.50.00 crore even when the 
expenditure has been almost full. The Committee, therefore, feel that amount on 
this scheme be suitably revised with commensurate increase in number of 
Awards to be given to Panchayats. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard.” 
 
13. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  

8 
 
 
            “For creating greater awareness and motivation among Panchayats 
across the country for National Panchayat Awards, vigorous efforts are made in 
collaboration with States/ Union Territories (UTs), inter-alia, for publicity through 
print, electronic media and other platforms. Further, the awardees under National 
Panchayat Awards are conferred awards on the occasion of National Panchayati 
Raj Day (NPRD) celebrated on 24th April annually. NPRD function is a widely 
publicized National Level event which is well attended (virtually or physically) by 
Union and States Ministers, high level dignitaries and the representatives from 
various Panchayats across the country apart from the ones selected for the 
awards. This celebration highlights and propogates the achievements/best 
practices of Panchayats and also role of Panchayats in overall governance and 
development.  
  Incentivization of Panchayats scheme has been approved as a central 
component of the revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan(RGSA) scheme 
with a budgetary provision of Rs.50.00 crores for the financial year 2022-23. 
Interventions are being made to further improve and rationalize the National 
Panchayat Awards with establishing a multi-level pyramidical structure of 
competition at National, State/UT, District and Block level and aligning the 
Awards/themes to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In addition to the 
budgetary provision by the Ministry for incentivization of Panchayats, initiatives 
are being taken to collaborate with line Ministries/Departments for sponsoring 
these awards keeping in view that the Panchayats play a pivotal role in 
implementing flagship schemes/programmes for attainment of SDGs.” 
  
14.    Taking into account that  conferring National Panchayat Awards as  laudable 
initiative to recognize good work and best practices the Committee in their Report had 
recommended for increasing the number of awards  and  also for  revision in the 
budgetary allocation. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that 
interventions are being made to further improve and rationalize the National Panchayat 
Awards by establishing a multi-level pyramidical structure of competition at National, 
State/UT, District and Block level and aligning the Awards/themes to Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs). In addition to getting sponsorship of these awards, 
concrete efforts also be made by the Ministry for generating additional source of funds 
to motivate the best work and practices of the Panchayats. Further, initiatives are being 

9 
 
taken to collaborate with line Ministries/Departments for sponsoring these awards 
keeping in view that the Panchayats play a pivotal role in implementing flagship 
schemes/programmes for attainment of SDGs. The Committee while appreciating these 
steps would like to be informed regarding fructification of the same. 
IV. Constitution of a High Level Task Force to examine Digitization of Gram 
Panchayats 
(Recommendation Serial No.8) 
 
15.         Regarding constitution of a High Level Task Force to examine Digitization of Gram 
Panchayats, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
             “The Committee’s examination has revealed that in August, 2015 under 
Pillar 3 of Digital India Programme, Government of India launched ‘Common 
Service Centre (CSCs) 2 Project’ to expand the outreach of CSCs to all Gram 
Panchayats (GPs) across the country that aimed to set up at least one CSCs in 
every GP thereby envisaging to set up 2.55 lakh CSCs covering all GPs of the 
country over a period of four years with Department of Telecommunications 
(DoT) to connect Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) by broadband internet connections. 
The Ministry aims to leverage Common Service Centres (CSCs) in realizing the 
objective of Smart Governance and provision of online services. It has signed a 
MoU with CSC to achieve this objective on 21st August, 2019. The MoU inter 
alia provides that CSCs would be co-located in the Gram Panchayat Bhawans 
and would be offering the various G2G, B2B and B2C services to rural public. 
However, the Committee constraint to note glairing irregularities in the 
functioning of CSCs during its study visit to the State of Maharashtra (Amaravati, 
Chandrapur and Nagpur) in the month of August 2021. The Committee inter alia 
observed that most of the CSCs were not collocated in the Gram Panchayats, 
internet infrastructure deployed in the Panchayat Bhawan was not functional, 
there was no board affixed outside to provide information to the people at large 
about the services provided by CSCs and at which rates, 10 to 15 documents 
were being issued on monthly basis, delay in payment of salary to the operator, 
etc. Further, on rough calculation, it was found that a print out at CSC centre is 
costing Rs. 3,682/-. The Committee were astonished to note that MoPRwas 
totally unaware of the above ground realities. ‘Panchayats’ being the State 
subject, it never made a genuine effort to ascertain the actual position at the 
State level by conducting a formal independent enquiry and it has heavily relied 
on the reports and facts furnished by CSCs. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that a high level taskforce may be set-up with a mandate to conduct 
in-depth examination of functioning of CSCs co-located in the Gram Panchayat 
Bhawans for which payment is being made though government exchequer. It 
may be ascertain as to how far it has been able to achieve the objectives 
enshrined in the MoU. The Committee would also like the task force to 

10 
 
understand the different models being followed in different state and come out 
with a possible cost effective alternative option of creating digital Panchayats. 
The Committee trust and expect that the taskforce would conduct a thorough 
and independent study of services being provided by the CSCs and submit its 
report within a period of three months from the date of presentation of the 
Report. The Committee would like to apprised of the effective steps taken by the 
Ministry in this regard.” 
16.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  
          “A Task Force to review the working of CSCs collocated in GPs (ASSKs) 
in the State of Maharashtra constituted under the chairmanship of Joint 
Secretary (Governance), MoPR by MeitY. 
The 1st meeting of the Task Force was held on 17th May, 2022 to 
examine the effectiveness of the services delivered by CSCs co-located in GP 
Bhawans. In the light of the findings, the continuation of the MoU between MoPR 
and CSC-SPV, which is an advice to the State to effect bilateral MoU with CSC-
SPV, shall be critically examined. Its role in improving delivery of the services at 
the grassroots level shall form the basis.” 
  
17.  On being asked to revise their reply, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their revised 
action taken reply have submitted as under:- 
            “A Task Force to review the working of CSCs collocated in GPs (ASSKs) 
in the State of Maharashtra constituted under the chairmanship of Joint 
Secretary (Governance), MoPR by MeitY. 
The 1st meeting of the Task Force was held on 17th May, 2022 to 
examine the effectiveness of the services delivered by CSCs co-located in GP 
Bhawans.Second Meeting is due on 21st June, 2022. 
In the light of the findings of the Task Force, the continuation of the MoU 
between MoPR and CSC-SPV, which is an advice to the State to effect bilateral 
MoU with CSC-SPV, shall be critically examined. Its role in improving delivery of 
the services at the grassroots level shall form the basis. 
The Task Force shall also examine the models being followed in other 
States and then recommend action to ensure that the best support services are 
provided to the GPs in the most effective manner.” 
 
18.  Taking note of glairing irregularities in the functioning of Common Service 
Centres (CSCs) during its study visit to the State of Maharashtra (Amravati, 
Chandrapur, Nagpur, etc.) in the month of August 2021, the Committee strongly 
recommended to set-up a high level Task Force for in-depth examination of functioning 
of CSCs co-located in the Gram Panchayat Bhawans. The Committee expected that 
Ministry would submit its report within a period of three months from the date of 

11 
 
presentation of the Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23). However, the expected 
action was not complimented by the Ministry. Further, it is quite exasperating to note 
that the Ministry submitted inconsiderate, vague and evasive replies to the well thought 
and pinpointed recommendations of Committee. It seems that the well deserved rapt 
attention on the part of the Ministry was lacking and the Ministry has time and again 
shown a very indifferent and callous attitude on taking corrective measure especially 
with respect to the Digitization of Gram Panchayats. 
The initial reply submitted by the Ministry states that a Task Force has been 
constituted by the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology to review the 
working of CSCs collocated in GPs under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary 
(Governance), Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The Committee are dismayed to note that the 
first meeting of the  Task Force was held only on 21st June 2022 i.e. after the 2 months 
of presentation of the Report in the Parliament. Moreover, the Task Force has been 
sluggish in its approach, it has only held two meetings and have not  even concluded 
its findings. Subsequently, during the sitting of the Committee, the Secretary had put 
forth his request to grant extra time of three months for the Task force to review and 
submit its report. The Committee are of strong view that the Task Force, at this glacial 
pace, will find it hard to wind up even within next 3 months as well. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to take concrete steps and find ways and 
means to finish up the task in hand expeditiously. The Committee are astonished to 
note that report of Joint Secretary (MoPR), which formed the background for the 
Ministry to enter into MoU with CSC, was compiled in just one day after visiting two 
Gram Panchayats of Pune districts on 20.07.2019. It is the legitimate expectation of the 

12 
 
Committee from the Ministry that instead of repeating such sketchy study and 
stereotype reply, they will ensure that Task Force would thoroughly probe each and 
every issue in detail and come out with an objective report so that Panchayat can serve 
the rural people in realistic manner. The Committee would like to reserve its comment 
till submission to Report by the Task Force.  
V. Withdrawal of advisory issued to the States under Digitization of Gram 
Panchayats 
(Recommendation Serial No.9) 
19.        Regarding the withdrawal of advisory to the States issued by the Ministry under 
Digitization of Gram Panchayats, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
            “The Committee note that a letter dated 03rd September 2019 had been 
issued by the Secretary, MoPR to Principal Secretary/Secretary, Panchayati Raj 
of all the States, wherein, while citing the MoU signed between MoPR and CSC 
e-Governance Services India Limited dated 21st August 2019 and advised to all 
the States to enter into MoU with CSCSPV for using their services towards 
Smart Governance and digital India, etc. Further, for this purpose, States may 
utilize funds provided to the States under various schemes viz. RGSA for 
computerization, deployment of Technical human resource, Fifteenth Finance 
Commission (FFC) component of Operation and Maintenance (10%) grants 
which are available with the Gram Panchayats. Consequently, 3 States i.e. 
Madhya Pradesh, and Uttarakhand entered into MoU with CSC and Maharashtra 
extended its earlier MoU signed with CSC on 17th November 2016. During the 
course of evidence, the Secretary, MoPR was candid enough to accept the fact 
that the programme has been a non-starter and the experience has not been 
good. He further admitted that the MoU entered by CSC-SPV with the States of 
Madhya Pradesh and Uttarakhand has not been made operational due to 
various reasons and Uttar Pradesh has rejected the proposal of CSC and 
declined to sign the MoU, citing high cost of services offered by CSC. The 
Committee has also observed irregularities in the functioning of CSCs during its 
study visit to Maharashtra. During the course of evidence, Secretary also 
informed the committee that of late, many complaints have also been received 
from the state of Maharashtra as well. He further added that in reality, not even 
one-forth CSCs have been collocated in Gram Panchayat Bhawans i.e. less than 
50,000 throughout India and most of the CSCs are functioning from the private 
centres in the market. He further assured the Committee that the Ministry would 
revisit the whole process to ascertain the factual position. During the Course of 
evidence, it was informed that a presentation was made before the Secretary, 
MoPR by CEO, CSC-SPV on digitization of Panchayati Raj and thereafter, the 
Joint Secretary, MoPR had visited 3 villages in Pune District. Subsequently, the 
letter dated 03rdSeptember 2019 was issued by the Secretary, MoPR. The 

13 
 
Committee acknowledged the candid submission of the Ministry with regards 
below benchmark performance of CSC-SPV in the State of Maharashtra. The 
Committee is, therefore, of the considerate view that under the current scheme 
of things, the vision of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to usher in and realize the 
aim of Smart Governance and providing online services both of Government and 
non-government is far to be achieved. The Committee are of the view that it was 
not rational on the part of the Ministry to issue an advisory for the State 
Government without conducting an impartial and independent inquiry, to 
ascertain the factual position in the different parts of the state of Maharashtra 
and not just Pune, which is one of the leading tech-savvy districts of 
Maharashtra. Thus, in the light of study visit of the Committee to different parts of 
Maharashtra, the Committee are of the view that it would not be prudent on the 
part of MoPR to continue MoU with CSC. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry that the letter dated 03rdSeptember, 2019 issued 
by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to the Principal Secretary/Secretary, 
Panchayati Raj of all States may be withdrawn forthwith and issue appropriate 
communication to all the States, in this regard. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.” 
 
20.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  
“A Task Force to review the working of CSCs collocated in GPs (ASSKs) 
in the State of Maharashtra has been constituted under the chairmanship of Joint 
Secretary (Governance), MoPR. 
 
The utility of the MoU signed between MoPR& CSC-SPV would also be 
evaluated by this committee.” 
 
21.  On being asked to revise their reply, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their revised 
action taken reply have stated as under:- 
            “A Task Force to review the working of CSCs collocated in GPs (ASSKs) 
in the State of Maharashtra has been constituted under the chairmanship of Joint 
Secretary (Governance), MoPR. Vide MEITY’s O.M dated 22.4.2022.” 
22.  The Committee have time and again apprised the Ministry of the dismal ground 
reality of Digitization of Panchayats taken up by CSC-SPV in the State of Maharashtra, 
witnessed during the Study Visit. The Committee after considering the astonishing fact 
shared by the Secretary (MoPR) that the MoU entered by CSC-SPV with the States of 
Madhya Pradesh and Uttarakhand could not be made operational due to various 
reasons and other States like Uttar Pradesh has declined to sign the MoU, inter-alia 

14 
 
recommended  to take action on two major points i.e. to withdraw advisory issued to 
States vide letter dated  the 3rd September 2019 and to decide whether to continue MoU 
with CSC e-Governance Services Limited or not. 
  From the Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that 
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has left everything on the Task Force to decide. The 
Secretary has categorically accepted the fact that the programme has been a non 
starter and its experience has not been good. But later on, due to facts not shared with 
the Committee, Secretary during the sitting of the Committee appeared satisfied with 
Common Service Centres and expressed constraints to withdraw Ministry’s advisory 
dated 3rd September 2019. The Committee are anguished to note that the Ministry just 
focused on issuing advisory and didn’t make any efficacious effort to cross check with 
ground reality. Given the fact that report of the Task Force is pending, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to take appropriate action, on the basis of final outcome of the 
Report and inform the Committee accordingly. 
 
VI. Thorough probe in the functioning of CSCs in Maharashtra and other States 
 
(Recommendation Serial No.10) 
  
23.       On the issue of thorough probe in the functioning of CSCs in Maharashtra and other 
States, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
            “It came out before the Committee that in these Common Services 
Centres (CSCs) are getting about Rs.1.50 lakh per annum from the State 
Government of Maharashtra. In return are unable to render the promised 
services the beneficiaries under MOUs signed and are merely handing over Birth 
and Death Certificates to rural population. Besides, CSCs have claimed funds for 
stationary items even during the lock down period. The Committee during the 
Study Visit to Maharashtra were apprised by the officials that CEOs of Zilla 
Parishad of Chandrapur and Wardha districts of Maharashtra have fined the 
CSC SPV for irregularities noticed in the working of CSCs co-located at the 

15 
 
Gram Panchayats viz. Non establishment of Centres, non repairs and 
replacement of hardware on time, Kendrachalak(Data entry operator) remained 
absent frequently or not performing duties as expected, etc. The Committee take 
serious exception to this plunder of public money at the hands of erring CSCs. 
The Committee recommend that all these cases of false claims of public money 
not only in Maharashtra and other States be thoroughly probed and erring CSCs 
officials be brought to book at the earliest. The Committee are of the firm view 
that an enquiry Committee be set up to enquire into functioning of CSCs 
Committed to provide facilities to Gram Panchayats in Maharashtra. Accordingly, 
the Ministry may take corrective measures to have a meaningful utilization of 
funds from Government exchequer and explore the possibility of refund to the 
Gram Panchayats. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard." 
24.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  
         “The funding for operationalization of CSCs and their day to day working is 
as per the MoU signed between State Government and CSC.  No funds are 
provided by MoPR for operating CSCs.  Hence, MoPR has no direct control over 
the day to day functioning of the CSC.”  
 
   25.  The brief response of the Ministry on being asked to revise the reply is produced as 
under:-  
           “Reply date 09.06.2022 retained.” 
 
26.  Taking serious exception to the plunder of public money at the hands of erring 
CSCs in the State of Maharashtra, the Committee inter-alia recommended the Ministry 
to take suitable measures to stop misappropriation of funds and put brake to this 
inefficacious use of Panchayat’s funds in the hand of erring CSC officials. 
 The Committee are anguished to note that the Ministry in their Action Taken 
Replies have again shed its responsibility on the States by stating that that it does not 
have control over the day to day working of the CSCs as per the MoU signed between 
State Government and CSC e-Governance Services Ltd. The Committee are of the view 
that Ministry is not serious enough to implement the very important recommendation of 
the Committee or deliberately trying to avoid addressing the issue by citing technical 

16 
 
loopholes of MoU. It is a matter of fact that Government of Maharashtra has agreed to 
grant extension to the Agreement with CSC-SPV relying on the advisory dated the 3rd 
September 2019, issued by Ministry of Panchayati Raj, which the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj is reluctant to withdraw it either. On careful examination of MoU provisions entered 
into by MoPR and CSC-SPV, the Committee noticed that specific roles and 
responsibilities have been assigned to the Ministry. Thus, the Ministry can’t escape 
scot free by citing MoU or by shedding its responsibility on the State Government. The 
Ministry has failed to impress the Committee by covering the wrongdoings of CSC with 
its one-liner replies. The Committee understands the limitation of the Ministry in the 
State affairs as “local government” being the State Subject and, therefore, it never 
expected the Ministry to directly meddle with the State affairs. But, least it could have 
issued an advisory to the States, instead of just being a mute spectator to the 
misappropriation of funds happening in the State of Maharashtra. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to immediately issue an advisory to the 
State Government that all such cases of false claims of public money not only in 
Maharashtra and other States be thoroughly probed and accountability of the erring 
CSCs officials be fixed at the earliest and recoveries, if any against CSCs, be claimed 
and deposited back in the Government exchequer, immediately. 
 
VII. Roles and Responsibilities of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj under Memorandum 
of Understanding for Digitization of Gram Panchayats 
 
(Recommendation Serial No.11) 
27.       With regard to Roles and Responsibilities of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj under 
Memorandum of Understanding for Digitization of Gram Panchayats, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 

17 
 
            “Government of India envisions India to be a Digitally Inclusive and 
empowered society where large sections of rural population are able to benefit 
from new technologies, can access and share information and services freely 
and participate in the development process more effectively. The Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj have envisaged “Digitization of Gram Panchayats” with the 
objective of setting up at least one self sustainable Common Service Centre in 
each Gram Panchayat (GP) across the country. In pursuant of this objective, a 
Memorandum of Understanding was signed between Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
and CSC e-governance services Ltd. (CSC-SPV) on the 21st August, 2019. 
Subsequently, an advisory was issued by the Secretary, MoPR vide letter dated 
3rd September 2019 to all the States to develop synergy between Common 
Service Centers and Gram Panchayats to establish Digital Bhawans. In this 
background, two States i.e. Madhya Pradesh, and Uttarakhand entered into MoU 
with CSC, whereas, Maharashtra extended its earlier MoU which was signed 
with CSC on 17th November 2016. The Committee on thorough examination of 
various provision of MoU, had arrive to the conclusion that under the MoU there 
has been paramount role and responsibility assigned to MoPR with regard to 
monitoring andreview progress of the project. As per the provision 7.4 of the 
MoU, MoPR was duty bound to nominate a Nodal officer, who shall be overall in 
charge of the project to monitor and review progress of this project with the 
States. Further, as per provision 7.6 of the MoU, MoPR had to constitute Project 
Monitoring and Steering Committee (PMSC) comprising of officials from MoPR, 
CSC-SPV and nominated States. It shall have oversight and monitoring 
functions and shall provide guidance for the smooth operation of the project. The 
Steering Committee would also review progress and initiate suitable timely 
advisory/instructions to the States/UTs. The Committee are constrained to note 
that Ministry had made no effort to nominate nodal officer for this purpose. 
Despite having a crucial role, the MoPR in its reply has again and again 
emphasised on ‘Panchayat’ being the State subject and digitization of 
Panchayats thereto primarily being the responsibility of the States and always 
tried to pass the buck to the States. The Ministry has, however, failed to impress 
the Committee with its evasive replies in this regard. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the explanation of the Ministry on the issue. There is nothing on 
records to suggest that the Ministry has taken its role seriously. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to revisit its role and responsibilities assigned 
to it in the MoU and come out with a concrete roadmap to deal such issues 
under the cooperative federal Structure where both Centre and States come 
together and resolve the common problems with each other's' cooperation. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard within 
three months after presentation of this report.” 
 
28.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  
 
        “The Ministry has been continuously following up with the States for co-
location of CSCs in Panchayat Bhawans. A Project Monitoring & Steering 
Committee for active Bharatnet Connection and CSC Co-location has been 

18 
 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, MoPR with 
members from DoT, MeitY, CSC-SPV etc.  
Moreover, financial incentives uptoRs. 5 Lakhs is also being provided to 
the States under the Ministry ’s umbrella Rashtriya Gram 
SwarajAbhiyaan(RGSA) scheme for co-location of CSCs in Gram Panchayat 
offices. 
  Further, various consultation meetings have been conducted and 
advisories written to the States in this regards.” 
29.  On being asked to revise their reply, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their revised 
action taken reply have stated as under:-  
          “The Ministry has been continuously following up with the States for co-
location of CSCs in Panchayat Bhawans. A Project Monitoring & Steering 
Committee for active Bharatnet Connection and CSC Co-location has been 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, MoPR with 
members from DoT, MeitY, CSC-SPV etc.  
Moreover, financial incentives upto Rs. 5 Lakhs is also being provided to 
the States under the Ministry’s umbrella Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyaan 
(RGSA) scheme for co-location of CSCs in Gram Panchayat offices.  
Further, various consultation meetings have been conducted and 
advisories written to the States in this regard.  The high-level Task Force is 
examining the issue. The Committee shall be duly apprised of the progress 
made.” 
  
30.  The Committee observed that appointment of a Nodal Officer for monitoring of 
the programme was a crucial responsibility assigned to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
under bilateral MoU entered with CSC e-Governance Services Limited. However, it 
never made an effort to appoint it, which left CSCs functioning unmonitored by any 
central agency to a large extent. It seems that the Ministry was in a hurry to enter in 
agreement with CSC e-Governance Services Limited, but it never expected to undertake 
the responsibility of oversight and monitoring functions as outlined in its MoU. The 
Committee note with deep concern that non-appointment of Nodal Officer is a major 
lapse on the part of the Ministry and even Joint Secretary (MoPR) agreed to it during the 
deliberations of the Committee. Furnishing evasive and inconclusive replies time and 
again to justify itself depicts lack of seriousness with which the issue has been dealt 

19 
 
with by the Ministry. The Committee are of considerate opinion that there is hardly any 
substance in the Action Taken Reply submitted by the Ministry which can convince the 
Committee that the Ministry had effectively performed its vital responsibility of 
oversight and monitoring assigned to it by the Ministry.  Inconclusively, the Ministry 
has reiterated that Task Force is examining the issue. The Committee note that the 
Ministry should give a considerable thought to the fundamental aspects of the 
programme. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry cannot shed its 
responsibility and shift onus on States stating that the role of the Ministry is advisory in 
nature. Therefore, the Committee reiterate that the Ministry should revisit its role and 
responsibilities and with a concrete roadmap to deal such issues under the cooperative 
federal Structure. The Committee would like to be apprised of the effective steps taken 
by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
VIII. Inadequate funds and unrealistic targets under SVAMITVA 
(Recommendation Serial No.12) 
 
31.       With regard to inadequate funds and unrealistic targets under SVAMITVA, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “Survey of Villages and Mapping with Improvised Technology in Village 
Areas (SVAMITVA) aims to provide the ‘record of rights’ to village households. It 
will facilitate issuing of property cards to owners resulting in monetization of rural 
residential assets for credit and other financial services. The Committee have 
been informed during evidence that 106,978 villages in 100 districts across 11 
states have completed the drone flying in all inhabited villages and 36,56,173 
property cards have been distributed in 28,072 village across 8 states. Further, 
357 Continuous Operating Reference System (CORS) network have been 
established under the Scheme by September 2022 providing a network of 
reference stations that allows access to long-range, high-accuracy in 
demarcation of land. The Committee are happy to observe the earnest efforts 
made by the Ministry in this regard as it will aid in socio economic development 
of rural households. Further, Committee have also been apprised of the 
challenges which has affected the scheme like unavailability of sufficient drones, 
bad weather conditions such as floods, high winds etc., Scheduled elections in 

20 
 
few States, restrictions imposed due to COVID-19 pandemic, paucity of field 
level manpower etc. The Committee, in this regard, trust and expect that the 
Ministry will continue to make more sustained and proactive efforts to remove 
the cited hindrance. However, considering the importance of the project, the 
Committee recommend that Ministry of Finance should provide adequate funds 
to the scheme so that the project may be expedited and an advance roadmap 
may be made by fixing realistic targets to achieve desired result. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.” 
 
 
 32.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  
“Funds under the SVAMITVA Scheme are proposed as per the rates 
approved in the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) meeting held on 15th 
February,2021 Chaired by Secretary, Department of Expenditure. The Scheme 
has been approved for five years (2020-2025) with financial outlay of Rs.566.23 
crores.  Quarterly Property Card targets are set for the Scheme. Refer 
Annexure for details. 
The target may need to revisit based on the availability of drones, on-
boarding of remaining States on Scheme, unforeseen conditions and Property 
card generation process:-State Governments are responsible for generation of 
Property cards after following due objection/dispute resolution periods wherein 
anyone can object the demarcation/ rights on property. Different States have 
different objection periods as per their State Acts/ Rules: it varies from 10 days 
to 3 months.” 
  
33.  Survey of Villages and Mapping with Improvised Technology in Village Areas 
(SVAMITVA) aims at providing ‘record of rights’ to village households is a very 
ambitious Central Sector Scheme of the Ministry. However, the Committee note that 
though the Ministry has well formulated the scheme but has not put up commensurate 
efforts to achieve the objectives. The scheme in its brief stint has not achieved much of 
its intended targets due to reasons stated by the Ministry such as non availability of 
drones, non-boarding of several States on Scheme, unforeseen conditions and 
stagnant Property card generation process. The Committee were also apprised of such 
issues in its study visits to various States. The Committee are dismayed to note that 
the Ministry have set huge unrealistic cumulative targets covering all the States without 
even acceptance of the scheme by many States. Therefore, the Ministry should analyse 

21 
 
its targets and achievements hitherto made. There is a need of persistent and 
concerted efforts by the Ministry on various issues with active participation of all 
stakeholders such as States, Gram Panchayats and Survey of India. The Committee are 
of the opinion that the Ministry should work on boarding of remaining States on priority 
considering the objectives of the scheme. The Ministry should also remove the other 
bottlenecks such as non availability of drones. The Committee feel that the Ministry 
should have realistic targets in consonance with State Acts/Rules.  Therefore, the 
Committee conclude that there is a need of revisiting of the targets with delineating the 
objectives of the SWAMITVA scheme.  
 
IX. Devolution of untied grants of Fifteenth Finance Commission (FFC) to States not 
having duly constituted Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
 
 (Recommendation Serial No.13) 
 
34.       With regard to devolution of untied grants of FFC to States not having duly constituted 
PRIs, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
            “Fifteenth Finance Commission in its recommendations have outlined 
duly constituted PRIs by the States as one of the condition for devolution of 
funds to the Gram Panchayats. Secretary, MoPR during the Course of Evidence 
has apprised the Committee that several states such as Madhya Pradesh are 
lacking in this aspect and are not conducting regular elections. In these States, 
elections are not being held and the conditions of FFC related to this are not 
followed. Secretary further stated that, Ministry of Finance ignore their 
recommendation to not devolve funds to such states. The Committee therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should take up the matter with Ministry of Finance 
to not release funds to those states which have not constituted PRIs after regular 
elections as it is a basic Constitutional Provision. Simultaneously, Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj should take up the matter vigorously with the States and advise 
them to held regular elections and duly constitute PRIs for unrestricted flow of 
FFC grants. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in 
this regard.” 
 
35.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  

22 
 
           “While making recommendations for release of installment of Fifteenth 
Finance Commission (FFC) Untied Grants to Ministry of Finance (MoF), MoPR 
duly follows the guidelines which stipulate, inter alia, that the grants are to be 
provided only to the duly constituted Rural Local Bodies (RLBs).  
  In April, 2022 Chief Ministers of States where due elections to the RLBs 
are pending have been requested to complete the election process 
expeditiously. Copies of these letters are enclosed.”  
  
36.  Untied Grants of the Fifteenth Finance Commission (FFC) released on the 
recommendations of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj are the basic grants which facilitate 
Rural Local Bodies to take up works as per local and location specific felt needs. In the 
FFC recommendations for 2021-26, “duly constituted Panchayati Raj Institutes (PRIs)” 
has been made a condition prerequisite for release of these grants.  Considering the 
importance of untied grants for improving basic services in the rural areas, the 
Committee are of the considerate opinion that no PRI be deprived as a result of non-
compliance of this condition. The Committee appreciate the proactive steps taken up 
by the Ministry by writing letters to the various States by emphasizing on timely holding 
of Panchayat Elections in the States. However, letter simply mentions that “.. also 
impacts devolution of funds meant for the Panchayats”, but, somehow, non-release of 
FFC Untied Funds in case the above condition is unfulfilled, has not been adequately 
highlighted. Hence, the Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, 
being the nodal Ministry for untied grants of FFC to States should rigorously follow-up 
the issue with the States by adequately emphasizing significance of strict compliance 
of condition prerequisite for the release of funds. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
X. Monitoring of untied funds of Fifteenth Finance Commission (FFC) devolved to 
the States 
 
(Recommendation Serial No.14) 

23 
 
 
37.       Regarding the monitoring of untied funds of FFC devolved to the States, the 
Committee had recommended as under: 
            “Article 280(3)(bb) of the Constitution of India stipulates that the Central 
Finance Commission shall make recommendations to the President regarding 
measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement 
the resources of the Panchayats in the State. In pursuance of this provision, 
Ministry has recommended successive Central Finance Commissions for 
enhanced financial devolution for Panchayats. The Committee have been 
informed that until Fourteenth Finance Commission Award, only Gram 
Panchayats were eligible for the grants. However, on recommendation of the 
Ministry, all three tiers of the Panchayats/ rural local bodies and traditional 
bodies are now eligible for grants under the Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV 
FC). The Committee are happy to observe the earnest effort made by the 
Ministry in this regard. Further, the Committee are given to understand that the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj is the nodal Ministry for making recommendations to 
the Ministry of Finance (MoF) for release of Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV 
FC) Untied Grants to the Rural Local Bodies. During the course of evidence, 
Secretary, MoPR has accepted that that monitoring of FFC untied funds shall be 
looked after the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The Committee, therefore 
recommend Ministry of Panchayati Raj to discharge their role effectively and also 
evolve a mechanism of constant monitoring of untied funds devolved to the 
States. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard.” 
38.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  
         “The Rural Local Bodies (RLB) who are in receipt of the FFC Grants have 
been mandated to make all the financial transactions out of these grants only 
through the MoPR online platform of eGramSwaraj– PFMS. This would facilitate 
regular monitoring of the utilization of the FFC Grants by the RLBs. 
  In addition, Ministry had requested States in June, 2020 to constitute High 
Level Monitoring Committees (HLMCs) under the chairmanship of Chief 
Secretary and including the Finance Secretary and other concerned 
departmental secretaries to monitor and carry out concurrent evaluation of the 
local bodies receiving the grants to ensure that funds are utilized for the purpose 
recommended by the Finance Commission. 
  Further, for ensuring timely audit of Panchayat accounts i.e. receipts and 
expenditures of Gram Panchayats (GPs), Ministry has rolled out an online 
application – Audit Online(https://auditonline.gov.in).This application not only 
facilitates the auditing of Panchayat accounts but also provides for maintaining of 
audit records. This application seeks to streamline the process for audit inquiries, 
draft local audit reports, draft audit paras etc. and thus ensures proper 
maintenance of accounts by Panchayats to improve transparency, accountability 
and monitoring.” 

24 
 
  
39. The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is the nodal Ministry for 
the devolution of untied grants of FFC to Panchayati Raj Institutions at all three tiers, 
the Committee, therefore, considered essential to evolve a mechanism wherein, 
Ministry can constantly monitor untied funds devolved to the States. As per the Action 
Taken Replies, the Ministry has mentioned two online platform i.e. eGramswaraj- PFMS 
and Audit Online to facilitate regular monitoring of utilization of FFC Grants and to 
facilitate auditing of Panchayats accounts, respectively. These online applications have 
been in existence for a while now, but the output seems to be on paper only. Despite, 
this online tool available with the Ministry, the Committee, have never been supplied 
with a copy of Audit Reports of Gram Panchayats by the Ministry, as and when asked 
for it. Similar scenario has been encountered during its various study visits to different 
Gram Panchayats. The Committee would, therefore, recommend the Ministry to make 
judicious use of the online tools available with them so as to really improve 
transparency, accountability and monitoring of the Panchayat’s untied funds devolved 
to the States and take suitable measure to bring out audit reports in public domain. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the actions taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
The Committee while examining the year-wise allocation and amount released under 
the schemes of Ministry of Panchayati Raj, find that in 2020-21, Rs.690.00 crore was allocated 
against a budget estimate of Rs.900.94 crore. Similarly, in 2021-22, Rs.868.38 crore has been 
allocated at revised estimates stage against a budget estimate ofRs.913.43 crore. On the 
issue of drastic reduction in allocation funds at RE stage, MoPR has stated that Ministry of 
Finance had imposed cut onthe budget estimates and allocated reduced amounts at revised 
estimates stage. During the course of evidence, Secretary, MoPR has also echoed the same 
views. Needless to mention here that sharp cuts in the budgetary allocation would handicap 
the Ministry in effective implementation of the schemes i.e. RGSA and SWAMITVA which are 
of great significance for strengthening Panchayati Raj Institutions. Thus, adequate allocation 
under them becomes essential to focus on capacity building of Panchayati Raj Institutions and 
Rural Development. The committee feel that the budget estimates of 2022-23at Rs.868.57 
crore including Rs.593 crore for RGSA, seems low with reference to their proposals. In the 
absence of adequate funds, the schemes/programme under taken by the Ministry would be 
adversely affected. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj should take up the matter with Ministry of Finance to allocate adequate funds 
as per the proposed requirement of the Ministry. At the same time, the Committee also 
recommend Ministry of Finance to spare MoPR from proposing cut on expenditure during 
2022-23 onwards considering the fact that the Ministry is allocated meager budget for lakh of 
Panchayats. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
           “Revamped RGSA is the umbrella scheme of the Ministry. The allocation of funds for 
RGSA at BE stage during 2021-22 was Rs.593 crore. Keeping in view the committed liabilities 
and projection of activities during the remaining period of the financial year, the allocation of 

26 
 
funds at RE stage was enhanced to Rs.618 crore out of which Rs. 617.99 crore (99.99%) had 
been utilized up to 31.03.2022. 
 It is also brought out that CCEA has approved the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 
Revamped RGSA on 13.04.2022 at an outlay of Rs.5,911 crore for implementation for four 
years i.e. from 2022-23 to 2025-26 (co-terminus with XV Finance Commission period). This 
includes Central share of Rs.3700 crore and State Share Rs.2211 crore.  The outlay for the 
financial year 2022-23 as approved by CCEA under the State component of the scheme is 
Rs.762 crore. The Ministry envisages adopting following strategy for optimal utilization of 
funds during 2022-23: 
  Ministry is in process for timely approval of Annual Action Plans (AAPs) for the year 
2022-23, the States/UTs have been asked to submit the AAPs at the earliest.  
• Sharing of AAPs format/checklist and providing handholding support to States for 
formulation of AAPs. 
• The states have been impressed upon to liquidate the unspent balance and that the 
priority in release of funds will be given to those states that have low unspent balance. 
• Effectively taking up with the States/UTs for PFMS compliance, release of matching 
share, liquidation of unspent balances and submission of requisite documents viz. UCs 
etc. for release of funds to the maximum extent. 
• Region/State-specific VCs also being undertaken for handholding of States/UTs. 
• Rolling out of MIS and constant monitoring of the progress of approved activities.  
• Mandatory release of funds through PFMS till last level of Executing Agency. 
Integration of RGSA MIS with PFMS. 
• New interventions for training of PRIs under the scheme. Realigning the strategy in the 
changed scenario with focus on promotion of distance learning modes as far as 
possible. 
It is expected that through the above mentioned measures, Ministry will be able to 
utilize the funds allocated at BE stage. Further, additional requirement of funds as per 
projection of activities as approved in the CCEA note for the year 2022-23 will be met through 
supplementary demands for grants.” 
                                                       O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
 

27 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
The Committee note that in the financial years of 2018-19, 2019-20 & 2020-21, Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) had surrender BE amount due to cut imposed by the Ministry of 
Finance at the RE stage. However, the Committee note with serious concern that the Ministry 
could not even spend the amount sanctioned at the RE stage and surrendered Rs.30.08 crore, 
Rs.1.74 crore and Rs.2.93 crore in 2018-19, 2019-20 & 2020-21 respectively. It reflects, laxity 
and lack of proper action plan on the part of the Ministry as it could not completely spend the 
funds allocated to it at the RE stage. All these facts, clearly speak about the poor performance 
of the Ministry in utilization of limited fund allocated to them. The Committee, therefore, feel 
that the Ministry could not achieve its avowed objectives and targets set for various schemes 
and programmes unless the funds are utilized by the Department optimally and effectively. 
Therefore, Committee recommend that the Ministry should take all efficacious efforts to utilize 
their funds on the heads envisaged by them in demand for grants for 2022-23 in order to avoid 
over surrendering even for small unspent amount. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
“RGSA is the major scheme of the Ministry implemented through State Government to 
enhance the Capacity of Panchyati Raj Institutions. The Budget Estimate (BE) / Revised 
Estimate (RE) and actual expenditure during 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 (as on 
31.03.2022) under the scheme of RGSA is given below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual Expenditure Exp. As % of RE 
2018-19 720.80 622.41 598.27 96.12 
2019-20 762.34 432.96 432.90 99.99 
2020-21 790.53 499.94 499.93 100.00 
2021-22 593.00 618.00 617.99 99.99 
 
In may be observed from the above that the expenditure under scheme for 3 years from 2019-
20 was almost 100% of RE allocation. It may also be noted that during 2021-22, the allocation 

28 
 
under RGSA had been enhanced from Rs.593 crore to Rs.618 crore at RE stage, which has 
been fully utilized. The utilization of funds in States/UTs has apparently led to the actualization 
of approved activities.During 2018-19 the utilisation of fund was around 96%, as it was the first 
year of the implementation of the scheme, which faced various operational issues regarding 
operationalisation of budget heads and release of funds to the States.   
  As brought out in reply to Sl. No. 1, the Ministry through adoption of multi-
prongedapproach, strives to utilize the allocated funds optimally during the current year.” 
O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 4) 
       RGSA has been envisaged as a scheme for transformation of Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
It aims to make PRI’s a tool of democratic decentralization. However, due to non-release of 
sanctioned amounts to the states/UTs under the scheme owing to various reasons, its 
objective of bringing in improvements in functioning of Panchayats has not been realised fully. 
During the course of evidence, the Secretary, MoPR informed the Committee that MoPR had 
requested the Ministry of Finance to make RGSA a Central Sector Scheme. However, Ministry 
of Finance has declined the request. In this regard, making RGSA a Central Sector Scheme 
will make it eligible for 100 percent funding from Central Government and funds will be 
released without corresponding release of state’s share. This will make release of funds 
expeditious and swift. This will enable States/UTs to utilize the funds for capacity building to 
Panchayati Raj Institutions. These funds may be utilized by the states for making PRIs 
efficient and effective institutions of Rural Development. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that the RGSA may be made a Central Sector Scheme. Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj should again take up the matter vigorously with Ministry of Finance citing the crucial role of 
RGSA envisaged in achieving Sustainable Development Goals and impress upon them to 
explore the possibility of making it a Central Sector Scheme. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 

29 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“As brought out above, the Ministry of Finance had not agreed to the proposal of this 
Ministry for changing the scheme into a Central Sector one. Subsequently, the Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC),while appraising the revised proposal for continuation of Revamped 
Scheme of RGSA beyond 31st March, 2022, recommended for its continuation during 2022-23 
to 2025-26 as Centrally Sponsored Scheme. Thereafter, Cabinet Committee on Economics 
Affairs (CCEA) has also approved the revamped RGSA as Centrally Sponsored Scheme on 
13.04.2022 at an outlay of Rs.5,911 crore for four years from  2022-23 to 2025-26 (co-
terminus with XV Finance Commission period). This includes Central share of Rs.3700 crore 
and State Share Rs.2211 crore.  The BE allocation under revamped RGSA for 2022-23 is 
Rs.676.20 crore to carry out the activities approved under revamped RGSA. As brought out in 
reply to Sl. No. 1, the Ministry through adoption of multi-pronged approach, will strive to utilize 
the allocated funds optimally under the scheme by addressing the handicaps faced earlier.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
 
(Recommendation Serial No.5) 
         Restructured RGSA scheme is aimed at capacity building of Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
Under RGSA, Ministry of Panchayati Raj supplements the efforts of the States, through its 
scheme of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) on limited scale. The Committee note that 
Ministry in its reply has informed that around 50917 GPs/Traditional Bodies are without GP 
Bhawan out of 271179 GPs/Traditional Bodies. The Committee are of the view that Gram 
Panchayat Bhawans are basic infrastructural prerequisite for any Gram Panchayats to function 
as an effective tools of participatory democracy. However, the Committee are distressed to 
note that the still significant number of Gram Panchayat have to function without any basic 
infrastructure like Panchayat Bhawans. The Committee, has time and again emphasized the 
need to construct Panchayat Bhawans and therefore, recommend that top priority should be 
give to the Construction of Panchayat Bhawans in those Gram Panchayats which are working 
without Bhawans. Considering the importance of the project, the Committee strongly 
recommend that adequate funding with an advance roadmap should be made with yearly 

30 
 
targets fixed and constant monitoring to have a Gram Panchayat Bhawan at each village left-
out. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
“The Ministry in all earnestness is seized of the concern expressed by the esteemed 
Committee to provide each Gram Panchayat / Rural Local Body a building of its own. The 
Ministry has also been making all out efforts to provide financial assistance to the maximum 
possible limit to States / UTs for this purpose. Under the scheme of RGSA, constructions of 
approximately 9,273 GP Bhawans were approved. It is also worthwhile to mention that 
construction of Gram Panchayat Bhawan was also taken up as a component of Garib Kalyan 
Rozgar Abhiyan(GKRA) launched by the Government for employment generation and creation 
of durable infrastructure in rural areas in the States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, 
Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. As per reports available, a total of 1,347 GP Bhawans 
have been constructed during GKRA period. Further, as per information received from the 
State of Uttar Pradesh, against the requirement of 58189 Gram Panchayats in the State prior 
to June 2020, a total of 33577 Gram Panchayat Bhawans existed. After June 2020, including 
the GKRA period, the State Government has constructed 21900 Panchayat Bhawans. As 
such, as on date, 55477 Panchayat Bhawans now exist in the State and efforts are being 
made by the State Government for construction of remaining 2712 Panchayat Bhawans. 
Similarly, all the States have been asked to bridge the entire deficits of Panchayat Bhawans. 
In addition, the Untied Grants of the Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV FC) can be 
utilized for all felt needs under the 29 subjects enshrined in the Eleventh Schedule of the 
Constitution and thus it would also cover construction and repair of GP Bhawans in the rural 
areas, as one of the permissible activities under XV FC mandated activities by Rural Local 
Bodies (RLBs). XV FC Tied Grants can also be utilised for water and sanitation related works 
for Panchayat Bhawans.  
  With a view to expedite saturation in this direction, a Joint Advisory was issued to 
States / UTs by Secretary of this Ministry and that of Ministry of Rural Development on 
10.06.2020 requesting for construction of GP Bhawans utilizing various resources under 
convergence mode viz. Unspent 14th Finance Commission, 15th Finance Commission untied 

31 
 
grants, MGNREGS funds and other funds from State Finance Commission (SFC) / Own 
Source Revenue (OSR) etc. In furtherance, vide D.O. letter dated 07.01.2021 of this Ministry, 
all States/UTs have also been requested to undertake / concerted efforts to bridge the 
infrastructure deficit regarding GP Bhawans by utilizing various resources at their level. 
States/UTs have also been advised to examine the possibility of creating a cluster of 
contiguous GPs for construction of GP Bhawans where the size of GPs is small. It has also 
been advised to States that while creating new GPs, the States should simultaneously make 
provision for creation of GP Bhawan also through available resources under central schemes 
or from the State Budget or OSR of the Panchayats. Further, under the Revamped scheme of 
RGSA provision has also been made for providing financial assistance to States/ UTs for 
construction of new GP building with/ and community hall with focus on North Eastern States.  
With the above mentioned approaches, it is expected that the deficit in GP Bhawans is 
likely to be abridged to a great extent.” 
O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation Serial No.7) 
 Mission Mode on E-Panchayat 
  
        e-Panchayat is one of the Mission Mode Projects (MMP) under the Digital India 
programme of Government of India that seeks to transform the functioning of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs), making them more transparent, accountable and effective as last mile 
cutting edge organs of decentralized local self-governments. The Committee are however, 
constrained to note that funds for most prominent scheme of Mission Mode on e-Panchayats 
with the object of automation of Panchayat work through e-Gram Panchayats and other 
Application has remained unchanged at Rs.20.00 crore from 2018-19 to 2022-23. Not only 
this, in all these years, the low level of funds have been downsized also 
leading to lower utilisation. The Committee note that as against BE of Rs.20.00 crore, 
Rs.15.50 crore and Rs.20.00 crore and Rs.20.00 crore in 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21 and 

32 
 
2021-22, at RE stage reduced fund amounting to Rs.11.91 crore, Rs.7.5 crore, Rs.17.82 crore 
and Rs.11.71 crore was provided respectively. The Committee feel reduction at RE stage 
does not serve the object of the scheme with less response from grassroot levels. In this 
connection, the MOPR has laboured to convince the Committee that currently 2.61 lakh PRIs 
have prepared their Panchayat Development Plans for 2021-22 and 2.19 lakh GPs have on 
boarded on e-Gram Swaraj PFMS Inter Face and 1.81 lakh GPs have undertaken online 
transactions. The Committee feel that for full automation of PRIs adequate funds be made 
available to PRIs expeditiously. The Committee are of the firm view that reduction of 
budgetary amount year after year at the revised stage shows that either there is faulty 
planning under the Digital India Programme for Panchayats or the Ministry of Finance is not 
serious enough to increase the capacity building of Gram Panchayats, in order to have easy 
access of documents to the residents of each Panchayat under the Digital India Programme. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  “ Under total allocation for e-Panchayat MMP substantial financial assistance is for 
central level support towards operation & maintenance, development & training of e-
Panchayat applications, faculty support and programme management. No funds are provided 
to PRIs or States directly under e-Panchayat MMP. NIC, NICSI is the technology partner of 
MoPR for e-Panchayat MMP. 
  There was a reduction in demand for handholding & capacity building on e-Panchayat 
applications from States due to restrictions imposed by COVID.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Serial No.12) 
SWAMITVA 
  
       Survey of Villages and Mapping with Improvised Technology in Village Areas 
(SVAMITVA) aims to provide the ‘record of rights’ to village households. It will facilitate issuing 
of property cards to owners resulting in monetization of rural residential assets for credit and 

33 
 
other financial services. The Committee have been informed during evidence that 106,978 
villages in 100 districts across 11 states have completed the drone flying in all inhabited 
villages and 36,56,173 property cards have been distributed in 28,072 village across 8 states. 
Further, 357 Continuous Operating Reference System (CORS) network have been 
established under the Scheme by September 2022 providing a network of reference stations 
that allows access to long-range, high-accuracy in demarcation of land. The Committee are 
happy to observe the earnest efforts made by the Ministry in this regard as it will aid in socio 
economic development of rural households. Further, Committee have also been apprised of 
the challenges which has affected the scheme like unavailability of sufficient drones, bad 
weather conditions such as floods, high winds etc., Scheduled elections in few States, 
restrictions imposed due to COVID-19 pandemic, paucity of field level manpower etc. The 
Committee, in this regard, trust and expect that the Ministry will continue to make more 
sustained and proactive efforts to remove the cited hindrance. However, considering the 
importance of the project, the Committee recommend that Ministry of Finance should provide 
adequate funds to the scheme so that the project may be expedited and an advance roadmap 
may be made by fixing realistic targets to achieve desired result. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
  “Funds under the SVAMITVA Scheme are proposed as per the rates approved in the 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) meeting held on 15th February,2021 Chaired by 
Secretary, Department of Expenditure. The Scheme has been approved for five years (2020-
2025) with financial outlay of Rs.566.23 crores.  Quarterly Property Card targets are set for the 
Scheme. Refer Annexure for details. 
  The target may need to revisit based on the availability of drones, on-boarding of 
remaining States on Scheme, unforeseen conditions and Property card generation process:-
State Governments are responsible for generation of Property cards after following due 
objection/dispute resolution periods wherein anyone can object the demarcation/ rights on 
property. Different States have different objection periods as per their State Acts/ Rules: it 
varies from 10 days to 3 months.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 

34 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 33 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation Serial No.13) 
  
Devolution of untied grants of Fifteenth Finance Commission (FFC) 
  
       FFC in its recommendations have outlined duly constituted PRIs by the States as one of 
the condition for devolution of funds to the Gram Panchayats. Secretary, MoPR during the 
Course of Evidence has apprised the Committee that several states such as Madhya Pradesh 
are lacking in this aspect and are not conducting regular elections. In these States, elections 
are not being held and the conditions of FFC related to this are not followed. Secretary further 
stated that, Ministry of Finance ignore their recommendation to not devolve funds to such 
states. The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take up the matter with 
Ministry of Finance to not release funds to those states which have not constituted PRIs after 
regular elections as it is a basic Constitutional Provision. Simultaneously, Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj should take up the matter vigorously with the States and advise them to held 
regular elections and duly constitute PRIs for unrestricted flow of FFC grants. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
“While making recommendations for release of installment of Fifteenth Finance 
Commission (FFC) Untied Grants to Ministry of Finance (MoF), MoPR duly follows the 
guidelines which stipulate, inter alia, that the grants are to be provided only to the duly 
constituted Rural Local Bodies (RLBs).  
  In April, 2022 Chief Ministers of States where due elections to the RLBs are pending 
have been requested to complete the election process expeditiously. Copies of these letters 
are enclosed.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 36 of Chapter I of the Report) 

35 
 
(Recommendation Serial No.14) 
 
       Article 280(3)(bb) of the Constitution of India stipulates that the Central Finance 
Commission shall make recommendations to the President regarding measures needed to 
augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources of the Panchayats in 
the State. In pursuance of this provision, Ministry has recommended successive Central 
Finance Commissions for enhanced financial devolution for Panchayats. The Committee have 
been informed that until Fourteenth Finance Commission Award, only Gram Panchayats were 
eligible for the grants. However, on recommendation of the Ministry, all three tiers of the 
Panchayats/ rural local bodies and traditional bodies are now eligible for grants under the 
Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV FC). The Committee are happy to observe the earnest 
effort made by the Ministry in this regard. Further, the Committee are given to understand that 
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is the nodal Ministry for making recommendations to the 
Ministry of Finance (MoF) for release of Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV FC) Untied Grants 
to the Rural Local Bodies. During the course of evidence, Secretary, MoPR has accepted that 
that monitoring of FFC untied funds shall be looked after the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The 
Committee, therefore recommend Ministry of Panchayati Raj to discharge their role effectively 
and also evolve a mechanism of constant monitoring of untied funds devolved to the States. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The Rural Local Bodies (RLB) who are in receipt of the FFC Grants have been 
mandated to make all the financial transactions out of these grants only through the MoPR 
online platform of eGramSwaraj– PFMS. This would facilitate regular monitoring of the 
utilization of the FFC Grants by the RLBs. 
  
In addition, Ministry had requested States in June, 2020 to constitute High Level 
Monitoring Committees (HLMCs) under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary and including the 
Finance Secretary and other concerned departmental secretaries to monitor and carry out 
concurrent evaluation of the local bodies receiving the grants to ensure that funds are utilized 
for the purpose recommended by the Finance Commission. 
  

36 
 
Further, for ensuring timely audit of Panchayat accounts i.e. receipts and expenditures of 
Gram Panchayats (GPs), Ministry has rolled out an online application – 
AuditOnline(https://auditonline.gov.in).This application not only facilitates the auditing of 
Panchayat accounts but also provides for maintaining of audit records. This application seeks 
to streamline the process for audit inquiries, draft local audit reports, draft audit paras etc. and 
thus ensures proper maintenance of accounts by Panchayats to improve transparency, 
accountability and monitoring.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 39 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 (Recommendation Serial No.15) 
 
       Fifteenth Finance Commission in its recommendations for the period of 2021-2026 has 
stated that the States which have not constituted relevant State Finance Commission (SFC) 
must constitute it on or before March, 2024. After March, 2024, no grants shall be released to 
a State that has not complied with the Constitutional provisions in respect of the SFC and 
other conditions have to comply to. The Committee note that it is the duty of MoPR to verify 
that the compliance to conditions related to the constitution of State Finance Commission and 
will have to be certified by the States in their Grant Transfer Certificates (GTCs) before making 
recommendation to Ministry of Finance for release of XV FC Grants. Further, the Committee 
note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has issued an advisory to the States in February, 
2021 to comply with requirement for SFC, which will be followed up by MoPR for compliance 
before March, 2024 from which the condition becomes enforceable. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that, the Ministry should take up the matter with State Governments at the highest 
level and impress upon them for strict compliance of recommendation of FFC as 
noncompliance of it would severely affect the devolution of funds to Panchayati Raj 
Institutions. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
 

37 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
“In pursuance of directions of the Committee, Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has 
written a D.O. letter dated 9th May, 2022 to Chief Secretaries of States to ensure due 
constitution of the State Finance Commissions (SFC)as well as facilitate their proper 
functioning. The copy of the letter is enclosed.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
 
(Recommendation Serial No.16) 
Ensuring Transparent, Accountable and Vibrant Gram Panchayats 
  
       Citizen Charter is a document that informs citizens about the service entitlements that 
they have as users of Public services, the standards they can expect for a service, grievance 
redressal mechanism available against non adherence to those standards and the 
procedures, cost, quality, timeframe and charges of a service. Citizen Charter is a tool to 
ensure accountability and transparency of Gram Panchayats. Citizen charter is one of the 
component of capacity building of Panchayati Raj institutions. The Committee note that out of 
2.55 lakh GramPanchayats, 2.00 lakh Gram Panchayats have prepared their Citizen Charter, 
out of which 1.96 lakh Gram Panchayat have approved their charter through Gram Sabha. It 
reflects a significant progress on Citizen Charters, however the Committee in its study visit to 
Maharashtra and Rajasthan undertaken in 2021 have encountered a grim scenario in this 
regard. There were hardly any Gram Panchayat which had affixed Citizen Charters board 
displayed outside the gram Panchayat Bhawan. The Committee welcome the proactive 
measure taken by the Ministry as various states have stated preparing and uploaded citizen 
charters online, due to the initiative of Ministry of Panchayati Raj. Notwithstanding the position 
stated above, the Committee, feel that the directives in this regard are not being followed in 
letter and spirit at the grass root level. As it is a major component of bringing social 
accountability and transparency, the Committee therefore recommend MoPR to issue 
necessary guidelines in this regard for circulating it in all the States. The Committee expect 
that immediate necessary steps are taken to ensure Gram Panchayats not just prepare their 
Citizen Charters and upload online but also adhere to the time lines in letter and spirit and 

38 
 
make wide publicity of them. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in 
this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
“The vision of Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) is to make Local Governments more 
responsive, by defining the role of Panchayats in the delivery of key services to rural people, 
giving them the mandate as enshrined under article 243G of the Constitution of India. 
 
In this endeavor, Ministry of Panchayati Raj carried out the ‘Meri Panchayat, 
MeraAdhikaar- Jan SevaayeinHamaareDwaar’ campaign from 01st July to 15th August, 2021 
with an aim to have citizen charter approved by the respective Gram Sabhas in place, 
cataloguing the different categories of services rendered to the citizen by the Panchayat, the 
conditions for availing such services and also the time limit for such service. 
 
The Citizen Charter would ensure transparent and effective delivery of public services for 
sustainable development and enhanced citizen service experiences; deepening inclusive and 
accountable Local Self Governments by incorporate diverse views while designing and 
delivering services.  
 
During the course of the campaign, various consultative workshops and meetings were 
held with the States, and the campaign culminated with the signing of the Mysuru declaration 
by the States, which focused on Provision of Common Core Services at the grassroots level.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.,  Dated:9thJune, 2022 
 (Recommendation Serial No.17) 
  
      To address critical institutional reform towards financial management, transparency and 
accountability, Ministry of Panchayati Raj launched the Audit Online application in April 2020 
for carrying out online Audits of Panchayat accounts. The application also envisaged to 
streamline the process for audit inquiries, draft local audit reports, draft audit paras, etc. The 
Committee is given to understand that 50 per cent of the Gram Panchayats have audit plans 
and audit reports of 40 per cent Gram Panchayats have been generated for the audit period 
2019-20 as on 31-01-2022. Similarly, for the audit period of 2020-21, as on 31-01- 2022, 52 

39 
 
per cent of the Gram Panchayats have audit plans and audit reports of 21 per cent Gram 
Panchayats have been generated. As per the FFC recommendations, which have been 
approved by the cabinet as per which with effect from 2023-24, 100 per cent audit online has 
been made compulsory for the Gram Panchayats. Needless to mention here that audit is 
significant tools in the hands of the Government to determine how the funds provided by the 
Government were actually used as per the prescribed norms by the Panchyats and to indentify 
factors that contribute to suboptimal use. It certifies the accounts of Panchayats and as 
representing true and fair picture of the PRI’s affairs in public. However, the Committee during 
its various study visits in different parts of the Country have observed that audit panchyats are 
not been conducted in a time bound manner. Moreover, in view of the FFC recommendation, it 
is imperative that States should not undermine the importance of conducting audit of 
Panchayats regularly. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj should take up the matter with State Governments at the highest level and impress upon 
them to timely conduct audit of accounts of Gram Panchayats with the Audit Online application 
of MoPR and fulfil the conditions of FFC. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
“As per guidelines of Ministry of Finance (MoF) on XV FC recommendations, Rural 
Local Bodies (RLBs) have to mandatorily prepare and make available online, both provisional 
accounts of the previous year and the audited accounts of the year before previous, as entry 
level conditions to avail the grants. However, for the years 2021-22 and 2022-23, the States 
need to ensure that at least 25 percent of the RLBs have both their provisional accounts for 
the previous year and audited accounts for the year before the previous available online in the 
public domain in addition to MoPR eGramSwaraj and Audit Online in order for them to avail of 
the full grants in that year. For the years 2023-24 onwards, all RLBs need to have both 
provisional accounts of the previous year and the audited accounts of the year before previous 
available online in public domain in addition to MoPR eGram Swaraj and Audit Online failing 
which grants will be released on pro-rata basis depending upon the number of bodies 
complying to these conditions. 
  

40 
 
The States have been asked to carry out the audit of the accounts for the expenditure 
incurred by the RLBs under both Fourteenth and Fifteenth Finance Commission on Audit 
Online. For the audit period 2019-20, all the States except Arunachal Pradesh, have 
completed the target of auditing 25% Gram Panchayats. For the Audit Period 2020-21, 
1,08,532 Audit Reports have been generated (Telangana & Odisha have completed audit of 
100% RLBs), while the remaining States are in the process of achieving the target.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl. , Dated:9thJune, 2022 
  
 (Recommendation Serial No.18) 
  
       During the course of evidence, the Committee were apprised by the Secretary that MoPR 
is the nodal ministry for the devolution of untied grants of FFC to Panchayati Raj Institutions at 
all three tiers. The Committee are of the view that the role of being the nodal agency of FFC 
untied funds should not be restricted to just ensuring that the funds transferred to the State 
Governments by the Centre has been provided to the Panchayati Raj Institutions or not just 
whether States have fulfilled the conditions laid out by FFC in its recommendations. The 
Committee are of the strong view that Ministry should play an effective role in devolution of 
funds and not just restrict itself to a nominal role of recommending transfer of funds. Keeping 
in view of the assessment as to whether funds to the Panchayats for the welfare schemes of 
villages are being prudently used as per norms fixed by the Government, the Committee had 
expressed time and again on the aspect of constraint faced in getting a certified copy of audit 
report of the Panchyats during its Study visits. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should take up the matter proactively with State Governments and also with the 
Ministry of Finance at the highest level and impress upon them to provide a copy of certified 
Audit Reports of Panchayats for scrutiny and to ensure that funds are utilized prudently. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
“Constitutionally, the subject of auditing of accounts of Panchayats comes within the 
purview of State Governments. Article 243J of the Constitution of India provides that the 
Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of 
accounts by the Panchayats and the auditing of such accounts.  

41 
 
  
It may also be mentioned that, MoPR has been implementing the e-Panchayat Mission 
Mode Project aimed at automating Panchayat functions. With a vision to usher in digital 
Panchayats to empower & transform rural India, eGramSwaraj, a unified tool for effective 
monitoring and evaluation of works taken up in the Panchayats was launched by Hon’ble 
Prime Minister on National Panchayati Raj Day, 24thApril, 2020. eGramSwaraj has been 
developed amalgamating all the functionalities of Panchayat functioning viz. planning, 
monitoring, accounting, online payment, asset management.  
To, ensure better financial management of RLBs for enhancing transparency & 
accountability in maintenance of accounts, Ministry has integrated eGramSwaraj with Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS). eGramSwaraj– PFMS Interface (eGSPI) to enable 
real time payments to vendors/service providers. All transactions are secured, and payment 
vouchers are created using 2 factor authentications. 
Further, there are several reports available in the public domain of eGramSwaraj 
website which provides various information such as (i) Scheme wise component expenditure, 
(ii) Unspent Balance report at PRI level, (iii) State wise Receipt & Expenditure reports etc. All 
these reports are generated based on the data entries done by the corresponding RLBs. The 
reports can be periodically viewed and analyzed by the stakeholders so as to know the exact 
position of the available funds, expenditure incurred under different categories etc. 
Further, for ensuring timely audit of Panchayat accounts i.e. receipts and expenditures 
of Gram Panchayats (GPs), Ministry has rolled out an online application – 
AuditOnline(https://auditonline.gov.in).This application not only facilitates the auditing of 
Panchayat accounts but also provides for maintaining of audit records. This application seeks 
to streamline the process for audit inquiries, draft local audit reports, draft audit paras etc. and 
thus ensures proper maintenance of accounts by Panchayats to improve transparency, 
accountability and monitoring. 
As regards scrutiny, the AuditOnline dashboard has an inbuilt program to capture trends 
of  audit observations such as variation in accounts figures,  excess utilization of 
grant,  diversion of grant or fund, non-utilization of grants before lapsable date, misutilization of 
grants or funds, non-utilization of earmarked funds, non- collection of dues, advances pending 
adjustment, violation of rules, non-remittance of deductions recoveries, non-production of 

42 
 
records, misappropriations and funds, excess payments, wasteful expenditure, cases of 
unaccounted cash or stores, pendency of utilization certificates, surcharge certificates 
recovery pending etc. 
O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl. , Dated:9thJune, 2022 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

43 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

44 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyaan (RGSA) 
 Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
         Rashtriya Gram SwarajAbhiyan(RGSA) is flagship scheme of Ministryof Panchayati Raj, 
aimed at strengthening PRIs for achieving Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with main 
thrust on convergence with Mission Antyodaya and emphasis on strengthening PRIs in the 
117 Aspirational Districts. The Committee note that the scheme has both State and Central 
components. Sharing pattern is in the ratio of 60:40 except NE and Hilly States and UT of J&K 
where Central and State Ratio is in the proportion of 90:10. For other UTs, it is 100% centrally 
funded. The Central component is 100% funded by Centre. However, analysis of release of 
funds to the States/UTs reflects a grim picture of apathy towards its objectives. There has 
been a huge gap in the approved plans vis-a-vis released funds under this scheme. Data 
provided by the Ministry shows that 432.90 crore fund has been released against 3213.13 
crore approved in the year 2019-20, further 499.93 crore has been released against 3337.87 
crore approved in 2020- 21 and 518.06 crore has been released against 4480.22 crore in 
2021-22. The Committee is concerned to note that non-release/untimely release of the 
sanctioned funds to the States/UTs after approval of their annual action plans (AAPs) by the 
Central Empowered Committee defeats the very purpose of the RGSA to make Panchayati 
Raj Institutions efficient, effective and transparent grass roots institutions. The Committee is 
given to understand that the Ministry has observed laxity and reluctance on the part of States 
in fulfilling conditions (in which non-release of corresponding share by the States is one of 
them) attached to release of funds result in delayed or non-release of funds to States/UTs. 
The Committee, however, note that the Ministry has not even released amount in previous 
years of 2019-20, 2020-21 & 2021-22 to the UTs such as Andaman & Nicobar Islands where 
100 per cent share is from Central Government. Under the current set-up, the Committee 
observe that fund for RGSA has been grossly underutilized. Considering the importance of the 
scheme the Committee recommend that to achieve the objectives of RGSA, Ministry should 
take proactive measure in streamlining the paperwork by reducing the number of requirement 
of documents and simplify the procedure of releasing funds to the States/UTs. The Committee 

45 
 
are of the firm view that in order to achieve the basic objectives of the RGSA, the Ministry 
should take a lenient approach and proactive measures to release adequate funds. The 
Committee is given to understand that the scheme of RGSA is demand driven in nature and its 
release of funds remained depend on timely submission of Annual Action Plans, liquidation of 
unspent balance, submission of requisite documents, State share release etc by the 
States/UTs. The committee are of the view that in further extension of RGSA several reforms 
are needed. One of these reforms may be active Involvement of local Members of Parliament. 
Needless to mention here that Members of Parliament are representatives of people, well 
versed with local needs of their areas. They are critical in providing crucial inputs regarding 
local needs for policy formulation. Their active involvement in programmes/schemes of 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj will make these programmes effective and catering to the local 
needs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
            “It is submitted that the quantum of release of funds under the scheme of RGSA 
during 2021-22 depended on the unspent balance available with the State, utilization 
certificate and physical-financial progress reports furnished etc. and also on compliance of 
Department of Expenditure instruction dated 23rd March, 2021 regulating the release of funds 
under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes and further instruction thereupon. During the large 
period of the year States/UTs were under the process to comply the said DoE instructions. 
The States/UTs which had unspent balances could not get full funds, thus resulting in the 
huge gap between sanctioned and released amounts. The funds to the UT of Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands could not be released due unspent balance of previous year exceeding the 
releasable amount. The Ministry appreciates the view expressed by the esteemed 
Committee about the involvement of Members of Parliament etc. in the 
programmes/schemes of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in making them effective. It is 
worthwhile to note that the National Steering Committee constituted for providing overall 
guidance and policy directions for the scheme of RGSA/Revamped RGSA includes Ministers 
of different Central Ministries as well as Minister of State Panchayati Raj Departments, 
eminent person working in the field of Panchayati Raj, Elected Representatives of 
Panchayats etc.  

46 
 
  
            Further, the State Advisory Committee to be constituted in the States for periodical 
review of implementation of the scheme in the respective states will inter alia include 
Ministers of line Departments in the States eminent person working in the field of Panchayati 
Raj, Elected Representatives of Panchayats etc. It may be observed there from, that there is 
ample provision for taking into account the feedback of Public Representatives in 
Implementation of the scheme. “ 
O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation Serial No.6) 
Incentivization of Panchayats  
 
        Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has been incentivizing best performing 
Panchayats/States/UTs since the year 2011 on the basis of developed evaluation 
criteria/parameters under the Incentivization of Panchayats Scheme. It provides awards in 
different categories to the Panchayats for their initiatives and achievements on set criteria. 
These initiatives undertaken by the Gram Panchayats and their achievements should be well 
publicised so that other Gram Panchayats are also motivated to launch similar initiatives. It will 
also enhance healthy competition among the Gram Panchayats. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Information dissemination of best practices and initiatives of Gram 
Panchayats should be given wide publicity so that other Gram Panchayats can follow. The 
Committee are constrained to note that the funds for Incentivisation of Panchayats given in 
recognition to their good work done for improving of delivery of services and public goods has 
been stagnant and the level of number of awards given has hardly increased during the last 
three years i.e. 2020-21 onwards from Rs. 47.00 crore to Rs.50.00 crore even when the 
expenditure has been almost full. The Committee, therefore, feel that 
amount on this scheme be suitably revised with commensurate increase in number of Awards 
to be given to Panchayats. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in 
this regard. 

47 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 “For creating greater awareness and motivation among Panchayats across the country 
for National Panchayat Awards, vigorous efforts are made in collaboration with States/ Union 
Territories (UTs), inter-alia, for publicity through print, electronic media and other platforms. 
Further, the awardees under National Panchayat Awards are conferred awards on the 
occasion of National Panchayati Raj Day (NPRD) celebrated on 24th April annually. NPRD 
function is a widely publicized National Level event which is well attended (virtually or 
physically) by Union and States Ministers, high level dignitaries and the representatives from 
various Panchayats across the country apart from the ones selected for the awards. This 
celebration highlights and propogates the achievements/best practices of Panchayats and 
also role of Panchayats in overall governance and development.  
Incentivization of Panchayats scheme has been approved as a central component of the 
revamped Rashtriya Gram SwarajAbhiyan(RGSA) scheme with a budgetary provision of 
Rs.50.00 crores for the financial year 2022-23. Interventions are being made to further 
improve and rationalize the National Panchayat Awards with establishing a multi-level 
pyramidical structure of competition at National, State/UT, District and Block level and aligning 
the Awards/themes to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In addition to the budgetary 
provision by the Ministry for incentivization of Panchayats, initiatives are being taken to 
collaborate with line Ministries/Departments for sponsoring these awards keeping in view that 
the Panchayats play a pivotal role in implementing flagship schemes/programmes for 
attainment of SDGs.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation Serial No. 8) 
 Digitization of Gram Panchayats 
  
        The Committee’s examination has revealed that in August, 2015 under Pillar 3 of Digital 
India Programme, Government of India launched ‘Common Service Centre (CSCs) 2 Project’ 
to expand the outreach of CSCs to all Gram Panchayats (GPs) across the country that aimed 
to set up at least one CSCs in every GP thereby envisaging to set up 2.55 lakh CSCs covering 

48 
 
all GPs of the country over a period of four years with Department of Telecommunications 
(DoT) to connect Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) by broadband internet connections. The Ministry 
aims to leverage Common Service Centres (CSCs) in realizing the objective of Smart 
Governance and provision of online services. It has signed a MoU with CSC to achieve this 
objective on 21st August, 2019. The MoU inter alia provides that CSCs would be co-located in 
the Gram Panchayat Bhawans and would be offering the various G2G, B2B and B2C services 
to rural public. However, the Committee constraint to note glairing irregularities in the 
functioning of CSCs during its study visit to the State of Maharashtra (Amaravati, Chandrapur 
and Nagpur) in the month of August 2021. The Committee inter alia observed that most of the 
CSCs were not collocated in the Gram Panchayats, internet infrastructure deployed in the 
Panchayat Bhawan was not functional, there was no board affixed outside to provide 
information to the people at large about the services provided by CSCs and at which rates, 10 
to 15 documents were being issued on monthly basis, delay in payment of salary to the 
operator, etc. Further, on rough calculation, it was found that a print out at CSC centre is 
costing Rs. 3,682/-. The Committee were astonished to note that MoPRwas totally unaware of 
the above ground realities. ‘Panchayats’ being the State subject, it never made a genuine 
effort to ascertain the actual position at the State level by conducting a formal independent 
enquiry and it has heavily relied on the reports and facts furnished by CSCs. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that a high level taskforce may be set-up with a mandate to 
conduct in-depth examination of functioning of CSCs co-located in the Gram Panchayat 
Bhawans for which payment is being made though government exchequer. It may be 
ascertain as to how far it has been able to achieve the objectives enshrined in the MoU. The 
Committee would also like the task force to understand the different models being followed in 
different state and come out with a possible cost effective alternative option of creating digital 
Panchayats. The Committee trust and expect that the taskforce would conduct a thorough and 
independent study of services being provided by the CSCs and submit its report within a 
period of three months from the date of presentation of the Report. The Committee would like 
to apprised of the effective steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

49 
 
“A Task Force to review the working of CSCs collocated in GPs (ASSKs) in the State of 
Maharashtra constituted under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Governance), MoPR by 
MeitY. 
  The 1st meeting of the Task Force was held on 17th May, 2022 to examine the 
effectiveness of the services delivered by CSCs co-located in GP Bhawans. In the light of the 
findings, the continuation of the MoU between MoPR and CSC-SPV, which is an advice to the 
State to effect bilateral MoU with CSC-SPV, shall be critically examined. Its role in improving 
delivery of the services at the grassroots level shall form the basis.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
REVISED REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
“A Task Force to review the working of CSCs collocated in GPs (ASSKs) in the State of 
Maharashtra constituted under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Governance), MoPR by 
MeitY. 
The 1st meeting of the Task Force was held on 17th May, 2022 to examine the 
effectiveness of the services delivered by CSCs co-located in GP Bhawans.Second Meeting is 
due on 21st June, 2022. 
In the light of the findings of the Task Force, the continuation of the MoU between MoPR 
and CSC-SPV, which is an advice to the State to effect bilateral MoU with CSC-SPV, shall be 
critically examined. Its role in improving delivery of the services at the grassroots level shall 
form the basis. 
The Task Force shall also examine the models being followed in other States and then 
recommend action to ensure that the best support services are provided to the GPs in the 
most effective manner.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 17thJune, 2022 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Serial No.9) 

50 
 
The Committee note that a letter dated 03rd September 2019 had been issued by the 
Secretary, MoPR to Principal Secretary/Secretary, Panchayati Raj of all the States, wherein, 
while citing the MoU signed between MoPR and CSC e-Governance Services India Limited 
dated 21stAugust 2019 and advised to all the States to enter into MoU with CSCSPV for using 
their services towards Smart Governance and digital India, etc. Further, for this purpose, 
States may utilize funds provided to the States under various schemes viz. RGSA for 
computerization, deployment of Technical human resource, Fifteenth Finance Commission 
(FFC) component of Operation and Maintenance (10%) grants which are available with the 
Gram Panchayats. Consequently, 3 States i.e. Madhya Pradesh, and Uttarakhand entered 
into MoU with CSC and Maharashtra extended its earlier MoU signed with CSC on 17th 
November 2016. During the course of evidence, the Secretary, MoPR was candid enough to 
accept the fact that the programme has been a non-starter and the experience has not been 
good. He further admitted that the MoU entered by CSC-SPV with the States of Madhya 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand has not been made operational due to various reasons and Uttar 
Pradesh has rejected the proposal of CSC and declined to sign the MoU, citing high cost of 
services offered by CSC. The Committee has also observed irregularities in the functioning of 
CSCs during its study visit to Maharashtra. During the course of evidence, Secretary also 
informed the committee that of late, many complaints have also been received from the state 
of Maharashtra as well. He further added that in reality, not even one-forth CSCs have been 
collocated in Gram Panchayat Bhawani.e. less than 50,000 throughout India and most of the 
CSCs are functioning from the private centres in the market. He further assured the 
Committee that the Ministry would revisit the whole process to ascertain the factual position. 
During the Course of evidence, it was informed that a presentation was made before the 
Secretary, MoPR by CEO, CSC-SPV on digitization of Panchayati Raj and thereafter, the Joint 
Secretary, MoPR had visited 3 villages in Pune District. Subsequently, the letter dated 
03rdSeptember 2019 was issued by the Secretary, MoPR. The Committee acknowledged the 
candid submission of the Ministry with regards below benchmark performance of CSC-SPV in 
the State of Maharashtra. The Committee is, therefore, of the considerate view that under the 
current scheme of things, the vision of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to usher in and realize 
the aim of Smart Governance and providing online services both of Government and non-
government is far to be achieved. The Committee are of the view that it was not rational on the 

51 
 
part of the Ministry to issue an advisory for the State Government without conducting an 
impartial and independent inquiry, to ascertain the factual position in the different parts of the 
state of Maharashtra and not just Pune, which is one of the leading tech-savvy districts of 
Maharashtra. Thus, in the light of study visit of the Committee to different parts of 
Maharashtra, the Committee are of the view that it would not be prudent on the part of MoPR 
to continue MoU with CSC. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry 
that the letter dated 03rdSeptember, 2019 issued by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to the 
Principal Secretary/Secretary, Panchayati Raj of all States may be withdrawn forthwith and 
issue appropriate communication to all the States, in this regard. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
“A Task Force to review the working of CSCs collocated in GPs (ASSKs) in the State of 
Maharashtra has been constituted under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Governance), 
MoPR. 
  The utility of the MoU signed between MoPR& CSC-SPV would also be evaluated by 
this committee.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
REVISED REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 “A Task Force to review the working of CSCs collocated in GPs (ASSKs) in the State 
of Maharashtra has been constituted under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Governance), 
MoPR. Vide MEITY’s O.M dated 22.4.2022.” 
O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 17thJune, 2022 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation Serial No.10) 
It came out before the Committee that in these Common Services Centres (CSCs) are 
getting about Rs.1.50 lakh per annum from the State Government of Maharashtra. In return 
are unable to render the promised services the beneficiaries under MOUs signed and are 

52 
 
merely handing over Birth and Death Certificates to rural population. Besides, CSCs have 
claimed funds for stationary items even during the lock down period. The Committee during 
the Study Visit to Maharashtra were apprised by the officials that CEOs of ZillaParishad of 
Chandrapur and Wardha districts of Maharashtra have fined the CSC SPV for irregularities 
noticed in the working of CSCs co-located at the Gram Panchayats viz. Non establishment of 
Centres, non repairs and replacement of hardware on time, Kendrachalak(Data entry 
operator) remained absent frequently or not performing duties as expected, etc. The 
Committee take serious exception to this plunder of public money at the hands of erring CSCs. 
The Committee recommend that all these cases of false claims of public money not only in 
Maharashtra and other States be thoroughly probed and erring CSCs officials be brought to 
book at the earliest. The Committee are of the firm view that an enquiry Committee be set up 
to enquire into functioning of CSCs Committed to provide facilities to Gram Panchayats in 
Maharashtra. Accordingly, the Ministry may take corrective measures to have a meaningful 
utilization of funds from Government exchequer and explore the possibility of refund to the 
Gram Panchayats. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The funding for operationalization of CSCs and their day to day working is as per the 
MoU signed between State Government and CSC.  No funds are provided by MoPR for 
operating CSCs.  Hence, MoPR has no direct control over the day to day functioning of the 
CSC.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
REVISED REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“Reply date 09.06.2022 retained.” 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

53 
 
(Recommendation Serial No.11) 
  
Government of India envisions India to be a Digitally Inclusive and empowered society 
where large sections of rural population are able tobenefit from new technologies, can access 
and share information and services freely and participate in the development process more 
effectively. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj have envisaged “Digitization of Gram Panchayats” 
with the objective of setting up at least one self sustainable Common Service Centre in each 
Gram Panchayat (GP) across the country. In pursuant of this objective, a Memorandum of 
Understanding was signed between Ministry of Panchayati Raj and CSC e-governance 
services Ltd. (CSC-SPV) on the 21st August, 2019. Subsequently, an advisory was issued by 
the Secretary, MoPR vide letter dated 3rd September 2019 to all the States to develop 
synergy between Common Service Centers and Gram Panchayats to establish Digital 
Bhawans. In this background, two States i.e. Madhya Pradesh, and Uttarakhand entered into 
MoU with CSC, whereas, Maharashtra extended its earlier MoU which was signed with CSC 
on 17th November 2016. The Committee on thorough examination of various provision of 
MoU, had arrive to the conclusion that under the MoU there has been paramount role and 
responsibility assigned to MoPR with regard to monitoring and review progress of the project. 
As per the provision 7.4 of the MoU, MoPR was duty bound to nominate a Nodal officer, who 
shall be overall in charge of the project to monitor and review progress of this project with the 
States. Further, as per provision 7.6 of the MoU, MoPR had to constitute Project Monitoring 
and Steering Committee (PMSC) comprising of officials from MoPR, CSC-SPV and nominated 
States. It shall have oversight and monitoring functions and shall provide guidance for the 
smooth operation of the project. The Steering Committee would also review progress and 
initiate suitable timely advisory/instructions to the States/UTs. The Committee are constrained 
to note that Ministry had made no effort to nominate nodal officer for this purpose. Despite 
having a crucial role, the MoPR in its reply has again and again emphasised on ‘Panchayat’ 
being the State subject and digitization of Panchayats thereto primarily being the responsibility 
of the States and always tried to pass the buck to the States. The Ministry has, however, failed 
to impress the Committee with its evasive replies in this regard. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the explanation of the Ministry on the issue. There is nothing on records to 
suggest that the Ministry has taken its role seriously. The Committee, therefore, recommend 

54 
 
the Ministry to revisit its role and responsibilities assigned to it in the MoU and come out with a 
concrete roadmap to deal such issues under the cooperative federal Structure where both 
Centre and States come together and resolve the common problems with each other's' 
cooperation. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard 
within three months after presentation of this report. 
ORIGINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The Ministry has been continuously following up with the States for co-location of CSCs 
in Panchayat Bhawans. A Project Monitoring & Steering Committee for active Bharatnet 
Connection and CSC Co-location has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Additional 
Secretary, MoPR with members from DoT, MeitY, CSC-SPV etc.  
Moreover, financial incentives uptoRs. 5 Lakhs is also being provided to the States under 
the Ministry’s umbrella Rashtriya Gram SwarajAbhiyaan(RGSA) scheme for co-location of 
CSCs in Gram Panchayat offices. 
  Further, various consultation meetings have been conducted and advisories written to 
the States in this regards.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 9thJune, 2022 
REVISED REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The Ministry has been continuously following up with the States for co-location of 
CSCs in Panchayat Bhawans. A Project Monitoring & Steering Committee for active Bharatnet 
Connection and CSC Co-location has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Additional 
Secretary, MoPR with members from DoT, MeitY, CSC-SPV etc.  
Moreover, financial incentives upto Rs. 5 Lakhs is also being provided to the States 
under the Ministry’s umbrella Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyaan (RGSA) scheme for co-
location of CSCs in Gram Panchayat offices.  
Further, various consultation meetings have been conductedand advisories written to 
the States in this regard.  The high-level Task Force is examining the issue. The Committee 
shall be duly apprised of the progress made.” 
 O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 17thJune, 2022 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 30 of Chapter I of the Report) 

55 
 
CHAPTER V 
 RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL 
AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
 
O.M. No. H-11024/2/2022-Parl.Dated: 17thJune, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        NEW DELHI;              PRATAPRAO JADHAV 
28 July, 2022                              Chairperson, 
06 Shravana, 1944 (Saka)         Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
  

56 
 
ANNEXURE I 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 23rd JUNE, 2022. 
 
 The Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj convened their twelfth 
sitting for 2021-22 on Thursday, the 23rd June 2022 from 1715 hrs. to 1825  hrs. in New 
Committee Room No. '3', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension (EPHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Prataprao Jadhav  -- Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri  Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri  A.K.P. Chinraj 
4. Shri  Rajveer Diler 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
7. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
8. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
9. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
10. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
11. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
12. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
13. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Shri  Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiya 
15.  Shri  Iranna Kadadi 
16. Shri Rathwa Naranbhai Jemlabhai 
17. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh 
18. Shri M. Mohammed Abdulla 
 
    Secretariat 
1. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar - Additional Director 
2. Shri Nishant Mehra  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

57 
 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
1.  Shri Sunil Kumar - Secretary 
2.  Dr. Chandra Shekhar Kumar - Additional Secretary 
3.  Shri Alok Prem Nagar - Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to the 
sitting convened to have a discussion with the representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
pertaining to Action Taken Replies furnished by them on Recommendation Nos. 8 to 11 
contained in the 24th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2022-23) regarding 
'Digitization of Gram Panchayats'.  
                  [Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj were then called in] 
 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the Secretary and his colleagues. In his opening remarks, 
the Chairperson pointed out that Action Taken Replies are vague and evasive in nature 
without delineating specific action taken thereon and that is why the Committee reverted and 
directed the Ministry to revise the same. However, the Ministry has not made any substantial 
changes even in its revised reply.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson highlighted that even after apprising the Ministry of the 
dismal ground reality observed by the Committee during its study visits to various parts of the 
country, so far no corrective action has been taken by the Ministry. The Chairperson also 
highlighted that several sittings and discussions with the officials of Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
(MoPR), Department of Telecommunications (DoT) Ministry of Communications and Ministry 
of Electronics and Information Technology (MEITY) held, however hardly any progress has 
been made and the matter still remains unresolved. Drawing the attention, the Chairperson 
briefly dealt with the recommendations which included: 
 Constitution of High Level Task Force to review the functioning of Common Service 
Centres (CSCs) and submit its report within a period of three months,  
 Withdrawal of advisory issued by the Ministry to all the States on 21 August 2019 for 
entering in an Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with CSC e-Governance 
Services Limited,  
 Decision of MoPR as to whether it should continue its MoU with CSC or not,  
 Fixing responsibility for all the false claims of public money in the hands of erring 
CSC officials not only in Maharashtra but in other States too by conducting a 
thorough  probe in the matter,  
 Nomination of a nodal officer for oversight of the programmes monitoring,  
 Issue of meaningful utilization of funds from Government exchequer, and  

58 
 
 To explore the possibility of refunds to the Gram Panchayats.  
 
5. Thereafter, impressing upon the representatives to treat the proceedings of the 
Committee as confidential under Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker', the 
Chairperson asked the representatives of the Ministry to briefly put up their perspectives on 
the agenda of the sitting.  
 
6. The Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj began with the introduction of his colleagues 
and informed that a high level Task Force has been constituted by Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology in Chairmanship of Joint Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj on the 
directions of the Committee. The Task Force has held two sittings and has taken presentation 
from five states. The Committee were then informed that the report of the Task Force will be 
furnished in due course and the actions will be undertaken based on that.  
 
7. The representatives of the Ministry accepted the fact that a Nodal Officer was supposed 
to be appointed for the monitoring of the programme but not done. The Committee were 
apprised that a Steering Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The Committee were further informed that 
the different models of Digitization of Gram Panchayats are followed in different States and 
models of different States will be analyzed by the Task Force in its Report.  
 
8. Thereafter, the Chairperson and Members sought clarifications from the Ministry on 
various issues which inter-alia included- 
 Memorandum of Understanding between Government of Maharashtra and CSC e-
Governance Services Ltd, has been given extension based on the advisory issued by the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj,   
 Reason for non-submission of information sought from the Ministry regarding names of at 
least five or ten Gram Panchayats in the State of Maharashtra districts where good work in 
Digitization has been taken up by CSC, 
 ‘Digitization of Gram Panchayats’ is a Central Government programme and funds provided 
to the CSCs and the requirement of their appropriate utilization.  
 Misappropriation of funds as observed by the Committee in its study visits, 
 Steps proposed by Ministry to put end to the misuse of Panchayat’s funds in the hands of 
erring CSC officials. 
 
9. The representatives of the Ministry responded to some of the queries raised by the 
Chairperson and Members of the Committee. The Ministry opined that the Task Force needs 
some more time to submit its findings as they were involved in getting cabinet approval of 
RGSA guidelines, celebration of Panchayati Raj Diwas, crunch of staff and officers. 
Additionally, the report will be submitted after taking stock of situation holistically in other 
States also where the programme is going on successfully. The Committee accepted the 

59 
 
request and directed the officials to submit its findings within three months with the appropriate 
actions taken on them.  
 
10. The Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj thanked the Committee and stated that the 
Ministry would furnish information and initiate appropriate action on specific recommendations 
of the Committee on the matter. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
            A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record. 
 
***** 
 (2021-2022) 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH  
  

60 
 
ANNEXURE II 
 
 
 
  

61 
 
 
 
  

62 
 
ANNEXURE - III 
[Vide  para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FOURTH REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 I. Total number of recommendations:     18  
      
 II. Recommendations that have been accepted     
  by the Government :  
 Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18    
    
Total:         12 
Percentage:        75%  
   
   
III. Recommendations which the Committee do  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies :    
  Serial Nos. NIL 
         
Total:         00 
Percentage:        00 %  
               
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of   
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee:         
Serial Nos. 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 
Total:         06 
Percentage:        25 %   
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies   
of the Government are still awaited :      
  Serial Nos. NIL 
 
Total:          00 
Percentage:         00 %  