 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2021-2022) 
   
 
 SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana –Gramin (PMAY-G) of the Ministry of Rural Development  
(Department of Rural Development)'] 
 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
21


 
 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2021-2022) 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana –Gramin (PMAY-G) of the Ministry of Rural Development  
(Department of Rural Development)'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   16.03.2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    16.03.2022 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2022/Phalguna, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
CRD No   175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
© 2022 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____ Edition) 
and Printed by __________________. 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-2022)   ......................................   (ii) 
  
 
INTRODUCTION      …....................................   (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report   ..........................................................................    1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................................... 20 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies………….............................................................................  39 
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee ............................................................................ 40 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ...................................... 51  
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 9 December, 2016………………......      19 
 
I. Extract of Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 14.03.2022..................   52 
 
 II.  Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
 Sixteenth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development  
& Panchayati Raj........................................................................................................  ..........54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2021-2022) 
 
  Shri Prataprao Jadhav  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok  Sabha 
2. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri C. N. Annadurai 
4. Shri A.K.P Chinraj 
5. Shri Rajveer Diler 
6. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
7. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
10. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
11. Shri Narendra Kumar 
12. Shri Janardan Mishra 
13. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
14. Shri Talari Rangaiah 
15. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
16. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
17. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
18. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
19. Shri Kumbakudi Sudhakaran 
20. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
21. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiya 
23. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
24. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
27. Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa 
28. Shri Ram Shakal 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
30. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh 
31. -vacant- 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri D.R.Shekhar - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Shah - Director    
3. Shri Inam Ahmed - Executive Officer 
____________________________________________________________ 
 
(ii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj  
(2021-2022) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the 
21st Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (17th Lok Sabha) on 'Pradhan 
Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY-G) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Rural Development). 
2.  The Sixteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 05.08.2021 and was laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on the same date. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 18.01.2022. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
14.03.2022. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEWDELHI;         PRATAPRAO JADHAV 
14 March,  2022               Chairperson, 
23 Phalguna, 1943 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj (2021-22) deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Sixteenth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana – 
Gramin (PMAY-G) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Rural Development).  
2.   The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 
05.08.2021 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. 
The Report contained 19 Observations/Recommendations.  
3.  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been 
received from the Government. These have been examined and 
categorised as follows: -  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 
           Total: 14  
          Chapter-II  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL           
          Total: NIL      
         Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 2, 5, 9, 11, 12        
Total: 05  
  Chapter-IV   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL         
Total: NIL  
       Chapter-V 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ 
recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be furnished to 
the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments.  
I. Selection of Beneficiaries 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
6. With regard to the selection of beneficiaries, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
The contention of the Ministry that PMAY-G aims to realize the vision of 
‘Housing for All by 2022’ through a robust delivery and monitoring mechanism for 
and improved scheme architecture put in place does not stand ground in view of the 
existing challenges of discrepancies in identification of beneficiary, cumbersome 
appellate process which is out of the reach of the rural poor. Biased and politically 
motivated approach in identification of beneficiary cannot be ruled out by the 
elected body of a Gram Panchayat coupled with the grievance redressal appellate 
mechanism out of the reach of the economically and socially deprived rural 
populace culminating into meaningless exercise in the absence of any support 
mechanism to provide assistance for raising grievance. This view of the Committee 
is further strengthened when the Secretary, Rural Development during evidence 
submitted that the “institutions become difficult to manage, if spoiled. Since 
Members of Parliament head DISHA meetings, they may point out the shortcomings 
and the Ministry of Rural Development shall take strict action against those found 
guilty.” However, the Committee are not fully convinced with stance and feel that if 
the primary concern of proper selection of the beneficiaries is not addressed 
properly, the whole initiative of bringing improvement in the living conditions of the 
rural poor may be ineffective. In a scenario where the centrally sponsored scheme 
is implemented at the District/Panchayat level and monitored at the central level, it 
becomes utmost important to downsize the role of Gram Sabha and to rope in 
private organizations and non-government bodies for identification / authentication 
of the beneficiary list and the responsibility is fixed on the Block Development 

3 
 
Officers by making them accountable for factual verification of the details and 
progress of PMAY-G unit for fairer results. The Members of Parliament definitely 
monitor the progress in the DISHA meetings and highlight the anomalies but issues 
are lost in the tussle of Centre, State jurisdiction. The Committee, therefore, seek 
the Ministry's intervention to review the methodology by downsizing the role of 
Sarpanch/Gram Panchayat by incorporation of Block Development Officer (BDO) by 
fixing accountability and involving NGOs / Private Bodies that may act as pillars of 
support for the socially 32 and economically poor in raising their issues so that 
proper identification / authentication of targeted beneficiaries of this scheme is 
achieved and intention of the present scheme is materialized.  
The Committee also observe that PMAY-G at the time of launch in 2016 was 
mandated to construct 2.95 crore houses to visualize the dream of providing pucca 
house with basic amenities to the selected beneficiaries by 2021-2022 will now 
cover 2.49 crore beneficiaries by 2022. The Committee, however, feel that in view 
of the complaints of biased approach of the Gram Panchayats and anomalies in the 
SECC-2011 data, a flexible approach should be adopted by devising a new strategy 
so that no needy houseless or household with kucha roof as defined are left out and 
the list is updated accordingly. 
7. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
As per Framework for Implementation of PMAY-G, the identification of 
beneficiaries under PMAY-G is based on the housing deprivation 
parameters and exclusion criteria prescribed under SECC 2011 subject 
to due verification by Gram Sabha and completion of Appellate 
process. 
The MoRD Commissioned the ‘Awaas+’ survey to identify additional 
eligible households for assistance under PMAY-G which were not 
included in the Permanent Wait List (PWL) derived from the SECC-
2011 survey data. Under this survey 3.57 Crore households were 
registered. Targets from the Awaas+ survey being allotted to the 
States/ UT following the recommendations of the Expert Committee. 
From the list of 3.57 crore registrations on Awaas+, there was a need 
for filtration of genuinely deprive households for providing the benefit 
under the scheme and therefore, Expert Committees were constituted. 
Out of 3.57 crore registered households, the States and UTs have 
removed 80.43 lakh ineligible households from the Awaas plus 
database and 2.77 crore households remain as eligible as on 25th 
November 2021.  

4 
 
The Union Cabinet had authorized the Minister, Rural Development, in 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance, for inclusion of additional 
eligible households from the final Awaas+ list into the Permanent Wait 
List (PWL) of PMAY-G, with a ceiling of 2.95 crore, for those States / 
UTs where PWL is exhausted and to allocate target to these States / 
UTs. The number of such households shall be the difference between 
2.95 crore households, as approved in the Cabinet Note for the 1st 
Phase of PMAY-G, and the beneficiaries left in the Permanent Wait List 
after verification by Gram Sabhas. Since some of the States, namely 
West Bengal, Tripura, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh were yet 
to exhaust their existing SECC based PWL of PMAY-G, the Ministry 
has so far allocated target of 50.99 lakh houses to States/UTs which 
had exhausted their existing SECC PWL. The targets from Awaas+ list 
at the State/UT level have been arrived at by using the methodology 
recommended by the two Expert Committees on Awaas+. In addition, 
at present, the Ministry is allocating targets till Gram Panchayat Level 
to the States/UTs and the above-mentioned targeted beneficiaries 
have been identified and the lists have been conveyed to the 
States/UTs on AwaasSoft for further processing. The States/UTs are 
able to generate the GP wise priority lists after following the procedure. 
The procedure for identification of the right beneficiary under PMAY-G 
is in alignment with the Article 243(G) of the Indian Constitution on the 
Powers authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.  
Apart from the process mentioned above for the selection of eligible 
beneficiaries from the SECC-2011 survey data / Awaas+ survey data, 
the eligibility of the beneficiaries is also being confirmed at the time of 
sanctioning the house. Further, the geotagged photographs of the 
existing houses and the proposed sites are being captured using 
AwaasApp. 
As per FFI, a Grievance redressal mechanism is also set up at Gram 
Panchayat, Block, District, and the State levels. Contact details of the 
designated grievance redressal official and the procedure to file the 
grievance is clearly displayed in each Panchayat. There is also scope 
for escalation, if the complainant is not satisfied with the disposal of his/ 
her grievance. Complaints received in the MoRD are forwarded to the 
respective State Government for redressal of the grievance. The 
designated officers are required to take necessary action and furnish 
the ATR to the MoRD under intimation to the complainant within one 
month of receipt of the complaint. Services of the Ombudsman under 
MGNREGA may also be utilized for redressal of the grievances.  

5 
 
In addition, complaints are received through CPGRAMS wherein there 
is an inbuilt mechanism for categorization of complaints. Regular follow 
up is done with States/UTs for speedy disposal of the grievances. In 
cases of serious irregularities/ allegations, Central Government Teams 
are also deputed for conducting enquiry. 
In cases where the complaint against the Officials/ Panchayat Adhikari/ 
Pradhan etc. is found to be true during enquiry by Central Government/ 
State Government team, prompt action is taken against the erring 
Officials. Following actions are suggested by Ministry to the States for 
immediate action against the erring Officials: 
(i)FIR be filed against the erring Officials immediately 
(ii)Action to be taken against the concerned BDO, who is second 
signatory of the FTOs under PMAY-G and other supervisors who would 
have certified and inspected the works 
(iii) Show cause be served against the Officials and other concerned 
officials in cases where there is delayed action against the erring 
Officials 
(iv) State/UT to publicise widely the action taken in the matter including 
on social media 
The above grievances redressal mechanism ensures that in cases of 
selection of ineligible households or other such cases, appropriate 
action is taken against those responsible for irregularities. 
  
The Union Cabinet has approved extension of the PMAY-G beyond 
March 2021 till March 2024, owing to non-release of state shares 
despite in-time release of funds by the Central Govt, in order to enable 
the States to complete the targets of 2.95 crore houses by March 2024" 
 
8. The Committee noted the existing challenges of discrepancies in 
identification of beneficiaries under PMAY-G and were concerned at the 
approach of the Ministry for realizing the vision of ‘Housing for All’ by 2022 in 
the absence of fool-proof and robust mechanism for the identification of 
genuine beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, sought the Ministry’s 
intervention to review the methodology by downsizing the role of 
Sarpanch/Gram-Panchayat through the incorporation of Block Development 
Officer (BDO) and involvement of NGOs/Private Bodies alongwith adoption of 
a flexible approach so that no needy person is left behind. 

6 
 
 From the replies submitted by the Ministry, as per Awaas+ survey 
additional 2.77 crore households remain as eligible as on  
25th November, 2021 and that the Ministry have so far allocated target of 50.99 
lakh houses to States/UTs which had exhausted their existing SECC 
Permanent Wait List (PWL). The Committee while recognizing the efforts being 
taken do not resonate with the view of the Ministry in quoting Article 243(G) of 
the Indian Constitution and silent response on the issue raised regarding the 
role of Gram Panchayats in the identification of right beneficiaries. Moreover, 
the Committee also do not find any cogent reply pertaining to the concern of 
identifying and including genuine beneficiaries under PMAY-G. It is expected 
of the Ministry to come up with some stringent mechanism for the resolution 
of issues afflicting the identification of beneficiaries and appropriate exercise 
of power by the Gram Panchayats in context of PMAY-G. Therefore, the 
Committee reiterate their recommendation for the suitable solution to the 
bottleneck in the implementation of PMAY-G, more so when the deadline has 
been extended to March, 2024. 
 
II. Unit Assistance under PMAY-G and Loan Facility 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
9. With regard to the Unit Assistance under PMAY-G and Loan Facility, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
The Ministry while admitting to no proposal in hand for increase in the unit 
assistance under PMAY-G owing to factors like land is owned by the beneficiary, 
minimum plot size is 25 Sq Meters and the unit cost has been substantially 
increased, have also apprised that 05 States i.e., Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Haryana, 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Andhra Pradesh provide specific top up schemes for 
assistance to beneficiaries, in addition to availability of loan facility of 70,000/- from 
financial institutions. In view of it the Committee feel that there is a need to re-

7 
 
examine the need for additional finance to meet construction expenses under the 
scheme.. The Committee opine that the Ministry's view of not bringing the unit 
assistance of PMAY-G at par with PMAY-U does not stand ground from their own 
admission that economic conditions of the beneficiaries warrant various States 
Governments to provide top up assistance for construction of PMAY-G house. 
Secondly, the Ministry stance that the present unit assistance may not be one of the 
reasons behind non achievement of targets is contradicted by the figures on backlog 
of Phase-I and non achievement of targets of Phase-II of PMAY-G. Furthermore, 
70,000/- loan scheme does not find acceptance among beneficiaries owing to their 
social and economic conditions making it impossible to render collateral and bear 
high interests / administrative costs. Also the assertion of substantial increase in the 
unit cost since April, 2016 is not convincing because the unit-wise plot size has been 
increased from 20 Sq. mtr. under the previous scheme to 25 Sq meter under PMAY-
G and cost escalation during the last 5 years besides increased transportation costs 
especially in remote, hilly and difficult terrain areas. The Committee, further, observe 
that the Secretary, MoRD was candid enough to depose the matter and come up 
with a solution on the issue of higher transportation costs being incurred in 
transporting building material to the site in Himalayan and hilly regions of the 
country. Besides, the Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development, in his further 
deposition stated that as per indication received from Prime Minister’s Office there 
will be no shortage of funds for this program. In this regard, the Committee are of the 
view that it becomes necessary for the Ministry to consider some increase in the unit 
assistance under PMAY-G on the basis of the present day price index and come up 
with a solution. The Committee, therefore, recommend that since the scheme is in 
the mid-way and accomplishment of the goal is set for 2022, it would be appropriate, 
to consider enhancement of assistance cost by Rs. 10,000/- both for plain and hilly 
areas respectively. The Committee also recommend that additional sources for 
topping up of unit assistance through convergence with State Schemes so that 
success of PMAY-G Scheme is achieved in all earnestness throughout the country. 
 
10. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“Under PMAY-G, the unit assistance of Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain 
areas and Rs. 1.30 lakh in difficult areas, IAP districts, Hilly States 
(including UTs of J&K and Ladakh) is as per the approval of the Union 

8 
 
Cabinet. In addition to the unit assistance, the beneficiaries are 
facilitated with 90/95 mandays of unskilled labour wages through 
mandatory convergence with MGNREGS. Support of Rs. 12,000 for 
construction of toilet is also provided through SBM-G, MGNREGS or 
any other dedicated source of funding. The total assistance available to 
a beneficiary for construction of house with toilet works out to Rs. 1.50 
lakh in plain areas and Rs. 1.60 lakh in difficult areas. 
  
Para 6.2.4 of the FFI of PMAY-G provides that the States can 
also source construction material of good quality at reasonable rates 
for the beneficiaries. This arrangement of material bank can be made 
at places where the beneficiaries have consented to get the 
construction material from State Govt instead of purchasing the same 
from open market. In few Hilly States including NE States of Arunachal 
Pradesh and Nagaland, the State Government has been providing the 
beneficiaries with construction material in lieu of financial assistance so 
that there is no difficulty faced by them in getting construction material 
at reasonable rates in Hilly areas. 
  
In cases of old/infirm beneficiaries, such houses are also taken 
up as part of the Rural Mason Training Programme for construction. 
  
Under PMAY-G, as on 27.10.2021, 2.07 crore houses have 
been sanctioned, out of which 1.61 crore houses have already been 
completed. Increasing the unit assistance at such a juncture may not 
be feasible. 
  
Further, the Ministry has already got the continuation of Scheme 
beyond March, 2021 till March, 2024 appraised by the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance which has also recommended 
continuation of PMAY-G with existing framework and hence no 
enhancement in unit assistance can be proposed at present. 
There are 4,46,058 landless (no land to construct the house) 
beneficiaries in the PWL of PMAY-G, out of which 
2,05,847beneficiaries have been provided land or financial assistance 
for purchasing the land. The States of Assam, Tamil Nadu, Odisha, 
and Maharashtra have their respective State schemes for providing 
financial assistance to the landless beneficiaries. 
Some of the States/UTsas detailed below provide additional top-
up financial support over and above unit assistance to the PMAY-G 
beneficiaries for the house constriction. 
S.N. State/ UT Top-up amount (in INR) 
1 Gujarat To improve the pace of house completion, the State 
Govt. of Gujarat is giving an incentive of Rs. 20,000 
to the beneficiaries who have constructed their 
houses within 6 months of the release of 1st 
installment. 
2 Haryana 18,000 

9 
 
3 Himachal Pradesh 20,000 
4 Kerala 2,80,000 
5 Odisha To improve the pace of house completion, the State 
Govt. of Odisha is giving an incentive of Rs. 20,000 
to the beneficiaries who have constructed their 
houses within 4 months of the release of 1st 
installment and Rs. 10,000 to the beneficiaries who 
have constructed the house in 6 months from the 
release of 1st installment.  
6 Sikkim 30 CGI Sheets are being provided to the beneficiary 
as an additional assistance for the house 
construction 
7 Tamil Nadu 1,20,000 
8 DD and DNH 1,20,000 
9 Andhra Pradesh 30,000 (Plain areas); 20000 (IAP districts) 
10 Karnataka 30,000 (For SC/ ST beneficiaries only) 
 
11. Considering the need to review the existing financial assistance being 
provided under the scheme of PMAY-G to the beneficiaries in view of the rising 
inflationary expenditure associated with the construction and also the 
impediments faced in availing Rs. 70,000/- loan by the beneficiaries, the 
Committee had recommended for increase in unit assistance on the basis of 
the present day price index. 
 However, the replies submitted by the Department of Rural Development 
categorically state that “increasing the unit assistance at such a juncture may 
not be feasible” and also that the “Ministry of Finance has also recommended 
continuation of PMAY-G with existing framework and hence no enhancement 
in per unit assistance can be proposed at present”. The Committee find this 
reply completely unsatisfactory and lacking any empathy towards the 
beneficiaries who belong to the marginal and deprived sections of the society. 
With the passage of time and ever increasing cost of raw materials, the 
Committee feel that the ‘need of the hour’ is to increase the per unit assistance 
under PMAY-G in a prudent manner with an approach which provides a logical 

10 
 
conclusion to the issue and reiterate their recommendation for suitable 
review/increase of existing unit assistance under PMAY-G. 
III. Loan Scheme of Rs. 70,000/- from Financial Institutions  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
12. With regard to the Loan Scheme of Rs. 70,000/- from financial institutions, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
The Committee during examination pointed to the problems being faced in 
availing loan from financial institutions and observed that most of the beneficiaries 
under PMAY-G are unable to avail loan facility of Rs. 70,000/- for construction of 
house as they belong to economically poor strata of the society which neither can 
bear higher interest nor have any possession / belongings for mortgage or security. 
The Ministry also pointed to the fact that there are very few takers of loan facility of 
Rs. 70,000/- from financial institutions because of higher administrative cost, interest 
rates and collateral etc and stated that they are currently working on developing a 
loan product, in association with Indian Bank Association (IBA), with minimum 
collateral requirements and cheaper interest rates. The Committee, therefore, urges 
the Ministry to expedite their efforts and bring out an attractive loan product with 
minimum collateral, administrative costs and lower interest rates best which should 
be widely circulated in their vernacular language among PMAY-G beneficiaries. 
13. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“A meeting under Chairmanship of DDG (RH) was held on 28th 
July, 2021 with representative of Indian Bank Association (IBA) to 
discuss out the modalities for development of loan product under 
PMAY-G. It was felt that there is need to analyze the product keeping 
in view the latest guidelines of RBI and explore the possibility for 
providing the facility of the loan product to the beneficiaries whose 
house is sanctioned exclusively in name of women or in the joint name 
of husband and wife. Accordingly, Sr. Adviser, IBA was requested to 
revert to the Ministry with redesigned loan product in consultation with 
the member banks/PLIs for taking this initiative further. 
The matter was also flagged before the Department of Financial 
Services, Ministry of Finance by the Secretary, Rural Development 
during the meeting on ‘Enhancing Credit Flow to Rural Areas’ held on 
17.11.2021. 
The MoRD is going to convene another meeting on 23.12.021 
with the Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance, and 

11 
 
Indian Bank’s Association (IBA) in this regard to resolve the matter at 
the earliest.” 
14. Regarding the facility of availing loan of Rs. 70,000/- for construction of 
house under PMAY-G, the Committee painfully took into account the 
constraints faced by the beneficiaries in securing loans that include higher 
interest rates and non-availability of mortgage/security belongings among the 
poor strata of the society. In this light, the Committee had recommended the 
Ministry to come out with attractive loan product with minimum collateral, 
administrative costs and low interest rates. The replies submitted by the 
Ministry state that a meeting under the Chairmanship of DDG(RM) was held on 
28th July, 2021 with representatives of Indian Bank Association (IBA) to 
discuss out the modalities for development of loan product under PMAY-G 
wherein it was felt that there was a need to analyze the product keeping in 
view the latest guidelines of RBI and exploring the possibility for providing the 
facility of the loan product to the beneficiaries whose house is sanctioned 
exclusively in name of women or in the joint name of husband and wife and 
the matter had been also raised before the Department of Financial Services, 
Ministry of Finance.  
 The Committee find the above initiatives of the Ministry a step in 
positive direction in resolving the issue affecting the loan provision but find 
the reply devoid of the detail of the meeting proposed to be held on 23.12.2021 
with the Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance and Indian 
Banks’ Association (IBA) in this regard. The Committee are also of the 
unanimous view that in light of the extension of the scheme to March, 2024, 
the issue be resolved at the earliest so that the beneficiaries encouragingly 

12 
 
utilize the option. Hence, the Committee reiterate their recommendation for 
simplistic loan product as early as possible.    
IV. Landlessness  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
15. With regard to the Landlessness, the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
The Committee appreciate that landlessness is being dealt at the highest level 
whereby States are being regularly persuaded to assess landlessness among 
PMAY-G beneficiaries and expedite action to provide land to landless beneficiary 
from the Government land or any other land including public land (Panchayat 
common land, community land or land belonging to other local authorities). Three 
States provide financial assistance for site purchase, namely, Bihar gives Rs. 
60,000/-, Maharashtra and Assam provide Rs. 50,000/- each and Odisha pursues 
Vasudha Scheme entailing allotment of Government Land or purchase of suitable 
land for allotment in case of non-availability of Government land. The Committee find 
that that despite the efforts undertaken, 2,29,321 (65.26%) out of the total of 
4,27,975 landless beneficiaries are yet to be provided land thereby putting a serious 
question on the full success of the scheme. Maharashtra accounts for81,193; Odisha 
- 52,731; Tamilnadu - 43,718; and Assam - 29,591 besides other States constituting 
the total number of landless beneficiaries as 2,79,321 are yet to be provided land. 
The above submission, makes it amply clear that scheme for provision of land to 
landless beneficiaries by the States has to be pursued vigorously by citing examples 
set forth by the four States/UT along with the AwaasSoft MIS module being 
developed for capturing the details on PMAY- G beneficiaries in the Permanent Wait 
List (PWL) with no land to construct the houses for focused monitoring. It is obvious 
that there are impediments owing to the unavailability of Government land and 
encroachments which need to be resolved in a time bound manner. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that there is need to gear up the existing machinery to get 
over such obstacles so that the landlessness among the poor can be dealt on priority 
for providing land for the construction of house. 
 
16. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 

13 
 
“The Ministry has already requested the States/UTs to resolve 
the issue time and again and provide land to all the landless 
beneficiaries on priority basis. The States/UTs were also requested to 
constitute a Committee under the Chief Secretary, comprising the 
Secretary (Revenue) and Secretary dealing with PMAY-G, so that land 
is allotted to landless beneficiaries under PMAY-G in a time bound 
manner. This matter has also been taken up at the level of Minister 
(RD) with the Chief Ministers of the States with highest number of 
landless beneficiaries under PMAY-G awaiting allotment of land to 
them. 
  
Further, a landless module has also been made live on 
AwaasSoft thus moving forward towards adoption of better monitoring 
mechanism and timely provision of land to landless beneficiaries under 
PMAY-G. 
Important communications regarding availing land to landless 
beneficiaries are detailed below -  
i. The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development & Panchayati Raj in his 
letters (D.O.No.13011/05/ 2013-LRD dated 5th September 2018 
and D.O.No. J-11014/01/2016-RH dated 30th April 2021) requested 
Hon’ble Chief Ministers / Administrators of the States/ UTs were 
requested to assess landless status in the States/ UTs and 
constitute task force committee to expedite availing land to the 
landless beneficiaries. 
ii. The Joint Secretary Rural Housing, in his letter (D. O. No. J- 11 
060/07/2018-RH (M&T) dated 4th January 2019), requested 
concerned States/ UTs to take necessary steps in time bound 
manner for availing land to landless beneficiaries in the time bound 
manner. 
iii. The Hon’ble Minister of State for Rural Development in her letter 
(No. J-11060/07/2018-RH(M&T) dated 16th September 2019) 
shared details of the Bihar state’s scheme for assistance to the 
landless. 
iv. The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj in 
his letter (No. M-12018/2/2016-RH(M&T) dated 10.08.2020) to the 
Hon’ble Minister of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) requesting 
financial assistance for availing land to the most deserving landless 
PMAY-G beneficiaries belong to the Schedule Tribe (ST) category 
under any of the suitable scheme of the MoTA. 
v. The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj in 
his letter (No. M-12018/2/2016-RH(M&T) dated 10.08.2020) to the 

14 
 
Hon’ble Minister of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(MoSJE) requested for financial assistance for availing land to the 
most deserving landless PMAY-G beneficiaries belong to the 
Schedule Cast (SC) category under any of the suitable scheme of 
the MoSJE. 
vi. The Secretary Rural Development in his letter (No. J-
11014/01/2016-RH dated 9th April 2021) requested States/ UTs to 
constitute task force under the chaiprmanship of Chief Secretary of 
the State comprising of State RD Secretary and State Revenue 
Secretary as members to expedite provisioning of land to the 
landless beneficiaries.” 
17. The Committee are constrained to note that the issue of landlessness 
among States is coming in the way of proper implementation of PMAY-G, as a 
result the needy beneficiaries always remained in queue for search of shelter 
and vision of ‘Housing for All’ is also belied. Viewing this issue with utmost 
seriousness, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to gear up their 
machinery and pursue vigorously with the States for tackling the matter of 
landlessness on war footing for early resolution of the issue.  
 In this context, the Committee find the reply of the Ministry routine in 
nature, devoid of any concrete measures which could yield desired results in a 
short span of time. Details of various written communication with the States 
since 2018 have been given which in itself proves that such practice has not 
borne the required solution and it is high time that a modified and novel 
approach be created for the speedier allocation of land to the landless 
beneficiaries across the country. Lingering the process for long will not at all 
serve the cause, hence the Committee strongly reiterate their recommendation 
for the provision/allocation of lands to the landless beneficiaries of PMAY-G 
expeditiously.  
 
 

15 
 
V. Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
18. With regard to the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT), the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
The Committee during examination and field visits came across with the 
irregularities in collusion with the Bank officials and Gram Sabha functionaries 
challenging direct benefit transfer of money to the beneficiaries, the Ministry had 
stated that DBT transfer had been adopted to overcome such challenges. The 
Committee desire that in order to know the ground reality, the Ministry is required to 
collect views of the State Governments and PMAY-G beneficiaries over the issue. 
The Committee further, recommend that the Ministry should devise a fool proof 
mechanism for seamless transfer of money to the beneficiary with some 
accountability for transfer of money/instalments of the various stages of completion 
of house under PMAY-G devoid of irregularities. 
19. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“For better implementation for DBT for release of PMAY-G funds to the 
actual beneficiaries in States/UTs, the Ministry has recently sent a 
communication via D.O. no. J-11060/21/2021-RH dated 15th 
September 2021 to implement the Aadhaar enabled payment system 
(AEPS) PMAYG from 1stNovember 2021 onwards.   
The MoRD came across the issues regarding the payment to PMAYG 
beneficiaries through overriding by BDOs/ Block level officers due to 
mismatch in the name etc. of a PMAY-G beneficiary between SECC 
record and bank details while generating FTOs in the name of 
beneficiaries concerned. In this regard, the Ministry of Rural 
Development has requested States/UTs to go far 100% verification of 
the beneficiaries who got the benefit of PMAY-G by overriding (by 
BDOs). So far against the 1,03,02,534 mismatch cases, so far 
14,19,299 cases have been verified. Further, the disciplinary action is 
being taken up by the government for the cases wherein the 
irregularities were observed. Also, the beneficiaries/ functionaries are 
being sensitized on the issue. 
The senior officials from the Rural Housing division of the Ministry have 
interacted with the PMAY-G beneficiaries from the States of Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Gujarat and Maharashtra on 6th 
December 2021. During this discussion the beneficiaries provided their 
feedback on receipt of the financial assistance for house construction 
through DBT under PMAY-G. All the beneficiaries have reported that 
they are getting their instalments in their bank account directly.” 

16 
 
 
20.  Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) had been started by the Ministry to obviate 
the challenges associated with the irregularities in money transfer to the 
beneficiaries. However, the Committee, through their experience of field 
visits and interactions were made aware of various issues in DBT 
adversely affecting the genuine beneficiaries. Thus, the Committee had 
recommended the Ministry to collect views of the State Governments 
and PMAY-G beneficiaries in this regard and come up with a fool-proof 
mechanism for seamless transfer of money to the beneficiaries. The 
written replies of the Ministry in this connection state that for better 
implementation of DBT, communication had been sent to the State 
Governments to implement the Aadhar Enabled Payment System (AEPS) 
from 01st November, 2021 onwards. It has been further elaborated that 
the Ministry of Rural Development found the payment to PMAY-G 
beneficiaries through overriding by BDOs/Block Level Officers due to 
mismatch in the name and details of PMAY-G beneficiaries between 
SECC record and bank details while generating Fund Transfer Orders 
(FTOs) in the name of beneficiaries. Therefore, the Ministry of Rural 
Development had requested States/UTs for 100% verification of the 
beneficiaries who got the benefit of PMAY-G by overriding (by BDOs). It 
has also been submitted that so far against 1.03 crore (approx) 
mismatch cases, only 14.19 lakh (approx) cases had been verified and 
disciplinary action against the erring officials were being taken where 
irregularities had been found. 
  The Committee, from the replies, find their view of alleged 
irregularities in DBT being endorsed, however, are still of the opinion 

17 
 
that the pace of verification and eradication of malaise should be carried 
speedily alongwith stringent disciplinary actions so as to set the record 
straight. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their recommendation for 
weeding out the wrong practices associated with the DBT for the 
redressal of genuine beneficiaries’ concerns.  
VI. Construction of toilets under convergence with Swachh Bharat Mission    
(SBM)  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
21. With regard to the construction of toilets under convergence with Swachh 
Bharat Mission (SBM), the Committee had recommended as under:- 
The Committee note that toilets are being constructed under the scheme with 
the provision of a plastic tank, however, are perturbed at the abysmal response of 
the Ministry that construction of toilet is under the Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation, Ministry of Jal Shakti. The Committee desired that there must be 
coordination between the Ministry in order to make the toilet properly functional. The 
Committee further raised the issue of delayed payment of Rs. 12,000/- after 
construction of toilet in PMAY-G Unit through convergence with Swachh Bharat 
Mission Scheme (SBM) and desired that the issue be resolved in coordination with 
the concerned Ministry. The Secretary, MoRD admitted that structural problem 
persisting in Swachh Bharat Mission, Gramin lead to delayed payments after 
construction of toilet and agreed to resolve the matter in coordination with them. The 
Committee opine that since, PMAY-G under the administrative control of the Ministry 
of Rural Development has specifically been launched to incorporate the basic 
amenities under convergence with other government schemes after noticing the 
shortcomings in the (C&AG) Performance Audit Report, 2014, of the previous rural 
housing scheme pointedly referring to lack of convergence, it becomes the 
responsibility to the MoRD to see that the Scheme achieves its motive in 
convergence with other schemes by removing the gaps and shortcomings by 
establishing closecoordination with the concerned Ministries instead of shifting the 
responsibility by intimating that the subject in question is dealt by the Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 

18 
 
shortcomings/challenges noticed be resolved in coordination with the Ministries 
responsible for convergence to achieve fruitful results for the welfare of the PMAY-G 
beneficiaries by ensuring that toilets are made functional by provision of water 
connection and timely payment is ensured. The Committee, further desire that an 
update with regard to the number of PMAY-G Units being provided with water 
connections may be incorporated in the AwaasApp for quick updates/results. 
22. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“The Ministry has already constituted a Committee on analysis of the 
degree of convergence and coordination with the line Ministries with 
whom the PMAY-G has been converged to provide benefits of 
electricity connection, LPG connection, Drinking water, toilet 
construction, etc. Study to assess the impact of convergence is already 
planned by the Ministry to be conducted through NIRD&PR. The 
Ministry is in consultation with the line Ministries for data transfer 
among MIS of the Schemes with which PMAY-G has been converged, 
including D/o DWS, so that the convergence benefits provided to the 
PMAY-G beneficiaries are available on AwaasSoft MIS. It is stated that 
a committee under the Chairpersonship of Additional Secretary, 
Department of Rural Development has been constituted comprising the 
members from the line Ministries to monitor and provide suggestions 
for effective convergence with the concerned schemes of the Central 
Government and State Govts.  
[ 
Status of the convergence as captured in the AwaasSoft as of 
23.11.2021 is given below - 
Total 
Completed 
Total no. of 
Houses for which 
Convergence data 
has been seeded 
Toilet 
Constructe
d 
Electricity 
Connection 
LPG 
Connection 
Water 
Connection 
16433787 6935328 6495745 6503424 6122399 3886495 
 
23. The Committee noted the provision of construction of toilets in the 
houses under PMAY-G through convergence with SBM(G) for which Rs. 
12,000/- assistance is also provided. However, to the utter dismay of the 
Committee, it was noticed that there was pertinent issue of delayed payment of 
Rs. 12,000/- after construction of toilets in PMAY-G which was hampering the 
interest of the beneficiaries alongwith the actual realization of the vision of the 
PMAY-G. In this regard, the Committee had recommended the Ministry for 

19 
 
carrying out effective coordination with the concerned Ministry of Jal Shakti 
(Department of Drinking Water & Sanitisation) for timely release of assistance 
amount of toilet construction to the beneficiaries alongwith water connection.  
 The Ministry in their reply have submitted that a Committee had already 
been constituted to analyse the degree of convergence and coordination with 
the Ministries with whom the PMAY-G had been converged. It is also seen from 
the reply that as on 23.11.2021 out of 1.64 crore (approx) houses, toilets have 
been constructed in 64.95 lakh (approx) houses and water connection only in 
38.86 lakh (approx) houses. The data amply demonstrates the concern being 
raised by the Committee. Looking at such poor figures, the Committee 
reiterate their recommendation for faster consultation processes with 
concerned Ministries for mitigating the delay in assistance component to the 
beneficiaries and ensuring that the benefits of convergence reach the needy 
on time.  

20 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G) 
has been carved out of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY), the erstwhile housing scheme, by 
addressing the shortcomings and lacuna therein as pointed out in the Performance 
Audit Report of Comptroller and Auditor General, 2014 and therefore PMAY-G was 
launched on 01 April, 2016 aiming to provide “Housing for All" by 2022, through 
provision of pucca house with basic amenities to all houseless households and 
households with kucha and dilapidated houses in rural areas. The PMAY-G primarily 
focuses on quality house construction through Rural Mason Training (RMT), House 
Design typologies, House Quality Review app etc. Another positive step being taken 
in the scheme is introduction of convergence with other programs for basic amenities 
such as Saubhagya for electricity, Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) for LPG 
connection and Swachh Bharat Mission(SBM)/ Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) for toilet construction. The amount given 
under the scheme is Rs. 1.20 lakh given to the beneficiaries in plain areas and Rs. 
1.30 lakhs in hilly areas. Further, the provision for availing loan of upto Rs. 70,000/- 
from financial institutions is a welcome step only if it finds support among the 
beneficiaries. The Committee feel that the steps initiated by the Government through 
PMAY-G for ameliorating the social and financial conditions of the poor rural 
populace are steps taken in the right direction and need to pursued in the right 
earnestness. The Committee also appreciates the efforts made for housing shortage 
estimation on the basis of reports of Working Group on Rural Housing for 12th Five 
Year Plan (2012-17), Census 2011 and SECC 2011. 
Reply of the Government  
 
The Ministry of Rural Development is in the process of finalization of the 
draft Cabinet Note for continuation of PMAY-G beyond March, 2021 till March, 
2024 as per the recommendations of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in 
its meeting held on 26th August 2021, for completion of overall target of 2.95 crore 

21 
 
houses. The Ministry is also in process of finalizing the EFC Note for the 
revamping of the Rural Housing Interest Subsidy Scheme (RHISS) Scheme.  
      (O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
The Committee note that migration and death have been stated to be one of 
the reasons behind rejection of 1.36 crore households out of a universe of 4.04 crore 
rejected by Gram Sabhas. The Committee is of the view that temporary shifting to 
urban areas in the search of livelihood cannot be construed as migration and 
rejections on grounds of migration and deaths cannot be supported because the 
person who temporarily migrates to the cities in search of job / livelihood is bound to 
return to his village and transfer of ownership can be resorted to in the event of 
death of a PMAY-G beneficiary instead of considering the rejection from the list of 
beneficiaries. The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development while clarifying over 
SECC-2011 data, admitted to the fact that of the total 4.3 crore persons earmarked, 
only 2.95 crore persons were considered to be eligible for house after thorough 
verification of Gram Sabhas which has subsequently come down to 2.32 crore 
persons making the role Gram Sabhas questionable. The Committee feel that if such 
decisions of rejection are not objective and fair, it becomes difficult for a scheme to 
function properly and therefore could jeopardise the scheme of pucca housing for all 
by 2022. As such, the Committee, desire that the Ministry should immediately 
undertake an exercise to counter the anomalies by cross checking through 
independent agencies and introducing the role of Block Development Officers in 
addition/rejection of a beneficiary, by fixing accountability. 
Reply of the Government  
The Ministry has already released SOP for dealing with cases of unwilling 
beneficiaries under PMAY-G (vide letter dated 13th Dec, 2019) and SOP for dealing 
with cases of temporary and permanent migration under PMAY-G (vide letter dated 
25th Feb, 2020). 
  
In cases of temporary migration, the States/UTs are required to identify the 
GPs where such cases exist and organise the Gram Sabha of the respective GP for 
reverification of the PWL prepared. The Gram Sabha during the meeting may review 
such cases and re-prioritize such households and place them at the end of PWL so 
that allotment of houses to such beneficiaries can be made at later date. Gram 

22 
 
Sabha Resolution re-prioritizing the PWL is the uploaded on AwaasSoft and priority 
of PWL changed accordingly.  
  
The Ministry has already released SOP (vide letter dated 10th Feb, 2020) for dealing 
with cases of the death of the beneficiaries under PMAY-G wherein all cases have 
been covered relating to minor family members; family members not reflected in the 
beneficiaries’ SECC details, etc. The States/UTs are requested to follow the same so 
that the dependents/ family members of the Head of Household are able to receive 
assistance and construct house under PMAY-G.  
  
It may be pertinent to mention here that in above cases, role of BDOs have also 
been defined and the process for deletion of names of households due to valid 
reasons is initiated at the level of BDO/ Block level Officers designated by 
States/UTs and approved at level of District Magistrate/ District Level Officers 
designated by the States/UTs. 
In regard to the Awaas+ survey data, to analyze and filter out the eligible 
households, an Expert Committee was constituted. Subsequently, in accordance 
with the recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry had directed the States/ 
UTs to upload Aadhaar details of Awaas+ households and their family members 
above the age of 15 years. Further, the States / UT were requested to direct the field 
functionaries to carry out physical verification of details of households uploaded on 
Awaas+ database and remove the names of the erroneously included ineligible 
households from the Awaas+ database. The predefined parameters were shared for 
consideration while deleting the names of such ineligible households. The 
States/UTs have registered details of 3.57 crore households under the Awaas+ 
Survey and 2.75 crore are reported as eligible as on 20.12.2021. 
The desk verification, Physical verification, Gram Sabha vetting are being followed for finalization of the list of eligible beneficiaries under PMAY-G. Even though in case of any irregularity the aggrieved party can submit his/her complaint directly to the Competent Authority. The Competent Authority enquires into the complaints, prepare a report, and submit the same in a time-bound manner, to an Appellate Committee who reviews the matter and takes necessary action. 
      (O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
The Committee, further, while examining came across instances of 
incomplete and erroneous data namely details of family members were missing; 
names of genuine beneficiaries were not there; names of ineligible persons' were 
found in the list of beneficiaries of PMAY-G. The Committee, therefore, take a 
serious note of it and recommend that the Ministry should take urgent steps to rectify 
the wrong listing of the beneficiaries under the PMAY-G list. The Ministry should also 

23 
 
direct the States to rectify the errors in the list at the earliest so that the benefits 
could reach to the actual poor and needy persons targeted under the scheme. 
Reply of the Government  
There is already a provision for rectifying the 'missing details' of beneficiaries 
under AwaasSoft from SECC 2011 database at Block/District level. 
Further, the Gram Sabha/ Village Sabha or the lowest unit of local self-
government as recognized by the respective State/ UT Panchayat Act, will verify 
thefacts in the thecategory wise system generated priority lists availed to them, 
based on whichthe household are identified as eligible.  
Post verification the list is widely publicized and entered on AwaasSoft. A 
three-member appellate committee is constituted at the districtlevel headed by 
District Magistrate/ Collector or his nominee. The appellate committee considers the 
complaints related to the deletion or change in ranking and resolve the same in time 
bound manner. In case of in case of irregularities, suitable action is being taken 
against the erring officials by the respective State.   
      (O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
The Committee during examination pointed to the problems being faced in 
availing loan from financial institutions and observed that most of the beneficiaries 
under PMAY-G are unable to avail loan facility of Rs. 70,000/- for construction of 
house as they belong to economically poor strata of the society which neither can 
bear higher interest nor have any possession / belongings for mortgage or security. 
The Ministry also pointed to the fact that there are very few takers of loan facility of 
Rs. 70,000/- from financial institutions because of higher administrative cost, interest 
rates and collateral etc and stated that they are currently working on developing a 
loan product, in association with Indian Bank Association (IBA), with minimum 
collateral requirements and cheaper interest rates. The Committee, therefore, urges 
the Ministry to expedite their efforts and bring out an attractive loan product with 
minimum collateral, administrative costs and lower interest rates best which should 
be widely circulated in their vernacular language among PMAY-G beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government  
A meeting under Chairmanship of DDG (RH) was held on 28th July, 2021 with 
representative of Indian Bank Association (IBA) to discuss out the modalities for 
development of loan product under PMAY-G. It was felt that there is need to analyze 

24 
 
the product keeping in view the latest guidelines of RBI and explore the possibility for 
providing the facility of the loan product to the beneficiaries whose house is 
sanctioned exclusively in name of women or in the joint name of husband and wife. 
Accordingly, Sr. Adviser, IBA was requested to revert to the Ministry with redesigned 
loan product in consultation with the member banks/PLIs for taking this initiative 
further. 
The matter was also flagged before the Department of Financial Services, 
Ministry of Finance by the Secretary, Rural Development during the meeting on 
‘Enhancing Credit Flow to Rural Areas’ held on 17.11.2021. 
The MoRD is going to convene another meeting on 23.12.021 with the 
Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance, and Indian Bank’s Association 
(IBA) in this regard to resolve the matter at the earliest. 
      (O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
The Committee during the course of examination raised the issue with regard 
to clarity on shifting of targets to other communities in the event of saturation among 
SCs/STs. The Secretary, Rural Development, during evidence, while explaining that 
the State Governments were competent to shift the targets consequent on saturation 
after concurrence of the Central Government admitted that the slow progress under 
PMAY-G being witnessed could be attributed to failure of the State Governments to 
take timely decision on shifting of targets prompting the Ministry to issue instructions 
on the subject. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should 
immediately resolve the confusion on the subject and issue fresh instructions to the 
States clearly outlining the procedure to be adopted for shifting of targets 
consequent upon saturation along with an Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to 
be followed by the State functionaries. 
Reply of the Government  
Para 3.4.1 of the FFI of PMAY-G provides that in cases all eligible SC/ST 
households from PWL of PMAY-G are covered, the State would be allowed to 
allocate/shift the targets to Other category households. The Ministry has already 
allocated target from the existing PWL of PMAY-G to all the States/UTs under 
PMAY-G for saturation of their existing PWL. In case all eligible SC and ST 
households are saturated in the entire PWL of the States/UTs, the SC/ST targets 
would be shifted to 'Other' categories with the approval of the Empowered 

25 
 
Committee chaired by secretary, Department of Rural Development, Ministry of 
Rural Development.  
This information on shifting of targets has already been disseminated to the 
States/UTs during various meetings/ discussion and all the States/UTs are aware of 
the same. We will again sensitize the state governments, even though the shifting of 
the target within the categories is an internal administrative matter of the State. It 
may not require a fresh SOP in this regard. 
The Ministry at present is allocating targets from finalized Awaas+ lists, 
wherein as per recommendations of the Expert Committee, the targets till GP level 
including Category wise targets are being allocated at the Ministry’s level (ensuring 
minimum 60% allocation to SC/ST).  
      (O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
The Committee considering ownership of a house as a sign of social and 
economic stability, appreciate the Government initiative that allotment of house shall 
be made jointly in the name of husband and wife except in the case of a 
widow/unmarried /separated person allowing the States to also choose to allot it 
solely in the name of the woman. The Committee, however, observe delays in 
transfer of ownership during field visits, hamper the performance of the Scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should include this aspect in the 
agenda of the meetings for review of progress under the Scheme with State 
Functionaries and reiterate immediate transfer of ownership consequent upon death 
of a PMAY-G beneficiary. The Committee, thus, also desire the Ministry of Rural 
Development to give instructions to the State Governments to resolve all ownership 
issues so that the performance of the Scheme is not affected and the rural poor are 
not faced with hardships on the event of death of the owner of the PMAY-G 
constructed house. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has already released SOP (vide letter dated 10th Feb, 2020) for 
dealing with cases of the death of the beneficiaries under PMAY-G wherein all cases 
have been covered relating to minor family members; family members not reflecting 
in the beneficiaries’ SECC details, etc. The States/UTs are requested to follow the 
same, so that the dependents/ family members of the Head of Household are able to 
receive assistance and construct house under PMAY-G. 
      (O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
 

26 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
The Committee note that the ‘AwaasApp’ empower officials and citizens to 
capture and upload geo-tagged, time stamped photographs of the house at various 
stages of construction thereby reducing time lags in verification. The App also 
enables monitoring end to end execution of the scheme from the selection of 
beneficiaries, disbursal of assistance to beneficiaries, verification of progress in 
construction, release of funds etc through mobile application. The Committee, 
however find that in order to have optimum utilization of the app among the rural 
populace, there is an imperative need to educate people about the operation through 
imparting training programmes at Panchayat levels at regular intervals and create 
help groups to facilitate the rural populace in accessing the benefit accruing thereto. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has time and again provided training to the State/UT Officials 
and also provided hands on training on the Applications- AwaasApp and Awaas Plus 
App and the website- AwaasSoft. The Ministry had also uploaded the user manual 
for AwaasSoft and AwaasApp on the website of PMAY-G under head – documents- 
on https://rhreporting.nic.in/netiay/Newreport.aspx. 
 There are also video manuals explaining usage of various modules of 
AwaasApp available on website of PMAY-G which may be accessed by the State/UT 
Officials. The same has also been intimated to the States/UTs during various 
meetings/ seminars organised by MoRD. 
The Social Media platforms - Twitter, Koo, Facebook, Instagram are also 
being used for thedissemination of the information and knowledge under PMAY-G. 
States/ UTs have been advised to impart training to the field functionaries at 
the block level and Gram Panchayat level on the different modules in the  AwaasApp 
and AwaasSoft. The Ministry has also developed 5 modules and uploaded on iGOT 
platform for the use of the stakeholders. 
      (O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
The Committee while evaluating the Scheme have found that the mandatory 
wage component provision and payment with regard to unskilled labour for 90 
person-days (95 person-days in hilly States, difficult areas and Integrated Action 
Plan (IAP) districts at the current rates under convergence with MGNREGA is not 
being scrupulously followed despite real time web link with NREGASoft to allow 

27 
 
creation of a NREGA work against each PMAY-G house sanctioned. This is evident 
from the State/UT wise details of number of PMAY-G households who have availed 
unskilled wages under of PMAY-G since the start of FY 2016-17. Though 94.86 % of 
work has been created against the total houses sanctioned, the number of man-days 
generated for wages is on 69.41% depicting a clear shortfall of more than 30%. The 
shortfall in number of the works created and the number of man-days generated 
cannot even suffice by the Rs. 20 hike in the financial assistance towards 
construction of houses, consequent on wage revision wages with effect from 1st 
April 2020. The Committee, therefore, recommend that since PMAY-G incorporates 
a mandatory provision of 90/95 work days depending upon the terrain, creation of 
equal number of man-days should be made compulsory for each house sanctioned 
and the provision scrupulously followed by educating the beneficiaries that 
unwillingness to opt for MGNREGA works could be considered as a case for 
rejection from the beneficiary list and receipt of future works/payment under 
MGNREGA. The Committee also desire that the effective monitoring of the updates 
on the AwaasApp may be undertaken by constant persuasion to States to abide by 
the provision scrupulously and overcome shortfalls, if any, besides incorporating 
essential provision for timely payment of the wages to help early completion of the 
PMAY-G Units. 
Reply of the Government 
Based on requests of the various States/ UTs regarding the difficulties faced by 
them in providing the persondays to PMAY-G beneficiaries, the matter was 
examined in consultation with RE Division in the MoRD and following decisions were 
taken and communicated to the States/ UT in the MoRD’s communication DO No. M-
13011/01/2016RH-Part (3) dated 16th September 2021: 
i. Generation of Master rolls under MGNREGA stands de-linking from the release 
of installments of funds under PMAY-G. 
ii. Muster rolls shall not be generated for the houses which have already been 
completed under PMAY-G. 
iii. Muster rolls for 90/95 persondays under MGNREGA for PMAY-G would be 
generated in two stages as per details given below – 
a. Demonstration of the 90/95 person-days between the first stage and the 
second one would be made by the State/ UT as per specific conditions of the 
State/ UT. 
b. First stage MR would be generated for any specified number of days between 
the date of sanction and plinth / Windowsill/ Lintel, as decided by the State/ 
UT. 

28 
 
c. Second Stage MR would be generated for any specified number of days 
between the period of plinth/ windowsill/ Lintel till the time of completion of 
houses. 
Accordingly necessary provisions have been made in the MIS of PMAYG and 
MGNREGA to avoid any difficulty in generation of muster rolls.  
      (O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
The Committee appreciate various steps initiated for benefitting the PMAYG 
beneficiaries through convergence with other schemes i.e., Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala 
Yojana (PMUY) for free LPG connection, Pradhan Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar 
Yojana (SAUBHAGYA) for free electricity connection. Safe drinking water through 
convergence with National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) besides 
provision of Solar Lanterns, Solar Home Lighting Systems, Solar Street lighting 
systems and the National Bio-Mass Cookstoves Programme (NBCP) and bio-gas 
schemes being implemented by Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. However, 
to their displeasure, the Committee found that among the 1,13,79,121(One Crore 
Thirteen Lakh Seventy Nine Thousand One hundred and Twenty One) houses 
completed under PMAY-G as on 31.08.2020 and only 32,79,914 houses of the 
1,10,68,379 above lintel level are stated to have been provided LPG connection. 
Such, a small number of PMAY-G beneficiaries getting LPG connection proves that 
the vision of the Government under PMUY in convergence with PMAY-G is not being 
followed scrupulously. Furthermore, the figures of PMAY-G Units getting electricity 
under Saubhagaya convergence are not readily available with the Ministry owing to 
the fact that Awaassoft is yet to be integrated with the scheme. Similar integration is 
needed for convergence with other schemes on access to safe drinking water, solid 
and liquid waste management, and production of building materials. The Committees 
are unhappy to note that the convergence of other schemes with PMAY-G in the 
absence of real time data owing to their non-integration on Awaas App till date. 
TheCommittee in view of the above findings, a serious lapse on the part of the 
Ministry, direct them to gear up their machinery to remove the shortfalls and 
shortcomings in the convergence of various schemes so that the benefits thereto 
percolate to the PMAY-G beneficiaries and take expeditious steps for integrating all 
these data on to the AwaasApp in coordination with the concerned Ministries. 

29 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has already constituted a Committee on analysis of the degree of 
convergence and coordination with the line Ministries with whom the PMAY-G has 
been converged to provide benefits of electricity connection, LPG connection, 
Drinking water, toilet construction, etc. Study to assess the impact of convergence is 
already planned by the Ministry to be conducted through NIRD&PR. The Ministry is 
in consultation with the line Ministries for data transfer among MIS of the schemes 
with which PMAY-G has been converged, including D/o DWS so that the 
convergence benefits provided to the PMAY-G beneficiaries are available on 
AwaasSoft MIS.The MoRD has already convened meetings with the concerned 
Departments / Ministries for the convergence data integration. Adequate efforts have 
already been taken by the MoRD in this regard. 
Ministry of P&NG vide SRD D.O letter dated 14th June 2021 was requested to 
continue their scheme "PMUY" beyond 31st March 2022 in convergence with the 
PMAY-G of MoRD and to integrate the MIS of both the said schemes so that the 
information on progress of convergence is available on real time basis. Accordingly, 
Secretary, M/o PNG vide his D.O letter dated 29th June 2021 reverted that as per 
the budget announcements 2021-22, additional 1 crore LPG connections are to be 
provided under the PMUY, modalities for which have been circulated to Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs). Further, for integration of MIS of PMAY-G and 
PMUY, NIC (DoRD) was also directed to share the relevant details with OMCs 
PMIS,  so that confirmation may be sent by OMCs on provision of LPG connections 
provided against AHL TIN of PMAY-G beneficiaries as per SECC data. The reply 
given in para no. 2.14 may be also be referred for more details. 
      (O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
The Committee note that since PMAY-G focuses on quality construction of 
houses, it becomes necessary that construction is undertaken by trained masons. As 
such, training for skill development of rural masons has been introduced for ensuring 
construction of houses under trained hands as also creating livelihood opportunities. 
To its dismay, the Committee’s examination has revealed a huge shortfall in the 
Rural Mason Training (RMT) being primarily imparted onsite wherein only 76,193 
masons out of the total of 1,49,842 enrolled have been certified creating skilled 
labour demand and supply gap. The Committee, therefore, seriously view the 
shortfall in the number of persons imparted training in view of the 2.32 crore houses 
to be constructed under PMAYG and the issue of non-availability of real-time figures 
on Rural Mason Training (RMT) as it is yet to be integrated on AwaasApp. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry spruce up their efforts to enroll 

30 
 
and train more and more persons for RMT for viability of PMAY-G and speed up the 
process of integrating the programme on the AwaasApp. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) implements Rural Mason Training 
(RMT) programme under Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY-G) to 
address the issue of less availability of skilled masons in the rural areas, so as to 
ensure quality house construction under PMAY-G.  As on 26.10.2021, under RMT, 
2,14,363 candidates have enrolled out of which 1,80,525 candidates have been 
assessed and 1,32,451 have been passed and certified.   
  The workers, who have required experience in construction sector, are trained 
in Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) mode under the RMT program of the PMAY-
G, to facilitate them for formal career progression.    
  
Further, the process of integration of RMT data from Skill India Portal is under 
process. As far as the technical teams of Division (DoRD) and NSDC are in constant 
touch for the integration.  
      (O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
The examination of the material provided has revealed that the objective of 
PMAY-G for construction of durable, disaster resilient house has been lost due to 
unawareness of the beneficiary about PAHAL Compendium. Availability of the 
information on the website of PMAY-G, pmayg.nic.in., does prove awareness of the 
beneficiary considering socio-economic condition and background. Furthermore, the 
Committee are disappointed to find that only Tripura, Sikkim and Maharashtra have 
constructed Demonstration houses despite request to the States implying that they 
have not been persuaded enough on the subject. The Committee are also 
astonished to note that the advisory for States/ UTs to develop simpler version of the 
relevant portion from the ‘PAHAL’ in the local language, on need basis totally 
diminishes the spirit of the scheme despite the fact that though the scheme is 
implemented at the State level, monitoring responsibility including the effectiveness 
and success remains the prime job of the Centre. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Ministry take up serious efforts in the direction by guiding States on creation 
of the simplified version of PAHAL and creating awareness among the beneficiaries 
through programmes in local languages, pamphlets and signboards besides setting 
up awareness camps and involvement of Self Help Groups (SHGs) and Non-
Government Organization (NGOs) may be explored. 

31 
 
Reply of the Government 
MoRD has issued guidelines for construction of demo houses dated 3rd 
September, 2020, so that beneficiaries can opt for appropriate design based on their 
local material and can use the readily available material within their vicinity for 
construction of house at low cost. 
At the time of sanction, the beneficiaries are being provided a booklet of 
options of house designs according to the local conditions using appropriate 
technology suitable to the region of their residence.Further, the workshop on 
alternative construction technologies and 5 regional workshops on best practices are 
proposed to be held in the next calendar year.  
MoRD with the help of IIT-Delhi, United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) and CSIR-Central Building Research Institute (CSIR-CBRI) undertook state-
specific studies in 18 states for the development of house design typologies 
appropriate to local geo-climatic and cultural context with the disaster-resilient 
features. As an outcome of the study, MoRD published a compendium of region-
specific house designs with the name ‘Pahal (Volume-I & II)’ which includes 108 
house designs for 62 housing zones in 15 States in the country. 
The beneficiaries are also being assisted in house construction with a booklet 
in local language of house design typologies inclusive of disaster resilient features 
that are suitable to their local geo-climatic conditions. SHGs are being involved in 
awareness building under PMAY-G. 
      (O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
The Committee's examination of the figures on the budget estimates (BE), 
revised estimates (RE) and the actual expenditure incurred under PMAY-G reveal 
that finance for the scheme is sourced from Gross Budgetary Resources (GBS) and 
Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR). The study reveals that the actual expenditure 
incurred for the years 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20 is over and above the BE and 
RE. For Phase – I of PMAY-G, the Union Cabinet approved an EBR of Rs. 21,975 
crore., of which an amount of Rs. 18,008.23 crore was sourced from National Bank 
for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) and under Phase II for the year 
2019-20, Ministry of Finance approved EBR of Rs 20,000 crore of which Rs. 
10,811.02 crore which again has been sourced from NABARD. The central share for 
construction of 70 lakh houses for the current fiscal, 2020-21 is Rs. 57,330 crore. 
Out of which Rs. 19,500 crore has been provided as the GBS and the balance is to 
be met through EBR. The steps taken by the Ministry on 43 availability of funds for 
the Scheme has obtained positive response from the Government ensuring 
availability of funds for the program. The evaluation depict that the scheme gathered 

32 
 
momentum from 2017-18 onwards warranting increased expenditure and the efforts 
initiated for availability of financial resources for the scheme establishes true 
commitment of the Government towards the cause for providing 'housing for all' by 
2022. 
The Committee, however, on examining the details of released/held 
Central/State share under the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana (PMAY-G) for the last 
three years found instances of non- release of Central share to some of States/UTs 
owing to non receipt of utilisation certificates, under utilisation of funds, non issue of 
the 2nd installment of the previous year or non receipt of proposals from the State 
Governments along with requests for surrender of targets under the Scheme by the 
State Government establishing lack of coordination between the Centre and the 
States for early resolutions. The lackadaisical approach of the Ministry on the 
ongoing scheme targeted to accomplish the goal set by 2022, is remotely possible. 
The Committee, therefore, urge them to modify their methodology for establishing 
better coordination among the implementing an the monitoring agencies so that 
shortcomings noticed are immediately addressed enabling timely release of 
Centre/States share and submission of utilization certificates to accomplish 
execution of the scheme by 2022. 
Reply of the Government 
To achieve the target of “Housing for All” by the year 2022 in rural areas, 2.95 
crore houses are to be completed under PMAY-G.  As on 28.10.2021, under PMAY-
G, 2.07 crore houses have been sanctioned, 1st installment released for 1.97 crore 
beneficiaries and 1.61 crore houses have been completed.  Regular follow up with 
States/UTs is being done at the Ministry level for review of the Scheme of PMAY-G 
periodically. Daily monitoring of the progress on various parameters such as 
sanction, completions, pendency in release of Central/State Share from State 
treasury into SNA, Awaas+ remand, etc. is being done. 
The completion of the house in a time bound manner is the responsibility of 
the State governments. Necessary supports to achieve the same is being provided 
by the MoRD. The pace of house completion varies from the State-to-state on 
account of the efficiency in the program implementation by the State/ UT. Further to 
smoothen the fund release process, the fund release guidelines at Cl. 10.4 of the 
Framework for Implementation (FFI) of PMAY-G relating to release of assistance of 
1st installment under PMAY-G has been amended and circulated with the wide letter 
no J-11012/01/2019-RH dated 16th November 2021. The revised system of release 
of funds would help in ensuring sufficient funds in time to the states. 

33 
 
The Financial year-wise release details (including from Budgetary Resources 
and EBR) till 2020-21 are given below:  
   (Rs.in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Budget 
Estimate 
Revised 
Estimate 
Amount released 
from GBS 
EBR availed/ 
released 
2016-17 15000.00 16078.60 16074.37 0.00 
2017-18 23000.00 22832.31 22572.29 7329.43 
2018-19 21000.00 19600.00 19307.95 10678.80 
2019-20 19000.00 18455.20 18119.61 10811.02 
2020-21 19500.00 19500.00 19269.14 19999.82 
       
(O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
The data submitted to the Committee for examination establish that PMAYG 
Phase I (2016-17 to 2018-19) target of 99, 94,125 houses, has achieved completion 
of only 89, 73,139 units (as on 2 September 2020) creating a shortfall of 10% of the 
target. The Phase-II (2019-20 to 2021-22) target of 1,21,49,942 houses set to 
accomplished by 2021-2022, has achieved completion of only 24,05,982 Units as on 
31.08.2020. This brings to the conclusion that the combined Phase-I & Phase-II 
target of 2,21,44,067 house, only 1,13,79,121 (51%) houses have been completed 
under Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana- Gramin (PMAY-G) as on 31st August 2020. It 
has also been found that the data provided on the additional list of points has been 
collected at different dates depriving the Committee of the real-time figures to make 
an assessment. The Committee, thus, conclude that besides revealing pendency 
from Phase-I owing to various reasons, the slow start to the completion under the 
Phase-II owing to covid pandemic, has immensely impacted the progress of the 
scheme. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should spruce up their 
strategy in the manner that the shortcomings, behind shortfall in targets are resolved 
and pendency of Phase-I targets is expedited, also the achievements in the Phase-II 
are geared up in a coordinated manner for cent per cent achievement besides 
ensuring supply of real-time figures to the Committee for examination. 
The Committee also, note that in order to arrest the pendency of targets on 
account of migration and unwilling beneficiaries, the Ministry has issued guidelines 
on procedure for dealing with cases of unwilling beneficiaries, death cases and 
migration of beneficiaries. The Ministry is in the process of releasing the Revised 

34 
 
Framework for Implementation-II for PMAY-G incorporating policy decisions to deal 
with such difficult cases besides steps initiated to collect State-wise and category-
wise data on number of such beneficiaries based on which, resolution by way of 
writing off, recovery mechanism can be proposed. The Committee, find the initiative 
undertaken as a progressive step in the right direction and hope that the Ministry 
expedites collection the required data for arriving at a strategy to deal with cases of 
migration and unwilling beneficiaries besides ensuring early release of the Revised 
Framework For Implementation-II for PMAY-G for better and smoother results. 
The Committee while examining the percentage of amount to be set for the 
installments found that, flexibility has been given to the States to set the percentage 
of money for an installment and the average for the first installment set by States is 
around 40 thousand rupees. On the issue of better results, the appraisal of Odisha 
State example wherein timely construction was achieved by attaching a permanent 
government official as field functionary for every ten PMAYG beneficiaries to monitor 
construction progress was provided. Over the frequency of DISHA meetings, it was 
mentioned that States were requested to ensure four meetings in a year. The 
Committee, on their part having much field exposure of the ground realities desire 
that the Ministry should firstly device a mechanism for the percentage of installment 
to be given to a beneficiary on the basis of assessing the state-wise progress results 
under the scheme on the basis of viability of the installment percentage set by that 
State and issue a general guideline on the subject. Secondly, the Ministry should 
propose to the State Governments to adopt the Odisha model for better and timely 
results and write to States for increase in the number of mandatory DISHA meeting 
to be held in a year from four to twelve meetings for better monitoring by the elected 
representatives. 
To improve the pace of house completion, the State Government of Odisha is 
giving an incentive of Rs. 20000 to the beneficiaries who construct the house within 
4 months of the release of 1st installment and Rs. 10000 to the beneficiary who has 
constructed the house in 6 months from the release of 1st installment. The same 
model was shared during the review meeting with the States/UTs so that other states 
can also adopt similar models to increase the pace of house construction. The 
Framework for the implementation of PMAY-G has been developed with the 

35 
 
involvement of the States/ UTs. The modalities therein for the release of installments 
as according to the recommendations from the States. 
Reply of the Government 
Under PMAY-G, as on 28.10.2021, 2.07 crore houses have been sanctioned, 
out of which 1.61 crore houses have already been completed. 
The Ministry has already allocated target of 51 lakh houses from finalised 
Awaas+ lists to the States/UTs which have exhausted their existing PWL from SECC 
data base. The Ministry has also allocated target of 7 lakh houses to State of Assam 
and 1,59,913 houses to State of Tripura from the beneficiaries newly identified on 
the basis of revised definition of Kutcha houses under PMAY-G. 
Against the allocated target from the Awaas+ survey data, the maximum 
number of sanctions are in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Uttarakhand, 
Jharkhand and Tamil Nadu. Against the cumulative target allocated to the States/ 
UTs under PMAY-G maximum percentage of houses completed are in the States of 
Uttar Pradesh, Lakshadweep, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, and Sikkim. 
The Ministry has already released SOP for dealing with cases of unwilling 
beneficiaries under PMAY-G (vide letter dated 13th December, 2019) and SOP for 
dealing with cases of temporary and permanent migration under PMAY-G. 
The States/UTs have the flexibility to decide on the quantum of instalments 
under PMAY-G as they are in a better position to assess the requirement of funds/ 
assistance by beneficiaries at various stages of construction. This is subject to the 
State/UT fixing a minimum of 3 installments under PMAY-G for better monitoring. 
The District level DISHA Committees have been formed under the 
Chairmanship of Members of Parliament by this Ministry since June 2016 in place of 
erstwhile Vigilance and Monitoring Committees. These committees monitor the 
implementation of the programme in accordance with prescribed procedures and 
guidelines and promote synergy and convergence for greater impact of programmes. 
DISHA Committee meetings provide a platform where discussion on development 
programmes can be held in detail and further course of action may be decided in the 
meeting taking valuable views from MPs and MLAs and representative from 
implementing department.  
 i. DISHA Guidelines stipulate that the meetings of DISHA Committee should 
be held at least once in every Quarter. The number of meetings reported across 
the districts in the country during last four years and the current year is as 
under:  
 Year Number of District Level DISHA Meetings 
2016-17 853 
2017-18 821 
2018-19 683 
2019-20 463 
2020-21 693 
 

36 
 
ii. Ministry has dedicated website for uploading of minutes of DISHA Committee 
meetings. Uploading of minutes are essential to track the decision taken in 
DISHA Committee and follow up action taken thereon. The districts need to be 
more active on the uploading of meeting proceedings in the dedicated portal.  
 
iii. State Level DISHA Committee has been constituted to resolve matter of 
urgent nature requiring intervention at apex level.  As per the provision of DISHA 
Guidelines, the meetings of State Level DISHA Committee should be held at 
least in every six months.  
(O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
The Committee find that the parameters set for monitoring quality and timely 
construction under PMAY-G cannot be visualised until and unless the robust 
monitoring mechanism is engineered to achieve all the aspects of the scheme by 
suitable upgradation of the Awass Soft platform to include real-time convergence 
data of all connected schemes. Furthermore, discrepancies in geotagging, 
transaction/service cost forced upon the beneficiary noticed in the National Institute 
of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) study findings and seconded by the field 
experiences of the Committee are required to be addressed properly for better 
results, apart from introducing a mechanism of third party inspection for eliminating 
corruption and unrealistic figures. The Committee feel that the collective 
responsibility of the monitoring and the implementing agency to achieve success in 
monitoring and implementation of the scheme requires steps for development of best 
coordination among themselves for efficacious desired results. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the MoRD brings in further improvements in their 
monitoring mechanism by redefining their strategy so that AwaasSoft is suitably 
upgraded on a result oriented approach to ensure realistic and proper monitoring for 
unhindered implementation at the grass root level The Committee also observed that 
on completion of the PMAY-G houses, the beneficiaries use the house one or two 
years and then sell the house made under the scheme. The Committee therefore, 
feel that a 'tracking system' should be developed by the Ministry to track whether the 
beneficiaries are living in the same house or someone has bought it and using it. The 
Committee also desire that some kind of provisions on time bound concept (to live in 
house for minimum number of years) should be made to discourage this kind of 

37 
 
practice as it ultimately defeats the purpose of having a proper and pucca house for 
poor and needy through 'Housing for All' by 2022. 
The Committee while deliberating on effective monitoring through DISHA 
meetings at regular intervals stressed on the need for a proper and effective 
mechanism. The Committee opine that until and unless proper mechanism to 
oversee the action taken on the points that emerge during the deliberations in DISHA 
meetings is devised, the exercise may not bear the desired results. The Committee, 
therefore recommend that besides uploading the minutes of the meeting of DISHA, 
proper action taken mechanism on the points emerging there from may be devised 
apart from increasing the frequency of these meetings. The Committee further desire 
that since the meetings are conducted at State level, the controlling officers i.e. 
District Magistrates/Commissioners/District Collectors should be made accountable 
for the number of the meetings held and action taken thereon by devising necessary 
and appropriate measures. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Rural Development emphasizes on regular monitoring and 
evaluation of  the programmes being implemented in rural areas under its ambit. In 
order to enhance the efficiency and efficacy of its programmes, the Ministry has 
evolved a comprehensive system of monitoring and evaluation of the implementation 
of its programmes. The purpose of National Level Monitors (NLMs) system is to 
strengthen all the rural development programmes and ensure effectiveness, 
transparency and accountability in the implementation of the programmes. The 
findings are reviewed and shared with the States to discuss and suggest 
improvements in the implementation processes at the grass roots levels. 
 
The PMAYG dashboard being developed will provide end-to-end insights to 
cater the analytical and strategic business intelligence needs to cater the physical 
and financial progress of PMAY-G scheme at a Glance. The dashboard will be able 
to provide the actionable insights that include the single screen visualization of entire 
physical and financial progress and state level reports drillable to block level, 
analyzing the gap/delays in release of instalments, speed of house construction, 
age-wise, category-wise data analysis in order to find out anomalies, outliers. Also, 
dashboard will be able to illustrate the trend analysis for sanction and completion 
progress using dynamic and customizable data visualization in close coordination 
with stakeholders. 
 
NLM undertake periodic visits to the States/UTs for review in respect of all 
schemes/ programmes of the Department of Rural Development including PMAY-G. 

38 
 
In addition, Central Teams are also deputed for undertaking review of houses 
constructed under the Scheme.  
 
DISHA (District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee) is a 
monitoring mechanism to ensure that Schemes are implemented in accordance with 
the Programme Guidelines. The meetings of DISHA Committee provides a platform 
in which implementation of development schemes in a District can be discussed and 
taking the valuable inputs from the elected representative including Members of 
Parliament, strategy for greater impact of the Programmes may be formulated. This 
Committee is chaired by Hon’ble Member of Parliament. The Ministry vide D.O. letter 
dated 26th October, 2021 from the Secretary (RD) addressed to the Additional Chief 
Secretaries/ Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries dealing with PMAY-G of All 
States/UTs have re-iterated the role of the Hon'ble Members of Parliament in 
implementation and monitoring of PMAY-G. 
 
(O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
The contention of the Ministry that PMAY-G aims to realize the vision of 
‘Housing for All by 2022’ through a robust delivery and monitoring mechanism for 
and improved scheme architecture put in place does not stand ground in view of the 
existing challenges of discrepancies in identification of beneficiary, cumbersome 
appellate process which is out of the reach of the rural poor. Biased and politically 
motivated approach in identification of beneficiary cannot be ruled out by the 
elected body of a Gram Panchayat coupled with the grievance redressal appellate 
mechanism out of the reach of the economically and socially deprived rural 
populace culminating into meaningless exercise in the absence of any support 
mechanism to provide assistance for raising grievance. This view of the Committee 
is further strengthened when the Secretary, Rural Development during evidence 
submitted that the “institutions become difficult to manage, if spoiled. Since 
Members of Parliament head DISHA meetings, they may point out the shortcomings 
and the Ministry of Rural Development shall take strict action against those found 
guilty.” However, the Committee are not fully convinced with stance and feel that if 
the primary concern of proper selection of the beneficiaries is not addressed 
properly, the whole initiative of bringing improvement in the living conditions of the 
rural poor may be ineffective. In a scenario where the centrally sponsored scheme 
is implemented at the District/Panchayat level and monitored at the central level, it 
becomes utmost important to downsize the role of Gram Sabha and to rope in 
private organizations and non-government bodies for identification / authentication 
of the beneficiary list and the responsibility is fixed on the Block Development 
Officers by making them accountable for factual verification of the details and 
progress of PMAY-G unit for fairer results. The Members of Parliament definitely 
monitor the progress in the DISHA meetings and highlight the anomalies but issues 
are lost in the tussle of Centre, State jurisdiction. The Committee, therefore, seek 
the Ministry's intervention to review the methodology by downsizing the role of 
Sarpanch/Gram Panchayat by incorporation of Block Development Officer (BDO) by 
fixing accountability and involving NGOs / Private Bodies that may act as pillars of 

41 
 
support for the socially 32 and economically poor in raising their issues so that 
proper identification / authentication of targeted beneficiaries of this scheme is 
achieved and intention of the present scheme is materialized.  
The Committee also observe that PMAY-G at the time of launch in 2016 was 
mandated to construct 2.95 crore houses to visualize the dream of providing pucca 
house with basic amenities to the selected beneficiaries by 2021-2022 will now 
cover 2.49 crore beneficiaries by 2022. The Committee, however, feel that in view 
of the complaints of biased approach of the Gram Panchayats and anomalies in the 
SECC-2011 data, a flexible approach should be adopted by devising a new strategy 
so that no needy houseless or household with kucha roof as defined are left out and 
the list is updated accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
 “ As per Framework for Implementation of PMAY-G, the identification of 
beneficiaries under PMAY-G is based on the housing deprivation parameters 
and exclusion criteria prescribed under SECC 2011 subject to due verification 
by Gram Sabha and completion of Appellate process. 
The MoRD Commissioned the ‘Awaas+’ survey to identify additional eligible 
households for assistance under PMAY-G which were not included in the 
Permanent Wait List (PWL) derived from the SECC-2011 survey data. Under 
this survey 3.57 Crore households were registered. Targets from the Awaas+ 
survey being allotted to the States/ UT following the recommendations of the 
Expert Committee.From the list of 3.57 crore registrations on Awaas+, there 
was a need for filtration of genuinely deprive households for providing the 
benefit under the scheme and therefore, Expert Committees were constituted. 
Out of 3.57 crore registered households, the States and UTs have removed 
80.43 lakh ineligible households from the Awaas plus database and 2.77 
crore households remain as eligible as on 25th November 2021.  
The Union Cabinet had authorized the Minister, Rural Development, in 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance, for inclusion of additional eligible 
households from the final Awaas+ list into the Permanent Wait List (PWL) of 
PMAY-G, with a ceiling of 2.95 crore, for those States / UTs where PWL is 
exhausted and to allocate target to these States / UTs. The number of such 
households shall be the difference between 2.95 crore households, as 
approved in the Cabinet Note for the 1st Phase of PMAY-G, and the 
beneficiaries left in the Permanent Wait List after verification by Gram 
Sabhas. Since some of the States, namely West Bengal, Tripura, Assam, 
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh were yet to exhaust their existing SECC 
based PWL of PMAY-G, the Ministry has so far allocated target of 50.99 lakh 

42 
 
houses to States/UTs which had exhausted their existing SECC PWL. The 
targets from Awaas+ list at the State/UT level have been arrived at by using 
the methodology recommended by the two Expert Committees on Awaas+. In 
addition, at present, the Ministry is allocating targets till Gram Panchayat 
Level to the States/UTs and the above-mentioned targeted beneficiaries have 
been identified and the lists have been conveyed to the States/UTs on 
AwaasSoft for further processing. The States/UTs are able to generate the 
GP wise priority lists after following the procedure. 
The procedure for identification of the right beneficiary under PMAY-G is in 
alignment with the Article 243(G) of the Indian Constitution on the Powers 
authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.  
Apart from the process mentioned above for the selection of eligible 
beneficiaries from the SECC-2011 survey data / Awaas+ survey data, the 
eligibility of the beneficiaries is also being confirmed at the time of sanctioning 
the house. Further, the geotagged photographs of the existing houses and the 
proposed sites are being captured using AwaasApp. 
As per FFI, a Grievance redressal mechanism is also set up at Gram 
Panchayat, Block, District, and the State levels. Contact details of the 
designated grievance redressal official and the procedure to file the grievance 
is clearly displayed in each Panchayat. There is also scope for escalation, if 
the complainant is not satisfied with the disposal of his/ her grievance. 
Complaints received in the MoRD are forwarded to the respective State 
Government for redressal of the grievance. The designated officers are 
required to take necessary action and furnish the ATR to the MoRD under 
intimation to the complainant within one month of receipt of the complaint. 
Services of the Ombudsman under MGNREGA may also be utilized for 
redressal of the grievances.  
In addition, complaints are received through CPGRAMS wherein there is an 
inbuilt mechanism for categorization of complaints. Regular follow up is done 
with States/UTs for speedy disposal of the grievances. In cases of serious 
irregularities/ allegations, Central Government Teams are also deputed for 
conducting enquiry. 
In cases where the complaint against the Officials/ Panchayat Adhikari/ 
Pradhan etc. is found to be true during enquiry by Central Government/ State 
Government team, prompt action is taken against the erring Officials. 
Following actions are suggested by Ministry to the States for immediate action 
against the erring Officials: 
(i)FIR be filed against the erring Officials immediately 

43 
 
(ii)Action to be taken against the concerned BDO, who is second signatory of 
the FTOs under PMAY-G and other supervisors who would have certified and 
inspected the works 
(iii) Show cause be served against the Officials and other concerned officials 
in cases where there is delayed action against the erring Officials 
(iv) State/UT to publicise widely the action taken in the matter including on 
social media 
The above grievances redressal mechanism ensures that in cases of 
selection of ineligible households or other such cases, appropriate action is 
taken against those responsible for irregularities. 
  
The Union Cabinet has approved extension of the PMAY-G beyond March 
2021 till March 2024, owing to non-release of state shares despite in-time 
release of funds by the Central Govt, in order to enable the States to complete 
the targets of 2.95 crore houses by March 2024" 
 
(O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
The Ministry while admitting to no proposal in hand for increase in the unit 
assistance under PMAY-G owing to factors like land is owned by the beneficiary, 
minimum plot size is 25 Sq Meters and the unit cost has been substantially 
increased, have also apprised that 05 States i.e., Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Haryana, 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Andhra Pradesh provide specific top up schemes for 
assistance to beneficiaries, in addition to availability of loan facility of 70,000/- from 
financial institutions. In view of it the Committee feel that there is a need to re-
examine the need for additional finance to meet construction expenses under the 
scheme.. The Committee opine that the Ministry's view of not bringing the unit 
assistance of PMAY-G at par with PMAY-U does not stand ground from their own 
admission that economic conditions of the beneficiaries warrant various States 
Governments to provide top up assistance for construction of PMAY-G house. 
Secondly, the Ministry stance that the present unit assistance may not be one of the 
reasons behind non achievement of targets is contradicted by the figures on backlog 
of Phase-I and non achievement of targets of Phase-II of PMAY-G. Furthermore, 

44 
 
70,000/- loan scheme does not find acceptance among beneficiaries owing to their 
social and economic conditions making it impossible to render collateral and bear 
high interests / administrative costs. Also the assertion of substantial increase in the 
unit cost since April, 2016 is not convincing because the unit-wise plot size has been 
increased from 20 Sqmtr under the previous scheme to 25 Sq meter under PMAY-G 
and cost escalation during the last 5 years besides increased transportation costs 
especially in remote, hilly and difficult terrain areas. The Committee, further, observe 
that the Secretary, MoRD was candid enough to depose the matter and come up 
with a solution on the issue of higher transportation costs being incurred in 
transporting building material to the site in Himalayan and hilly regions of the 
country. Besides, the Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development, in his further 
deposition stated that as per indication received from Prime Minister’s Office there 
will be no shortage of funds for this program. In this regard, the Committee are of the 
view that it becomes necessary for the Ministry to consider some increase in the unit 
assistance under PMAY-G on the basis of the present day price index and come up 
with a solution. The Committee, therefore, recommend that since the scheme is in 
the mid-way and accomplishment of the goal is set for 2022, it would be appropriate, 
to consider enhancement of assistance cost by Rs. 10,000/- both for plain and hilly 
areas respectively. The Committee also recommend that additional sources for 
topping up of unit assistance through convergence with State Schemes so that 
success of PMAY-G Scheme is achieved in all earnestness throughout the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 “Under PMAY-G, the unit assistance of Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain areas 
and Rs. 1.30 lakh in difficult areas, IAP districts, Hilly States (including UTs of 
J&K and Ladakh) is as per the approval of the Union Cabinet. In addition to 
the unit assistance, the beneficiaries are facilitated with 90/95 mandays of 
unskilled labour wages through mandatory convergence with MGNREGS. 
Support of Rs. 12,000 for construction of toilet is also provided through SBM-
G, MGNREGS or any other dedicated source of funding. The total assistance 
available to a beneficiary for construction of house with toilet works out to Rs. 
1.50 lakh in plain areas and Rs. 1.60 lakh in difficult areas. 
  
Para 6.2.4 of the FFI of PMAY-G provides that the States can also 
source construction material of good quality at reasonable rates for the 
beneficiaries. This arrangement of material bank can be made at places 
where the beneficiaries have consented to get the construction material from 
State Govt instead of purchasing the same from open market. In few Hilly 

45 
 
States including NE States of Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland, the State 
Government has been providing the beneficiaries with construction material in 
lieu of financial assistance so that there is no difficulty faced by them in 
getting construction material at reasonable rates in Hilly areas. 
  
In cases of old/infirm beneficiaries, such houses are also taken up as 
part of the Rural Mason Training Programme for construction. 
  
Under PMAY-G, as on 27.10.2021, 2.07 crore houses have been 
sanctioned, out of which 1.61 crore houses have already been completed. 
Increasing the unit assistance at such a juncture may not be feasible. 
  
Further, the Ministry has already got the continuation of Scheme 
beyond March, 2021 till March, 2024 appraised by the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance which has also recommended continuation of 
PMAY-G with existing framework and hence no enhancement in unit 
assistance can be proposed at present. 
There are 4,46,058 landless (no land to construct the house) 
beneficiaries in the PWL of PMAY-G, out of which 2,05,847beneficiaries have 
been provided land or financial assistance for purchasing the land. The States 
of Assam, Tamil Nadu, Odisha, and Maharashtra have their respective State 
schemes for providing financial assistance to the landless beneficiaries. 
Some of the States/UTsas detailed below provide additional top-up 
financial support over and above unit assistance to the PMAY-G beneficiaries 
for the house constriction. 
S.N. State/ UT Top-up amount (in INR) 
1 Gujarat To improve the pace of house completion, the State 
Govt. of Gujarat is giving an incentive of Rs. 20,000 
to the beneficiaries who have constructed their 
houses within 6 months of the release of 1st 
installment. 
2 Haryana 18,000 
3 Himachal Pradesh 20,000 
4 Kerala 2,80,000 
5 Odisha To improve the pace of house completion, the State 
Govt. of Odisha is giving an incentive of Rs. 20,000 
to the beneficiaries who have constructed their 
houses within 4 months of the release of 1st 
installment and Rs. 10,000 to the beneficiaries who 
have constructed the house in 6 months from the 
release of 1st installment.  
6 Sikkim 30 CGI Sheets are being provided to the beneficiary 
as an additional assistance for the house 
construction 
7 Tamil Nadu 1,20,000 
8 DD and DNH 1,20,000 
9 Andhra Pradesh 30,000 (Plain areas); 20000 (IAP districts) 
10 Karnataka 30,000 (For SC/ ST beneficiaries only) 

46 
 
 
(O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
The Committee appreciate that landlessness is being dealt at the highest level 
whereby States are being regularly persuaded to assess landlessness among 
PMAY-G beneficiaries and expedite action to provide land to landless beneficiary 
from the Government land or any other land including public land (Panchayat 
common land, community land or land belonging to other local authorities). Three 
States provide financial assistance for site purchase, namely, Bihar gives Rs. 
60,000/-, Maharashtra and Assam provide Rs. 50,000/- each and Odisha pursues 
Vasudha Scheme entailing allotment of Government Land or purchase of suitable 
land for allotment in case of non-availability of Government land. The Committee find 
that that despite the efforts undertaken, 2,29,321 (65.26%) out of the total of 
4,27,975 landless beneficiaries are yet to be provided land thereby putting a serious 
question on the full success of the scheme. Maharashtra accounts for81,193; Odisha 
- 52,731; Tamilnadu - 43,718; and Assam - 29,591 besides other States constituting 
the total number of landless beneficiaries as 2,79,321 are yet to be provided land. 
The above submission, makes it amply clear that scheme for provision of land to 
landless beneficiaries by the States has to be pursued vigorously by citing examples 
set forth by the four States/UT along with the AwaasSoft MIS module being 
developed for capturing the details on PMAY- G beneficiaries in the Permanent Wait 
List (PWL) with no land to construct the houses for focused monitoring. It is obvious 
that there are impediments owing to the unavailability of Government land and 
encroachments which need to be resolved in a time bound manner. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that there is need to gear up the existing machinery to get 
over such obstacles so that the landlessness among the poor can be dealt on priority 
for providing land for the construction of house. 
Reply of the Government 

47 
 
The Ministry has already requested the States/UTs to resolve the issue time 
and again and provide land to all the landless beneficiaries on priority basis. The 
States/UTs were also requested to constitute a Committee under the Chief 
Secretary, comprising the Secretary (Revenue) and Secretary dealing with PMAY-G, 
so that land is allotted to landless beneficiaries under PMAY-G in a time bound 
manner. This matter has also been taken up at the level of Minister (RD) with the 
Chief Ministers of the States with highest number of landless beneficiaries under 
PMAY-G awaiting allotment of land to them. 
  
Further, a landless module has also been made live on AwaasSoft thus moving 
forward towards adoption of better monitoring mechanism and timely provision of 
land to landless beneficiaries under PMAY-G. 
Important communications regarding availing land to landless beneficiaries are 
detailed below -  
i. The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development & Panchayati Raj in his letters 
(D.O.No.13011/05/ 2013-LRD dated 5th September 2018 and D.O.No. J-
11014/01/2016-RH dated 30th April 2021) requested Hon’ble Chief Ministers / 
Administrators of the States/ UTs were requested to assess landless status in 
the States/ UTs and constitute task force committee to expedite availing land 
to the landless beneficiaries. 
ii. The Joint Secretary Rural Housing, in his letter (D. O. No. J- 11 060/07/2018-RH 
(M&T) dated 4th January 2019), requested concerned States/ UTs to take 
necessary steps in time bound manner for availing land to landless beneficiaries 
in the time bound manner. 
iii. The Hon’ble Minister of State for Rural Development in her letter (No. J-
11060/07/2018-RH(M&T) dated 16th September 2019) shared details of the 
Bihar state’s scheme for assistance to the landless. 
iv. The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj in his letter (No. 
M-12018/2/2016-RH(M&T) dated 10.08.2020) to the Hon’ble Minister of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) requesting financial assistance for availing land 
to the most deserving landless PMAY-G beneficiaries belong to the Schedule 
Tribe (ST) category under any of the suitable scheme of the MoTA. 
v. The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj in his letter (No. 
M-12018/2/2016-RH(M&T) dated 10.08.2020) to the Hon’ble Minister of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (MoSJE) requested for financial 
assistance for availing land to the most deserving landless PMAY-G beneficiaries 
belong to the Schedule Cast (SC) category under any of the suitable scheme of 
the MoSJE. 
vi. The Secretary Rural Development in his letter (No. J-11014/01/2016-RH dated 
9th April 2021) requested States/ UTs to constitute task force under the 
chaiprmanship of Chief Secretary of the State comprising of  State RD Secretary 
and State Revenue Secretary as members  to expedite provisioning of land to 
the landless beneficiaries. 
 
(O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 

48 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
The Committee during examination and field visits came across with the 
irregularities in collusion with the Bank officials and Gram Sabha functionaries 
challenging direct benefit transfer of money to the beneficiaries, the Ministry had 
stated that DBT transfer had been adopted to overcome such challenges. The 
Committee desire that in order to know the ground reality, the Ministry is required to 
collect views of the State Governments and PMAY-G beneficiaries over the issue. 
The Committee further, recommend that the Ministry should devise a fool proof 
mechanism for seamless transfer of money to the beneficiary with some 
accountability for transfer of money/installments of the various stages of completion 
of house under PMAY-G devoid of irregularities. 
Reply of the Government 
For better implementation for DBT for release of PMAY-G funds to the actual 
beneficiaries in States/UTs, the Ministry has recently sent a communication via D.O. 
no. J-11060/21/2021-RH dated 15th September 2021 to implement the Aadhaar 
enabled payment system (AEPS) PMAYG from 1stNovember 2021 onwards.   
The MoRD came across the issues regarding the payment to PMAYG 
beneficiaries through overriding by BDOs/ Block level officers due to mismatch in the 
name etc. of a PMAY-G beneficiary between SECC record and bank details while 
generating FTOs in the name of beneficiaries concerned. In this regard, the Ministry 
of Rural Development has requested States/UTs to go far 100% verification of the 
beneficiaries who got the benefit of PMAY-G by overriding (by BDOs). So far against 
the 1,03,02,534 mismatch cases, so far 14,19,299 cases have been verified. Further, 
the disciplinary action is being taken up by the government for the cases wherein the 
irregularities were observed. Also, the beneficiaries/ functionaries are being 
sensitized on the issue. 
The senior officials from the Rural Housing division of the Ministry have 
interacted with the PMAY-G beneficiaries from the States of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Gujarat and Maharashtra on 6th December 2021. During this 
discussion the beneficiaries provided their feedback on receipt of the financial 
assistance for house construction through DBT under PMAY-G. All the beneficiaries 
have reported that they are getting their instalments in their bank account directly. 
(O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

49 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
The Committee note that toilets are being constructed under the scheme with 
the provision of a plastic tank, however, are perturbed at the abysmal response of 
the Ministry that construction of toilet is under the Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation, Ministry of Jal Shakti. The Committee desired that there must be 
coordination between the Ministry in order to make the toilet properly functional. The 
Committee further raised the issue of delayed payment of Rs. 12,000/- after 
construction of toilet in PMAY-G Unit through convergence with Swachh Bharat 
Mission Scheme (SBM) and desired that the issue be resolved in coordination with 
the concerned Ministry. The Secretary, MoRD admitted that structural problem 
persisting in Swachh Bharat Mission, Gramin lead to delayed payments after 
construction of toilet and agreed to resolve the matter in coordination with them. The 
Committee opine that since, PMAY-G under the administrative control of the Ministry 
of Rural Development has specifically been launched to incorporate the basic 
amenities under convergence with other government schemes after noticing the 
shortcomings in the (C&AG) Performance Audit Report, 2014, of the previous rural 
housing scheme pointedly referring to lack of convergence, it becomes the 
responsibility to the MoRD to see that the Scheme achieves its motive in 
convergence with other schemes by removing the gaps and shortcomings by 
establishing closecoordination with the concerned Ministries instead of shifting the 
responsibility by intimating that the subject in question is dealt by the Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
shortcomings/challenges noticed be resolved in coordination with the Ministries 
responsible for convergence to achieve fruitful results for the welfare of the PMAY-G 
beneficiaries by ensuring that toilets are made functional by provision of water 
connection and timely payment is ensured. The Committee, further desire that an 
update with regard to the number of PMAY-G Units being provided with water 
connections may be incorporated in the AwaasApp for quick updates/results. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has already constituted a Committee on analysis of the degree of 
convergence and coordination with the line Ministries with whom the PMAY-G has 
been converged to provide benefits of electricity connection, LPG connection, 
Drinking water, toilet construction, etc. Study to assess the impact of convergence is 
already planned by the Ministry to be conducted through NIRD&PR. The Ministry is 

50 
 
in consultation with the line Ministries for data transfer among MIS of the Schemes 
with which PMAY-G has been converged, including D/o DWS, so that the 
convergence benefits provided to the PMAY-G beneficiaries are available on 
AwaasSoft MIS. It is stated that a committee under the Chairpersonship of Additional 
Secretary, Department of Rural Development has been constituted comprising the 
members from the line Ministries to monitor and provide suggestions for effective 
convergence with the concerned schemes of the Central Government and State 
Govts.  
 
Status of the convergence as captured in the AwaasSoft as of 23.11.2021 is 
given below - 
Total 
Completed 
Total no. of 
Houses for 
which 
Convergence 
data has 
been seeded 
Toilet 
Constructed 
Electricity 
Connection 
LPG 
Connection 
Water 
Connection 
16433787 6935328 6495745 6503424 6122399 3886495 
 
(O.M. No.H-11013/3/2021-RH - Accts. Dated: 06/01/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

51 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEWDELHI;            PRATAPRAO JADHAV 
14 March,  2022      Chairperson, 
23 Phalguna, 1943 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
  

52 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  & PANCHAYATI 
RAJ (2021-2022) 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
MONDAY, THE 14 MARCH, 2022 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in New Committee Room 
No.'2', Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, Block - 'A' (PHA-Ext. 'A'), New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
      Shri Prataprao Jadhav  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
 
22. Shri A.K.P. Chinraj    
23. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey   
24. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
25. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
26. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
27. Shri Narendra Kumar 
28. Shri Janardan Mishra 
29. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
30. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
31. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
32. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
33. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
34. Shri  Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiya 
35. Shri  Shamsher Singh Dullo 
36. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
37. Shri Rathwa Naranbhai Jemlabhai 
38. Shri Ram Shakal 
39. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Shah   - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

53 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration of three Draft Reports of the Committee on 
XXX    XXX  XXX  in respect of  XXX XXX    XXX,  
 XXX XXX    XXX and XXX XXX    XXX  and  XXX 
 XXX    XXX on Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report on Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana - Gramin (PMAY-G) pertaining to 
the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development).. 
3.  The Committee then took up for consideration of following four Draft Reports 
of the Committee:- 
(i)  XXX  XXX   XXX   XXX; 
 
(ii)  XXX  XXX   XXX   XXX;  
 
(iii)  XXX  XXX   XXX   XXX; and 
 
(iv) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report on Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana - Gramin (PMAY-G) 
pertaining to the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of 
Rural Development). 
 
4. Draft Reports were taken up for consideration one-by-one and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the above Draft Report without any 
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the 
aforesaid Draft Reports and present the same to the Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
----------- 
 
_____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report 
 
  

54 
 
ANNEXURE II 
[Vide  para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:       19 
       
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
  Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 
           Total:14  
        Percentage:-  73.7%
     
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL          
          Total: NIL 
       Percentage:- 0%      
          
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
  Serial No. 2, 5, 9, 11, 12       
Total: 05  
Percentage:- 26.3% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL         
Total: NIL  
Percentage:- 0%      
 
 