 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT& PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2021-2022) 
   
 
 SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second Report (Seventeenth LokSabha) 
On 'Demands for Grants (2022-23)of the Ministry of Rural Development(Department of Rural Development)'.] 
 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
26 


 
 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(2021-2022) 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Demands for Grants (2022-23)of the Ministry of Rural Development(Department of Rural Development)'.] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2022 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2022/Shravana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
CRD No.180  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price  : Rs. 
 
 
 
© 2022 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in LokSabha (____ Edition) 
and Printed by __________________. 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-2022)   ......................................   (ii) 
  
 
INTRODUCTION      …....................................   (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report   ..........................................................................  1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government ........................................................................... 25 
 
CHAPTER III   Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies………….............................................................................  52 
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee ............................................................................ 53 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ...................................... 60  
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 9 December, 2016………………......      19 
 
I. Extract of Minutes of the 14th Sitting of the Committee held on 28.07.2022*   ...................... 62 
 
 II.  Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
 Twenty-Second Report (17thLokSabha)of the Standing Committee on Rural Development  64 
& Panchayati Raj.............................................................................................................................. 
 
_______ 
* Not Attached 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2021-2022) 
 
  Shri Prataprao Jadhav  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LokSabha 
2. ShriSisir Kumar Adhikari 
3. Shri C. N. Annadurai 
4. Shri A.K.P Chinraj 
5. Shri Rajveer Diler 
6. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
7. ShriSukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Prof. Rita Bahuguna Joshi 
10. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
11. Shri Narendra Kumar 
12. Shri Janardan Mishra 
13. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
14. Shri Talari Rangaiah 
15. Smt. Gitaben Vajesingbhai Rathva 
16. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
17. Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar 
18. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
19. Shri Kumbakudi Sudhakaran 
20. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
21. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
RajyaSabha 
22. Shri Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiya 
23. Smt. ShantaChhetri 
24. –vacant- 
25. ShriIrannaKadadi 
26. Dr. WanweiroyKharlukhi 
27. ShriNaranbhai J. Rathwa 
28. Shri Ram Shakal 
29. ShriBashisthaNarain Singh 
30. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh 
31. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1.   Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar -  Additional Director 
3. Shri Inam Ahmed  - Executive Officer 
____________________________________________________________ 
 
(ii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj  
(2021-2022) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the 
26th Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-
Second Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development &Panchayati Raj (17thLokSabha) on 
'Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development). 
2.  The Twenty-Second Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 16.03.2022 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained 
in the Report were received on 09.06.2022. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
28.07.2022. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Second Report (17thLokSabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                   PRATAPRAO JADHAV 
28 July, 2022                Chairperson, 
06 Shravana, 1944(Saka)            Standing Committee on Rural Development& Panchayati Raj 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development 
(2021-22) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty Second Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development) for the year 2022-2023.  
2.   The Twenty-Second Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 
16.03.2022 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. 
The Report contained 25 Observations/Recommendations.  
3.  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 25 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been 
received from the Government. These have been examined and 
categorised as follows: -  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 
          Total: 17
          Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL           
          Total: NIL      
         Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 3, 4, 5, 10, 13, 14       
Total:  06 
  Chapter-IV   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. 18, 19        
Total: 02 
       Chapter-V 

2 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case 
where it is not possible for any reasons to implement the recommendations in 
letter and spirit, the matter shall be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration/merit 
comments or are interim in nature.  
I. Liquidation of Unspent Balances 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
6. With regard to the liquidation of unspent balances, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:- 
           One of the permanent malaise associated with the expenditure 
of allocated funds is the non-judicious approach resulting in huge 
amounts of unspent balances in almost all the schemes of the DoRD. 
The Committee painfully note that Rs. 2,524 crores in NRLM and Rs. 
2,504.98 crores in DDU-GKY lies unspent as on 31.12.2021 while Rs. 
491.28 crores in MGNREGA (as on 28.01.2022) and Rs. 4,860.15 
crores (as on 24.01.2022) in PMGSY are the quantum of unspent 
balances in these major schemes. The Committee, although note the 
various constraints being faced and measures adopted by the DoRD in 
tackling and mitigating the issue of unspent balances are still in a 
quandary on the meagre increase in fund allocation for the Department 
on one hand, existing pendencies in schemes like MGNREGA as 
reflected through wage and material component liabilities or delay in 
installment releases in PMAY-G on the other hand along-with non-
utilization of full funds. In situations, wherein beneficiaries are kept 
awaiting for their wages or installments, the accrual of unspent 
balances is completely unacceptable. Therefore, the Committee urge 
DoRD to ensure that unspent balances do not keep piling up in the 
various schemes and that each penny allocated against the schemes is 
fully utilized for the welfare of poor and marginalized section of the rural 
populace.  
 
7.  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“All out efforts are being made by the Department to bring the 
unspent balances to a bare minimum. In this regard, rigorous 

3 
 
examination of fund availability with the States as well as expenditure 
incurred by the States against the balance funds is done in order to 
ensure that further funds are released to only those States where the 
State have expenditure plan in place. While sanctioning the funds, the 
unspent balances of the previous releases are taken into account. For 
this purpose, the Programme Divisions of the Department also take the 
help of Public Financial Management System (PFMS) Portal to know 
the bank balance of the recipients before making each release. The 
instructions of the Department of Expenditure regarding the use of 
PFMS Portal for the use of Central Sector Scheme from time to time 
are strictly followed by the Department. The principles of ‘just in time’, 
is being strictly followed for releases in respect of all payments to the 
extent possible. The broad principles, like, cash balance at a time 
should preferably not be more than 3 months of requirements and 
funds released as per actual requirements, are adhered to. Recent 
guidelines issued by Department of Expenditure in the month of March 
2021, further emphasise the requirement of reduction of float available 
with States/UTs by following ‘just in time release’ principle, releases in 
four installments during a year and  efficient and proper use of PFMS 
Portal by all the stakeholders.                                                      
Further, Finance Review Meetings are held with States/UTs to review 
the progress of expenditure and resolve any impediments in smooth 
flow of funds and pace of expenditure. Performance review meetings 
with the States are also held regularly under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (RD) which are being attended by the Additional Chief 
Secretaries / Principal Secretaries of all States/UTs. Video 
conferences, review meetings, regular follow-up, etc. are being 
conducted at various levels on regular basis to monitor the 
performance, progress of the schemes and liquidation of unspent 
balances in the States/UTs.”  
 
8. During the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2022-23), the 
Committee were dismayed  to note the huge  accumulation of unspent 
balances in almost all the schemes of the Department of Rural Development 
(DoRD).  As on on 31.12.2021,  NRLM and DDU-GKY  had unspent balances to 
the tune of Rs. 2,524 crore and Rs. 2,504.98 crore respectively.  The unspent 
balance  for MNREGA was Rs. 491.28 crore  (as on 28.01.2022)  whereas  for 
PMGSY, it was as high as Rs. 4,860.15 crore  (as on 24.01.2022) . The 
Committee found the accrual of such unspent balances  unacceptable which 
raised aspersions over the financial management of the Department. While 
emphasising the need for full utilization of funds in  schematic interventions 

4 
 
for the welfare of rural masses, the Committee  in their Report had 
recommended  DoRD to ensure expeditious liquidation of unspent balances. 
The Action Taken Reply submitted by DoRD states that “further funds are 
released to only those States where the State have expenditure plan in place” 
and “the principles of ‘just in time’ is being strictly followed for releases in 
respect of all payments to the extent possible”. The reply also  mentions about 
recent Guidelines issued by the Department of Expenditure in  March, 2021 for 
the redressal of piling up of unspent balances.  While acknowledging the 
various measures  that have been put in place by the DoRD, the Committee 
urge  DoRD to avoid letting their ‘guards down’ and keep accelerating their 
efforts for complete mitigation of unspent balances .  
 
II. Filling of Muster Rolls at Gram Panchayat Level 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
9. Regarding the filling of Muster Rolls at Gram Panchayat Level under the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGA), the 
Committee had recommended  as under:- 
"The Committee took note that the essential pre-requisite for the 
timely payment of wages to the labourers of MGNREGA was the 
immediate online filling up of muster-roll after the issue of work order. It 
is also understood by the Committee through its study visits and the 
practical experiences of the Members that quite often the rozgarsevaks 
are in the habit of filling up kachha muster at the start and go to the 
Block once a week for online uploading of muster-rolls. This practice is 
having a cascading detrimental effect on the MGNREGA beneficiaries 
as delay in muster uploading causes delay in the payment of wages. 
Moreover, in cases where the muster-roll is not updated and uploaded 
within the stipulated time, the same cannot be filled from back date or 
of previous week, thus causing loss of number of that many days of 
work done by the labourers in the calculation for payment. This is a 
huge anomaly at the ground level fully attributable to the callous 
approach of the concerned official. The plea of non-availability of 
internet connection at Panchayat level does not stand firm in the face 
of the provision of Bharat-Net providing internet to the Gram 
Panchayats. Thus, it becomes imperative that the lackadaisical 
approach of grass-root officials associated with MGNREGA be handled 

5 
 
with firmly and no excuse be tolerated any further for non-filling of 
muster at Gram Panchayat level itself without wasting time. Therefore, 
the Committee vehemently implore upon Department of Rural 
Development to make it mandatory for the filling of muster at Gram 
Panchayat level itself specifically the Gram Panchayats which are 
connected with Bharat-Net. The Committee may be informed about the 
efficacious steps taken by the Government in this regard."  
 
10. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 "As per the provision, e-muster is the norm. Only in exceptional 
and unavoidable circumstance, paper musters can be issued by State 
Government after due approval of Central Government. e-Muster has 
printed names of workers who have demanded employment and are 
allocated a particular work. In the case of e-muster, muster roll 
numbers are generated by the NREGASoft and therefore, not required 
to be entered in the system. 
  Central Government has made mandatory for capturing of real 
time attendance alongwithgeotagged photographs of beneficiaries  
through National Mobile Monitoring system(NMMS) of all worksites 
wherein muster roll have been issued to engage 20 or more 
beneficiaries. These captured attendances go directly to NREGASoft 
for wage list creation. No need to do separate data entry. 
  State can use NMMS even for the worksite having less than 20 
workers. 
  Schedule-II of the Act has provision for the purpose of ensuring 
accountability in payment of wages and to calculate culpability of 
various functionaries or agencies, the State shall divide the processes 
leading to determination and payment of wage into various stages and 
specified Stage wise maximum time limits alongwith the functionary or 
agency which is responsible for discharging the specific function.  
 Also, the State Government shall pay the compensation upfront 
after due verification within the time limits as specified above and 
recover the compensation amount from the functionaries or agencies 
who is responsible for the delay in payment." 
 
11.  The  issue of  rampant delay in filling up of online muster roll 
immediately after the generation of work order  under MNREGA  came to the 
notice of the Committee during their study visits to various rural locales of the 
country. Timely payment of wages entirely depends upon the exercise of 
immediate online filling up of muster roll.   Therefore, it warrants utmost 
alacrity on part of the rozgar-sevaks. However, to the contrary, the Committee 
found lackadaisical approach in completing this essential procedure which 
ultimately causes delay in the payment of wages to the beneficiaries .  In this 

6 
 
backdrop, the Committee had strongly implored upon DoRD to comply with 
the mandatory and immediate filling up of muster rolls at Gram Panchayat 
level itself to ward off any delay in the payment of wages and also to ensure 
that number of days of work are not lost due to late  filling  of muster rolls after 
the stipulated due date.  However, from the response of DoRD , the Committee 
find a complete lack of empathy towards  such a serious issue. Rather than  
specifically responding  on the issue of delay in filling of muster roll at ground 
level, the reply merely indicate about the existing provision of e-muster, 
National Mobile Monitoring System and Schedule 11 of the Act providing 
accountability in payment of wages. The Committee are not at all satisfied with 
the approach elicited by DoRD in addressing the pinpointed  recommendation 
by just  mentioning the existing norms mandating e-muster. The Department 
should  have  replied specifically upon the delay factor in filling up of muster 
at Gram Panchayat level . The Committee are not wary about the existence of 
provision but are deeply pained with the non-compliance factor with the extant 
guidelines. In view of the foregoing, the Committee while exhibiting their 
displeasure, strongly reiterate their recommendation for the implementation of 
prompt online filling up of muster roll at the Gram Panchayat level itself in 
‘letter and spirit’and exhort DoRD to take up this issue in right earnest. 
 
III. Wage and Material Pendencies under  MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
12.  With regard to the wage and material pendencies under MGNREGA, 
the Committee had recommended as under:- 
“A demand driven scheme such as MGNREGA having a 
statutory status and aimed at securing some sort of livelihood for the 
destitute and marginalized having no other ‘fall back options’ certainly 
stays defeated in its intent in wake of Rs. 4,060 crore lying as pending 

7 
 
wages. Shockingly, Rs. 9,000/- crores remains pending against the 
material component. The Committee find these figures alarming in 
nature more so when both the aspect of MGNREGA, i.e. a demand 
driven nature of the scheme and creation of assets under the scheme 
are severely hampered through such pendencies. More startling is the 
fact that even after such existing scenario, the BE for MGNREGA has 
been reduced from the Rs. 78,000/- crore as sought by DoRD, to Rs. 
73,000/- crores for the financial year 2022-23. Any administrative or 
procedural lapse causing such delays are completely uncalled for and 
unacceptable in the context of a scheme of such enormous proportion. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend DoRD to spruce up its 
financial management of the scheme and tighten their grip on the 
fallacies that may have crept in the implementation of MGNREGA at 
ground level for the earliest eradication of pendencies in wages and 
material components.” 
 
13. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS fund release to the States is a 
continuous process and Central Government is committed to making 
fund available to States for the implementation of the Scheme. Under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, States submit fund release proposals to 
Government of India. The Ministry releases funds periodically in two 
tranches with each tranche consisting of one or more installments, 
keeping in view the “agreed to” Labour Budget, demand for works, 
opening balance, pace of utilization of funds, pending liabilities, overall 
performance and subject to  submission of relevant documents by the 
State. 
 The Ministry seeks additional funds under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS from Ministry of Finance as and when required for meeting the 
demand for work on the ground. 
  The Central Government had enhanced the financial allocation 
under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS for previous financial year 2020-21 
from Rs. 61,500 crore at Budget Estimate (BE) stage to Rs.1,11,500 
crore at Revised Estimate (RE) stage. 
  During the current financial year 2021-22 (as on 31.03.2022), an 
amount of Rs. 98,467.85 crore has been released by Central 
Government to the States/UTs under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS.” 
 
 
14. The Committee were aghast  with revelation  that an amount of Rs. 4,060 
crore was lying as pending wages while Rs. 9,060 crore remained uncleared 
against the material component  for a welfare oriented schematic intervention 
like  MGNREGA.  While being deeply concerned with the adverse impact of 
such pendency and its impact on  upliftment of rural labourers, the Committee 

8 
 
had strongly recommended DoRD to spruce up its financial management to 
address the lacunas in administration  to overcome   huge  pendencies in 
wages and material component at the earliest. The response  furnished by  
DoRD is completely bereft of any concrete measure that have been taken and 
furthermore it is silent upon the existing pendencies. Simply it has again 
demonstrated the same old stereotypical approach . It is unfathomable  as to 
how a specific query of the Committee can be sidelined and remained silent 
and evasive on such important matter.  The ‘need of the hour’ is to tighten the 
Department’s grip over the widely publicised shimmering malaise of 
pendencies and entail all measures for its rectification expeditiously. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly reiterate their recommendation for the 
eradication of wage and material pendencies under MGNREGA through 
robust measures of financial prudence at the earliest.  
IV. Widening the Ambit of Permissible Works 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
15.  With regard to the widening the ambit of permissible works under 
MGNREGA, the Committee had recommended  as under:- 
“During the deliberations of the Committee, one of the pertinent 
issue that kept on coming up was the demand of suitable review and 
widening the ambit of ‘permissible works’ under MGNREGA so as to 
include few contemporary required areas to be covered. One such 
aspect pertaining to the flood affected regions of country was the 
construction of ‘landspurs’ for protecting acres of lands affected with 
the vagaries of flood every year. These landspurs may reportedly 
prevent the erosion/cutting of lands during floods causing loss of 
terrain. Not only this structure, but other notable areas of work like 
fencing the farmlands and various agricultural activities including 
agricultural labour also merit a relook for inclusion under permissible 
domain of MGNREGA. Hence, the Committee strongly urge DoRD to 
look into the matter of inclusion of ‘landspurs’, fencing of farmlands, 
agricultural labour activities under the permissible ambit of MGNREGA 
to meet the ‘need of the hour’.” 
 
16. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 

9 
 
            “There are 262 works permissible under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA which includes Construction of wire crate (gabion) spur, stone 
spur and earthen spur which can be taken up in the flood affected 
regions of country. 
   Fencing of farm land is not a permissible work under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS. However, live fencing can be taken up as an item of 
work in plantation related works. 
  As per the Schedule I of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA Section 4 
(3), Para 4(3) Works which are non-tangible, not measurable, repetitive 
such as, removing grass, pebbles, agricultural operations, shall not be 
taken up. Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a demand driven scheme.” 
  
 
17.  The Committee were apprised of the requirement  that was felt from 
various quarters for further widening of the ambit of  permissible works under 
MGNREGA such as construction of ‘landspurs’ in flood ravaged areas and  
inclusion of other agricultural related activities.  In that scenario, the 
Committee had urged  DoRD to review the various activities  that could be kept 
under the permissible works  under MNREGA. DoRD in their written reply has 
categorically stated that non-tangible, non-measurable and repetitive works 
such as removing grass, pebbles, agricultural operations shall not be taken 
up. However stone and earthen spurs  can be taken up in the flood affected 
regions of the country. Nonetheless, the Committee still cannot comprehend 
the reason as to why  DoRD could not assess some of the works which the 
Committee had recommended for their inclusion under the permissible domain 
of MGNREGA. The existing provisions of the MGNREGA have been drafted and 
enacted upon through the efforts of DoRD and there is every possibility of  
assessing and addressing the emerging needs and requirements  raised by 
the common masses through the Committee. Possibility of 
amendments/revision of the scheme is open to the wisdom of the Department 
and should be explored. Therefore, the Committee while reiterating their 
recommendation for widening the ambit of permissible works under 

10 
 
MGNREGA to include ‘landspurs’ and agricultural activities also, implore upon 
DoRD to review the extant norms and come up with a more practical and need 
basis solution in this regard.   
 
V. Increase in Accidental Compensation 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
18.  With regard to the increase in Accidental Compensation, the 
Committee had recommended  as under:- 
“The Committee were enlightened with the practice of providing 
compensation to the labourers under MGNREGA who meet accident 
on work site resulting in their demise. During the course of evidence, it 
was averred by the Secretary, DoRD that an enhanced amount of two 
lakhs were being paid to the victims of accident while working on 
MGNREGA work-site through the insurance component. The 
Committee observe that the MGNREGA beneficiaries belong to very 
poor and marginalized sections of the society who are oblivious to their 
rights and benefits and are also not very forthcoming in exercising their 
choice. The Committee were also made aware of the dismal ground 
reality of non-payment of very less amount to such accidental victims 
and that the issue required urgent attention. Keeping the stock of 
situation in light and the strata of MGNREGA labourers in view, the 
Committee feel that separate two lakhs compensation amount over and 
above existing provision should be immediately paid to the next of kin 
of the accidental victims under MGNREGA and call upon DoRD to 
redress the issue of low payment as per revised provisions and with a 
humanitarian approach.” 
 
19.  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
            “As per the provision in schedule-II of the Act, If a person 
employed under the Scheme meets with death or becomes 
permanently disabled by accident arising out of and in the course of 
employment, he or his legal heirs, as the case may be, shall be paid by 
the implementing agency an ex gratia as per entitlements under the 
PradhanMantriSurakshaBimaYojana or as may be notified by the 
Central Government. This is a very significant enhancement as the 
maximum amount payable  in case of loss of life or both the limbs have 
gone up from Rs. 1 lac to Rs. 2 lac. Other benefits have also been 
similarly raised. No further enhancement is under consideration.” 
 
20. Instances are galore wherein labourers under MGNREGA meet 
unfortunate demise while working onsite due to several accidental causes. The 

11 
 
Committee were of the unanimous view that the beneficiaries of MGNREGA 
belong to the periphery of the economic strata and are from extremely 
marginalised sections of the rural populace. The loss of life of such 
‘breadwinners’ are irreparable which could throw the remaining family 
members in the deep caverns of penury. As an act of solace, an increase in 
accidental compensation through a separate amount paid immediately during 
those calamitous hour could, perhaps, go a long way in ‘hand holding’ of the 
poor by the Government. Keeping in mind the extant provisions as asserted by 
the Secretary, DoRD during evidence meeting, the Committee still preferred an 
upward revision and a separate Rs. two lakh compensation payment to the 
next of kin of the accidental victims of MGNREGA. However, the response 
elicited by the DoRD only highlights the ex-gratia payment amount as per 
entitlements under the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha BimaYojana and that the 
maximum amount payable in case of loss of life or both the limbs have gone 
up from Rs. 1 lakh to Rs. 2 lakh. No further enhancement is under 
consideration. The Committee have taken due note of the reply and are not 
completely oblivious of the efforts of the DoRD in this regard. Compensation 
payment through Pradhan MantrI Suraksha Bima Yojana, though accounted 
for, the Committee are still wary of the documentary procedures required for 
such assistance and the lack of knowledge of the labourers to do so, 
particularly, at the time of being afflicted with tragedy of maximum intensity. 
The Committee are of the view that an easy and separate provision of 
compensation payment to the tune of Rs. 2 lakh may be done for prompt help 
to the needy poor beneficiary, over and above the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha 

12 
 
Bima Yojana corpus, and thus, call upon the Department to relook into the 
matter with a much more sympathetic approach.  
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
VI. Increase in wages under MGNREGA 
 
21. With regard to the increase in wages under MGNREGA, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 “An oft repeated concern of the Committee pertaining with 
MGNREGA has been that of increase in wages. Despite several 
recommendations in this regard, there has been no noticeable change 
in the stance of DoRD. While DoRD has been always repeating their 
same routine response of the revision of wages every financial year, 
but realistically, the quantum of revision, in all earnest, merits a relook. 
Rising inflation and cost of living, be it urban area or rural setting, has 
risen manifold and is evident to ‘all and sundry’. Even at this moment, 
going by the notified wage rates of MGNREGA, per day wage rate of 
around Rs. 200/- in many States defies any logic when the same State 
has much higher labour rates. It becomes inexplicable as to why the 
wages under MGNREGA still can’t be linked to a suitable index 
commensurate with the existing inflation. Aware of the demand of 
increase in wages under MGNREGA from various quarters, the 
Committee urge DoRD unequivocally to revisit their stand and devise a 
mechanism for raising the wages under MGNREGA.”  
 
22.  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“As per Section 6(1) of Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, 2005 by 
notification specify the wage rate for its beneficiaries. Accordingly, the 
Ministry of Rural Development notifies Mahatma Gandhi NREGA wage 
rate every year for States/UTs. To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA workers against inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development 
revises the wage rate every year based on change in Consumer Price 
Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The CPI-AL index figures are 
taken from the website of Labour Bureau, Shimla. The wage rate is 
made applicable from 1st April of each financial year. However each 
State/UT can provide wage over and above the wage rate notified by 
the Central Government.  
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a demand driven wage 
employment scheme which provides livelihoods security i.e. fall back 
option for livelihoods for the rural households, in the situation when 
regular employment is absent. Wage rate for the scheme Mahatma 
Gandhi NREG A ct is mandated in section 6 of the Act.”   
 

13 
 
23. The Committee are constantly gripped with demand from numerous 
quarters for the increase in wages under MGNREGA through linkage with 
suitable inflationary index to provide a buffer against the rising cost of living. 
Wage rate of around Rs. 200/- in many States is completely unfathomable and 
surpassing all the logic. In this context, the Committee had recommended 
DoRD to devise a mechanism for raising the wages under MGNREGA. The 
same sentiment of the Committee were also echoed through their 
recommendation in the 20th Report of the Committee (17thLokSabha) on the 
‘Critical Evaluation of MGNREGA’ wherein increase in wage rates and uniform 
wage rates across the nation have been urged upon. The Committee, as in 
earlier cases, find the reply of DoRD  remaining pretty much the same and the 
inability of the Department can be noticed for increasing the wages under 
MGNREGA and linking it  to  any appropriate inflationary index. The 
Committee, although have taken note of the stand taken by the Department, 
yet they are  still  not in a position to ignore the demand raised from the 
various ‘nooks and corners’ of the country. Therefore, the Committee, in all 
earnest, beseech upon the DoRD to explore the feasibility  to review their 
stand and devise any possible means for the upward revision of wages under 
MGNREGA by bringing all the stakeholders on-board. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
VII. Review of Caste-based Payment Provision 
 
24. With regard to the issue of Caste-based Payment Provision initiated under 
MGNREGA, the Committee had recommendedas under:- 
 “A startling fact that came to the fore during the examination of 
Demands for Grants 2022-23 pertaining to the mechanism of payment 
of wages being employed under MGNREGA was the audacious 
practice of wages being paid to the MGNREGA beneficiaries on the 
basis of caste, i.e. in the order of priority starting from SC/ST to 

14 
 
remaining others. The Committee were taken aback and aghast on 
such revelation. Belying all logic and employing such modality, 
surpasses any prudence whatsoever. The Committee finding 
themselves at a total ‘loss of words’ could not fathom the rationale 
behind such idea. The scheme of MGNREGA draws its origin from a 
statutory source, i.e. MGNREG Act, 2005. Such absurdity is nowhere 
mentioned in the Act and digressing from the basic tenets of treating all 
the MGNREGA beneficiaries at par call for sternest possible criticism. 
The beneficiaries of MGNREGA cutting across the different sections of 
society have only one thing in common, i.e. they are poor, destitute and 
have no other fall back option, but MGNREGA to look upon for their 
basic source of survival. Thus, they are economically weak populace 
and can come from any religion/caste, creation of such payment 
system wherein one specific community is preferred over the other 
solely on the ground of caste will only give rise to resentment and 
create rift among the beneficiaries of MGNREGA. The practice which 
started from 2021-22 itself need to be addressed urgently and not to be 
encouraged any further by ensuring that each and every labour 
working under the Scheme, irrespective of caste, get payment within 
time-frame fixed by the MGNREGA.  
  
In view of such piquant situation, the Committee unanimously 
recommend DoRD to restore the earlier mechanism of generation of 
single Fund Transfer Order without any sort of segregation on the basis 
of caste so that the welfare oriented nature of MGNREGA is not 
divided on caste basis.” 
 
25.  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
           “The category wise (SC, ST and Others) wage payment system, 
as made applicable from the FY 2021-22, has been introduced to 
accurately reflect on ground flow of funds to various population groups. 
Its further streamlining has been undertaken. From FY 2022-23 single 
FTO for wage payment has been started keeping the provisioning for 
separate budget for different categories to reflect accurate flow of funds 
on ground.” 
 
26. The examination of Demands for Grants (2022-23) brought to fore a 
deeply disturbing and compelling fact associated with the introduction of an 
audacious practice of wages being paid to the MGNREGA beneficiaries on the 
basis of caste (SC/ST and remaining others). The Committee were completely 
taken aback and were at ‘loss of words’ to even respond to such an 
unbelievable practice, more so  when call for equality is ever more deafening 
from various quarters of the country. Defying any logic, such practice seemed 

15 
 
to be in complete contradiction to the sentiments of the Act itself which talks 
about only one category i.e. poor rural masses. Thus, the Committee had 
unanimously recommended for reviewing the caste based payment provision 
under MGNREGA and restoring the earlier practice of payment. Surprisingly, 
the response elicited by  DoRD in this regard is non-yielding, which only states 
that from the financial year 2022-23, single Fund Transfer Order (FTO) for wage 
payment has been started while “keeping the provisions for separate budget 
for different categories to reflect accurate flow of funds on ground”. The 
Committee are not satisfied with the response enumerated as above wherein 
separate budget for different categories have been talked upon. The intent of 
the Committee through their recommendation was to ‘nip in the bud’ any rift 
created among the rural masses due to caste based payment under MGNREGA 
which could defy the spirit of a welfare scheme. Therefore, the Committee are 
still of the firm opinion that such practice needs to be done away with 
completely and payment under MGNREGA should be done only in consonance 
with the provisions enshrined in the legal statute.  Hence, the Committee 
vehemently call upon DoRD for ending this practice on an immediate basis. 
VIII. Increase in per-unit assistance under PMAY-G 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
27. With regard to the Increase in per-unit assistance under PMAY-G, the 
Committee had recommended  as under:- 
“The Committee note that the deadline of PMAY-G has been 
extended to March, 2024 with the target of 2.95 crore houses. All 
necessary formalities also reportedly seem to have been completed to 
ensure that the list of beneficiaries are updated. The per unit 
assistance under PMAY-G for plain areas is Rs. 1.2 lakh and for hilly 
areas is Rs. 1.3 lakh which has remained static for quite a while now. 
With rising inflation having detrimental effect on the cost factor 
associated with the raw material, transportation cost, labours cost et. 

16 
 
al., constructing a new house of the requisite area under PMAY-G for 
the poor and needy beneficiary with such assistance amount seem to 
be an arduous task. The vision “Housing for All” may not reach its 
envisaged culmination until and unless the beneficiaries are provided 
with proper ‘hand-holding’ in terms of financial assistance of right value 
and at right juncture. Moreover, instances are galore wherein houses 
remain incomplete for want of finance and the target keeps on lagging. 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee find it utmost necessary that a 
review of per-unit assistance be done on priority basis, more so when 
the scheme has been extended to March, 2024. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the DoRD to revise the per unit assistance 
under PMAY-G through suitable hike in the assistance component for 
the much required augmented help to the needy beneficiaries.” 
 
28. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“The scheme provides financial Assistance of Rs. 1.20 lakh in 
plain areas and Rs. 1.30 lakhs in hilly states (including North Eastern 
States and UTs of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh), difficult areas and 
Integrated Action Plan (IAP) districts. Additional assistance of Rs. 
12,000/- is extended for construction of toilets through convergence 
with Swacch Bharat Mission – Gramin (SBM-G), Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) or other 
dedicated source of funding. It also provides support of 90/95 person 
days unskilled wage employment at the current rates to a PMAY-G 
beneficiary for construction of his / her house in convergence with 
MGNREGS. There is also provision of convergence with other 
schemes for provision of basic amenities to beneficiaries of PMAY-G:- 
electricity connection through SAUBHAGYA scheme of Ministry of 
Power,  LPG connection through PMUY of Ministry of Petroleum 
&Natural Gas & Supply of drinking water through JalJeevan Mission 
(JJM) of Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation, Ministry of Jal 
Shakti. 
  
The unit assistance under PMAY-G is as per the approval of the Union 
Cabinet. At present, there is no proposal for revision in unit assistance 
under PMAY-G.” 
 
29. Increase in per-unit assistance under PMAY-G has also been a long 
standing demand brought before the Committee on numerous occasion during 
their deliberations. The Committee resonated with the idea of hike in per unit 
assistance from the existing Rs. 1.20 lakh in plains and Rs. 1.30 lakh in hilly 
areas considering the ever increasing cost of logistics and materials required 
in the construction of houses by the rural poor. The Committee had also taken 

17 
 
note of the fact that the deadline for the scheme of PMAY-G had been 
extended to March, 2024. Keeping in view this development, the Committee 
had recommended DoRD to make an upward revision in the per unit 
assistance being provided to the beneficiaries. Responding to the 
recommendation,  DoRD in their Action Taken Reply have detailed the existing 
provision under the Scheme and have submitted that at present there is no 
proposal for revision in unit assistance under PMAY-G. The Committee having 
gone through the brief response of the Department  feel that a genuine 
demand of the beneficiaries who are facing hard time to construct a house 
with such meagre assistance amount under PMAY-G has not been  addressed. 
The Committee are fully aware of the backlog in the status of completion of 
houses under PMAY-G and also about the substantial remaining target of 
about 80 lakh houses finalised for completing the target of 2.95 crore houses 
by March 2024 under PMAY-G. Therefore, the Committee strongly believe that 
revising and raising the per unit assistance under PMAY-G from the existing 
Rs. 1.2 lakh/Rs. 1.3 lakh at this juncture could still be a boon for large number 
of beneficiaries and would  help them in completing the construction of their 
houses at a faster rate. Thus, the Committee reiterate their recommendation 
for the hike in per unit assistance under PMAY-G. 
 
IX. Parity in PMAY-U and PMAY-G 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
30. With regard to the Parity in PMAY-U and PMAY-G, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:- 
“The Committee observe the disparity in the financial assistance 
provided under the urban component and rural component of Pradhan 
Mantri AwaasYojana - Gramin (PMAY-G). While the per-unit 
assistance amount in the rural sector ranges from Rs. 1.2 lakh to Rs. 

18 
 
1.3 lakh for plain & hilly areas respectively, the assistance amount 
under the urban component lies in the region of about Rs. 2.5 lakh 
through subsidy on loan component. This approach is very intriguing 
and Committee are unable to grasp the rationale behind keeping the 
assistance amount in rural sector substantially less than its urban 
counterpart. The challenges faced in construction of houses in rural 
areas are far more both in terms of logistics and cost factor while the 
organized parameters of urban sector is not a hidden fact. Among the 
rural sector too, the hilly regions require a completely different 
approach for the construction and vagaries or rural system throws 
unprecedented bottlenecks ranging from non-availability of labours for 
bringing raw materials from far flung areas. It is high time that the 
DoRD undertake an objective assessment of the financial aid under the 
two sister schemes of PMAY and bridge the divide between the two in 
a suitable and rationale manner. Therefore, the Committee recommend 
the DoRD to bring a semblance of parity between the assistance 
amount under PMAY-U and PMAY-G.”  
 
31. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“The scheme provides financial Assistance of Rs. 1.20 lakh in 
plain areas and Rs. 1.30 lakhs in hilly states (including North Eastern 
States and UTs of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh), difficult areas and 
Integrated Action Plan (IAP) districts. Additional assistance of Rs. 
12,000/- is extended for construction of toilets through convergence 
with Swacch Bharat Mission – Gramin (SBM-G), Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) or other 
dedicated source of funding. It also provides support of 90/95 person 
days unskilled wage employment at the current rates to a PMAY-G 
beneficiary for construction of his / her house in convergence with 
MGNREGS. There is also provision of convergence with other 
schemes for provision of basic amenities to beneficiaries of PMAY-G:- 
electricity connection through SAUBHAGYA scheme of Ministry of 
Power,  LPG connection through PMUY of Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas & Supply of drinking water through JalJeevan Mission 
(JJM) of Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation, Ministry of Jal 
Shakti.   
The unit assistance under PMAY-G is as per the approval of the 
Union Cabinet. At present, there is no proposal for revision in unit 
assistance under PMAY-G.” 
 
32. The rationale behind the disparity in the per unit assistance being 
provided under PMAY-U and PMAY-G had always flummoxed the Committee . 
The Committee believe that amount of assistance for construction in rural 
areas where infrastructure logistics and material/labour cost have a much 
more telling effect on the budget of a beneficiary as compared to their urban 

19 
 
counterpart needed to be addressed wisely. Considering such difference in the 
two counterparts of PMAY, wherein rural beneficiaries are entitled to Rs. 
1.2/1.3 lakh assistance per unit, while the urban beneficiaries’ assistance 
component reaches upto Rs. 2.5 lakh, the Committee had recommended DoRD 
to bring about parity in the assistance amount through upward revision of per 
unit assistance under PMAY-G, to create a semblance of equality between both 
the schemes of similar nature. However, the reply submitted by DoRD lacks 
any substance as it clearly states that there is no proposal for revision in unit 
assistance under PMAY-G. The Committee are extremely dissatisfied with the 
stand of DoRD  and feel that the Department need to chalk out a proper 
proposal and move it forward for consultation with the Ministry of Finance 
regarding additional budgetary requirement to meet any genuine demand. 
Merely stating the fact about ‘no proposal’ smacks of an indifferent attitude 
completely oblivious to the concern and need of the poor beneficiaries of the 
scheme, more so during the times of heavy inflation. The Committee find such 
callous approach of the Department bereft of any empathy and thus, urge 
upon  DoRD, while reiterating their recommendation, to review their stand and 
carry out an effective exercise for the hike in assistance component of PMAY-
G by bringing it at par with PMAY-U. 
 
X. Strictures to National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
33. With regard to the the damages caused to the roads under PMGSY by the 
vehicles of the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee were informed during the deliberations through the 
ground experience of Members of Parliament (MPs) that the roads 

20 
 
constructed under PMGSY with an optimum weight bearing capacity were 
witnessing load carrying heavy vehicles of NHAI upto the tune of 50 tonnes 
plying on them. Such enormous weight causes damage to the roads under 
PMGSY and the matter needed to be looked upon seriously. Even though, 
provision exists for the roads damaged by the plying of NHAI vehicles to be 
repaired by them, still no one pays heed to them. This is a blatant violation of 
norms creating damaging effects on the roads of PMGSY which need to be 
resolved at the earliest. In view of such conflicting situation, it is perhaps 
appropriate if the Department takes up the matter sternly with the NHAI and 
thus the Committee recommend DoRD to ensure a result oriented dialogue 
process with the NHAI for stricter compliance of the norms of PMGSY.”  
 
34. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“As recommended by the committee, the matter is being taken up with 
Ministry of Roads, Transport & Highways for better appreciation of this issue.” 
 
35. The Committee took note of the blatant flouting of norms associated 
with the repairs of rural roads that are damaged by the plying of heavy 
vehicles involved in the construction of highways under NHAI.  The 
Committee, therefore had recommended DoRD to take up the matter with the 
NHAI so that the extant provisions of PMGSY are complied and the rural roads 
damaged through their vehicles are repaired and not left in a non-
transportable position defying the objective of PMGSY roads. The Department 
in their reply have submitted a miniscule response stating that the matter is 
being taken up with the Ministry of Roads, Transport and Highways for better 
appreciation of the issue. The Committee find this reply incomplete and 
interim in nature as it does not provide any concrete action that have been  
taken   by the Department at this juncture. Instead of dilly-dallying and 
treading slowly, the Department need to address such issues promptly to stop 
further damages to PMGSY roads.  Finding the nature of reply incomplete, the 
Committee urge upon DoRD to take some tangible efforts and apprise the 
Committee  accordingly at the earliest. 

21 
 
XI. Prioritizing of Roads under PMGSY & construction of roads according to 
population density 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
36. With regard to prioritizing of roads under PMGSY and construction of roads 
according to population density, the Committee had recommended  as under:- 
“Another serious concern that arose before the Committee during their 
deliberations pertained to the issue of change in prioritizing of roads 
earmarked for construction in the villages. Normally, routes are selected 
keeping in mind the important landmarks they devise to connect such as 
school, hospital etc. However, routes more often than not require land which 
the landowners are not ready to let go in the absence of any compensation 
mechanism for land transfer under the scheme. Thus, the project gets stalled 
due to conflicting opinion and interest at the local level. Thus, arises the 
necessity to change the priority which is dependent upon the Gram 
Panchayats. The conflict goes on, simply lingering the construction work. 
Hence, the Committee recommend that the need of the hour is to ensure that 
prudence may be applied in cases where change in priority is required and a 
mechanism or authority may be appointed for taking unbiased decision 
immediately so that rural connectivity projects are not hampered.”  
 
37. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“As per PMGSY guidelines, providing land for the construction of roads 
under PMGSY is the responsibility of concerned State Government. A 
certificate to the fact that land is available has to be submitted by the state 
along with the proposal. 
  
The representatives of the Local Gram Panchayat are also involved in 
the transect walk for deciding the alignment of the roads.  This situation 
regarding non-availability of lands in some cases mostly happen at the time of 
execution of PMGSY-I works, where the new roads were being constructed 
first time for providing connectivity to habitations. Since construction of most 
of the sanctioned works have been completed under PMGSY-I and states had 
tackled the issue relating to acquisition of land in some cases, Ministry does 
not foresee any requirement for putting in place any new system at this 
juncture.” 
  
Ministry is now primarily sanctioning works of PMGSY-III which are 
upgradation and consolidation of the existing roads. The issue relating to land 
disputes have not been brought to the notice of Ministry yet. However, the 
concerns of the committee have been noted and will be taken up with the 
concerned State Government.” 
 
38. One of the issues hindering the progress of projects under PMGSY that 
was brought to the attention of the Committee revolved around the change in 
priority of the routes owing to the non-availability of land. The Committee were 

22 
 
concerned on the non-serious in addressing this issue, which more often than 
not stalled the projects and thus recommended  DoRD to wisely handle the 
cases where change in priority was required. In their written reply, the 
Department have submitted that land acquisition cases primarily across the 
wider PMGSY-I which had been duly tackled by the States and that the Ministry 
was now primarily sanctioning works under PMGSY-III which were upgradation 
and consolidation of the existing roads. It has been further averred that land 
dispute cases have not been brought to the notice of the Ministry yet but the 
concerns of the Committee had been noted and would be taken up with the 
concerned State Government. The Committee find the reply being ill informed 
on the part of  DoRD and are surprised at their ignorance regarding a much 
prevalent issue on the ground level. The Committee expected that  DoRD must 
have been seized of the matter and some concrete reply would have been 
given. However, the reply speaks about a future course of action with no time 
limit for such deliberations. Therefore, the Committee finding the reply interim 
and incomplete in nature stresses upon DoRD to take stock of the situation 
State-wise surgicallyand bring an early solution for handling of such cases 
under intimation to the Committee. 
XII. Provision of Assistance under NSAP 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24) 
39. With regard to the provision of assistance under NSAP, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:- 
“A scheme of wide outreach aimed at the poor and destitute 
population of society need a better assistance component for providing 
real succor to its beneficiary. The Committee feel that the upward 
revision of assistance amount ranging at present from Rs. 200/- to Rs. 
500/- per month under the different components of the scheme is much 
awaited. The Committee had recommended for the same earlier also in 
their Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth LokSabha) and reiterated it in 

23 
 
their Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth LokSabha), but still no 
augmentation of pension amounts have been noticed on the ground. 
Much time has elapsed and the Committee find that the assurance of 
DoRD regarding the ongoing consultation is not taking desired shape. 
So, the Committee strongly recommend DoRD to take the issue of 
increase in pension amount under NSAP seriously and concretize the 
result on ground level as soon as possible.”   
 
40. The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
            “Under NSAP schemes, financial assistance ranging from 
Rs.200/- to Rs.500/- per beneficiary per month is being provided. Apart 
from this assistance, States/ UTs are adding top-ups ranging from 
Rs.50 to Rs.2,700 per month under the NSAP schemes. The issue of 
revamping the NSAP Scheme through changes in acceptable rates 
and parameters was considered at the highest level in Government 
and it was decided to continue with the existing system.” 
 
 
41. National Social Assistance Programme caters to poor and destitute 
section of the society and monetary help being provided to them through the 
scheme of DoRD  for uplifting the living standards of the needy. However, the 
prevalent assistance amount to the tune of Rs. 200/- to Rs. 500/- per month 
under the different components of the scheme is extremely meagre and 
demands for its revision had been made from long back. The Committee, 
seized of the relevance of such demand had urged DoRD to take note of their 
earlier recommendation made in this regard in the thirteenth report of the 
17thLokSabha in response to which it had been stated by  DoRD that the 
Report of 3rd Party evaluation of NSAP had been submitted and that the 
further action with regard to increase in the amount of pension/assistance will 
be taken in consultation with the States/UTs and other stakeholders. The 
recommendation for faster implementation and going beyond providing only 
assurances by taking some concrete action for the revision was reiterated in 
the seventeenth report of the 17thLokSabha, but to no avail. In the present 
instance, the reply submitted by the Department have clearly expressed their 

24 
 
inability in carrying out revision of the scheme in wake of the decision taken at 
the highest level in Government to continue with the existing system. The 
Committee note the response and also take into account the submission 
regarding the top ups made by the State Government ranging from Rs. 50/- to 
Rs. 2700/- per month under the NSAP schemes. Acknowledging the fact, the 
Committee are still of the view that NSAP being a Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
merits a revision at the central stage also so that the base assistance amount 
get increased for providing further relief to the beneficiaries of this scheme. 
The Department need to relook at their stand and should not rely at the 
discretion of States for the success/progress of their scheme. So, the 
Committee beseech upon DoRD to review its stand and once again explore the 
feasibility of revision of assistance  given under NSAP. 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Department of Rural Development (DoRD) have a huge responsibility upon 
them to nurture, nourish and create an atmosphere wherein the vast rural populace 
living in the nooks and corners of the country realise the succor of holistic 
development. The areas of concern range from Rural Development, Rural Housing, 
Rural Connectivity to Rural Livelihoods to name a few. For a nation of such rich 
heritage as ours, the rise from ‘developing’ to ‘developed’ status is not at all feasible 
until and unless the majority population of the country residing in villages march side 
by side with their urban counterparts. The Committee resonate with this idea and 
acknowledge the paramount importance of rural development in the country. 
However, in this scenario, the Committee is not able to reason the approach of the 
Department in seeking/obtaining funds which prima-facie do not seem to be 
adequate enough to fuel the sustainable momentum of the rural progress. While the 
Budget Estimate (BE) for 2021-22 was Rs. 1.31 lakh crores which rose to Rs. 1.54 
lakh crores at Revised Estimate Stage, the budgetary allocation sought for the 
financial year 2022-23 stands at Rs. 1.35 lakh crores, a meagre hike of 3.36%. The 
Committee specifically note the case of MGNREGA, wherein the BE for 2022-23 has 
been kept static at Rs. 73,000/- crores, similar as that of 2021-22 even when the RE 
for MGNREGA rose to Rs. 98,000/- crores in the ongoing fiscal. The Committee are 
perplexed at this situation and are concerned for the pace of implementation of rural 
development schemes with such funds. Therefore, the Committee recommend the 
DoRD to relook at its calculation and suitably approach the Ministry of Finance for 
higher allocation of funds in order to speed up the pace of rural development 
schemes for dearth of budget.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
MGNREGA:-Mahatma Gandhi NREGA  is a demand driven wage 
employment progamme and funds are released to the States/UTs on the basis of 
agreed to Labour Budget and performance of the States during the year. Funds 

26 
 
release to States/UTs is a continuous process and central Government is committed 
in making funds available keeping in view of the demand. The Ministry seeks 
additional funds from Ministry of Finance as and when required for meeting the 
demand for work on the ground.   Details of funds provided during last two Financial 
Year  is as given below: 
                                                                      (Rs. In crore) 
Financial 
Year 
BE RE 
2020-21 61500 1,11,500 
2021-22 73000 98,000 
   
PMAY-G:-The Budget Estimate under PMAY-G for the Financial Year 2021-
22 was Rs. 19500 crores which increased to Rs 20389.84 cr at RE stage. As per the 
EFC Note for continuation of PMAY-G, an amount of Rs. 21373 crores was projected 
as the amount under Extra Budgetary Resources. However, during the Financial 
Year 2021-22 approval for availing EBR was not received from Ministry of Finance. 
Therefore, during the Third Batch of Supplementary Demand for Grants the Division 
had availed additional funds over B.E for an amount of Rs. 9668 crores. Further, as 
per the EFC Note dated 29th November, 2021, the total cost to the Government of 
India for FY 2022-23 is Rs. 48422 crores, out of which Rs. 20000 crores would be 
met from GBS and Rs. 28,422 crores shall be sought as additional funds over and 
above GBS from Ministry of Finance as Ministry of Finance had directed for phasing 
out of EBR during its approval for continuation of PMAY-G till March, 2024. 
  
PMGSY:-Budget allocation for the year 2021-22 under PMGSY was 
Rs.15,000 crore which was revised to Rs.14,000 crore at RE stage.  
  
The Budget Allocation for PMGSY has been increased to Rs. 19,000 crore for 
the Financial year 2022-23. PMGSY will require continuous budgetary support of Rs 
19,000 crore/ year up to 2024-25 to complete all the interventions of the Scheme and 
this issue was brought to the notice of the CCEA while getting approval for PMGSY-
III. Currently, the scheme has sufficient allocation of funds. 
  
DAY-NRLM:-As far as DAY-NRLM is concerned, the provision of Rs. 
13336.42 Crore in BE 2022-23 is adequate to meet the programme requirement for 

27 
 
the year 2022-23. If any requirement of additional funds arises during the current 
year, the same will be sought at the time of RE for the year 2022-23. 
  
DDU-GKY SKILLS:- The BE for DDU- GKY in FY 2021-22 was Rs. 2000 
crore, however, due to reasons such as covid impact, non fulfilment of SNA 
guidelines by States/UTs maximum funds could not be utilized. Hence, the BE for 
the upcoming FY 2022- 23 has been reduced to Rs 1000 Crores. 
  
  
NSAP:- The Budget Estimate (BE) for FY 2021-22 was Rs. 9200.00 crore for 
National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP). The BE for FY 2022-23 is Rs. 
9653.31 crore for NSAP, which shows around 5 percent increase in the Budget 
Estimate over BE 2021-22. 
  
SPMRM:-  The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), in its meeting held on 
26th August 2021 has suggested for discontinuing the scheme. Since August 2021, 
fund releases were held up due to the EFC decision. On the repeated requests of 
Ministry, the Department of Expenditure granted permission to release funds for FY 
2021-22 on 22nd March 2022, allowing releases against the ongoing work liability as 
on 26th August 2021 only. Due to this only Rs. 150.10 crore could be released by 
31st March 2022.  
In order to complete all the Mission activities, Ministry is seeking extension for 
the programme till March 2024. Out of the approved outlay of Rs. 5142.08 crore, till 
31st March 2022, Rs. 2445.02 crore has been utilized.  The Cabinet Note for seeking 
extension till March 2024 is currently under submission, pending final decision. 
Ministry is also seeking exemption from the Department of Expenditure to allow 
expenditure from the budgetary allocation for 2022-23.  
   
Also, earlier the funds used to be released to each cluster in three 
installments, where the release of Second and Third installment of CGF used to 
depend on fund utilisation on ground and preparation of Spatial plans. Due to this, 
the fund release to States was held up. Ministry had taken course correction, and 
fund release conditions were modified to ease the fund release proposal submission 
by States/UTs to the Ministry, in order to expedite the works on ground at fast pace. 

28 
 
Ministry had implemented fund pooling mechanism since January 2021, after which, 
all the funds allocated to the State/UT are maintained in a single State Nodal 
Account (SNA). This helped States by providing flexibility to manage fund limits 
among various clusters within State, thereby easing implementation. This is also 
helping in liquidating the high unspent balance lying with the States. Therefore, the 
fund releases in FY 2020-21 were limited.  
 
As per the extant guidelines by the Department of Expenditure, funds are 
being released to States on achieving 75% of funds as against the earlier release 
condition of 60%. Further, the funds are released in two tranches of 50% each since 
April 2020. Due to this, the releases to States have been constrained. As the 
unspent balance lying with the States and UTs is being utilized first, further releases 
are being done only on fulfillment of conditions stated above. This has limited the 
releases to States/ UTs in the last two years. Meanwhile, the States/UTs have been 
consistent in speeding up of activities undertaken which are being monitored through 
Monthly Progress Reports and timely UC submissions.  
(DoRDO.M. No.G-20011/3/2021-B&Adated 09/06/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
           One of the permanent malaise associated with the expenditure of allocated 
funds is the non-judicious approach resulting in huge amounts of unspent balances 
in almost all the schemes of the DoRD. The Committee painfully note that Rs. 2,524 
crores in NRLM and Rs. 2,504.98 crores in DDU-GKY lies unspent as on 31.12.2021 
while Rs. 491.28 crores in MGNREGA (as on 28.01.2022) and Rs. 4,860.15 crores 
(as on 24.01.2022) in PMGSY are the quantum of unspent balances in these major 
schemes. The Committee, although note the various constraints being faced and 
measures adopted by the DoRD in tackling and mitigating the issue of unspent 
balances are still in a quandary on the meagre increase in fund allocation for the 
Department on one hand, existing pendencies in schemes like MGNREGA as 
reflected through wage and material component liabilities or delay in installment 
releases in PMAY-G on the other hand along-with non-utilization of full funds. In 
situations, wherein beneficiaries are kept awaiting for their wages or installments, the 
accrual of unspent balances is completely unacceptable. Therefore, the Committee 
urge DoRD to ensure that unspent balances do not keep piling up in the various 
schemes and that each penny allocated against the schemes is fully utilized for the 
welfare of poor and marginalized section of the rural populace.  
 
 

29 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
All out efforts are being made by the Department to bring the unspent 
balances to a bare minimum. In this regard, rigorous examination of fund availability 
with the States as well as expenditure incurred by the States against the balance 
funds is done in order to ensure that further funds are released to only those States 
where the State have expenditure plan in place. While sanctioning the funds, the 
unspent balances of the previous releases are taken into account. For this purpose, 
the Programme Divisions of the Department also take the help of Public Financial 
Management System (PFMS) Portal to know the bank balance of the recipients 
before making each release. The instructions of the Department of Expenditure 
regarding the use of PFMS Portal for the use of Central Sector Scheme from time to 
time are strictly followed by the Department. The principles of ‘just in time’, is being 
strictly followed for releases in respect of all payments to the extent possible. The 
broad principles, like, cash balance at a time should preferably not be more than 3 
months of requirements and funds released as per actual requirements, are adhered 
to. Recent guidelines issued by Department of Expenditure in the month of March 
2021, further emphasise the requirement of reduction of float available with 
States/UTs by following ‘just in time release’ principle, releases in four installments 
during a year and  efficient and proper use of PFMS Portal by all the 
stakeholders.                                                      
Further, Finance Review Meetings are held with States/UTs to review the 
progress of expenditure and resolve any impediments in smooth flow of funds and 
pace of expenditure. Performance review meetings with the States are also held 
regularly under the Chairmanship of Secretary (RD) which are being attended by the 
Additional Chief Secretaries / Principal Secretaries of all States/UTs. Video 
conferences, review meetings, regular follow-up, etc. are being conducted at various 
levels on regular basis to monitor the performance, progress of the schemes and 
liquidation of unspent balances in the States/UTs.  
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

30 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
The Committee were enlightened with the practice of providing compensation 
to the labourers under MGNREGA who meet accident on work site resulting in their 
demise. During the course of evidence, it was averred by the Secretary, DoRD that 
an enhanced amount of two lakhs were being paid to the victims of accident while 
working on MGNREGA work-site through the insurance component. The Committee 
observe that the MGNREGA beneficiaries belong to very poor and marginalized 
sections of the society who are oblivious to their rights and benefits and are also not 
very forthcoming in exercising their choice. The Committee were also made aware of 
the dismal ground reality of non-payment of very less amount to such accidental 
victims and that the issue required urgent attention. Keeping the stock of situation in 
light and the strata of MGNREGA labourers in view, the Committee feel that 
separate two lakhs compensation amount over and above existing provision should 
be immediately paid to the next of kin of the accidental victims under MGNREGA 
and call upon DoRD to redress the issue of low payment as per revised provisions 
and with a humanitarian approach. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
            As per the provision in schedule-II of the Act, If a person employed 
under the Scheme meets with death or becomes permanently disabled by accident 
arising out of and in the course of employment, he or his legal heirs, as the case may 
be, shall be paid by the implementing agency an ex gratia as per entitlements under 
the PradhanMantriSurakshaBimaYojana or as may be notified by the Central 
Government. This is a very significant enhancement as the maximum amount 
payable  in case of loss of life or both the limbs have gone up from Rs. 1 lac to Rs. 2 
lac. Other benefits have also been similarly raised. No further enhancement is under 
consideration. 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

31 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
As part of green initiatives and utilizing the barren areas of land alongside 
roads on highways, provision exists for the plantation of trees and their maintenance. 
However, the ground reality throws a picture reflecting non-application of wisdom 
with such provision. The provision holds potential for revenue generation and 
maintaining greenery both through a single step only if the current norm is tweaked 
to allow the plantation of revenue yielding trees. The Committee unanimously feel 
that it is only prudent if trees bearing fruits are planted at such sites so that a source 
of income is also generated as a corollary effect which can only aid the local 
authorities in utilizing the fund for maintenance of public properties and other welfare 
measures. Therefore, the Committee recommend DoRD to modify the provision for 
mandatory plantation of revenue yielding trees along the roads through MGNREGA 
works.  
Reply of the Government  
 
            The approval of self of works is done by Gram Sabha. However, there 
is a provision for taking up Horticulture plantation, Road side plantation under the 
Scheme. To provide focus on Road side plantation, Horticulture plantation including 
nursery raising, Moring Plantation including moringa nursery raising, an advisory has 
been issued to engage Cluster Level Federation (CLF) as Programme Implementing 
Agency  (PIA). 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
An oft repeated concern of the Committee pertaining with MGNREGA has 
been that of increase in wages. Despite several recommendations in this regard, 
there has been no noticeable change in the stance of DoRD. While DoRD has been 
always repeating their same routine response of the revision of wages every 
financial year, but realistically, the quantum of revision, in all earnest, merits a relook. 
Rising inflation and cost of living, be it urban area or rural setting, has risen manifold 
and is evident to ‘all and sundry’. Even at this moment, going by the notified wage 
rates of MGNREGA, per day wage rate of around Rs. 200/- in many States defies 
any logic when the same State has much higher labour rates. It becomes 
inexplicable as to why the wages under MGNREGA still can’t be linked to a suitable 

32 
 
index commensurate with the existing inflation. Aware of the demand of increase in 
wages under MGNREGA from various quarters, the Committee urge DoRD 
unequivocally to revisit their stand and devise a mechanism for raising the wages 
under MGNREGA.  
Reply of the Government  
 
 As per Section 6(1) of Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, 2005 by notification 
specify the wage rate for its beneficiaries. Accordingly, the Ministry of Rural 
Development notifies Mahatma Gandhi NREGA wage rate every year for 
States/UTs. To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers against inflation, 
the Ministry of Rural Development revises the wage rate every year based on 
change in Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The CPI-AL index 
figures are taken from the website of Labour Bureau, Shimla. The wage rate is made 
applicable from 1st April of each financial year. However each State/UT can provide 
wage over and above the wage rate notified by the Central Government.  
  
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a demand driven wage employment scheme 
which provides livelihoods security i.e. fall back option for livelihoods for the rural 
households, in the situation when regular employment is absent. Wage rate for the 
scheme Mahatma Gandhi NREG A ct is mandated in section 6 of the Act.   
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
The Committee are anguished to note a social welfare scheme of unmatched 
rivalry, MGNREGA, being riddled with issues of malpractices ranging from fake job 
cards, irregularities of funds, unfair practices in usage of machines to name a few. 
Genuine labourers not getting their dues while money keeps changing hands due to 
collusion of unscrupulous elements surrounding the implementation of scheme at 
ground level is a bitter truth of the time. The Committee were informed of the non-
availability of actual labourers working in MGNREGA site while on-paper the number 
of labourers stayed intact and full. Such unfair activities need to be strongly handled 
with to prevent the scheme going completely haywire in the hands of a few. 

33 
 
Although, the Department boasts of several monitoring mechanisms of the scheme 
but observing the ground reality from closer proximity divulge a different picture. 
Instead of ‘passing the buck’ each time on the States for implementation of the 
scheme, the DoRD should also come out with some concrete measures to ensure a 
hawkish mode of surveillance of the scheme to weed out the unfair practices 
associated with the scheme. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend DoRD 
to create and implement stricter mechanism of monitoring incorporating 
accountability of every officials and penalty provision for the violators for the actual 
benefit of genuine MGNREGA beneficiaries.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The National Mobile Monitoring Service (NMMS) was launched on 21st May 
2021. The National Mobile Monitoring System App permits taking real time 
attendance of workers at Mahatma Gandhi NREGA worksites along with geo-tagged 
photographs. This NMMS app aids in increasing the citizen oversight of the 
programme and is one more step towards transparency and accountability. 
  
          The Mobile Monitoring system has enabled real time attendance 
capturing for NREGA workers. The attendance is uploaded on daily basis by 11:00 
am along with photograph of the workers on work site and the second photograph in 
between 2:00 to 5:00 pm. The vigilant groups can verify the attendance in real time. 
The morning attendance along with first Photograph can be captured in offline mode 
and to be uploaded once the device comes in network.  
  
Area Officer Monitoring Visit App was also launched on 21st May 2021. The 
purpose of the App is to make real time inspection & evidence-based reporting of RD 
scheme.  
  
The Ministry has been constantly reviewing various aspects of the monitoring 
through the Area Officer Monitoring Visit Application. Moving forward with this 
endeavor, the Ministry has directed the States/UTs to register their senior officers to 
this App and start monitoring through this App. The minimum nos. of visit of ongoing 
work to be conducted by the Commissioner, DPC/ ADPC, in charge Mahatma 

34 
 
Gandhi NREGA and Project officer (PO) per month regularly and visit report may be 
uploaded by using the App which could be seen by any citizen on the link 
https://ruraldiksha.nic.in/areaofficerwebnew/login.aspx. 
  
This App will facilitate the officials of the State/UT to record their field visit 
findings online. The App will also allow the officials to record time stamped and 
geotagged photograph for all the schemes launched by Department of Rural 
Development. This App will help in developing hassle-free reporting of field visit. The 
provision to view the field visit outcome report by the senior officials is also there in 
the App. 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
The Committee note the procedural constraint being experienced by the 
Members in exercising their desire of providing push to the works under MGNREGA 
in their constituency by converging their funds from MPLADS with the material 
component of ongoing projects locally. More often than not, the ongoing projects 
under MGNREGA get stalled due to non-release of adequate fund component, 
specifically due to the delay in the release of material component under the 40% 
ratio of the funds. The idea of convergence of funds is indeed a noble approach on 
part of the Members and need to be encouraged and facilitated by smoothening the 
procedural steps. Therefore, the Committee urge the DoRD to take into 
consideration the vision of Members of Parliament and issue necessary instruction at 
State/District level for easing convergence modalities and utilization of funds 
redirected by Members for better and faster momentum to the stalled projects. 
Reply of the Government 
 Convergence at both Centre/State scheme including MPLAD is permissible 
under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. This Ministry would work with Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation and the States to streamline modalities for 
convergence.  
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
 
 

35 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
As per the information furnished by the DoRD, the realization of ‘Housing for 
All’ vision under PMAY-G has been extended from March, 2022 to March, 2024 due 
to various reasons. Moreover, the data of Awaas plus survey for the inclusion of 
leftover eligible beneficiaries have been also compiled and after all formalities, final 
figure of new beneficiaries have been identified. The steps of the Department seems 
to be in right direction for the identification and addition of leftover beneficiaries to the 
Permanent Wait List. However, a pertinent issue that have engulfed the yojana since 
its start has been that of the challenges faced in the identification of genuine 
beneficiaries/real needy homeless or kaccha home occupants. The study visits 
undertaken frequently by the Committee to see the actual implementation of the 
schemes of Department of Rural Development have time and again revealed a 
dismal scenario wherein such beneficiaries availing the benefit of assistance through 
PMAY-G have emerged who are already well off and have built expensive houses, 
belying their claims of being a genuine beneficiary. The Committee were 
flabbergasted at witnessing such occurrences, but instances were galore of such 
events. The discretion employed at grass root level at the time of preparation of lists, 
addition/deletion of beneficiaries to the list seem to be governed through vested 
interests perhaps fuelled with local biases, prejudices and politics. Thus, to assuage 
the ambitious approach of few in serving their own self-interest, the very purpose of 
the scheme meant for the really genuine and needy persons get defeated as they 
get deprived of the benefits of PMAY-G. Moreover, the Committee also feel that 
there is an utmost necessity of increasing the target of number of houses from the 
existing 2.95 crores to include the entire homeless rural populace. Therefore, in the 
larger interest of common masses and real beneficiaries, the Committee vociferously 
appeal the DoRD to ensure all foolproof corrective measures for identification of 
genuine beneficiaries under PMAY-G alongwith increasing the target of beneficiaries 
from the existing 2.95 crore.  
 
Reply of the Government 
In order to achieve “Housing for All”, the overall target is to construct 2.95 
crore houses under the PMAY-G in rural areas. The beneficiaries under the scheme 
are identified from Socio Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011 and new survey 
“Awaas+” conducted to identify eligible households subject to due verification by 

36 
 
Gram Sabha and completion of appellate process.  The number of eligible 
beneficiaries available through SECC 2011 database currently stands at 2.15 crore 
(approx.).  In order to fill the gap of 80 lakh houses (2.95-2.15), Awaas+ data is being 
utilized. Awaas+ currently has over 2.7 crore eligible beneficiaries claiming for a 
house against only 80 lakh houses (approx.) that can be sanctioned from this 
database in order to fill the gap. 
  
Further, based on the recommendations of Expert Committee, the target from 
Awaas+ list is allocated to the States/UTs on the basis of 50%  weightage given to 
number of  households in PWL and 50% to households living in kutcha house as per 
NSO survey. Thus, an upper ceiling of targets to be allocated is fixed for each 
State/UT with a cumulative ceiling of 80 lakh houses to be allocated across the 
country from Awaas+ list, irrespective of number of households registered by the 
States/UTs under this survey. The allocation of targets to Gram Panchayats is done 
by the concerned State Governments. Accordingly, a target of 63.76 lakh houses 
has already been allocated to 28 eligible States/UTs from Awaas+ who have 
saturated their SECC based PWL. 
  
Under PMAY-G, the States/UTs have been directed for wall painting of the 
Permanent Wait List of PMAY-G on the Government buildings so that the 
beneficiaries are aware of their selection under PMAY-G and also regarding their 
ranking/ priority. Various campaigns through print media and electronic media are 
organized by the Ministry of Rural Development for dissemination of information in 
respect of PMAY-G.  Also, in the Serial “GaonVikaski Ore” being telecasted on 
Doordarshan in 20 regional languages, many episodes were related to scheme of 
PMAY-G highlighting its features and the success stories. Also, The Ministry time to 
time undertake other activities to ensure that the information on benefits/ disbursal 
under PMAY-G reaches the rural population/ beneficiaries of the scheme. 
  
A grievances redressal mechanism has also been set up under PMAY-G for 
redressal of grievances relating to bribe seeking, ineligible households being 
provided assistance under the scheme, etc. The Ministry gets these grievances 
checked through State Government Officials and/or National Level Monitors of 
DoRD. In cases where the complaint against the Officials/ PanchayatAdhikari/ 

37 
 
Pradhan etc. is found to be true during enquiry by Central Government/ State 
Government team, prompt action is taken against the erring Officials. Following 
actions are suggested by Ministry to the States for immediate action against the 
erring officials: 
  
(i) FIR be filed against the erring officials immediately 
(ii) Action to be taken against the concerned BDO, who is second signatory of 
the FTOs under PMAY-G and other supervisors who would have certified and 
inspected the works 
(iii) Show cause be served against the officials and other concerned officials 
in cases where there is delayed action against the erring Officials 
(iv) State/UT to publicise widely the action taken in the matter including on 
social media 
  
The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 8th December, 2021 has approved 
the continuation of PMAY-G beyond March, 2021 to complete the remaining houses 
within cumulative target of 2.95 crore houses by March, 2024. At present, there is no 
proposal for revision in target of 2.95 crore houses under PMAY-G. 
 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
The documents of DoRD reveal that out of the total 4.46 lakh landless 
beneficiaries identified in the entire Permanent Wait List of PMAY-G so far, only 2.05 
lakh (46%) have been provided land for the construction of houses, issue of 
landlessness is a glaring bottleneck affecting the progress of PMAY-G and delaying 
the completion of target. The Committee also note that the States/UTs were also 
requested by the Department to constitute a Committee under the Chief Secretary, 
comprising the Secretary (Revenue) and Secretary dealing with PMAY-G so that the 
land is allotted to the landless beneficiaries under PMAY-G in a time bound manner. 
The Committee acknowledge the effort elicited by the Department being in positive 
direction, but also feel that the deliberations may linger for too long causing undue 
agony to the landless beneficiaries. In this context, the Committee recommend 
DoRD that in order to ensure land to landless people for their own house, policy be 

38 
 
framed in public interest within a specified period so that land must be allotted to 
identified persons to expedite the timely construction of houses in their respective 
States under PMAY-G.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has already requested the States/UTs to resolve the issue time 
and again and provide land to all the landless beneficiaries on priority basis. The 
States/UTs were also requested to constitute a Committee under the Chief 
Secretary, comprising the Secretary (Revenue) and Secretary dealing with PMAY-G, 
so that land is allotted to landless beneficiaries under PMAY-G in a time bound 
manner. This matter has also been taken up at the level of Minister (RD) with the 
Chief Ministers of the States with highest number of landless beneficiaries under 
PMAY-G awaiting allotment of land to them. 
  
Further, a landless module has also been made live on AwaasSoft thus 
moving forward towards adoption of better monitoring mechanism and timely 
provision of land to landless beneficiaries under PMAY-G. 
Important communications regarding availing land to landless beneficiaries 
are detailed below -  
i.       The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development & Panchayati Raj in his 
letters (D.O.No.13011/05/ 2013-LRD dated 5th September 2018 and D.O.No. J-
11014/01/2016-RH dated 30th April 2021) requested Hon’ble Chief Ministers / 
Administrators of the States/ UTs were requested to assess landless status in the 
States/ UTs and constitute task force committee to expedite availing land to the 
landless beneficiaries. 
  
ii.      The Joint Secretary Rural Housing, in his letter (D. O. No. J- 11 
060/07/2018-RH (M&T) dated 4th January 2019), requested concerned States/ UTs 
to take necessary steps in time bound manner for availing land to landless 
beneficiaries in the time bound manner. 
  
iii.     The Hon’ble Minister of State for Rural Development in her letter (No. J-
11060/07/2018-RH(M&T) dated 16th September 2019) shared details of the Bihar 
state’s scheme for assistance to the landless. 

39 
 
  
iv.     The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj in his 
letter (No. M-12018/2/2016-RH(M&T) dated 10.08.2020) to the Hon’ble Minister of 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) requesting financial assistance for availing land 
to the most deserving landless PMAY-G beneficiaries belong to the Schedule Tribe 
(ST) category under any of the suitable scheme of the MoTA. 
  
v.      The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj in his 
letter (No. M-12018/2/2016-RH(M&T) dated 10.08.2020) to the Hon’ble Minister of 
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (MoSJE) requested for financial 
assistance for availing land to the most deserving landless PMAY-G beneficiaries 
belong to the Schedule Cast (SC) category under any of the suitable scheme of the 
MoSJE. 
  
vi.     The Secretary Rural Development in his letter (No. J-11014/01/2016-RH 
dated 9th April 2021) requested States/ UTs to constitute task force under the 
chairmanship of Chief Secretary of the State comprising of State RD Secretary and 
State Revenue Secretary as members to expedite provisioning of land to the 
landless beneficiaries. 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
A flagship programme like PMGSY is affected with malaise of poor 
maintenance post construction and handover to the States. The entire effort of 
constructing quality roads providing rural connectivity gets marred in the aftermath of 
poor maintenance aspect. The Committee note the concern raised from various 
quarters and through their own experiences during study visits that the roads 
constructed under PMGSY at various places suffer from poor maintenance and start 
getting degraded from early stage itself. It has been noted that there are provisions 
for maintenance in the guidelines but the adherence to them and with no 
accountability at all. The wherewithal for honesty and transparency seems to be 
missing in the implementation of such an important scheme. Even the monitoring 
mechanism is also elaborately laid down the maintenance aspect of roads 
constructed under PMGSY remains a cause of concern. It has been also noticed that 

40 
 
the contractors after the stipulated time under their supervision hand over the roads 
by carrying out cosmetic patch works on the damaged roads. Therefore, the 
Committee are of the firm opinion that the evaluation of roads be done on periodic 
basis even after completion of construction both physically and through utilization of 
virtual techniques, geotagging etc. so that the real picture post construction emerge 
in front of everyone and accountability of erring contractors may be fixed. Thus, 
DoRD is recommended to earmark specific teams for periodic and mandatory 
physical inspection of roads under PMGSY.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry is in agreement with the concerns of the committee with regard to 
poor maintenance of roads constructed under PMGSY. In order to strengthen the 
quality of roads being constructed under PMGSY, Ministry has taken many steps 
which are as under-  
  
1.  The number of NQMs has been increased from 98 to 156 in the last one 
year. The percentage of satisfactory works is increasing continuously, in the 
inspection of ongoing works in the last two years 
  
2.   Total number of SQMs has been increased from 872 to 1,332 in last one 
year (53% increase), selection process for empanelment of new SQMs has been 
initiated by states 
  
In 2021-22, 9,416 NQM inspections and 59,255 SQM inspections have been 
conducted. There has been an increase of 71% in no. of NQM inspections and 53% 
in no. of SQM inspections over the last year.  
  
3.   Intensity of SQM inspections has been increased. Now every 5 km section 
length is inspected 
4.   Verification of field laboratories is ensured. 
  
5.  Payment of CC roads is done only after verification of core test results. 
  
6.    Quality monitoring inspection format has been broadened 

41 
 
  
7.     In order to reduce the pendency of Action Taken Report (ATRs) of NQM  
observations in their inspection report, Ministry has issued guidelines dated 17th 
February 2022, that pending ATRs  will have bearing on the release of 2nd 
installment of programme funds.   
  
As a measure of further enhancing the focus on maintenance of roads during 
the defect liability period and also streamlining the delivery of routine maintenance of 
PMGSY roads, Electronic Maintenance of Rural Roads under PMGSY (eMARG) has 
been launched in all the states. 
  
Conceptualized on Performance Based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC), 
eMARG sets up a blue-print on how maintenance of infrastructure can be solved 
across government departments with smart IT & Contract Management. PBMC is a 
type of contract in which payment to the contractor is made based on the minimum 
condition of road, its cross drainage works and traffic assets that have to be met by 
him/her. Payments are based on how well the contractor manages to comply with 
the performance standards or service levels defined in the contract, and not on piece 
work. 
eMARG is a GIS-based Enterprise e-Governance solution to aid and assist 
the officials, Contractors, Banks and general public. It is an end-to-end solution, 
which provides restricted role-based access via internet. 
  
Prior to making payments to the contractor, bi-monthly inspections are carried 
out by engineers for every 1 km section of the road in which they click two 
photographs at randomly generated locations through the mobile app to capture the 
actual condition of roads as evidence. Thereafter, they give a grading of Satisfactory/ 
Unsatisfactory based on the condition of road. Furthermore, based on these 
photographs and grading, the condition of the road is evaluated on a scale of 100 
based on pre-defined performance standards (as explained in Figure 1). Finally, on 
the basis of marks obtained out of 100, a proportional payment is made.   The bi-
monthly inspections ensure that the road is maintained throughout the year. 
Furthermore, eMARG allows contractors to submit e-bills in one click on the system 
and auto-generate vouchers based on the result of the performance evaluation.  

42 
 
  
End-to-end processing of bills is achieved through the system, thus drastically 
reducing the administrative friction. At the same time, it ensures complete 
transparency and provides accountability analytics for each bill against every rural 
road through a plethora of reports and dashboards that aid in monitoring at various 
levels.                   (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
An important and practical situation that emerged before the Committee 
during the deliberations was concerning with the non-uniform nature of distribution of 
target of roads to the districts by the States. No fixed parameter is seen to be utilized 
in allocation of targets to the districts and discretionary approach of States in this 
regard cannot be ruled out. The Committee also find the same issue afflicting the 
phase-III of PMGSY wherein every district is allegedly no being given their rightful 
target of roads. The Committee find such happenings as a blot on the scheme 
causing the failure in achievement of desired target in uniform manner. In this 
connection, the Committee strongly recommend DoRD to bring onboard all the 
stakeholders involved in the allocation of targets of roads in the State Governments 
and coordinate with necessary dialogue or through preventive measures so that the 
broader goal of PMGSY is not defeated.  
Reply of the Government 
In PMGSY-III, as per the decision of the CCEA, targets have been allocated 
to the state as a whole. District-wise distribution of targets is to be done by the state 
and it is expected that equitable distribution of district wise and block wise targets will 
be ensured by the concerned State Governments. During the examination of the 
proposals in the Ministry, this aspect is examined and necessary advise/ directions 
are given to the states, where Ministry feels that equitable distribution has not been 
made among districts and blocks. 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
One of the loopholes associated with the rural connectivity projects through 
linkage of habitations with roads came to the fore was that of roads reaching quite 
far away from the actual population density. The Committee note that in various 

43 
 
cases, the roads touch the periphery of village and get counted in the achievement 
of target for connecting habitations but in actual the habitation residing in majority 
lies at least 2-3 km inside the periphery. This defeats the purpose behind habitation 
linkage. So, the Committee finding it a practical need recommend the DoRD to 
review the policy of road connectivity more accurately and create means so that the 
roads constructed under PMGSY actually reach the habitation and are not merely 
touching the outskirts of villages.  
Reply of the Government 
            As per PMGSY guidelines, if the road is constructed prior to 500 m to 
reach the habitation it is treated as connected. Further, providing all-weather road 
connectivity to the eligible habitations was the mandate of PMGSY-I, which is 
targeted for completion by September 2022. As on date, 99% of the eligible and 
feasible habitations have been provided all weather road connectivity. Since, the 
scheme is on the verge of its completion, it would not be appropriate to review the 
PMGSY guidelines at this stage. However, if any new vertical under PMGSY is 
launched in future, the recommendations of the committee will be taken into 
account.  The Gram Panchayats would be also advised to take up such last mile 
gaps through funds available with them.  
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
Self-Help Groups (SHGs) under the scheme of DAY-NRLM are a boon to the 
rural women who work together for means of livelihoods. However, the Committee 
note that the women of SHGs may be better served in terms of generating revenue 
for their livelihoods if products prepared by them like dairy, agriculture, handicrafts 
etc. have a proper platform for their marketing and income. Although they get access 
to the village mandis but the number of days of such mandis are limited and perhaps 
a source for continued marketing is required for providing them a much needed 
opportunity of flourishing, like free connectivity of their product for online marketing 
on platforms like Amazon, Flipkart etc. They also need to be imparted special 
computer training to launch their local products online through websites utilizing 
social media so that these women SHGs can really get revenue of their sincere 
efforts and skills. Therefore, the Committee recommend DoRD to come up with a 
robust structure of marketing wherein the products of SHGs get an opportunity for 

44 
 
better advertisement resulting in wide local/international customer-base ultimately 
causing increased revenue generation and sustainability of income.  
Reply of the Government 
            The following efforts are being made for marketing of SHG products 
under NRLM. 
•    Periodic organization of Saras Fairs at State and National level where SHGs 
are invited to showcase and sell their products. 
•    Saras Gallery at New Delhi has been renovated and curated SHG products 
are being showcased for wider marketing to elite class at National capital.  
This is being managed professionally through FDRVC (Foundation for 
Development of Rural Value Chains), a joint initiative of MoRD and Tata Trust. 
•    Alliance with Flipkart (an online portal for retailing of variety of products to 
consumers) for online showcasing and marketing of SHG products.  Similar 
alliance is being proposed with Amazon. 
•    Dedicated e-Commerce platform for SHG products is also being developed 
through DIC (Digital India Corporation, a not for profit Company set up by 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), Govt. of India). 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22) 
During the course of evidence, it came to light that the SPMRM programme 
may not receive further extension and could be wound up as the Expenditure 
Finance Committee had initiated. However, the matter is before the Cabinet and a 
decision is awaited so further expenses have been stopped in this scheme. The 
Committee find this information discomforting as SPMRM has always been looked 
upon with high expectations considering its novel approach of creating unbiased 
clusters in the country which could act as a model of villages with urban facilities act 
as a model of villages with urban facilities and would not only aid in curtailing 
migration to the cities but also had enormous potential for employment generation at 
village level. The Committee are of the firm opinion that the Mission should get 
appropriate extension so that at least the ongoing projects do not suffer and are 
completed for the benefit of rural population. Thereafter, a proper review may be 
done on holistic basis weighing the benefits of the scheme for a longer run.  
Reply of the Government 

45 
 
The Cabinet Note for seeking extension till March 2024 is currently under 
submission, pending final decision. Meanwhile, Department of Economic Affairs has 
disallowed utilization of allocation(BE) for 2022-23, vide OM dated 28th March 2022 
considering the 31st March as 'Sunset Day' for the Mission. Therefore, the 
States/UTs have been intimated the same for strict compliance. 
Ministry had written to Department of Expenditure dated 18th October 2021, 
06th December 2021, and 24th February 2022, to allow release of funds and 
continuation of activities until the Cabinet Decision on continuation/ discontinuation 
of the Mission. Vide OM dated 22nd March 2022, DoE had allowed release of funds 
till 31st March 2022, only for the projects that had started on ground on or before 
26th August 2021 (i.e. the date of EFC meeting). Ministry has also written to DoE on 
19th April, 2022 for allowing expenditure during FY 2022-2023 against BE of Rs.550 
Crore for specific works those have already been started on ground (to avoid 
unproductive spending under the Mission).  If only ongoing works as on 31st March 
2022 are allowed to be completed, the total outlay (central share part) for the Mission 
would be limited to Rs. 3335.57 crore (against the approved outlay of Rs. 5142.08 
crore). 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23) 
The Committee are hopeful of the completion of ongoing projects of SPMRM 
and its continuance so they are of unanimous view that for the effectiveness of the 
programme, quality of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) was of paramount 
importance and DPRs should prepared meticulously through consultation with all the 
stakeholder so that the local acumen is brought onboard for a fool-proof strategy 
before initiation of projects under SPMRM. Moreover, the Committee also feel that 
Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) be actively involved in the setting up of mills 
under the projects of SPMRM for better convergence and coordination. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend DoRD to spruce up its DPR preparation work with active 
utilization of FPOs for relevant projects under SPMRM. 
Reply of the Government 
The views of the Committee are noted. Ministry, in its various interactions with 
States, Districts and PRIs, has requested the functionaries to ensure participation of 
all stakeholders including Self Help Groups (SHGs)/ Village Organizations (VOs)/ 

46 
 
Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) while preparation of DPRs, implementation, 
operations and maintenance. Ministry has also written letters/ advisories to 
States/UTs in this regard.  
The Ministry as its major action step, finalized State as final approving 
authority for DPR approval of cluster for expediting works on the ground in the given 
time-frame. An advisory has also been issued to States/UTs to make desired 
changes in DPRs on account of Covid-19, and rebooting the rural economy through 
the inclusion of more economic activities for providing employment and livelihood 
opportunities to the rural citizens. Thus the States/ UTs can carry out necessary 
review and modifications in DPRs at their end, without any intervention from the 
Ministry. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24) 
A scheme of wide outreach aimed at the poor and destitute population of 
society need a better assistance component for providing real succor to its 
beneficiary. The Committee feel that the upward revision of assistance amount 
ranging at present from Rs. 200/- to Rs. 500/- per month under the different 
components of the scheme is much awaited. The Committee had recommended for 
the same earlier also in their Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) and 
reiterated it in their Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha), but still no 
augmentation of pension amounts have been noticed on the ground. Much time has 
elapsed and the Committee find that the assurance of DoRD regarding the ongoing 
consultation is not taking desired shape. So, the Committee strongly recommend 
DoRD to take the issue of increase in pension amount under NSAP seriously and 
concretize the result on ground level as soon as possible.   
Reply of the Government 
Under NSAP schemes, financial assistance ranging from Rs.200/- to Rs.500/- 
per beneficiary per month is being provided. Apart from this assistance, States/ UTs 
are adding top-ups ranging from Rs.50 to Rs.2,700 per month under the NSAP 
schemes. The issue of revamping the NSAP Scheme through changes in acceptable 
rates and parameters was considered at the highest level in Government and it was 
decided to continue with the existing system. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 

47 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 41 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25) 
The Committee have time and again echoed the sentiments of the MPs 
regarding the better utilization of their acumen and wisdom of ground reality in the 
monitoring of schemes. DoRD have submitted before the Committee that regular 
inspection teams visit the districts and sites of implementation of various schemes of 
the DoRD. The Committee in this regard feel that availability of the local MPs of 
concerned district well in advance where the inspection teams of DoRD propose to 
visit is of vital importance. By engaging the local MPs, the inspection teams would 
not only be made aware of the ground realities for settling local issues affecting the 
schemes but would also provide with an indepth insight of local situation for the 
success of the scheme, so, the Committee urge DoRD to devise a mechanism for 
the prior information and active involvement of local MPs at the time of field 
visit/inspection of the teams of Department.  
Reply of the Government 
MGNREGA:- The recommendation of the committee noted for further 
deliberation with States. 
PMAY-G:- The Framework For Implementation (FFI) of PMAY-G issued by 
the Ministry of Rural Development provides an important role in the implementation 
and monitoring of the Scheme for the Members of Parliament. According to 
provisions, district DISHA committee headed by Member of Parliament will also 
monitor the progress and implementation of PMAY-G. The Hon’ble Minister of Rural 
Development, Government of India has also written letter dated 8th November, 2021 
to the Hon’ble Members of Parliament (Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha) for monitoring 
and supervision of the scheme as per the provisions. 
PMGSY:- The PMGSY has an inbuilt mechanism for consultation with public 
representatives at various stages of implementation of the programme. Following are 
the main provisions in the PMGSY Guidelines for consultation with Members of 
Parliament: -  
 i) The priorities of elected representatives including Members of Parliament 
and Members of Legislative Assemblies are expected to be duly taken into account 

48 
 
and given full consideration while finalizing District Rural Roads Plan (DRRP) and 
Core Network (CN). 
  
ii) The Comprehensive New Connectivity Priority List (CNCPL) and 
Comprehensive Upgradation Priority List (CUPL) will be prepared after consultation 
with MPs and taking their suggestions.  
In preparing Annual proposals for road works to be undertaken under 
PMGSY-III, role of Members of Parliament have been envisaged as follows:- 
•      CUPL should be sent to each MP with the request that their proposals on 
the selection of works out of the CUPL should be sent to the District Panchayat. It is  
•      In order to ensure that the prioritization has some reference to the 
funding available, the size of proposals expected may also be indicated to the 
Members of Parliament while forwarding them the CUPL list.  District / Block-wise 
allocation may be indicated to enable choice with the requisite geographical spread. 
It is expected that such proposals of Members of Parliament which adhere to the 
order of Priority would be invariably accepted subject to considerations of equitable 
allocation of funds. 
•      The proposals received from the Members of Parliament by the stipulated 
date should be given full consideration in the District Panchayat which should record 
the reason in each case of non-inclusion, and the Members of Parliament should be 
informed of the inclusion / non-inclusion of their proposals along with the reasons in 
each case in the event of non-inclusion. It would be preferable if the communication 
is issued from the Nodal Department at a senior level. 
While Lok Sabha Members would be consulted in respect of their 
constituencies, Rajya Sabha Members will be consulted in respect of that District of 
the State they represent for which they been nominated as Co-Chairman of the 
District Vigilance & Monitoring Committee of the Ministry of Rural Development. 
 In order to ensure that the State Government give due attention towards this 
aspect of the guidelines while submitting the proposals to the Ministry of Rural 
Development for sanction, the Ministry has issued a fresh advisory to the States on 
2nd June, 2020. The State Governments have been advised, inter-alia, to 
communicate the final list of proposals in the order of priority to the Member of 
Parliament with the reasons for non-inclusion of certain roads in the proposals and 

49 
 
incorporate their recommendations with the proposals sent to NRIDA/Ministry for 
approval. 
  
Further, with a view to ensure effective participation of Hon’ble Members of 
Parliament, the following stipulations have been made with regard to laying of 
foundations stone and inauguration of PMGSY works: - 
a. All elected representatives associated with the programme should be duly 
invited to the foundation laying and inauguration ceremonies; 
b. The function should be held in a manner befitting social functions with due 
regard to protocol requirements, particularly in relation to Hon’ble Union Ministers 
and Hon'ble Ministers from States; and 
c. The foundation stone for a PMGSY road should be laid and the road should 
also be inaugurated by the Hon’ble Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) with the 
function presided over by the local Hon’ble Minister or other dignitary, as per the 
State Protocol. 
Further, to promote transparency and effective monitoring, the Superintending 
Engineer concerned of the zone/region has been asked to request the concerned 
Member of Parliament and Zilla Panchayat Pramukh representing the zone/region, 
once in six months, to select any PMGSY project(s) for joint inspection. 
As regards prior information to the Members of Parliament regarding visits of 
DoRD team, it is submitted that, whenever any complaint is received from Member of 
Parliament, Ministry constitutes a team of NQMs to enquire into the issue and prior 
intimation is given to the concerned member about the proposed visit of NQMs and 
request is made that, either the concerned MP may remain present or depute his/ 
her representative. Moreover, the observation has been noted and will be complied 
with in future cases.   
DDU-GKY SKILLS:-  The schemes of Rural Skills Division namely DDU-GKY 
& RSETI both are covered under DISHA and the same is being monitored at District 
level by Honourable Member of Parliament. 
            Regular inspection teams goes as National Level Monitors(NLM) for 
Common Review Missions (CRM) on periodic basis and coordinating division may 
take suitable action regarding informing Local MPs of the visit, as per availability & 
requirement. 

50 
 
SPMRM:-  The views of the Standing Committee are noted. Hon’ble Minister 
(RD) has written letter (dated 18th Nov 2020 and 08th Nov 2021) to all MPs having 
Rurban clusters in their constituencies, seeking cooperation in developing the 
clusters in their constituencies and their active involvement in the Mission's 
activities.  Also, the field visit/ inspection schedule of the teams of the Department of 
Rural Development will be intimated to the State/ District Administration for active 
involvement of local MPs during the visits. 
SAGY:-  Saansad Adarsh Gram yojana (SAGY) envisages the holistic 
development of Gram Panchayats through convergence with existing schemes 
under the complete guidance and leadership of Hon'ble MPs. 
A village development plan (VDP) is prepared for every adopted SAGY Gram 
Panchayat (GP) which serves as a blueprint to develop the model GP. The objective 
of Village Development Plan is to develop the selected village in an integrated 
manner including economic development, infrastructure development and other 
aspects of human development. For better involvement of community in the 
development process, before the formulation of the Village Development Plan (VDP), 
systematic environment creation and social mobilisation is spearheaded by the MP 
himself/herself. VDP is prepared with the involvement of the Gram Sabha and further 
approved by the District level committee headed by the District Collector, in the 
presence of the concerned MP, duly considering his/her comments and suggestions. 
To ensure transparency and accountability, MPs can visit the GPs anytime 
and monitor the progress of projects approved under VDP and take the lead in 
sorting out issues and problems in the programme implementation and public 
grievances. Simultaneously, they can coordinate with the community to achieve the 
desired, non-tangible outcomes, particularly the social ones. 
As per SAGY guidelines, the District Collector is the nodal officer for 
implementing SAGY. A monthly review meeting is organized by the District Collector 
with representatives of the participating line departments and the Members of 
Parliament concerned chair the review meetings. MPs can provide their valuable 
feedback and suggestions for betterment of development work. Continuing 
leadership and guidance of the MP plays a major role in sustainability of projects 
post implementation of VDP. 
To facilitate the monitoring process, an MP Dashboard has been developed 
on SAGY website where the Hon'ble MP can log in and check the progress of the 

51 
 
selected GP, and review it with States and Districts so that projects planned under 
VDP can be implemented successfully at the grassroot level. This serves as an 
interface enabling the MP and other key stakeholders to tog-in and give 
suggestions/comments, and even raise queries or complaints, which should be 
promptly responded to by the implementing authorities. 
It has been requested by the Minister, Rural Development to all Members of 
Parliament to visit their identified SAGY Gram Panchayats to monitor the 
activities/projects that are being implemented. It has also been communicated by the 
Minister, Rural Development to include and review SAGY during DISHA meetings. 
In addition, the Ministry organized orientation workshops for newly elected 
17th Lok Sabha Members and the representatives of MPs for ground insights, cross-
learning and feedback so that better coordination can be established at State. 
Districts and GP level. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
  

52 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Rural Development O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022 
 
  

53 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
The Committee took note that the essential pre-requisite for the timely 
payment of wages to the labourers of MGNREGA was the immediate online filling up 
of muster-roll after the issue of work order. It is also understood by the Committee 
through its study visits and the practical experiences of the Members that quite often 
the rozgar sevaks are in the habit of filling up kachha muster at the start and go to 
the Block once a week for online uploading of muster-rolls. This practice is having a 
cascading detrimental effect on the MGNREGA beneficiaries as delay in muster 
uploading causes delay in the payment of wages. Moreover, in cases where the 
muster-roll is not updated and uploaded within the stipulated time, the same cannot 
be filled from back date or of previous week, thus causing loss of number of that 
many days of work done by the labourers in the calculation for payment. This is a 
huge anomaly at the ground level fully attributable to the callous approach of the 
concerned official. The plea of non-availability of internet connection at Panchayat 
level does not stand firm in the face of the provision of Bharat-Net providing internet 
to the Gram Panchayats. Thus, it becomes imperative that the lackadaisical 
approach of grass-root officials associated with MGNREGA be handled with firmly 
and no excuse be tolerated any further for non-filling of muster at Gram Panchayat 
level itself without wasting time. Therefore, the Committee vehemently implore upon 
Department of Rural Development to make it mandatory for the filling of muster at 
Gram Panchayat level itself specifically the Gram Panchayats which are connected 
with Bharat-Net. The Committee may be informed about the efficacious steps taken 
by the Government in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
“As per the provision, e-muster is the norm. Only in exceptional and 
unavoidable circumstance, paper musters can be issued by State Government after 
due approval of Central Government. e-Muster has printed names of workers who 
have demanded employment and are allocated a particular work. In the case of e-
muster, muster roll numbers are generated by the NREGASoft and therefore, not 
required to be entered in the system. 

54 
 
  
Central Government has made mandatory for capturing of real time 
attendance alongwith geotagged photographs of beneficiaries  through National 
Mobile Monitoring system(NMMS) of all worksites wherein muster roll have been 
issued to engage 20 or more beneficiaries. These captured attendances go directly 
to NREGASoft for wage list creation. No need to do separate data entry. 
  
State can use NMMS even for the worksite having less than 20 workers. 
  
Schedule-II of the Act has provision for the purpose of ensuring accountability 
in payment of wages and to calculate culpability of various functionaries or agencies, 
the State shall divide the processes leading to determination and payment of wage 
into various stages and specified Stage wise maximum time limits alongwith the 
functionary or agency which is responsible for discharging the specific function.  
  
Also, the State Government shall pay the compensation upfront after due 
verification within the time limits as specified above and recover the compensation 
amount from the functionaries or agencies who is responsible for the delay in 
payment.” 
 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
A demand driven scheme such as MGNREGA having a statutory status and aimed 
at securing some sort of livelihood for the destitute and marginalized having no other 
‘fall back options’ certainly stays defeated in its intent in wake of Rs. 4,060 crore 
lying as pending wages. Shockingly, Rs. 9,000/- crores remains pending against the 
material component. The Committee find these figures alarming in nature more so 
when both the aspect of MGNREGA, i.e. a demand driven nature of the scheme and 
creation of assets under the scheme are severely hampered through such 
pendencies. More startling is the fact that even after such existing scenario, the BE 
for MGNREGA has been reduced from the Rs. 78,000/- crore as sought by DoRD, to 
Rs. 73,000/- crores for the financial year 2022-23. Any administrative or procedural 
lapse causing such delays are completely uncalled for and unacceptable in the 
context of a scheme of such enormous proportion. Therefore, the Committee 

55 
 
strongly recommend DoRD to spruce up its financial management of the scheme 
and tighten their grip on the fallacies that may have crept in the implementation of 
MGNREGA at ground level for the earliest eradication of pendencies in wages and 
material components.  
 
Reply of the Government 
            Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS fund release to the States is a continuous 
process and Central Government is committed to making fund available to States for 
the implementation of the Scheme. Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, States submit 
fund release proposals to Government of India. The Ministry releases funds 
periodically in two tranches with each tranche consisting of one or more installments, 
keeping in view the “agreed to” Labour Budget, demand for works, opening balance, 
pace of utilization of funds, pending liabilities, overall performance and subject to  
submission of relevant documents by the State. 
  
The Ministry seeks additional funds under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from Ministry of 
Finance as and when required for meeting the demand for work on the ground. 
  
The Central Government had enhanced the financial allocation under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS for previous financial year 2020-21 from Rs. 61,500 crore at Budget 
Estimate (BE) stage to Rs.1,11,500 crore at Revised Estimate (RE) stage. 
  
During the current financial year 2021-22 (as on 31.03.2022), an amount of Rs. 
98,467.85 crore has been released by Central Government to the States/UTs under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
During the deliberations of the Committee, one of the pertinent issue that kept 
on coming up was the demand of suitable review and widening the ambit of 
‘permissible works’ under MGNREGA so as to include few contemporary required 
areas to be covered. One such aspect pertaining to the flood affected regions of 
country was the construction of ‘landspurs’ for protecting acres of lands affected with 
the vagaries of flood every year. These landspurs may reportedly prevent the 
erosion/cutting of lands during floods causing loss of terrain. Not only this structure, 
but other notable areas of work like fencing the farmlands and various agricultural 

56 
 
activities including agricultural labour also merit a relook for inclusion under 
permissible domain of MGNREGA. Hence, the Committee strongly urge DoRD to 
look into the matter of inclusion of ‘landspurs’, fencing of farmlands, agricultural 
labour activities under the permissible ambit of MGNREGA to meet the ‘need of the 
hour’. 
Reply of the Government 
“There are 262 works permissible under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA which 
includes Construction of wire crate (gabion) spur, stone spur and earthen spur which 
can be taken up in the flood affected regions of country. 
   
Fencing of farm land is not a permissible work under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS. However, live fencing can be taken up as an item of work in plantation 
related works. 
  
As per the Schedule I of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA Section 4 (3), Para 4(3) 
Works which are non-tangible, not measurable, repetitive such as, removing grass, 
pebbles, agricultural operations, shall not be taken up. Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a 
demand driven scheme.” 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 09/06/2022) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
A startling fact that came to the fore during the examination of Demands for 
Grants 2022-23 pertaining to the mechanism of payment of wages being employed 
under MGNREGA was the audacious practice of wages being paid to the 
MGNREGA beneficiaries on the basis of caste, i.e. in the order of priority starting 
from SC/ST to remaining others. The Committee were taken aback and aghast on 
such revelation. Belying all logic and employing such modality, surpasses any 
prudence whatsoever. The Committee finding themselves at a total ‘loss of words’ 
could not fathom the rationale behind such idea. The scheme of MGNREGA draws 
its origin from a statutory source, i.e. MGNREG Act, 2005. Such absurdity is 
nowhere mentioned in the Act and digressing from the basic tenets of treating all the 
MGNREGA beneficiaries at par call for sternest possible criticism. The beneficiaries 
of MGNREGA cutting across the different sections of society have only one thing in 
common, i.e. they are poor, destitute and have no other fall back option, but 
MGNREGA to look upon for their basic source of survival. Thus, they are 

57 
 
economically weak populace and can come from any religion/caste, creation of such 
payment system wherein one specific community is preferred over the other solely 
on the ground of caste will only give rise to resentment and create rift among the 
beneficiaries of MGNREGA. The practice which started from 2021-22 itself need to 
be addressed urgently and not to be encouraged any further by ensuring that each 
and every labour working under the Scheme, irrespective of caste, get payment 
within time-frame fixed by the MGNREGA.  
  
In view of such piquant situation, the Committee unanimously recommend 
DoRD to restore the earlier mechanism of generation of single Fund Transfer Order 
without any sort of segregation on the basis of caste so that the welfare oriented 
nature of MGNREGA is not divided on caste basis.  
Reply of the Government 
            ”The category wise (SC, ST and Others) wage payment system, as made 
applicable from the FY 2021-22, has been introduced to accurately reflect on ground 
flow of funds to various population groups. Its further streamlining has been 
undertaken. From FY 2022-23 single FTO for wage payment has been started 
keeping the provisioning for separate budget for different categories to reflect 
accurate flow of funds on ground.” 
 
 (DoRDO.M. No.G-20011/3/2021-B&Adated 14/06/2021) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
The Committee note that the deadline of PMAY-G has been extended to 
March, 2024 with the target of 2.95 crore houses. All necessary formalities also 
reportedly seem to have been completed to ensure that the list of beneficiaries are 
updated. The per unit assistance under PMAY-G for plain areas is Rs. 1.2 lakh and 
for hilly areas is Rs. 1.3 lakh which has remained static for quite a while now. With 
rising inflation having detrimental effect on the cost factor associated with the raw 
material, transportation cost, labours cost et. al., constructing a new house of the 
requisite area under PMAY-G for the poor and needy beneficiary with such 
assistance amount seem to be an arduous task. The vision “Housing for All” may not 
reach its envisaged culmination until and unless the beneficiaries are provided with 
proper ‘hand-holding’ in terms of financial assistance of right value and at right 

58 
 
juncture. Moreover, instances are galore wherein houses remain incomplete for want 
of finance and the target keeps on lagging. In view of the foregoing, the Committee 
find it utmost necessary that a review of per-unit assistance be done on priority 
basis, more so when the scheme has been extended to March, 2024. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the DoRD to revise the per unit assistance under PMAY-G 
through suitable hike in the assistance component for the much required augmented 
help to the needy beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government 
“The scheme provides financial Assistance of Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain areas and 
Rs. 1.30 lakhs in hilly states (including North Eastern States and UTs of Jammu & 
Kashmir and Ladakh), difficult areas and Integrated Action Plan (IAP) districts. 
Additional assistance of Rs. 12,000/- is extended for construction of toilets through 
convergence with Swacch Bharat Mission – Gramin (SBM-G), Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) or other dedicated 
source of funding. It also provides support of 90/95 person days unskilled wage 
employment at the current rates to a PMAY-G beneficiary for construction of his / her 
house in convergence with MGNREGS. There is also provision of convergence with 
other schemes for provision of basic amenities to beneficiaries of PMAY-G:- 
electricity connection through SAUBHAGYA scheme of Ministry of Power,  LPG 
connection through PMUY of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas & Supply of 
drinking water through Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) of Department of Drinking Water & 
Sanitation, Ministry of Jal Shakti. 
  
The unit assistance under PMAY-G is as per the approval of the Union 
Cabinet. At present, there is no proposal for revision in unit assistance under PMAY-
G.” 
(DoRD O.M. No.G-20011/3/2021-B&Adated 14/06/2021) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
The Committee observe the disparity in the financial assistance provided 
under the urban component and rural component of Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana - 
Gramin (PMAY-G). While the per-unit assistance amount in the rural sector ranges 
from Rs. 1.2 lakh to Rs. 1.3 lakh for plain & hilly areas respectively, the assistance 
amount under the urban component lies in the region of about Rs. 2.5 lakh through 
subsidy on loan component. This approach is very intriguing and Committee are 
unable to grasp the rationale behind keeping the assistance amount in rural sector 
substantially less than its urban counterpart. The challenges faced in construction of 

59 
 
houses in rural areas are far more both in terms of logistics and cost factor while the 
organized parameters of urban sector is not a hidden fact. Among the rural sector 
too, the hilly regions require a completely different approach for the construction and 
vagaries or rural system throws unprecedented bottlenecks ranging from non-
availability of labours for bringing raw materials from far flung areas. It is high time 
that the DoRD undertake an objective assessment of the financial aid under the two 
sister schemes of PMAY and bridge the divide between the two in a suitable and 
rationale manner. Therefore, the Committee recommend the DoRD to bring a 
semblance of parity between the assistance amount under PMAY-U and PMAY-G.  
Reply of the Government 
The scheme provides financial Assistance of Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain areas and 
Rs. 1.30 lakhs in hilly states (including North Eastern States and UTs of Jammu & 
Kashmir and Ladakh), difficult areas and Integrated Action Plan (IAP) districts. 
Additional assistance of Rs. 12,000/- is extended for construction of toilets through 
convergence with Swacch Bharat Mission – Gramin (SBM-G), Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) or other dedicated 
source of funding. It also provides support of 90/95 person days unskilled wage 
employment at the current rates to a PMAY-G beneficiary for construction of his / her 
house in convergence with MGNREGS. There is also provision of convergence with 
other schemes for provision of basic amenities to beneficiaries of PMAY-G:- 
electricity connection through SAUBHAGYA scheme of Ministry of Power,  LPG 
connection through PMUY of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas & Supply of 
drinking water through Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) of Department of Drinking Water & 
Sanitation, Ministry of Jal Shakti.   
  
The unit assistance under PMAY-G is as per the approval of the Union 
Cabinet. At present, there is no proposal for revision in unit assistance under PMAY-
G. 
(DoRDO.M. No.G-20011/3/2021-B&Adated 14/06/2021) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

60 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
The Committee were informed during the deliberations through the ground 
experience of Members of Parliament (MPs) that the roads constructed under 
PMGSY with an optimum weight bearing capacity were witnessing load carrying 
heavy vehicles of NHAI upto the tune of 50 tonnes plying on them. Such enormous 
weight causes damage to the roads under PMGSY and the matter needed to be 
looked upon seriously. Even though, provision exists for the roads damaged by the 
plying of NHAI vehicles to be repaired by them, still no one pays heed to them. This 
is a blatant violation of norms creating damaging effects on the roads of PMGSY 
which need to be resolved at the earliest. In view of such conflicting situation, it is 
perhaps appropriate if the Department takes up the matter sternly with the NHAI and 
thus the Committee recommend DoRD to ensure a result oriented dialogue process 
with the NHAI for stricter compliance of the norms of PMGSY.  
Reply of the Government 
            As recommended by the committee, the matter is being taken up with 
Ministry of Roads, Transport & Highways for better appreciation of this issue. 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.G-20011/3/2021-B&Adated 14/06/2021) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 35 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
Another serious concern that arose before the Committee during their 
deliberations pertained to the issue of change in prioritizing of roads earmarked for 
construction in the villages. Normally, routes are selected keeping in mind the 
important landmarks they devise to connect such as school, hospital etc. However, 
routes more often than not require land which the landowners are not ready to let go 
in the absence of any compensation mechanism for land transfer under the scheme. 
Thus, the project gets stalled due to conflicting opinion and interest at the local level. 

61 
 
Thus, arises the necessity to change the priority which is dependent upon the Gram 
Panchayats. The conflict goes on, simply lingering the construction work. Hence, the 
Committee recommend that the need of the hour is to ensure that prudence may be 
applied in cases where change in priority is required and a mechanism or authority 
may be appointed for taking unbiased decision immediately so that rural connectivity 
projects are not hampered.  
Reply of the Government 
 “As per PMGSY guidelines, providing land for the construction of roads under 
PMGSY is the responsibility of concerned State Government. A certificate to the fact 
that land is available has to be submitted by the state along with the proposal. 
  
The representatives of the Local Gram Panchayat are also involved in the 
transect walk for deciding the alignment of the roads.  This situation regarding non-
availability of lands in some cases mostly happen at the time of execution of 
PMGSY-I works, where the new roads were being constructed first time for providing 
connectivity to habitations. Since construction of most of the sanctioned works have 
been completed under PMGSY-I and states had tackled the issue relating to 
acquisition of land in some cases, Ministry does not foresee any requirement for 
putting in place any new system at this juncture. 
  
Ministry is now primarily sanctioning works of PMGSY-III which are 
upgradation and consolidation of the existing roads. The issue relating to land 
disputes have not been brought to the notice of Ministry yet. However, the concerns 
of the committee have been noted and will be taken up with the concerned State 
Government.” 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No.G-20011/3/2021-B&Adated 14/06/2021) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 38 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                   PRATAPRAO JADHAV 
28 July, 2022                Chairperson, 
06 Shravana, 1944(Saka)      Standing Committee on Rural Development& Panchayati Raj 
 
  

62 
 
ANNEXURE I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
 
  

64 
 
ANNEXURE- II 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-SECOND REPORT (17TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:    25 
       
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 
          Total:17
                Percentage:-68%
    
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL          
          Total: NIL 
       Percentage:- 0%      
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 3, 4, 5, 10, 13, 14       
Total: 06 
          Percentage:-24% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. 18, 19        
Total: 02 
           Percentage:- 8%      
 
 
 