 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
   
 
  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report on “Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)” (2024-25) of 
the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)] 
 
 
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
34 


 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report on “Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)” (2024-25) of 
the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 31.07.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31.07.2026 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2026 / Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 225 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-2026) ii 
INTRODUCTION iii 
   
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
33 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
37 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
38 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
57 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I.  An advisory on Invitation to the Public representatives for 
foundation laying and inauguration ceremonies of PMGSY works 
dated 03.02.22 
58 
II.  Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
70 
   III. Extracts of the Minutes of the Twenty Sixth Sitting of the 
Committee held on Wednesday, 8th July, 2026 
71 
  

 
 
ii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
26. Smt. Rajathi 
27. Shri Nagendra Ray 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Smt. P.T. Usha 
30. Shri Karamvir Singh Boudh 
31. Shri Baidyanath Ram 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sudhanshu Shekhar  - Under Secretary 

 
 
iii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj (2025-2026) having been authorised by the Committee to present 
the Report on their behalf, present the Thirty-Fourth Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 17th Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (18thLok Sabha) on 
‘Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)” (2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development). 
2.  The Seventeenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 07.08.2025 and 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2025. Replies of the Government to 
all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 06.11.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 08.07.2026. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
30 July, 2026 
Shravana 8, 1948 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2025-26) deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in their Seventeenth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on “Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)” 
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development). 
1.2  The Seventeenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 
07.08.2025 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2025. The 
Report contained 17 Observations/ Recommendations.  
1.3  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 17 Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been examined and categorised as follows: -  
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Serial Nos. 11, 12 & 13       
          Total: 03
          Chapter-II 
 (ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL  
Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Serial No. 1 to 10 and 14 to 17 
 Total: 14 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
 Total: NIL 
Chapter-V 
  

 
 
2 
 
 
1.4  The Committee desire that Final Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/ Recommendations that require reiteration/ merit 
comments.  
I. Low Bidding of Tenders 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
1.6 With regard to low bidding of tenders, the Committee had recommended as 
under: 
“The Committee observe that bidding through tenders for 
obtaining projects for construction of roads under PMGSY is an integral 
part of the scheme and the contractors who are awarded construction 
contracts through tenders are, perhaps, the central figures who through 
their activities more often than not determine the vary quality of roads 
constructed under PMGSY. The Committee note with concern that, in 
order to win the bid for acquiring the rights for the construction of 
projects, under PMGSY the contractors often quote 25-30% lower 
amount than the minimum bidding amount. The so-called practice of 
low-tendering by contractors are often brought to fore by the Members 
of the Committee during their deliberations. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the DoRD to entail all measures for curbing the practice of 
low bidding and should bring out a mechanism/provision at least by 
which a certain quantum of amount component equivalent to the 
difference between bidding and actual quoting is kept aside as security 
and may be released only after ensuring that the constructed road 
satisfy the stipulated quality norms. Therefore, a fair bidding 
mechanism is required to ensure an equitable and transparent process 
where bidders compete for contracts or opportunities without 
manipulation or unfair advantages. The Committee also recommend 
the Government to set up a Committee to assess the effect on quality 
of road by quoting low amount by the contractors than the minimum 
bidding amount.” 
1.7 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows: 
“In the interest of the quality of roads being built under PMGSY 
and for protection against Abnormally Low Bids (ALBs), provisions of 
taking the additional performance security from the contractor have 
been made in the Standard Bidding Documents (SBD). All States have 
been advised to deal with cases of ALBs as per SBD provisions which 
are enumerated as under. 
  

 
 
3 
 
 
   Qualification of the Bidder: 
  
To make sure that contractors who are bidding for the works have 
sufficient backgrounds in execution of good quality works, the following 
Qualification criteria are laid down in clause 4 of the SBD:- 
  
(a) Contractor to provide the aggregate monetary value of civil 
construction projects executed in each of the preceding five 
years. 
(b) Furnish a record of past involvement in projects similar in 
nature and scale for each of the past five years. Additionally, 
include particulars of ongoing or contracted projects, along with 
endorsements from a relevant authority not lower than the rank 
of an Executive Engineer or its equivalent.  
(c) Present comprehensive information regarding the technical 
personnel slated for engagement in the project.  
(d) Confirm that the contract aligns with the qualifications 
specified in Clause 4.4 B(b) (ii) of ITB for the construction.  
(e) Submit a proposed schedule for construction activities and a 
Quality Management Plan outlining the anticipated timeline for 
project completion in adherence to technical specifications and the 
stipulated completion period. 
B. Additional Bank Guarantee 
As per the clause 46, sub clause 46.1 and 46.2 of the SBD, the 
Performance Security equal to 5% (five percent) of the Contract Price 
and additional Security for unbalanced bids shall be provided to the 
Employer. 
C. Blacklist/Termination of Contract 
As per the clause 52, sub clause 52.1 and 52.2 the Employer can 
terminate the Contract if the Contractor commits a major breach of 
contract in terms of quality and other contractual commitments i.e. 
Failure to correct a specified Defect promptly, Non-maintenance of 
required Security, Delaying project completion beyond allowable 
liquidated damages period and Not completing a specified portion of 
work on time. 
It may be noted that SBD already has strict provisions to ensure 
that good quality contractors are engaged for execution of PMGSY 
works; however, the States/UTs have been further advised to ensure 
strict technical evaluation during the technical scrutiny of bids.  
As suggested, a Committee is also being constituted to examine the 
matter of Abnormally Low Bids on PMGSY roads.” 

 
 
4 
 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
1.8 The Committee, while appreciating the Government’s existing 
provisions in the Standard Bidding Document (SBD) such as qualification 
criteria, additional performance security for Abnormally Low Bids (ALBs), and 
termination clauses, find these measures are inadequate in practice. Despite 
such efforts aggressive under-quoting continues in many States. Provisions 
confined to the manuals alone would perhaps not serve any purpose unless 
they are being followed in letter and spirit.  In this regard, it is expected that 
these provisions are implemented scrupulously at the ground level. Therefore, 
the Committee further recommend strict monitoring through mandatory 
quarterly reporting by States, enhanced additional security for unbalanced 
bids, a robust Terms of Reference for the proposed ALB Committee with 
empirical studies and possible minimum bid thresholds, stricter technical 
evaluation with higher weightage to past performance, mandatory public 
disclosure of bids and quality reports, quality incentives and bonuses for good 
performers, and capacity building for contractors. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) must move 
from a “provision-based” approach to a “result-oriented monitoring and 
deterrent” approach to effectively curb low bidding and ensure better quality 
of PMGSY roads.  
II. Quality of Construction of Roads 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
1.9 In the context of quality of construction of roads, the Committee had 
recommended as under: 

 
 
5 
 
 
“The Committee are constrained to note that the quality of road 
construction under PMGSY is a glaring issue affecting the whole 
country and has wider ramification in the lives of rural people. Building 
roads build nations as quality roads serve in manifold ways for the 
prosperity of a country. The scheme was launched by the Government 
with various welfare-oriented goals in foresight and has been one of 
the flagship rural development schemes over the years. There are 
many instances wherein the attention of the Committee have been 
drawn towards the non-compliance of stipulated norms and standards 
of construction and poor quality of road materials used in the 
construction of roads at many places which are not able to sustain the 
rigours of weather and traffic volume even for one season and are 
washed away with the onset of monsoon. Therefore, the Committee 
implore upon DoRD to take stronger measures to ensure that the 
quality norms as prescribed under the provisions of PMGSY should not 
at all be compromised so that the roads built have strong durability and 
the noble goal of the scheme to provide all weather road to rural 
habitation get achieved as early as possible, as it is an important issue 
affecting the entire rural progress of the country.” 
1.10 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows: 
“To strengthen the quality control measures during construction, 
a system of Stage-Passing has been mandated under PMGSY. Under 
this new system, the concerned PIU Head will certify quality at each 
section of road at defined stages of construction. The PIUs who are 
responsible for passing the bills and making payments to contractors 
are now required to inspect the work on ground, carry out quality 
control tests and certify the quality of work. The abstract of quality 
grading awarded by the concerned PIUs and their geo-referenced 
photographs of works taken by the PIUs shall be made available in 
public domain. Also, quality grading abstracts along with geo-
referenced photographs of works recorded by PIU head will be placed 
in the public domain. This measure was made applicable from 15th 
August 2025 in all ongoing and recently completed projects under 
PMGSY-III, PMGSY-JANMAN, PMGSY-VVP and shall also be 
applicable to all PMGSY-IV projects. The introduction of Stage-Passing 
is expected to bring in accountability, strict compliance to prescribed 
norms, and improve overall quality and durability of projects under 
PMGSY.” 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.11 The Committee has carefully examined the reply of the Government and 
appreciate the introduction of the Stage-Passing system with mandatory 
quality certification by Programme Implementation Unit (PIU) Heads, linkage of 

 
 
6 
 
 
payments to quality checks, and the provision for placing quality grading 
abstracts along with geo-referenced photographs in the public domain. While 
these measures are steps in the right direction, the Committee is of the 
considered view that internal departmental checks alone may not be sufficient 
to address the deep-rooted quality issues. Therefore, the Committee further 
recommend mandatory independent third-party audits (especially by experts 
from IITs/NITs), stricter accountability with penalties for both erring officials 
and contractors, a robust centralized monitoring dashboard with real-time 
data, technological interventions like drones and non-destructive testing, 
capacity building of PIU staff, a stronger defect liability and maintenance 
regime, and a public grievance mechanism for citizens. The Committee also 
desire that the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) should treat quality 
of PMGSY roads as a non-negotiable priority. The ultimate test of success will 
be the visible improvement in the durability and riding quality of roads that 
withstand at least one full monsoon season without major deterioration. The 
quality of roads under PMGSY are essential for transforming rural India by 
playing the role for economic growth, social development, safety and longevity 
of rural peoples. 
III. Maintenance of PMGSY Roads-Post Completion 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
1.12 With regard to maintenance of PMGSY roads-post completion, the Committee 
had recommended as under: 
“The Committee find that the usual design life of roads 
constructed under PMGSY is 10 years and as per the programme 
guidelines, responsibility of the maintenance of roads within Defect 
Liability Period (DLP) (initial 5 years) falls on the Contractor, while post 
DLP (next 5 years) is the responsibility of the concerned State 
Government and the funds for the same need to be provided by the 

 
 
7 
 
 
concerned State Governments. The Committee note with concern that 
the guidelines are not being followed sincerely and the roads 
constructed under PMGSY at various places suffer from poor 
maintenance and start getting degraded before 5 years of warranty. 
Even the monitoring mechanism of the elaborately laid down principle 
for the maintenance aspect of roads constructed under PMGSY 
remains a cause of concern. The Committee note that the issue require 
equally strict regulation and compliance by the Contractors. Therefore, 
the Committee strongly recommend the DoRD to ensure that the 
guidelines governing post construction maintenance of roads of 
PMGSY may be strictly complied with in letter and spirit' by the 
contractors so that the roads do not get deteriorated at an early stage, 
rather serve the purpose of connectivity for a longer period of time. 
Erring contractors should also be short-listed and strict action should 
be taken to declare them black-listed. The Committee further 
recommend the DoRD to ensure due coordination with the nodal 
agencies regarding surveillance for proper maintenance of the PMGSY 
roads post construction. Quality Control Mechanism should be geared 
up sincerely to achieve the aim of the scheme.” 
1.13 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows: 
“As a measure of further enhancing the focus on maintenance of 
roads during the defect liability period (DLP) and also streamlining the 
delivery of routine maintenance of PMGSY roads, Electronic 
Maintenance of Rural Roads (eMARG) was launched as a simple yet 
an extremely effective solution to these problems. Conceptualized on 
Performance Based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC), eMARG sets up 
a blue-print on how maintenance of infrastructure can be solved across 
government departments with smart IT & Contract Management. 
PBMC is a type of contract in which payment to the contractor is made 
based on the minimum condition of road, its cross drainage works and 
traffic assets that have to be met by him/her. Payments are based on 
how well the contractor manages to comply with the performance 
standards or service levels defined in the contract, and not on piece 
work. eMARG is being further strengthened to capture Post DLP 
maintenance expenditure also. 
 
 eMARG is implemented for five years after construction for 
online monitoring of maintenance of PMGSY roads. Rigorous 
monitoring of eMARG implementation during review meetings, pre-EC, 
EC meetings with States is being done & extension of 5 Year Defect 
Liability Period (DLP) in case of poor maintenance of roads has been 
made mandatory. For the Post 5-year period i.e. another 5 years after 
DLP i.e. for a total period of 10 years, eMARG module has been 
developed, which all States have to follow. This will ensure stricter 
compliance of post construction maintenance.  
 

 
 
8 
 
 
Maintenance of rural roads is the responsibility of the concerned 
state government. However, Ministry is seized with the issue relating to 
complaints of poor maintenance of roads under Defect Liability Period 
(DLP). NRIDA deploys teams of NQMs to carry out inspection of such 
roads when specific complaints are received from Hon’ble Members of 
Parliament and also from other agencies. Based on the inquiry report, 
States are asked to take necessary action against concerned 
contractor. Also, after implementation of eMARG, which is primarily 
performance-based maintenance contract, it has become possible for 
NRIDA to monitor all such roads visually. If any roads fail to get desired 
grading, maintenance payments are not released. Further, DLP period 
of such roads also stand extended for the period for which the road has 
failed to get desired grading. Hence, Ministry has always been trying to 
find out ways and means to strengthen the oversight mechanism for 
ensuring better roads maintenance.” 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.14 The Committee appreciate the Government’s initiatives like the 
introduction of the Electronic Maintenance of Rural Roads (eMARG) system 
based on Performance Based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC), the linkage of 
payments to road condition, mandatory extension of the Defect Liability Period 
(DLP) for poor maintenance, and the development of a post-DLP module. 
However, the Committee are concerned that the problem of poor maintenance 
persists on the ground and that reliance on State Governments for post-DLP 
funding and execution continues to be a weak link. Therefore, the Committee 
further recommend strict implementation of eMARG with mandatory geo-
tagged data and random third-party verification, stronger penalties including 
mandatory blacklisting of erring contractors, a dedicated funding/incentive 
mechanism for States to support post-DLP maintenance, independent audits, 
full public disclosure of maintenance data on a dashboard, and integration of 
maintenance performance with future bidding eligibility. The ultimate objective 

 
 
9 
 
 
must be to ensure that PMGSY roads actually deliver their full 10-year design 
life in good condition. 
IV. Linkage of Unconnected Habitations 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
1.15 With regard to linkage of unconnected habitations, the Committee had 
recommended as follows: 
"The Committee note that one of the issue associated with the 
rural connectivity projects through linkage of habitations with roads 
came to the fore was that of roads merely touching the outskirt or 
periphery of villages without reaching the actual habitation where 
majority resides. This defeats the purpose behind habitation linkage 
and many needy habitations especially, Desam, Dhanis, Tolas, Majras, 
Hamlets, etc., are in most of the cases lies at least 2-3 Km inside the 
periphery of the village and are thus, not getting the benefit of 
connectivity. The Committee, therefore, in view of this ground reality 
recommend the DoRD to review the policy of road connectivity 
comprehensively and create means so that the roads constructed 
under PMGSY actually reach the unconnected habitations to achieve 
the aim of providing all weather road to rural populace living in far flung 
areas of the country without any compromise, so that socio-economic 
progress may be achieved for rural populace in the country." 
1.16 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 " Through the implementation of PMGSY, all-weather 
connectivity to about 99.6% of eligible habitations has been provided 
as per Census 2001.The emergence of habitations is a dynamic 
process and several new habitations have emerged across the States/ 
UTs that are unconnected. Providing connectivity to these habitations 
is imperative in accordance with the Government's approach to 
saturation of basic services and ensuring equitable access to 
infrastructure, including rural roads.  
To ensure connectivity to the farthest unconnected habitations in 
the country, the Government of India has approved the implementation 
of Phase-IV of PMGSY. Under this initiative, all-weather connectivity 
will be provided to about 25,000 rural habitations that have become 
eligible in view of the increase in their population. While connecting 
habitations, States have been that the alignment of the PMGSY IV road 
passes through the habitation and that the nearby important public 
utility/ services are connected as far as feasible with this road for the 
benefit of the rural masses. The States/UTs have also been requested 
to identify eligible habitations after a detailed survey through the 
PMGSY Gram Sadak Survey App with the planning undertaken 
through the help of Geo-Sadak and PM-Gati Shakti. 

 
 
10 
 
 
The Department of Rural Development (DoRD) is also 
implementing the road connectivity component of Pradhan Mantri 
Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan (PM- JANMAN). Under the PM-
JANMAN programme, identified Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups 
(PVTG) villages are being provided connectivity. The PMGSY-IV and 
PM-JANMAN and road connectivity components will ensure 
connectivity to several unconnected habitations." 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.17  The Committee has examined the Government’s reply and appreciate 
the high coverage (99.6%) achieved under earlier phases, the approval of 
PMGSY Phase-IV for around 25,000 newly eligible habitations, the directives 
for road alignments to pass through habitations, and the use of digital tools 
like PMGSY Gram Sadak Survey App, Geo-Sadak, and PM-Gati Shakti. The 
Committee also note the special focus under Pradhan Mantri Janjati Adivasi 
Nyaya Maha Abhiyan (PM- JANMAN) for Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups 
(PVTG) villages. However, the Committee remain concerned about the 
perennial problem of roads merely touching village peripheries instead of 
reaching the core habitations (Dhanis, Tolas, Majras, Hamlets, etc.) may 
continue unless stronger enforcement mechanisms are put in place. The 
Committee, therefore, further recommend mandatory core-habitation 
connectivity with extended alignments, compulsory geo-tagged and third-party 
verification, stronger integration of digital mapping tools, special provisions 
for scattered habitations, a public dashboard for monitoring, and penalties for 
non-compliant alignments so that the objective of providing meaningful all-
weather connectivity to the last rural household is fully achieved. Linking 
unconnected habitations breaks rural isolation, bridge the urban rural divide, 

 
 
11 
 
 
integrates marginalised communities and acts as a primary catalyst for 
poverty reduction and inclusive growth. 
V. Increasing the Load Bearing Capacity of PMGSY Roads 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
1.18  In the context of increasing the lead bearing capacity of PMGSY roads, the 
Committee had recommended as below: 
“The Committee note that rural roads built under PMGSY are of 
the mandated thickness of 20 mm. In this era of modernization when 
industrial setups at far flung areas and the construction works of 
highways and bridges often necessitate movement of heavy load 
bearing vehicles, particularly those of NHAI to also utilize the roads 
built under PMGSY, cause irreversible damages to the rural roads 
because these are generally low volume roads and were never meant 
to bear the load of heavy vehicles. It, thus, becomes imperative to 
protect and get repaired the existing roads under PMGSY from the 
damaging NHAI vehicles and increasing the thickness of roads under 
PMGSY to 30 mm for bearing the load of heavy vehicles that would 
keep on plying on them in future. Therefore, keeping in view the traffic 
intensities depending on the village population, the Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend DoRD to have urgent constructive 
dialogue with NHAI to ensure that the damages are repaired by NHAI 
in accordance with the provisions of PMGSY and at the same time also 
urge, DoRD to increase the thickness of the PMGSY road from the 
existing 20 mm to 30 mm by making appropriate amendments in the 
provisions of the PMGSY at the earliest to protect them from getting 
further damaged by heavy vehicles.” 
 
1.19 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“As per PMGSY Guidelines there is no upper limit for design 
load in (Equivalent Standard Axle Load) for designing of pavement, 
however additional cost for pavement compositions provided over and 
above the designed crust required for 5 MSA (Million Standard Axles) 
are to be borne entirely by the State. If heavy vehicles plying on NHAI 
roads are to use the PMGSY roads, States are regularly made aware 
through Empowered Committee meetings that proper analysis should 
be done for projecting the Traffic and design of pavement should be 
done based on the projected Traffic.  
 
Rural roads are designed for 10 years of design life and future 
traffic annual growth rate is also taken into consideration while 
designing the pavement crust. Roads built under PMGSY follows the 
specifications of IRC especially IRC SP 72:2015 to design the rural 
roads, IRC SP 72:2015 limits the design traffic to 2 MSA. Load carried 

 
 
12 
 
 
by standard axle (single axle, dual wheel) is 8.16 tonnes and tandem 
axle is 14.9 tonnes. Fully loaded Heavy Commercial Vehicle (HCV) 
have a rear axle load of 10.2 tonnes and a front axle load half the rear 
axle load i.e. 5 tonnes and 20 % overloading is considered if overload 
vehicles are present. Heavier loads than this is not considered in 
design. 
  
As per IRC SP 72:2015 the surface course recommended is 20 
mm OGPC only for higher traffic, The surfacing course (layer) is the 
upper layer of the flexible pavement and provides the smooth, durable, 
abrasion-resistant characteristics of a good roadway, retaining 
adequate friction for road safety. It is normally made from bitumen 
bound aggregate – asphalt concrete. It will be waterproof and prevent 
ingress of water into the lower pavement layers, which would adversely 
affect their strength. These layers must be strong enough not to rut 
under the action of traffic.  
Since the main load bearing layers are the Binder course, Base 
course and Sub base course, thickness of these layers are more 
determining factors for the distresses caused in the pavement when 
heavy vehicles ply over it.  
The issue regarding damage of PMGSY roads by heavy 
vehicles coming from NHAI roads has been taken up with Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways firstly by Secretary vide DO letter dated 
08.08.2023 and further by Minister (Rural Development) vide DO letter 
27.09.2023. Copies of DO letters are attached.”  
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
1.20 The Committee acknowledge the Government’s reply regarding flexible 
design provisions beyond 5 Million Standard Axles- MSA (with extra cost on 
States), adherence to IRC SP 72:2015 standards, and letters issued to 
MoRTH/NHAI on damages caused by heavy vehicles. However, the Committee 
remain dissatisfied that the current design parameters, particularly the 20 mm 
surface course, are insufficient to handle increasing heavy traffic on rural 
roads. Therefore, the Committee further recommend revising PMGSY 
guidelines to mandate higher design traffic (5–10 MSA)  with central financial 
support for thicker pavements, enhancing thickness of load-bearing layers, 

 
 
13 
 
 
establishing a formal coordination mechanism with NHAI for repair and 
compensation, imposing traffic regulations, using technology for monitoring, 
and launching pilot projects with enhanced designs including the status of 
follow-up on the DO letters sent to MoRTH and proposed amendments in 
guidelines to avoid premature damage of PMGSY roads and their higher 
maintenance burden. 
VI. Delay/Stalling of Projects under PMGSY 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
1.21  With regard to delay/stalling of projects under PMGSY, the Committee had 
recommended as below: 
“Rural roads are akin to the arteries of the body which connect 
the hinterland of the vast stretch of the country with the cycle of 
ongoing development in every sphere of the society. The Pradhan 
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) was launched with the aim of 
providing all-weather road connectivity to unconnected habitations, 
thereby boosting rural infrastructure and economic development. 
However, it has been observed that a significant number of projects 
under PMGSY remain incomplete within their designated timeframe, 
leading to delays in infrastructure and socio-economic development of 
the areas. Such delays result in cost overrun, especially the escalation 
of cost of raw material and labour component. The Committee found 
during deliberations with the representatives of the Department and 
through the on-ground reality witnessed during the study visits, the 
presence of umpteen cases wherein the contractor left the project mid-
way or just after start, due to the rising cost of construction owing to 
delay in projects on account of various logistical issues ranging from 
non-availability of land clearance to non-release of funds. These 
obstacles or hindrances have been a significant hurdle in the timely 
completion of road construction projects, affecting the most 
disadvantaged and vulnerable rural populace who rely solely on 
improved connectivity for economic and social mobility. In light of the 
above facts, the Committee strongly recommend that 'no stone should 
be left unturned in the efforts of the DoRD to ensure that the remaining 
pendency are completed on 'war footing by taking appropriate 
measures, viz., effective coordination with State Governments to 
ensure timely release of funds, streamlining approval processes, and 
facilitating better convergence with other Ministries. The Committee, 
therefore stress that it is imperative for the DoRD to address these 
issues on a priority basis to ensure that PMGSY projects are 
completed as per scheduled time period without any cost escalation. 

 
 
14 
 
 
The implementation of all sanctioned work under the scheme should be 
monitored sincerely through the existing mechanism evolved for the 
purpose.” 
1.22 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“To make the programme transparent and also to ensure ease 
of access for monitoring the programme in terms of 
planning/implementation, a web-based programme Monitoring 
Information System named Online Monitoring, Management and 
Accounting System (OMMAS) has been developed. The 
implementation of all sanctioned works is monitored through OMMAS 
on real time basis. Data on OMMAS is also available in public domain. 
Ministry has been monitoring this issue at various level with the 
States. With the introduction of SNA SPARSH improvement in the 
timely release of State share is expected. States have to conform to 
program guidelines and other conditions of Ministry of Finance to be 
eligible for further fund release. These issues are taken up regularly 
with the States for early resolution.   
In so far as escalation of cost of raw material and labour 
component is concerned, it is submitted that once project is 
sanctioned, there is no provision for payment of cost escalation on 
account of time overrun under the scheme. Timeline has been clearly 
laid down for completion of roads/ bridges in the guidelines and the 
same has to be adhered to by the States as there is fixed timeline for 
completion of projects sanctioned under PMGSY. If cost increases on 
account of time overrun, States have the responsibility to bear the extra 
cost which acts as a disincentive against time and cost overruns.” 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
1.23 The Committee has carefully examined the Government’s reply on 
delays and stalling of projects under PMGSY and appreciate the 
implementation of the Online Monitoring, Management and Accounting System 
(OMMAS) for real-time tracking and public access to data, regular high-level 
monitoring with States, improvement in fund release through SNA SPARSH, 
and the existing mechanism that places the burden of cost escalation due to 
time overruns entirely on the States as a disincentive. However, the Committee 
remain deeply concerned that, despite these measures, a large number of 

 
 
15 
 
 
projects continue to face inordinate delays, with contractors frequently 
abandoning works midway due to land issues, delayed fund releases, and 
rising costs, ultimately hindering rural connectivity and causing significant 
cost overruns. In view of the persistent ground realities, the Committee further 
strongly recommend strengthening of the monitoring framework by enhancing 
OMMAS with automated early warning alerts for slow progress and mandatory 
remedial action plans. It has called for stringent actions such as immediate 
contract termination, forfeiture of securities, and mandatory blacklisting of 
erring contractors, along with the creation of a national blacklisting database. 
The Committee emphasize the need for a fast-track mechanism to resolve 
critical bottlenecks like land acquisition and forest clearances within fixed 
timelines. The Committee also suggest stricter fund flow discipline linked to 
physical milestones, limited provisions for justified cost escalation in 
exceptional cases, better pre-qualification of contractors, promotion of cluster-
based and mechanised construction, and greater public accountability 
through transparent dashboards and grievance redressal systems. Last but 
not the least, the Committee urge the Department of Rural Development 
(DoRD) to treat timely completion of projects on a war footing scale with 
highlighting the status of pending works and steps taken to minimise delays. 
This is essential to prevent further cost escalations and ensure that the socio-
economic benefits of PMGSY reach the rural population as originally 
envisaged and thus vital  for socio-economic development of the country. 
VII. Relaxation of Road Construction Norms and Standards under PMGSY 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 

 
 
16 
 
 
1.24  In the context of relaxation of road construction norms and standards under 
PMGSY, the Committee had recommended as below: 
“The Committee are of the view that construction of rural roads 
is an ongoing process and there is always scope for improvement and 
inclusion of better ideas for bolstering the rural connectivity much more 
holistically. Rural roads is a State subject, and the responsibility for the 
execution of road works and their maintenance under PMGSY lies with 
the State Governments, who are the implementing authorities of the 
scheme. The roads constructed under this Yojana are based on the 
prescribed norms and standards under the provisions of PMGSY. The 
Committee were enlightened during their study visit about the non-
availability of land/space for road construction and narrow width as per 
the prescribed norms under PMGSY. 
Therefore, for effective implementation of the scheme the 
Committee urge DoRD to relax the road construction norms by 
amending the provisions and guidelines of PMGSY to give flexibility to 
State Governments to adjust road width and design norms based on 
their local geographical conditions and transportation needs. The 
Committee also recommend that the construction of an additional 100 
km of roads be allocated based on the recommendation of the local 
representative of Parliament, and that the funds for the same be 
allocated from the Consolidated Fund of India.” 
1.25 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“The construction of road works under PMGSY are as per the 
technical specifications and geometric design standards given in the 
Ministry of Rural Development Specifications for Rural Roads, Rural 
Roads Manual of the Indian Road Congress (IRC) (IRC: 
SP:20),IRC:SP:72 and also, where required, the Hill Road Manual 
(IRC: SP:48) and other IRC Codes/ Guidelines.” 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.26 The Committee has examined the Action Taken Reply of the 
Government, which states that all PMGSY roads are constructed as per fixed 
technical specifications and geometric design standards prescribed in the 
Ministry of Rural Development Specifications for Rural Roads, IRC:SP:20, 
IRC:SP:72, IRC:SP:48 (for hill roads), and other relevant IRC codes. While 
acknowledging the importance of maintaining uniform quality and safety 

 
 
17 
 
 
standards, the Committee express concern that rigid adherence to these 
norms particularly road width and alignment requirements is proving 
impractical in many areas due to acute shortage of land, difficult topography, 
and local geographical challenges, often resulting in delayed or stalled 
projects. To address these ground-level constraints without compromising 
core quality, the Committee further recommend introducing flexibility in the 
guidelines by allowing case-to-case relaxation in road width (for example, 
reducing carriageway from 5.5m to 3.75–4.5m in land-scarce or difficult 
terrains), subject to proper justification, geo-tagged evidence, and approval 
mechanisms. The Committee suggest categorizing roads into different tiers 
based on traffic volume and terrain, delegating limited powers to State-level 
committees for approving minor deviations, and ensuring mandatory 
uploading of all relaxations on Online Monitoring, Management and 
Accounting System (OMMAS) with third-party quality audits. The Committee 
has also reiterated its earlier recommendation for sanctioning an additional 
100 km of roads per year on the recommendation of local Members of 
Parliament, with funds from the Consolidated Fund of India and provision for 
relaxed norms where necessary. Therefore, the Committee urge the 
Department of Rural Development (DoRD) to review and amend the PMGSY 
guidelines accordingly to enable more effective and context-sensitive 
implementation of the scheme while safeguarding road quality and safety. 
VIII. Periodic and Mandatory Physical Inspection of the Roads under PMGSY 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
1.27  In the context of periodic and mandatory physical inspection of the roads 
under PMGSY, the Committee had recommended as below: 

 
 
18 
 
 
“Building roads build nations as quality roads serve in manifold 
ways for the prosperity of a country in terms of economic strengthening 
via boost in domestic trade and commerce, providing employment 
opportunities and ultimately achieving the goals of development 
associated with better livelihoods of people. The scheme was launched 
by the Government with various welfare-oriented goals in foresight and 
has been one of the flagship rural development schemes over the 
years. But the Committee are concerned to note that the scheme is 
affected by the malaise of poor maintenance post-construction and 
after being handed over to the States. The entire effort of constructing 
quality roads to provide rural connectivity gets marred by inadequate 
maintenance. The Committee note the concerns raised from various 
quarters and through their own experiences during study visits that 
roads constructed under PMGSY at various locations suffer from poor 
maintenance and begin to deteriorate at an early stage. It has been 
noted that while provisions for maintenance exist in the guidelines, 
there is a lack of adherence to them, and there is no accountability. 
The wherewithal for honesty and transparency seems to be lacking in 
the implementation of such an important scheme. Even though a 
monitoring mechanism is elaborately laid down, the maintenance of 
roads constructed under PMGSY remains a serious concern. 
It has also been noticed that contractors, after the stipulated 
period under their supervision, hand over the roads by merely carrying 
out cosmetic patchwork on damaged roads. Therefore, the Committee 
are of the firm opinion that the evaluation of roads should be conducted 
on a periodic basis even after the completion of construction, both 
through physical inspections and by utilizing virtual techniques such as 
geo-tagging and mobile applications, to ensure roads are not neglected 
and are maintained properly. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the DoRD to earmark 
specific teams for periodic and mandatory physical inspections of roads 
under PMGSY. For those roads that are already neglected and are in 
disrepair conditions, the Committee, further recommend that these 
roads be identified and either rehabilitated under a dedicated initiative 
or included in the new PMGSY allotment to improve rural connectivity 
and accessibility.” 
1.28 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“To ensure that the objectives of PMGSY are not undermined by 
inadequate post-construction upkeep, the Ministry has put in place a 
multi-tier system of quality monitoring wherein physical inspection of 
projects are done periodically. The concerned Project Implementation 
Unit (PIU) technical staff conduct periodic and mandatory inspections, 
wherein the technical staff physically inspect the work, carries out the 
prescribed quality control tests, and record the results in the quality 
control register maintained for each project. In addition, the Stage-
Passing system, also mandates the PIU Head to certify the quality of 

 
 
19 
 
 
work at each defined stage of construction before bills are passed and 
payments are released. Also, States have empanelled retired 
engineers as State Quality Monitors (SQMs), who inspect each work at 
defined stage of construction within their respective States. The works 
are inspected through the Quality Monitoring System (QMS) 
application, along with geo-tagged photographs, ensuring transparency 
and accountability.  
Furthermore, National Quality Monitors (NQMs) empanelled by 
NRIDA, MoRD, carry out field inspections on a random sample basis 
across different States to bring out systemic issues of quality 
monitoring system. This three-tiered framework ensures that quality is 
not only checked at the construction stage but also continuously 
evaluated during 05 years maintenance period, thereby addressing the 
issue of poor maintenance and ensuring the long-term durability of 
roads under PMGSY. 
During the Defect Liability Period (DLP) and post-DLP phase of 
a road in the maintenance regime, a well-defined mechanism of 
bimonthly Routine Inspections by field level Engineers and 
Performance Evaluation is in place under eMARG. The States are 
requested regularly to ensure that the Routine Inspections are carried 
out in time and the maintenance is undertaken as per specifications.” 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.29 The Committee has examined the Government’s reply and appreciate 
the existing multi-tier quality monitoring system under PMGSY, which 
includes periodic inspections by Project Implementation Unit (PIU) technical 
staff, the Stage-Passing mechanism, State Quality Monitors (SQMs), National 
Quality Monitors (NQMs), the Quality Monitoring System (QMS) with geo-
tagging, and bimonthly routine inspections under the eMARG platform during 
the Defect Liability Period (DLP) and beyond. While these mechanisms appear 
comprehensive on paper, the Committee remain seriously concerned that 
poor maintenance, early deterioration of roads, and cosmetic patchwork by 
contractors continue unabated, indicating inadequate enforcement and lack 
of accountability at the ground level. To address these persistent issues, the 

 
 
20 
 
 
Committee further recommend institutionalizing mandatory physical 
inspections of all PMGSY roads at least twice a year (pre- and post-monsoon) 
by dedicated teams, supplemented by drone surveys in challenging terrains 
and has called for stricter accountability measures, including penalties, cost 
recovery, and blacklisting for officials and contractors failing in their 
maintenance duties. Periodic physical inspection of the roads under the 
PMGSY is crucial to ensure structural durability, enforce contractor 
accountability and safeguard massive public investments. The Committee 
also suggest creating a dedicated PMGSY Road Rehabilitation Fund for timely 
repair of prematurely damaged roads, full integration of QMS, eMARG, and 
Online Monitoring, Management and Accounting System (OMMAS) into a 
transparent public dashboard with real-time updates, increasing the scope of 
independent third-party and NQM audits, and greater involvement of local 
Panchayats through a mobile app-based grievance system. Lastly, the 
Committee urge the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) to treat post-
construction maintenance and periodic inspection as a high priority. This is 
critical to ensure that the huge public investment in PMGSY yields long-term 
durable rural connectivity and does not go to waste due to neglect after 
completion. 
IX. Revised Road Survey under PMGSY-IV 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
1.30  In the context of revised road survey under PMGSY-IV, the Committee had 
recommended as below: 
“A new vertical under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
(PMGSY) which is called PMGSY-IV has been launched with a focus to 
provide all-weather connectivity to unconnected habitations of 500+ 
population in plain areas and 250 population in NE and Hill States/UTs, 

 
 
21 
 
 
special category areas (Tribal Schedule-V Aspirational Districts/Blocks, 
Desert Areas) and 100 in LWE affected districts as per Census 2011. 
The scheme will be implemented from financial year 2024-25 to 2028-
29 with a total outlay of Rs. 70,125 crore (Central Share: Rs. 49,087.50 
crore, State Share: Rs. 21,037.50 crore) with a target to provide 
connectivity to 25,000 habitations. It is proposed that 62,500 km of all-
weather roads will be provided to these unconnected habitations. 
Additionally, the construction of required bridges along the alignment of 
these roads will also be undertaken. This new vertical act as catalyst 
for the expected socio-economic development and transformation of 
remote rural areas. The Committee, however, express concern that the 
PMGSY-IV road survey is currently based on the obsolete 2011 
Census, which does not reflect the present population, settlement 
expansions, and evolving infrastructure needs. Since the new Census 
has not yet been conducted, the survey lacks an accurate picture of 
ground realities, leading to ineligible habitations receiving priority while 
genuine beneficiaries are overlooked. The Committee therefore 
recommend that, to ensure equitable and last mile rural connectivity, 
the road survey under PMGSY-IV should be revised based on the 
latest available population figures or an interim assessment. This will 
help to identify genuine beneficiaries, address infrastructural 
bottlenecks, and ensure that roads are allocated fairly to areas most in 
need. Furthermore, the Committee strongly recommend that the local 
Member of Parliament (MP) must be consulted before the survey, and 
each survey must be vetted and approved by the local parliamentary 
representative. The Committee emphasize that Parliamentary oversight 
is crucial in ensuring that the road network benefits those who need it 
the most and that no eligible habitation is left out due to bureaucratic 
lapses or outdated data, Such steps are essentially required to provide 
all weather road connectivity to eligible unconnected rural habitations 
thereby improving access to economic and social services and 
fostering rural development.” 
1.31 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
 “Gram Sadak Survey App has been introduced for survey of 
habitations under PMGSY-IV and being implemented already by the 
SRRDAs. Training has also been imparted to the SRRDAs. Data has 
been uploaded on OMMAS and approved by implementing agencies. 
MoRD/ NRIDA also scrutinized the tentatively identified habitations.” 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.32 The Committee acknowledge and appreciate the introduction of the 
Gram Sadak Survey App, training provided to State Rural Roads Development 

 
 
22 
 
 
Agencies (SRRDAs), uploading of data on Online Monitoring, Management and 
Accounting System (OMMAS), and scrutiny by MoRD/NRIDA. While these are 
welcome steps towards digitization, the Committee are concerned that the 
survey for the new phase, aimed at connecting approximately 25,000 
unconnected habitations, continues to rely primarily on the obsolete 2011 
Census data. This has resulted in a disconnect from current ground realities, 
including population growth, new settlements, and emerging habitations, 
thereby risking exclusion of genuinely deserving areas while including others 
that may no longer qualify. To ensure accurate identification of beneficiaries 
and equitable distribution of road connectivity, the Committee further 
recommend immediate revision and validation of the survey using the latest 
available population data from sources such as voter lists, Aadhaar, or recent 
projections and has strongly reiterated the need for mandatory consultation 
with local Members of Parliament at the district level before finalization of 
habitation lists, with their inputs duly recorded. Further suggestions include 
independent third-party verification covering at least 20% of habitations 
(especially in tribal, hilly, and LWE areas), publication of the complete 
surveyed list (included and excluded) on a transparent public dashboard 
linked to Online Monitoring, Management and Accounting System (OMMAS) 
and development of a dynamic mechanism for continuous updation to 
accommodate newly emerged habitations. Lastly, the Committee also urge the 
Department of Rural Development (DoRD) to treat this as a priority and submit 
a detailed Action Taken Report on the survey revision, MP consultations, and 
implementation of these recommendations within three months. This will help 
PMGSY-IV achieve its objective of providing meaningful last-mile all-weather 

 
 
23 
 
 
connectivity to the most deserving remote rural habitations and foster genuine 
socio-economic development. 
X. Proper Coordination between Centre and State 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
1.33  In the context of proper coordination between centre and state, the Committee 
had recommended as below: 
“The Committee note that one of the most important aspects 
associated with the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) 
relies on the strong Centre-State coordination for its effective 
implementation. This coordination involves various aspect such as 
funding, project planning, quality control and monitoring. The scheme 
was launched in the year 2000 as a 100% centrally sponsored scheme 
However, the funding pattern was revised to 60:40 ratio between 
Centre and State from the financial year 2015-16, in all the States 
barring eight North Eastern States and three Himalayan States where it 
is 90.10 ratio. Thus, the seamless flow of funds is very important for the 
timely completion of projects under PMGSY Although the issue of fund 
release is of paramount importance, rural roads being a State subject, 
the onus of effective implementation also depends upon various other 
factors which require the prompt and pre-emptive approach of the 
State Government. In this context, the Committee find that various 
projects in many States get delayed or stalled due to logistics issue or 
non-timely release of funds either by Centre or State Government or 
both. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department of Rural 
Development to ensure that the projects under PMGSY do not get 
hampered due to lack of coordination between Centre and State rather 
a better cohesive mode of coordination along with effective monitoring 
mechanism may be devised for providing a positive impetus to the 
scheme.” 
1.34 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
 “Various Institutional mechanisms are already in place for 
effective coordination between the States/UTs for implementation of 
the schemes. The progress of the scheme is regularly reviewed by the 
Ministry by way of Regional Review Meetings (RRMs), Performance 
Review Committee (PRC) Meetings, Pre-Empowered/ Empowered 
Committee Meetings with the States. At District level, the District 
Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA) headed 
by Hon’ble Member of Parliament (LS) monitors the implementation of 
various schemes of Government of India including PMGSY. Besides 
above, special review meetings/monthly review meetings are also held 
by Secretary/Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary, Ministry of Rural 
Development with Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of the States 
to take stock of the progress of the scheme and remove the 

 
 
24 
 
 
bottlenecks, if any. Whenever States point out any difficulty in 
implementation of the scheme, the same is taken care of and issues 
are flagged at appropriate level to the concerned agencies for positive 
outcome. 
 PMGSY has an unbroken chain of fund release and no work has 
been hampered on account of non-availability of funds. Sometimes 
fund released from Central Government does get stuck up for a longer 
period than the permissible time limit in the State treasury, however, of 
late, this problem has also been addressed due to constant interaction 
with the concerned State Governments.” 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.35 The Committee do acknowledge and appreciate the various institutional 
mechanisms already in place for Centre-State coordination, including Regional 
Review Meetings (RRMs), Performance Review Committee (PRC) meetings, 
Empowered Committee meetings, DISHA Committees headed by Hon’ble MPs, 
and regular high-level reviews by senior Ministry officials. The assurance of 
uninterrupted central fund flow and efforts to address delays in State 
treasuries is also noted. However, the Committee remain concerned that 
despite these platforms, coordination gaps continue to cause delays in project 
execution, fund releases (especially State share), and resolution of on-ground 
bottlenecks in many States. Coordination between Centre and States under the 
scheme is vital for standardising planning, ensuring seamless fund 
disbursement and executing projects without delay.  To strengthen 
coordination and ensure smoother implementation of PMGSY, the Committee 
further recommend developing a unified real-time dashboard on Online 
Management, Monitoring and Accounting System (OMMAS) with automated 
alerts for fund releases and milestones. It has called for fixing clear timelines 

 
 
25 
 
 
for State share releases, introducing quarterly ranking of States on 
coordination parameters with public disclosure, and linking performance to 
future allocations. Further suggestions include making DISHA meetings more 
outcome-oriented with automatic escalation of unresolved issues, mandating 
routing of funds through PFMS/SNA SPARSH with penalties for parking 
delays, constitution of a standing Joint Coordination Task Force for inter-
ministerial and Centre-State bottlenecks, and preparation of an Annual Centre-
State Coordination Report highlighting best practices and corrective actions. 
The Committee emphasized that seamless coordination between the Centre 
and States is critical for the success of this flagship scheme. These steps 
would help minimise delays, prevent cost overruns, and accelerate the 
delivery of rural connectivity benefits to the last mile. 
XI. Prior Intimation and Mandatory Involvement of Members for Inspection 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
1.36  In the context of prior intimation and mandatory involvement of members for 
inspection, the Committee had recommended as below: 
“The Committee are concerned to note that the prior information 
to the Members of Parliament regarding inspection of sites which are 
carried out by the State Government officials and the National Quality 
Monitors are often not received by the concerned Members and the 
information about inspection team's departure or their non-arrival 
reaches the Members. Despite the presence of clear-cut theoretical 
provisions in the scheme, these have been violated umpteen times and 
the protocol of the Members of Parliament are compromised. It is 
imperative for both the nodal agency (Centre and State) of the scheme 
to ensure that the mandatory provision mentioned under the scheme 
regarding the involvement of Members of Parliament in carrying out 
inspection of construction sites are complied scrupulously. Moreover, 
the information to the concerned Members of Parliament about the 
arrival of inspection teams from Centre or State should be 
disseminated to them through all possible modes of communication at 
least one week in advance so that they can make themselves available 
for the inspection of construction sites. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the Department of Rural Development should relook into 
this matter earnestly and ensure the strictest compliance of the 

 
 
26 
 
 
provisions of PMGSY in letter and Spirit. Further, the Committee also 
recommend, rather request, both the nodal agency (Centre and State) 
to come up with a joint and harmonious approach without shying away 
from fulfilling their own responsibilities to achieve the aim of the 
scheme i.e. economic growth, social development and improved living 
standards in rural areas.” 
1.37 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“To ensure effective implementation concerning prior intimation 
to Hon’ble Members of Parliament regarding inspection of PMGSY 
works, it is highlighted that this Ministry has proactively reiterated the 
relevant provisions through Circular No. P-17025/22(1)/2017-RC dated 
23rd January 2025. The circular underscores the importance of timely 
and transparent communication, mandating the concerned Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) to inform the Hon’ble Member of Parliament 
well in advance about the visits of National Quality Monitors (NQMs) for 
inspection of PMGSY roads within their jurisdiction. Further, the State 
Quality Coordinator (SQC) is responsible for ensuring that such 
intimation is duly communicated to the Hon’ble MP, with a copy to the 
Ministry of Rural Development and NRIDA, until the online facility on 
OMMAS becomes fully operational. The circular also emphasizes that 
the advance notice should be supplemented by simultaneous 
telephonic confirmation to enable the Hon’ble MP, or their authorized 
representative, to participate in the inspection and provide valuable 
observations, thereby promoting greater transparency, accountability, 
and collaboration in monitoring road quality.” 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.38 The Committee appreciate the Government’s issuance of Circular as a 
positive step for ensuring prior intimation to Hon’ble Members of Parliament 
regarding PMGSY inspections. However, the Committee express deep concern 
that a mere circular may not ensure effective ground-level compliance, given 
past violations. The Committee, therefore, recommend a firm timeline (within 6 
months) for full operationalization of the online intimation facility on Online 
Management, Monitoring and Accounting System (OMMAS) coupled with 
monthly compliance reports. The Committee further suggest establishing a 
robust accountability mechanism, including quarterly reviews, nodal officers, 

 
 
27 
 
 
and linking compliance to Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) for Project 
Implementation Units (PIUs) and State Quality Coordinators (SQCs). To 
enforce adherence, administrative and financial penalties should be 
introduced for repeated non-compliance. Intimation must be sent through at 
least three modes (email, SMS/WhatsApp, and letter) with mandatory 
acknowledgements. The Committee also calls for a dedicated grievance portal 
for MPs, a Joint Centre-State Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) and regular 
sensitization workshops for officials.  
XII. Selection of Roads as per Members Suggestions 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
1.39  In the context of selection of roads as per Members suggestions, the 
Committee had recommended as below: 
“The Committee are concerned to note that adequate attention 
is not given to the provision under the scheme that the 
suggestions/advise given by the Members of Parliament are to be 
given due consideration while sanctioning / selection of roads for 
construction under the scheme. Being the Elected Representatives, the 
MPs represent the sentiments and ethos of local population in an 
extremely efficient manner. Utilizing the wealth of local knowledge in 
various aspect of the welfare scheme like PMGSY would perhaps only 
help to strengthen and enrich the policy formulation. In this regard, 
Members of Parliament have expressed their concern that even though 
there is explicit role assigned to them under the scheme relating to the 
finalization of road projects, this rule is not given due sanctity by the 
implementing agencies. The Committee are of the view that, inspecting 
teams, DPR preparation teams etc, should definitely avail the benefits 
of the inputs from the local MPs to have a real picture of the issues 
concerning that locality. Thus, if Members of Parliament (MPs), on 
merit, gauging the requirement felt by the locals, place their 
suggestions for inclusion of such roads/sites under PMGSY, then the 
Department of Rural Development must look into the request with 
promptness and should explore all the option of inclusion of such 
suggestions/advise which could allay the concerns of local rural 
populace, even at a later stage. Therefore, the Committee recommend 
that Department of Rural Development should take into account the 
preference of roads suggested by the Members on priority basis and 
utilize their experience/skills/advice in best manner for efficacious 
implementation of the scheme. The suggestions/recommendations of 
the Members of Parliament may be considered sincerely for planning, 

 
 
28 
 
 
implementation and monitoring of road projects ensuring that their 
perspectives and concerns are incorporated.” 
1.40 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“Priority is given to the recommendations made by Hon’ble MPs 
subject to condition that, they should meet the guidelines and 
objectives of PMGSY. In this respect an advisory has been issued by 
the Ministry vide letter dated 16-12-2019 detailing out the role of 
Hon’ble MPs and other elected members in planning and 
implementation of road work under PMGSY.  
Also, an advisory dated 2-6-2020 has also been issued to all the 
states on Role of Hon’ble MPs in Planning and selection of road works 
under PMGSY-III. 
 
The relevant paras of PMGSY-IV guidelines with respect to 
proposals of hon’ble MP/MLAs are reproduced below: 
 
Para 5.5 After the Comprehensive New Connectivity Priority List 
is prepared and verified it shall be placed before the district Panchayat. 
The Member of Parliament/ MLAs shall be given a copy of the CNCPL 
and their suggestions and the suggestions of lower level Panchayati 
Raj institutions shall be given fullest consideration by the district 
panchayat while according its approval. 
 
Para 5.6 After approval by the District Panchayat, the proposals 
would be forwarded by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to the 
State Rural Road Development Agency. The PIU will, at that time, 
prepare the details of proposals forwarded by the Members of 
Parliament in Proforma MP-I with the consent of the concerned MP, 
and action taken thereon in Proforma MP–II indicating the prioritization 
and other details, and send it along with the proposals. In all cases 
where the proposal of an MP has not been included, cogent reasons 
shall be given based on the reasons given by the District Panchayat in 
MP-II format itself. 
Para 5.7 The SRRDA shall vet the proposals to ensure that they 
are in accordance with the Guidelines and shall place them before the 
State-level Standing Committee along with the MP-I and MP-II 
Statements. 
 Para 5.8 The State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) would 
scrutinize the proposals to see that they are in accordance with the 
Guidelines and that the proposals of the Members of Parliament (MP) 
have been given full consideration. In all cases where the proposal of 
an MP has not been included, cogent reasons shall be given to the 
concerned MP and these shall be recorded in the proceedings of the 
SLSC.” 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 

 
 
29 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.41 The Committee acknowledge the Government’s reply, including the 
advisories issued in 2019 and 2020, and the detailed provisions under Paras 
5.5 to 5.8 of PMGSY-IV guidelines that mandate due consideration to 
suggestions of Hon’ble Members of Parliament in road selection. However, the 
Committee note with concern that despite these guidelines, MPs’ proposals 
are often not given adequate priority or are rejected without proper 
justification on the ground. The Committee, therefore, recommend strict 
adherence to Proformas MP-I and MP-II, with cogent reasons for rejection to be 
communicated to the MP within 30 days. All MP suggestions should be 
disposed of within a maximum of 90 days through a centralized tracking 
system on Online Management, Monitoring and Accounting System (OMMAS). 
The Committee further suggest quarterly reviews by the Department of Rural 
Development (DoRD) to assess the inclusion rate of MP-suggested roads, 
linking compliance to the performance evaluation of Project Implementation 
Units (PIUs) and State Rural Roads Development Agencies (SRRDAs) officials 
and conducting regular orientation programmes for field functionaries to 
ensure sincere incorporation of MPs’ local knowledge and suggestions for 
effective implementation of the scheme. 
XIII. Invitation to Members for Foundation Laying and Inauguration 
Ceremonies  
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
1.42  In the context of Invitation to Members for Foundation Laying and 
Inauguration Ceremonies, the Committee had recommended as below: 
“The Committee have been frequently informed about the 
violation of norms/provisions of PMGSY pertaining to the protocol to be 

 
 
30 
 
 
adhered to in cases of stone laying of any project under PMGSY and 
later at the time of inauguration of constructed roads vis-à-vis 
involvement of the Member of Parliament of the Concerned District. 
This is yet another area of concern wherein the reality and the facts on 
ground are completely different on numerously reported occasions. 
Even though this was highlighted by the Committed through the 
previous recommendations, continuous prevalence of non-adherence 
to these norms are a matter of concern to the Committee. Thus, the 
Committee recommend to Department of Rural Development to relook 
into this matter and ensure that the Members of Parliament (MPs) are 
compulsorily invited at the time of foundation laying and inauguration 
ceremonies of PMGSY works. Authorities at State level should also be 
impressed upon to scrupulously adhere to these norms/provisions 
Further, the Committee also recommend that a good quality 
photograph (each) of the inauguration and foundation laying 
ceremonies, containing clear picture of MP along with the plaque must 
be uploaded on Online Management, Monitoring and Accounting 
System (OMMAS). The concerned Department State may take the 
sincere steps for proper implementation of guidelines laid down for the 
purpose.” 
1.43 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“An advisory on Invitation to the Public representatives for 
foundation laying and inauguration ceremonies of PMGSY works dated 
03.02.22 has already been issued by MoRD and the same is attached 
at Annexure I.” 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.44 The Committee acknowledge the Government’s reply and appreciate the 
issuance of the advisory dated 03.02.2022 regarding invitation of public 
representatives for foundation laying and inauguration ceremonies under 
PMGSY. However, the Committee remain concerned that despite such 
advisories, violations continue and MPs are often not invited, undermining 
established parliamentary protocol. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) issue strict mandatory 
instructions to State Governments and PIUs to invite the concerned Hon’ble 
MP or their representative at least 15 days in advance through multiple modes 

 
 
31 
 
 
of communication (email, letter, and SMS). High-quality photographs of the 
events, clearly depicting the MP’s participation along with the plaque, must be 
mandatorily uploaded on OMMAS within 7 days of the ceremony. The 
Committee further suggest instituting a quarterly monitoring mechanism to 
track compliance, linking persistent violations to administrative accountability, 
and conducting regular sensitization programmes for officials for effective 
implementation of the 2022 advisory and enforcement of these protocols. 
XIV. Redressal of Complaints raised by the Members 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
1.45 In the context of redressal of complaints raised by the Members, the 
Committee had recommended as below: 
“The Committee are concerned to note that 
complaints/grievances raised by the Members of Parliament about 
promptly taking up and redressing the grievances regarding the 
inaction/irregularities in the works of PMGSY highlighted by them are 
casually taken up by the Department of Rural Development. The 
Committee feel that this approach of DoRD needs to be rectified 
immediately. Members of Parliament are constitutional figures and 
present the voices/concerns of major chunk of population. Through 
them, the issues of common man is heard by the authorities at top 
echelons Hence, it is imperative that the genuine concern/plight of the 
scheme at ground level highlighted by a Member of Parliament needs 
to be taken up seriously and redressal of such complaints needs to be 
done on priority basis with due information to the concerned Members. 
Hence, the Committee urge the Department of Ru Development to sort 
out the areas of grievance raised by Members and ensure their prompt 
disposal to achieve the targets of the scheme within a specified time 
frame.” 
1.46 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“The Ministry follows the guidelines laid down for handling of all 
references received from public representatives and strictly adheres to 
the prescribed timelines. Utmost priority is given to settle the 
references/grievances received from Member of Parliament. However, 
in some cases delay occurs due to non-receipt of inputs from 
concerned State Government. In some cases, team of National Quality 
Monitors (NQMs) need to be deputed to carry out the inspection of 
roads work against which complaint has been made. All these 

 
 
32 
 
 
processes take some time and hence delay may occur. However, the 
Ministry makes all efforts to minimize the delay.” 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.47 The Committee appreciate the Government’s reply that priority is given 
to grievances received from Hon’ble Members of Parliament as per prescribed 
timelines. Redressal of such complaints is vital to ensure transparency, 
accountability and proper utilisation of public funds. However, the Committee 
remain concerned over frequent delays due to slow inputs from State 
Governments and time taken for National Quality Monitors (NQMs) 
inspections. The Committee, therefore, recommend laying down clear time-
bound timelines (e.g., 30 days for acknowledgment and 60-90 days for final 
redressal) with automatic escalation for delays. The Committee further 
suggest developing a dedicated module on OMMAS for real-time tracking of 
MP complaints, fixing accountability on States for timely responses, and 
ensuring mandatory detailed Action Taken Reports are sent to the concerned 
MP in every case. Quarterly reviews of pendency and resolution time should 
be conducted and shared with the Committee. These measures will ensure 
prompt and effective redressal of genuine concerns raised by MPs and 
streamline the grievance redressal mechanisms. 
  

 
 
33 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
2.1 The Committee note that Road Connectivity Project for Left Wing Extremism 
Areas (RCPLWEA), a very important intervention under PMGSY, was launched in 
2016 with the primary goal of ensuring socio-economic development of the areas 
affected by left wing extremism in such States of the country. The deadline for the 
completion of this vertical under PMGSY was March, 2020 which was extended till 
March, 2025. In this regard, the Committee are concerned to note that out of total of 
12,228 Km sanctioned road length only 9,523 Km is completed as on 14 May. 2025 
and length of 2.705 km is still loft even after extended deadlines. Though, the 
Committee have taken into account the unique nature of challenges that left wing 
extremism areas throw in terms of insurgency, tough terrain, law and order situation, 
forest clearance issues etc. Still, the Committee feel that such bottlenecks can be 
removed by proper planning and strong coordination between all the stakeholders. 
Special efforts and perhaps area specific professionals who are skilled to work in 
combat and insurgent zones such as Border Roads Organisation (BROs) might 
serve as a boost to the lagging projects under RCPLWEA. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that DoRD should come up with sincere innovative ideas and guide the 
concerned States and all the stakeholders accordingly so as to ensure that the 
projects under RCPLWEA do not suffer further delay and are completed on a faster 
basis for the time-bound realization of the objectives of this vertical. 
     Reply of the Government  
2.2 Works sanctioned under RCPLWEA are regularly reviewed both by Ministry 
as well as MHA. Ministry is in constant touch with the implementation states, and 
States have given their action plan for completion of feasible balance work by March, 
2026. Ministry is actively reviewing RCPLWEA works of all States, including 
Chhattisgarh, and necessary handholding is being done to ensure that bottlenecks, if 
any which are coming in the way of progress are removed.  Efforts are being made 
to ensure that all the sanctioned works are completed by the extended timeline 
which is March, 2026. 
  

 
 
34 
 
 
As on 14.10.2025, 335 roads of 2363 km and 184 bridges remain balance for 
completion under RCPLWEA. States/UTs are being continuously advised to 
complete the works under RCPLWEA within the stipulated timeline.  
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
2.3 The Committee note with concern that the survey to identify eligible 
habitations under PMGSY-IV is currently based on the 2011 Census which lacks an 
accurate picture of ground realities, leading to ineligible habitations receiving priority 
while genuine beneficiaries are overlooked. While examining the subject of PMGSY 
and during their deliberations, the Committee were apprised about demands from 
local Members of Parliament (MPs) to choose Gram Panchayats as reference 
point/unit for providing rural connectivity rather than utilizing the population criteria of 
a habitation. The provision may be conceptualized in term of connecting all the 
villages under a specific Gram Panchayat and so on. This would ensure that all 
Gram Panchayats are covered step by step which inter-alia would cover all the 
habitations/villages automatically. Therefore, the Committee recommend the DoRD 
to explore the feasibility of picking up Gram Panchayats as reference points/units for 
providing connectivity to ensure that the genuine beneficiaries are not excluded 
enabling the eligible rural households to reap the benefits of the scheme. A proper 
mechanism may be evolved to ensure transparency for the purpose. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The unit of connectivity under PMGSY is lower than a Gram Panchayat or a 
Village; the unit of connectivity is a habitation. The objective of PMGSY-IV is to 
provide all-weather road connectivity to about 25,000 unconnected habitations of 
population size 500+ in plains, 250+ in Hill States/ UTs and North-Eastern Region 
(NER), Special Category Areas (Tribal Schedule-V Areas, Desert Areas, Aspirational 
Blocks/ Districts) and 100+ in LWE affected Districts (areas notified by MHA) in 9 
States as per Census 2011. Under PMGSY-IV, while connecting a habitation, the 
nearby government educational and health institutions, market and growth centres 
should be connected as far as feasible with the all-weather road for the benefit of the 
rural masses. The enhanced connectivity will facilitate easier and faster movement to 
and from educational, health, market and growth centres. 
 
The PMGSY-IV guidelines, issued in December 2024, affirm the government's 
continued use of the habitation as the unit for the program, citing the 2011 Census 
for eligibility. The government has approved PMGSY-IV to connect 25,000 
unconnected habitations between 2024–25 and 2028–29. It prioritizes habitations 
based on their population and demographic features, such as those with a significant 

 
 
35 
 
 
Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe population. The guidelines mandate the use of 
the PM Gati Shakti portal for planning and involve community participation through 
"Transect Walks" and Gram Sabha meetings to finalize road alignments. State 
Governments are required to arrange joint inspection of ongoing as well as 
completed works under PMGSY by Hon’ble MPs, Hon’ble MLAs and representatives 
of Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
2.5 The Committee acknowledge and appreciate the fact that there is a well-
structured monitoring mechanism under PMGSY. The tools include Online 
Management, Monitoring and Accounting System (OMMAS), Project Management 
Information System (PMIS), Citizen Information Board, National Level Monitors 
(NLM), Regional Review Meetings (RRM) among others, 'Meri Sadak' App has also 
been launched through which any person can register the complaint relating to slow 
pace of work, abandoned work, poor quality, ensuring on-ground monitoring of road 
construction on a real time basis. District Development Coordination and Monitoring 
Committees (DISHA) set up by the Department will monitor the progress and 
exercise vigilance in respect of PMGSY-IV. The Committee take due note of all the 
existing systems of monitoring of PMGSY projects but are still not satisfied with the 
effectiveness of such monitoring mechanisms. Through the on-ground experiences 
of the Members and the insight gained by the Committee during their study visits, 
startling revelations of by-passing the monitoring mechanism by the erring 
stakeholders involved in PMGSY projects can be found out. Poor condition of 
PMGSY roads both in terms of construction quality and maintenance aspect can be 
noticed even after all such monitoring mechanisms in place. It is evident that 
monitoring needs to be tighter. Therefore, the Committee recommend that DoRD 
should entail creative and innovative solutions like uploading of real time videos of 
roads at the duration of every six months, The increase in surprise inspections 
during the Defect Liability Period specifically, along with concerned Members of 
Parliament among others need to be explored on priority basis. Sincere efforts may 
be initiated to bring greater efficiency, accountability and transparency for proper 
implementation of the scheme. 
 

 
 
36 
 
 
     Reply of the Government  
2.6 In order to effectively monitor the entire Programme and bring about greater 
efficiency, accountability and transparency in implementation, a modern web based 
On-line Management, Monitoring and Accounting System (OMMAS) has been set up 
for PMGSY. Implementation of all sanctioned works is being monitored through 
OMMAS on real time basis to ensure that the physical and financial progress is in 
sync with the overall targets given to states. Progress of all roads uploaded on 
OMMAS is monitored on real time basis with the provision of Geo-tech Photographs. 
Further Project Management Information System (PMIS) has been developed for 
better management of construction activities of each road sanctioned under PMGSY-
III. To enhance transparency during road construction it has been made mandatory 
to install Global Positioning System (GPS) enabled Vehicle Tracking System (VTS) 
on all vehicles/ machinery/ equipment deployed by the contractor/ PIUs for execution 
of PMGSY works. This helps in assessing the proper operation of these machinery/ 
equipment for a specified period which is very essential for achieving the specified 
quality of the roads being constructed. Further, as a measure of further enhancing 
the focus on maintenance of roads during the defect liability period and also 
streamlining the delivery of routine maintenance of PMGSY roads, Electric 
Maintenance of Rural Roads (eMARG) has been introduced, which is conceptualized 
on Performance Based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC). Payment to the contractor 
is now made through eMARG which is based on the minimum condition of road, its 
cross drainage works and traffic assets. Payments are based on how well the 
contractor manages to comply with the performance standards or service levels 
defined in the contract, and not on piece work. 
  
PMGSY roads are constructed by the State Governments with a design life of 
at least 10 years. As per PMGSY guidelines, maintenance of roads constructed 
under the programme is the responsibility of the State Governments. All PMGSY 
road works are covered by initial five-year maintenance contracts to be entered into 
along with the construction contract, with the same contractor, as per the Standard 
Bidding Document. Maintenance funds to service the contract are required to be 
budgeted by the State Governments and placed at the disposal of the State Rural 
Roads Development Agencies (SRRDAs) in a separate maintenance account. On 
expiry of this 5-year post construction maintenance, PMGSY roads are required to 
be placed under Zonal maintenance contracts consisting of 5-year maintenance 
including renewal as per cycle, from time to time. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
37 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
  

 
 
38 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
4.1 The Committee observe that bidding through tenders for obtaining projects for 
construction of roads under PMGSY is an integral part of the scheme and the 
contractors who are awarded construction contracts through tenders are, perhaps, 
the central figures who through their activities more often than not determine the vary 
quality of roads constructed under PMGSY. The Committee note with concern that, 
in order to win the bid for acquiring the rights for the construction of projects, under 
PMGSY the contractors often quote 25-30% lower amount than the minimum bidding 
amount. The so-called practice of low-tendering by contractors are often brought to 
fore by the Members of the Committee during their deliberations. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the DoRD to entail all measures for curbing the practice of low 
bidding and should bring out a mechanism/provision at least by which a certain 
quantum of amount component equivalent to the difference between bidding and 
actual quoting is kept aside as security and may be released only after ensuring that 
the constructed road satisfy the stipulated quality norms. Therefore, a fair bidding 
mechanism is required to ensure an equitable and transparent process where 
bidders compete for contracts or opportunities without manipulation or unfair 
advantages. The Committee also recommend the Government to set up a 
Committee to assess the effect on quality of road by quoting low amount by the 
contractors than the minimum bidding amount. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 In the interest of the quality of roads being built under PMGSY and for 
protection against Abnormally Low Bids (ALBs), provisions of taking the additional 
performance security from the contractor have been made in the Standard Bidding 
Documents (SBD). All States have been advised to deal with cases of ALBs as per 
SBD provisions which are enumerated as under. 
  
A. Qualification of the Bidder:  
To make sure that contractors who are bidding for the works have 
sufficient backgrounds in execution of good quality works, the following 
Qualification criteria are laid down in clause 4 of the SBD: 

 
 
39 
 
 
  
(a) Contractor to provide the aggregate monetary value of civil 
construction projects executed in each of the preceding five years. 
(b) Furnish a record of past involvement in projects similar in nature 
and scale for each of the past five years. Additionally, include 
particulars of ongoing or contracted projects, along with endorsements 
from a relevant authority not lower than the rank of an Executive 
Engineer or its equivalent.  
(c) Present comprehensive information regarding the technical 
personnel slated for engagement in the project.  
(d) Confirm that the contract aligns with the qualifications specified in 
Clause 4.4 B(b) (ii) of ITB for the construction.  
(e) Submit a proposed schedule for construction activities and a Quality 
Management Plan outlining the anticipated timeline for project completion 
in adherence to technical specifications and the stipulated completion 
period. 
B. Additional Bank Guarantee 
As per the clause 46, sub clause 46.1 and 46.2 of the SBD, the 
Performance Security equal to 5% (five percent) of the Contract Price and 
additional Security for unbalanced bids shall be provided to the Employer. 
C. Blacklist/Termination of Contract 
As per the clause 52, sub clause 52.1 and 52.2 the Employer can 
terminate the Contract if the Contractor commits a major breach of 
contract in terms of quality and other contractual commitments i.e. Failure 
to correct a specified Defect promptly, Non-maintenance of required 
Security, Delaying project completion beyond allowable liquidated 
damages period and Not completing a specified portion of work on time. 
It may be noted that SBD already has strict provisions to ensure that 
good quality contractors are engaged for execution of PMGSY works; 
however, the States/UTs have been further advised to ensure strict 
technical evaluation during the technical scrutiny of bids.  
As suggested, a Committee is also being constituted to examine the 
matter of Abnormally Low Bids on PMGSY roads. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
 
40 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
4.3 The Committee are constrained to note that the quality of road construction 
under PMGSY is a glaring issue affecting the whole country and has wider 
ramification in the lives of rural people. Building roads build nations as quality roads 
serve in manifold ways for the prosperity of a country. The scheme was launched by 
the Government with various welfare-oriented goals in foresight and has been one of 
the flagship rural development schemes over the years. There are many instances 
wherein the attention of the Committee have been drawn towards the non-
compliance of stipulated norms and standards of construction and poor quality of 
road materials used in the construction of roads at many places which are not able to 
sustain the rigours of weather and traffic volume even for one season and are 
washed away with the onset of monsoon. Therefore, the Committee implore upon 
DoRD to take stronger measures to ensure that the quality norms as prescribed 
under the provisions of PMGSY should not at all be compromised so that the roads 
built have strong durability and the noble goal of the scheme to provide all weather 
road to rural habitation get achieved as early as possible, as it is an important issue 
affecting the entire rural progress of the country. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 To strengthen the quality control measures during construction, a system of 
Stage-Passing has been mandated under PMGSY. Under this new system, the 
concerned PIU Head will certify quality at each section of road at defined stages of 
construction. The PIUs who are responsible for passing the bills and making 
payments to contractors are now required to inspect the work on ground, carry out 
quality control tests and certify the quality of work. The abstract of quality grading 
awarded by the concerned PIUs and their geo-referenced photographs of works 
taken by the PIUs shall be made available in public domain. Also, quality grading 
abstracts along with geo-referenced photographs of works recorded by PIU head will 
be placed in the public domain. This measure was made applicable from 15th 
August 2025 in all ongoing and recently completed projects under PMGSY-III, 
PMGSY-JANMAN, PMGSY-VVP and shall also be applicable to all PMGSY-IV 
projects. The introduction of Stage-Passing is expected to bring in accountability, 
strict compliance to prescribed norms, and improve overall quality and durability of 
projects under PMGSY. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
41 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
4.5 The Committee find that the usual design life of roads constructed under 
PMGSY is 10 years and as per the programme guidelines, responsibility of the 
maintenance of roads within Defect Liability Period (DLP) (initial 5 years) falls on the 
Contractor, while post DLP (next 5 years) is the responsibility of the concerned State 
Government and the funds for the same need to be provided by the concerned State 
Governments. The Committee note with concern that the guidelines are not being 
followed sincerely and the roads constructed under PMGSY at various places suffer 
from poor maintenance and start getting degraded before 5 years of warranty. Even 
the monitoring mechanism of the elaborately laid down principle for the maintenance 
aspect of roads constructed under PMGSY remains a cause of concern. The 
Committee note that the issue require equally strict regulation and compliance by the 
Contractors. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend the DoRD to ensure that 
the guidelines governing post construction maintenance of roads of PMGSY may be 
strictly complied with in letter and spirit' by the contractors so that the roads do not 
get deteriorated at an early stage, rather serve the purpose of connectivity for a 
longer period of time. Erring contractors should also be short-listed and strict action 
should be taken to declare them black-listed. The Committee further recommend the 
DoRD to ensure due coordination with the nodal agencies regarding surveillance for 
proper maintenance of the PMGSY roads post construction. Quality Control 
Mechanism should be geared up sincerely to achieve the aim of the scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.6 As a measure of further enhancing the focus on maintenance of roads during 
the defect liability period (DLP) and also streamlining the delivery of routine 
maintenance of PMGSY roads, Electronic Maintenance of Rural Roads (eMARG) 
was launched as a simple yet an extremely effective solution to these problems. 
Conceptualized on Performance Based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC), eMARG 
sets up a blue-print on how maintenance of infrastructure can be solved across 
government departments with smart IT & Contract Management. PBMC is a type of 
contract in which payment to the contractor is made based on the minimum condition 
of road, its cross drainage works and traffic assets that have to be met by him/her. 
Payments are based on how well the contractor manages to comply with the 
performance standards or service levels defined in the contract, and not on piece 
work. eMARG is being further strengthened to capture Post DLP maintenance 
expenditure also. 
 

 
 
42 
 
 
eMARG is implemented for five years after construction for online monitoring 
of maintenance of PMGSY roads. Rigorous monitoring of eMARG implementation 
during review meetings, pre-EC, EC meetings with States is being done & extension 
of 5 Year Defect Liability Period (DLP) in case of poor maintenance of roads has 
been made mandatory. For the Post 5-year period i.e. another 5 years after DLP i.e. 
for a total period of 10 years, eMARG module has been developed, which all States 
have to follow. This will ensure stricter compliance of post construction 
maintenance.  
 
Maintenance of rural roads is the responsibility of the concerned state 
government. However, Ministry is seized with the issue relating to complaints of poor 
maintenance of roads under Defect Liability Period (DLP). NRIDA deploys teams of 
NQMs to carry out inspection of such roads when specific complaints are received 
from Hon’ble Members of Parliament and also from other agencies. Based on the 
inquiry report, States are asked to take necessary action against concerned 
contractor. Also, after implementation of eMARG, which is primarily performance-
based maintenance contract, it has become possible for NRIDA to monitor all such 
roads visually. If any roads fail to get desired grading, maintenance payments are 
not released. Further, DLP period of such roads also stand extended for the period 
for which the road has failed to get desired grading. Hence, Ministry has always 
been trying to find out ways and means to strengthen the oversight mechanism for 
ensuring better roads maintenance. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
4.7 The Committee note that one of the issue associated with the rural 
connectivity projects through linkage of habitations with roads came to the fore was 
that of roads merely touching the outskirt or periphery of villages without reaching 
the actual habitation where majority resides. This defeats the purpose behind 
habitation linkage and many needy habitations especially, Desam, Dhanis, Tolas, 
Majras, Hamlets, etc., are in most of the cases lies at least 2-3 Km inside the 
periphery of the village and are thus, not getting the benefit of connectivity. The 
Committee, therefore, in view of this ground reality recommend the DoRD to review 
the policy of road connectivity comprehensively and create means so that the roads 
constructed under PMGSY actually reach the unconnected habitations to achieve 
the aim of providing all weather road to rural populace living in far flung areas of the 
country without any compromise, so that socio-economic progress may be achieved 
for rural populace in the country. 

 
 
43 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 Through the implementation of PMGSY, all-weather connectivity to about 
99.6% of eligible habitations has been provided as per Census 2001.The emergence 
of habitations is a dynamic process and several new habitations have emerged 
across the States/ UTs that are unconnected. Providing connectivity to these 
habitations is imperative in accordance with the Government's approach to 
saturation of basic services and ensuring equitable access to infrastructure, including 
rural roads.  
To ensure connectivity to the farthest unconnected habitations in the country, 
the Government of India has approved the implementation of Phase-IV of PMGSY. 
Under this initiative, all-weather connectivity will be provided to about 25,000 rural 
habitations that have become eligible in view of the increase in their population. 
While connecting habitations, States have been that the alignment of the PMGSY IV 
road passes through the habitation and that the nearby important public utility/ 
services are connected as far as feasible with this road for the benefit of the rural 
masses. The States/UTs have also been requested to identify eligible habitations 
after a detailed survey through the PMGSY Gram Sadak Survey App with the 
planning undertaken through the help of Geo-Sadak and PM-Gati Shakti. 
The Department of Rural Development (DoRD) is also implementing the road 
connectivity component of Pradhan Mantri Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan (PM- 
JANMAN). Under the PM-JANMAN programme, identified Particularly Vulnerable 
Tribal Groups (PVTG) villages are being provided connectivity. The PMGSY-IV and 
PM-JANMAN and road connectivity components will ensure connectivity to several 
unconnected habitations. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
4.9 The Committee note that rural roads built under PMGSY are of the mandated 
thickness of 20 mm. In this era of modernization when industrial setups at far flung 
areas and the construction works of highways and bridges often necessitate 
movement of heavy load bearing vehicles, particularly those of NHAI to also utilize 
the roads built under PMGSY, cause irreversible damages to the rural roads 
because these are generally low volume roads and were never meant to bear the 
load of heavy vehicles. It, thus, becomes imperative to protect and get repaired the 
existing roads under PMGSY from the damaging NHAI vehicles and increasing the 
thickness of roads under PMGSY to 30 mm for bearing the load of heavy vehicles 
that would keep on plying on them in future. Therefore, keeping in view the traffic 
intensities depending on the village population, the Committee, therefore, strongly 

 
 
44 
 
 
recommend DoRD to have urgent constructive dialogue with NHAI to ensure that the 
damages are repaired by NHAI in accordance with the provisions of PMGSY and at 
the same time also urge, DoRD to increase the thickness of the PMGSY road from 
the existing 20 mm to 30 mm by making appropriate amendments in the provisions 
of the PMGSY at the earliest to protect them from getting further damaged by heavy 
vehicles. 
Reply of the Government 
4.10 As per PMGSY Guidelines there is no upper limit for design load in 
(Equivalent Standard Axle Load) for designing of pavement, however additional cost 
for pavement compositions provided over and above the designed crust required for 
5 MSA (Million Standard Axles) are to be borne entirely by the State. If heavy 
vehicles plying on NHAI roads are to use the PMGSY roads, States are regularly 
made aware through Empowered Committee meetings that proper analysis should 
be done for projecting the Traffic and design of pavement should be done based on 
the projected Traffic.  
 
Rural roads are designed for 10 years of design life and future traffic annual 
growth rate is also taken into consideration while designing the pavement crust. 
Roads built under PMGSY follows the specifications of IRC especially IRC SP 
72:2015 to design the rural roads, IRC SP 72:2015 limits the design traffic to 2 MSA. 
Load carried by standard axle (single axle, dual wheel) is 8.16 tonnes and tandem 
axle is 14.9 tonnes. Fully loaded Heavy Commercial Vehicle (HCV) have a rear axle 
load of 10.2 tonnes and a front axle load half the rear axle load i.e. 5 tonnes and 20 
% overloading is considered if overload vehicles are present. Heavier loads than this 
is not considered in design. 
  
As per IRC SP 72:2015 the surface course recommended is 20 mm OGPC 
only for higher traffic, The surfacing course (layer) is the upper layer of the flexible 
pavement and provides the smooth, durable, abrasion-resistant characteristics of a 
good roadway, retaining adequate friction for road safety. It is normally made from 
bitumen bound aggregate – asphalt concrete. It will be waterproof and prevent 
ingress of water into the lower pavement layers, which would adversely affect their 
strength. These layers must be strong enough not to rut under the action of traffic.  
Since the main load bearing layers are the Binder course, Base course and 
Sub base course, thickness of these layers are more determining factors for the 
distresses caused in the pavement when heavy vehicles ply over it.  
The issue regarding damage of PMGSY roads by heavy vehicles coming from 
NHAI roads has been taken up with Ministry of Road Transport and Highways firstly 
by Secretary vide DO letter dated 08.08.2023 and further by Minister (Rural 
Development) vide DO letter 27.09.2023. Copies of DO letters are attached. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 

 
 
45 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
4.11 Rural roads are akin to the arteries of the body which connect the hinterland 
of the vast stretch of the country with the cycle of ongoing development in every 
sphere of the society. The Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) was 
launched with the aim of providing all-weather road connectivity to unconnected 
habitations, thereby boosting rural infrastructure and economic development. 
However, it has been observed that a significant number of projects under PMGSY 
remain incomplete within their designated timeframe, leading to delays in 
infrastructure and socio-economic development of the areas. Such delays result in 
cost overrun, especially the escalation of cost of raw material and labour component. 
The Committee found during deliberations with the representatives of the 
Department and through the on-ground reality witnessed during the study visits, the 
presence of umpteen cases wherein the contractor left the project mid-way or just 
after start, due to the rising cost of construction owing to delay in projects on account 
of various logistical issues ranging from non-availability of land clearance to non-
release of funds. These obstacles or hindrances have been a significant hurdle in the 
timely completion of road construction projects, affecting the most disadvantaged 
and vulnerable rural populace who rely solely on improved connectivity for economic 
and social mobility. In light of the above facts, the Committee strongly recommend 
that 'no stone should be left unturned in the efforts of the DoRD to ensure that the 
remaining pendency are completed on 'war footing by taking appropriate measures, 
viz., effective coordination with State Governments to ensure timely release of funds, 
streamlining approval processes, and facilitating better convergence with other 
Ministries. The Committee, therefore stress that it is imperative for the DoRD to 
address these issues on a priority basis to ensure that PMGSY projects are 
completed as per scheduled time period without any cost escalation. The 
implementation of all sanctioned work under the scheme should be monitored 
sincerely through the existing mechanism evolved for the purpose. 
  

 
 
46 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.12 To make the programme transparent and also to ensure ease of access for 
monitoring the programme in terms of planning/implementation, a web-based 
programme Monitoring Information System named Online Monitoring, Management 
and Accounting System (OMMAS) has been developed. The implementation of all 
sanctioned works is monitored through OMMAS on real time basis. Data on OMMAS 
is also available in public domain. 
Ministry has been monitoring this issue at various level with the States. With 
the introduction of SNA SPARSH improvement in the timely release of State share is 
expected. States have to conform to program guidelines and other conditions of 
Ministry of Finance to be eligible for further fund release. These issues are taken up 
regularly with the States for early resolution.   
In so far as escalation of cost of raw material and labour component is 
concerned, it is submitted that once project is sanctioned, there is no provision for 
payment of cost escalation on account of time overrun under the scheme. Timeline 
has been clearly laid down for completion of roads/ bridges in the guidelines and the 
same has to be adhered to by the States as there is fixed timeline for completion of 
projects sanctioned under PMGSY. If cost increases on account of time overrun, 
States have the responsibility to bear the extra cost which acts as a disincentive 
against time and cost overruns. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
4.13 The Committee are of the view that construction of rural roads is an ongoing 
process and there is always scope for improvement and inclusion of better ideas for 
bolstering the rural connectivity much more holistically. Rural roads is a State 
subject, and the responsibility for the execution of road works and their maintenance 
under PMGSY lies with the State Governments, who are the implementing 
authorities of the scheme. The roads constructed under this Yojana are based on the 
prescribed norms and standards under the provisions of PMGSY. The Committee 
were enlightened during their study visit about the non-availability of land/space for 
road construction and narrow width as per the prescribed norms under PMGSY. 
Therefore, for effective implementation of the scheme the Committee urge 
DoRD to relax the road construction norms by amending the provisions and 
guidelines of PMGSY to give flexibility to State Governments to adjust road width 

 
 
47 
 
 
and design norms based on their local geographical conditions and transportation 
needs. The Committee also recommend that the construction of an additional 100 
km of roads be allocated based on the recommendation of the local representative of 
Parliament, and that the funds for the same be allocated from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.14 The construction of road works under PMGSY are as per the technical 
specifications and geometric design standards given in the Ministry of Rural 
Development Specifications for Rural Roads, Rural Roads Manual of the Indian 
Road Congress (IRC) (IRC: SP:20),IRC:SP:72 and also, where required, the Hill 
Road Manual (IRC: SP:48) and other IRC Codes/ Guidelines. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
4.15 Building roads build nations as quality roads serve in manifold ways for the 
prosperity of a country in terms of economic strengthening via boost in domestic 
trade and commerce, providing employment opportunities and ultimately achieving 
the goals of development associated with better livelihoods of people. The scheme 
was launched by the Government with various welfare-oriented goals in foresight 
and has been one of the flagship rural development schemes over the years. But the 
Committee are concerned to note that the scheme is affected by the malaise of poor 
maintenance post-construction and after being handed over to the States. The entire 
effort of constructing quality roads to provide rural connectivity gets marred by 
inadequate maintenance. The Committee note the concerns raised from various 
quarters and through their own experiences during study visits that roads 
constructed under PMGSY at various locations suffer from poor maintenance and 
begin to deteriorate at an early stage. It has been noted that while provisions for 
maintenance exist in the guidelines, there is a lack of adherence to them, and there 
is no accountability. The wherewithal for honesty and transparency seems to be 
lacking in the implementation of such an important scheme. Even though a 
monitoring mechanism is elaborately laid down, the maintenance of roads 
constructed under PMGSY remains a serious concern. 

 
 
48 
 
 
It has also been noticed that contractors, after the stipulated period under 
their supervision, hand over the roads by merely carrying out cosmetic patchwork on 
damaged roads. Therefore, the Committee are of the firm opinion that the evaluation 
of roads should be conducted on a periodic basis even after the completion of 
construction, both through physical inspections and by utilizing virtual techniques 
such as geo-tagging and mobile applications, to ensure roads are not neglected and 
are maintained properly. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the DoRD to earmark specific teams 
for periodic and mandatory physical inspections of roads under PMGSY. For those 
roads that are already neglected and are in disrepair conditions, the Committee, 
further recommend that these roads be identified and either rehabilitated under a 
dedicated initiative or included in the new PMGSY allotment to improve rural 
connectivity and accessibility. 
Reply of the Government 
4.16 To ensure that the objectives of PMGSY are not undermined by inadequate 
post-construction upkeep, the Ministry has put in place a multi-tier system of quality 
monitoring wherein physical inspection of projects are done periodically. The 
concerned Project Implementation Unit (PIU) technical staff conduct periodic and 
mandatory inspections, wherein the technical staff physically inspect the work, 
carries out the prescribed quality control tests, and record the results in the quality 
control register maintained for each project. In addition, the Stage-Passing system, 
also mandates the PIU Head to certify the quality of work at each defined stage of 
construction before bills are passed and payments are released. Also, States have 
empanelled retired engineers as State Quality Monitors (SQMs), who inspect each 
work at defined stage of construction within their respective States. The works are 
inspected through the Quality Monitoring System (QMS) application, along with geo-
tagged photographs, ensuring transparency and accountability.  
Furthermore, National Quality Monitors (NQMs) empanelled by NRIDA, 
MoRD, carry out field inspections on a random sample basis across different States 
to bring out systemic issues of quality monitoring system. This three-tiered 
framework ensures that quality is not only checked at the construction stage but also 
continuously evaluated during 05 years maintenance period, thereby addressing the 
issue of poor maintenance and ensuring the long-term durability of roads under 
PMGSY. 
During the Defect Liability Period (DLP) and post-DLP phase of a road in the 
maintenance regime, a well-defined mechanism of bimonthly Routine Inspections by 
field level Engineers and Performance Evaluation is in place under eMARG. The 

 
 
49 
 
 
States are requested regularly to ensure that the Routine Inspections are carried out 
in time and the maintenance is undertaken as per specifications. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
4.17 A new vertical under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) which is 
called PMGSY-IV has been launched with a focus to provide all-weather connectivity 
to unconnected habitations of 500+ population in plain areas and 250 population in 
NE and Hill States/UTs, special category areas (Tribal Schedule-V Aspirational 
Districts/Blocks, Desert Areas) and 100 in LWE affected districts as per Census 
2011. The scheme will be implemented from financial year 2024-25 to 2028-29 with 
a total outlay of Rs. 70,125 crore (Central Share: Rs. 49,087.50 crore, State Share: 
Rs. 21,037.50 crore) with a target to provide connectivity to 25,000 habitations. It is 
proposed that 62,500 km of all-weather roads will be provided to these unconnected 
habitations. Additionally, the construction of required bridges along the alignment of 
these roads will also be undertaken. This new vertical act as catalyst for the 
expected socio-economic development and transformation of remote rural areas. 
The Committee, however, express concern that the PMGSY-IV road survey is 
currently based on the obsolete 2011 Census, which does not reflect the present 
population, settlement expansions, and evolving infrastructure needs. Since the new 
Census has not yet been conducted, the survey lacks an accurate picture of ground 
realities, leading to ineligible habitations receiving priority while genuine beneficiaries 
are overlooked. The Committee therefore recommend that, to ensure equitable and 
last mile rural connectivity, the road survey under PMGSY-IV should be revised 
based on the latest available population figures or an interim assessment. This will 
help to identify genuine beneficiaries, address infrastructural bottlenecks, and ensure 
that roads are allocated fairly to areas most in need. Furthermore, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the local Member of Parliament (MP) must be consulted 
before the survey, and each survey must be vetted and approved by the local 
parliamentary representative. The Committee emphasize that Parliamentary 
oversight is crucial in ensuring that the road network benefits those who need it the 

 
 
50 
 
 
most and that no eligible habitation is left out due to bureaucratic lapses or outdated 
data, Such steps are essentially required to provide all weather road connectivity to 
eligible unconnected rural habitations thereby improving access to economic and 
social services and fostering rural development. 
Reply of the Government 
4.18 Gram Sadak Survey App has been introduced for survey of habitations under 
PMGSY-IV and being implemented already by the SRRDAs. Training has also been 
imparted to the SRRDAs. Data has been uploaded on OMMAS and approved by 
implementing agencies. MoRD/ NRIDA also scrutinized the tentatively identified 
habitations. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
4.19 The Committee note that one of the most important aspects associated with 
the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) relies on the strong Centre-State 
coordination for its effective implementation. This coordination involves various 
aspect such as funding, project planning, quality control and monitoring. The scheme 
was launched in the year 2000 as a 100% centrally sponsored scheme However, the 
funding pattern was revised to 60:40 ratio between Centre and State from the 
financial year 2015-16, in all the States barring eight North Eastern States and three 
Himalayan States where it is 90.10 ratio. Thus, the seamless flow of funds is very 
important for the timely completion of projects under PMGSY Although the issue of 
fund release is of paramount importance, rural roads being a State subject, the onus 
of effective implementation also depends upon various other factors which require 
the prompt and pre-emptive approach of the State Government. In this context, the 
Committee find that various projects in many States get delayed or stalled due to 
logistics issue or non-timely release of funds either by Centre or State Government 
or both. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department of Rural 
Development to ensure that the projects under PMGSY do not get hampered due to 
lack of coordination between Centre and State rather a better cohesive mode of 

 
 
51 
 
 
coordination along with effective monitoring mechanism may be devised for 
providing a positive impetus to the scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
4.20 Various Institutional mechanisms are already in place for effective 
coordination between the States/UTs for implementation of the schemes. The 
progress of the scheme is regularly reviewed by the Ministry by way of Regional 
Review Meetings (RRMs), Performance Review Committee (PRC) Meetings, Pre-
Empowered/ Empowered Committee Meetings with the States. At District level, the 
District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA) headed by 
Hon’ble Member of Parliament (LS) monitors the implementation of various schemes 
of Government of India including PMGSY. Besides above, special review 
meetings/monthly review meetings are also held by Secretary/Additional 
Secretary/Joint Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development with Chief 
Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of the States to take stock of the progress of the 
scheme and remove the bottlenecks, if any. Whenever States point out any difficulty 
in implementation of the scheme, the same is taken care of and issues are flagged at 
appropriate level to the concerned agencies for positive outcome. 
 PMGSY has an unbroken chain of fund release and no work has been 
hampered on account of non-availability of funds. Sometimes fund released from 
Central Government does get stuck up for a longer period than the permissible time 
limit in the State treasury, however, of late, this problem has also been addressed 
due to constant interaction with the concerned State Governments. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.35 of Chapter I of the Report) 
4.21 The Committee are concerned to note that the prior information to the 
Members of Parliament regarding inspection of sites which are carried out by the 
State Government officials and the National Quality Monitors are often not received 
by the concerned Members and the information about inspection team's departure or 
their non-arrival reaches the Members. Despite the presence of clear-cut theoretical 
provisions in the scheme, these have been violated umpteen times and the protocol 
of the Members of Parliament are compromised. It is imperative for both the nodal 
agency (Centre and State) of the scheme to ensure that the mandatory provision 
mentioned under the scheme regarding the involvement of Members of Parliament in 
carrying out inspection of construction sites are complied scrupulously. Moreover, 
the information to the concerned Members of Parliament about the arrival of 

 
 
52 
 
 
inspection teams from Centre or State should be disseminated to them through all 
possible modes of communication at least one week in advance so that they can 
make themselves available for the inspection of construction sites. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the Department of Rural Development should relook into this 
matter earnestly and ensure the strictest compliance of the provisions of PMGSY in 
letter and Spirit. Further, the Committee also recommend, rather request, both the 
nodal agency (Centre and State) to come up with a joint and harmonious approach 
without shying away from fulfilling their own responsibilities to achieve the aim of the 
scheme i.e. economic growth, social development and improved living standards in 
rural areas. 
Reply of the Government 
4.22 To ensure effective implementation concerning prior intimation to Hon’ble 
Members of Parliament regarding inspection of PMGSY works, it is highlighted that 
this Ministry has proactively reiterated the relevant provisions through Circular No. P-
17025/22(1)/2017-RC dated 23rd January 2025. The circular underscores the 
importance of timely and transparent communication, mandating the concerned 
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to inform the Hon’ble Member of Parliament well in 
advance about the visits of National Quality Monitors (NQMs) for inspection of 
PMGSY roads within their jurisdiction. Further, the State Quality Coordinator (SQC) 
is responsible for ensuring that such intimation is duly communicated to the Hon’ble 
MP, with a copy to the Ministry of Rural Development and NRIDA, until the online 
facility on OMMAS becomes fully operational. The circular also emphasizes that the 
advance notice should be supplemented by simultaneous telephonic confirmation to 
enable the Hon’ble MP, or their authorized representative, to participate in the 
inspection and provide valuable observations, thereby promoting greater 
transparency, accountability, and collaboration in monitoring road quality. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.38 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
4.23 The Committee are concerned to note that adequate attention is not given to 
the provision under the scheme that the suggestions/advise given by the Members of 
Parliament are to be given due consideration while sanctioning / selection of roads 
for construction under the scheme. Being the Elected Representatives, the MPs 
represent the sentiments and ethos of local population in an extremely efficient 
manner. Utilizing the wealth of local knowledge in various aspect of the welfare 

 
 
53 
 
 
scheme like PMGSY would perhaps only help to strengthen and enrich the policy 
formulation. In this regard, Members of Parliament have expressed their concern that 
even though there is explicit role assigned to them under the scheme relating to the 
finalization of road projects, this rule is not given due sanctity by the implementing 
agencies. The Committee are of the view that, inspecting teams, DPR preparation 
teams etc, should definitely avail the benefits of the inputs from the local MPs to 
have a real picture of the issues concerning that locality. Thus, if Members of 
Parliament (MPs), on merit, gauging the requirement felt by the locals, place their 
suggestions for inclusion of such roads/sites under PMGSY, then the Department of 
Rural Development must look into the request with promptness and should explore 
all the option of inclusion of such suggestions/advise which could allay the concerns 
of local rural populace, even at a later stage. Therefore, the Committee recommend 
that Department of Rural Development should take into account the preference of 
roads suggested by the Members on priority basis and utilize their 
experience/skills/advice in best manner for efficacious implementation of the 
scheme. The suggestions/recommendations of the Members of Parliament may be 
considered sincerely for planning, implementation and monitoring of road projects 
ensuring that their perspectives and concerns are incorporated. 
Reply of the Government 
4.24 Priority is given to the recommendations made by Hon’ble MPs subject to 
condition that, they should meet the guidelines and objectives of PMGSY. In this 
respect an advisory has been issued by the Ministry vide letter dated 16-12-2019 
detailing out the role of Hon’ble MPs and other elected members in planning and 
implementation of road work under PMGSY.  
Also, an advisory dated 2-6-2020 has also been issued to all the states on 
Role of Hon’ble MPs in Planning and selection of road works under PMGSY-III. 
 
The relevant paras of PMGSY-IV guidelines with respect to proposals of 
hon’ble MP/MLAs are reproduced below: 
 
Para 5.5 After the Comprehensive New Connectivity Priority List is prepared 
and verified it shall be placed before the district Panchayat. The Member of 
Parliament/ MLAs shall be given a copy of the CNCPL and their suggestions and the 
suggestions of lower level Panchayati Raj institutions shall be given fullest 
consideration by the district panchayat while according its approval. 

 
 
54 
 
 
 
Para 5.6 After approval by the District Panchayat, the proposals would be 
forwarded by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to the State Rural Road 
Development Agency. The PIU will, at that time, prepare the details of proposals 
forwarded by the Members of Parliament in Proforma MP-I with the consent of the 
concerned MP, and action taken thereon in Proforma MP–II indicating the 
prioritization and other details, and send it along with the proposals. In all cases 
where the proposal of an MP has not been included, cogent reasons shall be given 
based on the reasons given by the District Panchayat in MP-II format itself. 
Para 5.7 The SRRDA shall vet the proposals to ensure that they are in 
accordance with the Guidelines and shall place them before the State-level Standing 
Committee along with the MP-I and MP-II Statements. 
 Para 5.8 The State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) would scrutinize the 
proposals to see that they are in accordance with the Guidelines and that the 
proposals of the Members of Parliament (MP) have been given full consideration. In 
all cases where the proposal of an MP has not been included, cogent reasons shall 
be given to the concerned MP and these shall be recorded in the proceedings of the 
SLSC. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.41 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
4.25 The Committee have been frequently informed about the violation of 
norms/provisions of PMGSY pertaining to the protocol to be adhered to in cases of 
stone laying of any project under PMGSY and later at the time of inauguration of 
constructed roads vis-à-vis involvement of the Member of Parliament of the 
Concerned District. This is yet another area of concern wherein the reality and the 
facts on ground are completely different on numerously reported occasions. Even 
though this was highlighted by the Committed through the previous 
recommendations, continuous prevalence of non-adherence to these norms are a 
matter of concern to the Committee. Thus, the Committee recommend to 
Department of Rural Development to relook into this matter and ensure that the 
Members of Parliament (MPs) are compulsorily invited at the time of foundation 
laying and inauguration ceremonies of PMGSY works. Authorities at State level 
should also be impressed upon to scrupulously adhere to these norms/provisions 
Further, the Committee also recommend that a good quality photograph (each) of 

 
 
55 
 
 
the inauguration and foundation laying ceremonies, containing clear picture of MP 
along with the plaque must be uploaded on Online Management, Monitoring and 
Accounting System (OMMAS). The concerned Department State may take the 
sincere steps for proper implementation of guidelines laid down for the purpose. 
Reply of the Government 
4.26 An advisory on Invitation to the Public representatives for foundation laying 
and inauguration ceremonies of PMGSY works dated 03.02.22 has already been 
issued by MoRD and the same is attached at Annexure I. 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.44 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
4.27 The Committee are concerned to note that complaints/grievances raised by 
the Members of Parliament about promptly taking up and redressing the grievances 
regarding the inaction/irregularities in the works of PMGSY highlighted by them are 
casually taken up by the Department of Rural Development. The Committee feel that 
this approach of DoRD needs to be rectified immediately. Members of Parliament 
are constitutional figures and present the voices/concerns of major chunk of 
population. Through them, the issues of common man is heard by the authorities at 
top echelons Hence, it is imperative that the genuine concern/plight of the scheme at 
ground level highlighted by a Member of Parliament needs to be taken up seriously 
and redressal of such complaints needs to be done on priority basis with due 
information to the concerned Members. Hence, the Committee urge the Department 
of Ru Development to sort out the areas of grievance raised by Members and ensure 
their prompt disposal to achieve the targets of the scheme within a specified time 
frame. 
Reply of the Government 
4.28 The Ministry follows the guidelines laid down for handling of all references 
received from public representatives and strictly adheres to the prescribed timelines. 
Utmost priority is given to settle the references/grievances received from Member of 
Parliament. However, in some cases delay occurs due to non-receipt of inputs from 
concerned State Government. In some cases, team of National Quality Monitors 
(NQMs) need to be deputed to carry out the inspection of roads work against which 

 
 
56 
 
 
complaint has been made. All these processes take some time and hence delay may 
occur. However, the Ministry makes all efforts to minimize the delay. 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.47 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
 
57 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(O.M. No. P-17017/3/2022-RC (eFMS No. 380695) Dated: 06/11/2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
30 July, 2026 
Shravana 8, 1948 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
 
 

 
 
58 
 
 
Annexure I


 
 
59 
 
 


 
 
60 
 
 


 
 
61 
 
 


 
 
62 
 
 


 
 
63 
 
 


 
 
64 
 
 


 
 
65 
 
 


 
 
66 
 
 


 
 
67 
 
 


 
 
68 
 
 


 
 
69 
 
 
 
  


 
 
70 
 
 
ANNEXURE II 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:     17
        
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 11, 12, & 13  
Total:3 
Percentage: 18% 
III.  Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL 
Percentage: 0% 
 
IV. Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 1 to 10 & 14 to 17      
Total: 14 
Percentage: 82%  
V. Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
Total: NIL 
Percentage: 0% 
 
  

 
 
71 
 
 
ANNEXURE III 
 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE 
COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 8th JULY, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1347 hrs in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
3. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
4. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
5. Shri Jugal Kishore 
6. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
7. Shri Janardan Mishra 
8. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
9. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
10. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
11. Shri Ganesh Singh 
12. Shri Vivek Thakur 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
14. Shri Samirul Islam 
15. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
16. Shri Nagendra Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
2. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 

 
 
72 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of (i) Draft Report on action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 17th Report on 
“Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)” pertaining to the Department of 
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development); (ii) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx; and xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
 3. Above mentioned draft reports were taken up for consideration and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid draft reports and 
present the same to the Parliament. 
[xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx] 
4. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
5. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
6.  xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
7. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
8. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
9. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx.  
 [xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx] 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
____________________________ 
xxxx Not related to the Draft Report. 