 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
   
 
      EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI GRAM SADAK YOJANA (PMGSY) 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
17 


 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI GRAM SADAK YOJANA (PMGSY) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025/ Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
CRD No. 208  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs 
 
 
 
© 2025 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2024-2025) ii 
Introduction  iii  
REPORT 
PART I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
I. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) - Introduction 1 
II. Salient Features of PMGSY 3 
III. Quality Management Mechanism under PMGSY 7 
IV. Maintenance of PMGSY roads 10 
V. Monitoring Mechanism under PMGSY 12 
VI. PMGSY-IV 15 
VII. Role of Public Representatives 23 
VIII. Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) in Rural Roads 26 
 Part - II 
Recommendations / Observations 
27-40 
ANNEXURES  
I. Prior intimation to Hon’ble MPs about inspection visits of National 
Quality Monitors (NQMs) 
41 
II. State-wise details of habitations tentatively identified under PMGSY-IV 44 
III. Role of Hon’ble Members of Parliament in planning and selection of road 
works under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana-III 
45 
IV. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the committee held on Tuesday, the 
10th December, 2024 
57 
V. Extracts of the Minutes of the Thirty-Second sitting of the committee 
held on Tuesday, the 5th August, 2025 
60 
 
 
 
  

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-2025) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh Alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh Alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Shri Nagendra Ray 
27. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sudhanshu Shekhar  -  Under Secretary 
 

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2024-2025) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present the Seventeenth Report on ‘Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak 
Yojana (PMGSY)’ of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development).  
2.  The Committee took a briefing of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development) at their sitting held on 10.12.2024. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
05.08.2025. 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development) for placing before them the requisite 
material and their considered views in connection with the examination of the subject.  
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
06 August, 2025 
15 Shraavana,1947 (Saka)   
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and  
Panchayati Raj 
 

1 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
PRADHAN MANTRI GRAM SADAK YOJANA (PMGSY)  
 
PART – I  
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
CHAPTER I 
Introduction 
 
1.1     The government of India, as the part of poverty reduction strategy, launched the 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY-I) on 25th December, 2000 as a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme to assist the states through “Rural Roads”. 
 
1.2     The primary objective of the PMGSY is to provide connectivity through an all-
weather road with necessary culverts and cross-drainage structures, which is operable 
throughout the year, to eligible unconnected habitations in rural areas. Habitations with a 
population of 500+ in plain areas and 250+ in North-Eastern and Himalayan states, 
Desert areas, Tribal (Schedule V) areas and selected tribal and backward districts as 
identified by the Ministry of Home Affairs/ Planning Commission as per Census, 2001 
were to be covered under the scheme, so that these habitations can have access to 
basic health services, education and markets for their produce. In the critical Left Wing 
Extremism (LWE) affected blocks (as identified by MHA), additional relaxation has been 
given to connect habitations with population of 100+ (Census 2001). The Scheme had 
also an element of upgradation (to prescribed standards) of existing rural roads in 
districts where all the eligible habitations of the designated population size have been 
saturated with all weather road connectivity, though this objective was not central to the 
scheme (PMGSY-I). 
 
1.3     Against 1,78,184 eligible habitations of 250+ and 500+ population size identified 
for coverage under the scheme, 16,028 habitations have been provided connectivity by 
the States out of their own resources and 4,925 habitations have either been dropped or 
have not been found feasible. Out of the balance 1,57,231 habitations sanctioned for 
providing connectivity under the PMGSY, 1,54,777 have already been covered. Thus, as 
on 14th May, 2025, 381 habitations remain to be saturated. 
  
1.4     Under 100-249 population category (LWE areas), 6,245 habitations have been 
sanctioned for providing all-weather road connectivity, out of which 6,075 habitations 
have been saturated till 14th May, 2025. 
  
1.5     A total of 6,44,852 Km road length has been sanctioned under new connectivity 
and upgradation components under PMGSY-I, out of which 6,25,093 Km road length has 
been completed till 14th May, 2025.  
 

2 
 
1.6    As the programme unfolded, a need was felt for consolidation of the existing Rural 
Road Network to improve its efficiency not only as a provider of transportation services, 
but also as a vehicle of social and economic development. Accordingly, in the year 2013, 
PMGSY-II was launched for upgradation of selected Through Routes and Major Rural 
Links (MRLs) with a target to upgrade 50,000 Km in various states and Union Territories. 
Subsequently, in 2016, Road Connectivity Project for Left Wing Extremism Affected 
Areas (RCPLWEA) for construction/ upgradation of strategically important roads was 
launched as a separate vertical under PMGSY. In the year 2019, Government launched 
PMGSY-III for consolidation of 1,25,000 Km Through Routes and Major Rural Links 
connecting habitations, inter-alia, to Gramin Agricultural Markets (GrAMs), Higher 
Secondary Schools and Hospitals.  
  
PMGSY-II 
  
1.7     PMGSY-II was launched in May 2013 and envisages consolidation of the existing 
Rural Road Network to improve its overall efficiency as a provider of transportation 
services for people, goods and services. A total of 50,000 km road length has been 
targeted for upgradation under PMGSY-II. A total of 49,795 Km road length has been 
sanctioned under the Scheme and 49,080 Km completed as on 14th May, 2025. 
  
Road Connectivity Project for Left Wing Extremism Areas (RCPLWEA) 
  
1.8     RCPLWEA was launched in the year 2016 with the approval of the CCEA with an 
aim to improve the road connectivity in 44 worst affected LWE districts and some 
adjoining districts in 9 States, viz. Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh. The scheme has 
twin objectives of enabling smooth and seamless anti-LWE operations by the security 
forces and also ensuring socio-economic development of the area.  
 
1.9  The Ministry of Home Affairs in various phases have recommended road works 
against the scheme to these states.  
1.10  A total of 12,228 Km road length has been sanctioned under the Scheme and 
9,523 Km completed as on 14th May, 2025. 
PMGSY-III 
 
1.11   The Government approved PMGSY-III in July, 2019 for consolidation of 1,25,000 
Km Through Routes and Major Rural Links connecting habitations, inter-alia, to Gramin 
Agricultural Markets (GrAMs), Higher Secondary Schools and Hospitals. The 
implementation period of the Scheme is upto March, 2025. A total of 1,22,555 Km road 
length has already been sanctioned to 32 States/UTs and 95,707 Km road length 
completed till 14th May, 2025.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
CHAPTER II 
Salient Features of PMGSY 
 
2.1    Decentralized Planning: The Programme draws upon the model of decentralized 
network planning for rural roads. The District Rural Roads Plans (DRRPs) have been 
developed for all the districts of the country and Core Network has been drawn out of the 
DRRP to provide for at least a single connectivity to each target habitation under 
PMGSY. For prioritization of the annual project proposals, the Comprehensive New 
Connectivity Priority List (CNCPL) and Comprehensive Upgradation Priority List (CUPL) 
are used. The CNCPL and CUPL have been developed from the Core Network data. 
This planning exercise has been carried out with full involvement of the three-tier 
Panchayati Raj Institutions, as well as Members of Legislative Assemblies and 
Parliament.  
2.2    Standards and Specifications: As envisaged in the Programme guidelines, a 
Manual on Geometric Standards, Design, Construction and Maintenance of Rural Roads 
was published by the Indian Roads Congress (IRC) at the special intervention of Ministry 
of Rural Development as Rural Roads Manual IRC SP: 20.  Subsequently, IRC has 
prepared and published the following codes, which help in design of low volume rural 
roads: 
  
i. Guidelines for the Design and Construction of Cement Concrete Pavement for 
Rural Roads (IRC:SP:62-2014), 
ii. Guidelines for the Use of Interlocking Concrete Block Pavement (IRC:SP:63-
2004), 
iii. Guidelines for Construction of Roller Compacted Concrete Pavements 
(IRC:SP:68-2005),  
iv. Guidelines for the Design of Flexible Pavements for Low Volume Rural Roads 
(IRC:SP: 72-2015), and  
v. Manual for Design Construction & Maintenance of Gravel Roads (IRC:SP:77-
2008). 
vi. Guidelines on Tree Plantation Along Rural Roads (IRC:SP:103:2014). 
vii. Guidelines for the use of Waste Plastic in Hot Bituminous Mixes (Dry Process) in 
Wearing courses (IRC:SP:98-2013). 

4 
 
viii. Use of Cold Mix Technology in Construction and Maintenance of Roads using 
Bitumen Emulsion (IRC:SP:100-2014).  
2.2.1    A Standard Data Book to enable the States to prepare Schedules of Rates based 
on specifications has also been developed by IRC. The specifications form the part of the 
contract agreement and the Schedule of Rates developed by States on the basis of 
prescribed Standard Data Book is being used for preparation of bill of quantities in a 
uniform manner.  
2.2.2      The road geometrics in hill states as well as plain and rolling terrains have been 
finalized on the basis of the recommendations made by the Expert Committee 
constituted to review the Standards, Specifications and Design of Rural Roads under 
PMGSY and communicated to all the States.  
2.3     Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) and Scrutiny:  As an important step to achieve 
quality output for each road under the Programme, proper survey and adequate 
investigations are stipulated.  A Detailed Project Report (DPR) is a pre-requisite for 
project clearance.  Independent  
scrutiny of the project proposals to ensure that the project has been formulated as per 
the guidelines is carried out by the prominent institutions of Engineering and Technology 
in the country, identified as State Technical Agencies (STAs). Ministry has also identified 
reputed Technical and Research Institutions such as the Indian Institutes of Technology 
(IITs) as Principal Technical Agency (PTAs) for various groups of States, which 
scrutinizes at least 10% of the STA scrutinized proposals on sample basis. 
2.3.1    The proposals are thereafter scrutinized by the technical experts in NRIDA. The 
proposals are then submitted for scrutiny in a Pre-Empowered Committee Meeting 
chaired by the Director General, NRIDA and attended by representatives of the State 
Government. In case all required documents are complete and there is no major capacity 
or institutional deficiency, and data in OMMS has been found to be satisfactory, the 
proposal is placed before the Empowered Committee chaired by the Secretary, 
Department of Rural Development. The recommendations of the Empowered Committee 
are submitted to the Minister of Rural Development and in case the proposals meet the 
programme requirements, the same is sanctioned.  
2.3.2    Thus, the proposals submitted by the State Government are scrutinized at the 
every level with due diligence and only those proposals, which are technically correct and 
meet the programme requirements are sanctioned. 

5 
 
2.4    Institutional Arrangements:  Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) is the Nodal 
Ministry for implementation of the scheme (PMGSY) at Central level. National Rural 
Infrastructure Development Agency (NRIDA) has been constituted to provide technical 
and managerial support for implementation of the programme at the central level. The 
State Governments have identified State Nodal Departments and State Rural Roads 
Development Agencies (SRRDAs) have been constituted for the programme 
implementation at the State level. Depending upon the work load, Programme 
Implementation Units (PIUs) are constituted by the States.  
2.5    Procurement Process:  Based on best national and international practices, a 
Standard Bidding Document (SBD) has been developed for procurement of works under 
the PMGSY. All the works under the Programme are being procured and managed on 
the basis of provisions of the SBD. To ensure transparency and harness various 
advantages of electronic tendering, entire bidding for procurement of works under the 
programme is being carried out only through e-procurement process. The states are 
advised to use www.pmgsytenders.gov.in (GePNIC website) to streamline and create a 
single database for tendering of all PMGSY works. Revision of Specifications for Rural 
Roads and Standard Data-book for Analysis of Rates has also been accomplished by 
IRC.   
2.6   Online Monitoring, Management and Accounting System (OMMAS): To make 
the programme transparent and also to ensure ease of access for monitoring the 
programme in terms of planning/implementation a web based Online Monitoring, 
Management and Accounting System (OMMAS) has been developed. Data on OMMAS 
is also available in public domain. 
2.7    Operations Manual and Programme Monitoring: Programme guidelines have 
been issued separately for all the ongoing interventions/verticals of the scheme.  All the 
operations under the programme have been systematically laid down in the “Operations 
Manual” which was published in the year 2005. Operational Manual is intended for day to 
day use as a comprehensive supplement to the PMGSY Guidelines on procedural 
aspects of the programme. This manual provides for details of all the processes 
encompassing Institutional Structures, Planning, Design, Project Preparation, 
Procurement, Quality, Technical Agencies, Monitoring, Management of Maintenance, 
Road Safety, Implementation Responsibility etc. 

6 
 
2.8       Use of GIS in Planning, Monitoring and Maintenance: PMGSY heavily relies 
on GIS data for selection of roads in PMGSY-III, verification of proposals and for 
maintenance. Under PMGSY-III, all rural facilities of interest are initially geo-tagged using 
the GEOPMGSY mobile app along with pictures. Thereafter, this information is combined 
with the GIS based DRRP and Habitation data from the Geospatial Rural Road 
Information System (GRRIS) which hosts relevant GIS data from all the states. Then, a 
“Trace Map” is generated which is a custom map which highlights important Through 
Routes and Major Rural Links based on a simulation of traffic from habitations to their 
nearest rural facilities. Roads recommended by Trace Map are combined with 
recommendations from political representatives, local PIU knowledge and other sources. 
Together these roads are referred as “Candidate Roads”. Finally, Comprehensive 
Upgradation Cum Prioritisation List (CUCPL) is generated through OMMAS based on 
utility value of each such candidate road. Further, NRIDA uses GIS data and satellite 
imagery to verify whether road proposals are meeting objectives of PMGSY, their 
existing surface, available width and surface condition of existing road etc. 
2.8.1    eMARG :  PMGSY’s IT platform for maintenance of rural roads, also uses GIS to 
readily display the geo-tagged inspection photos which are used to ratify routine 
maintenance payments to contractors. Every road in eMARG is registered on GIS and 
each inspection is tied to a geo-tagged section of the road along with photographs. 
 
         
 
  

7 
 
                                                            CHAPTER III 
 
Quality Management Mechanism under PMGSY 
 
3.1     PMGSY envisages a three tier Quality Assurance Mechanism to ensure quality of 
road works during construction. The first two tiers of the structure are the responsibility of 
the respective State Governments and under the third tier, National Rural Infrastructure 
Development Agency (NRIDA), a technical arm of the Department of Rural Development, 
engages independent National Quality Monitors (NQMs) for inspections at random, of the 
road works under the programme.  
3.2     Ensuring the quality of road works is primarily the responsibility of the State 
Governments who are implementing the programme. NRIDA has issued general 
guidelines and prescribed quality assurance hand books to regulate the quality control 
process at works level. Guidelines have also been issued for inspections of works by 
independent monitors under the second and third tier of the quality assurance 
mechanism. To make the inspections trustworthy, it is being ensured that independent 
monitors at the second and the third tier take at least 10 digital photographs including 
one of the field laboratories, for each work and upload it on OMMAS website to facilitate 
public viewing of quality of road works executed under the programme.  Based on the 
experience gained, the PMGSY guidelines have been reviewed and revised from time to 
time. 
3.3 The Department has also issued instructions to the States that the State Quality 
Controller in the State Rural Roads Development Agency (SRRDA) should coordinate 
between the NQMs and the office of the Hon’ble Members of Parliament regarding 
intimation about the inspections by NQMs. A copy of the circular of Department of Rural 
Development is at Annexure I. 
 
 
3.4 During the course of evidence, JS (DoRD) on the issue of quality of road 
construction stated as under:- 
एक Ĥæन यह उठाया गया था ͩक Èया हमारȣ सड़कɉ मɅ हेवी åहȣकãस Üलाइंग का 
Ĥावधान है। उन पर भारȣ गाड़ी चल सकती है, हम कैसे ͫडजाइन करते हɇ। कुछ माननीय 

8 
 
सदèयɉ ने इनके नैरो होने कȧ बात भी कहȣ थी। सर, अगले 10 वषɟ कȧ Ěैͩफक ĤोजेÈशन 
के Ǒहसाब से काम ͩकया जाता है। हमारे इंͫडयन रोड काँĒेस, आईआरसी के Ǔनयम के 
अनुसार 3.75 मीटर, ͧसंगल लेन रोड कȧ ͫडजाइǓनंग होती है। इसकȧ मोटाई भी आईआरसी 
के अनुसार हȣ कȧ जाती है। डीपीआर मɅ इसका ͪवशेष Ĥावधान रखा जाता है। जब 
एसटȣए-पीटȣए चेͩकंग करते हɇ, तो यह देखते हɇ ͩक आईआरसी Ěैͩफक ĤोजेÈशन के 
अनुसार सड़क बनाई गई है या नहȣं। यह ͧमǓनèĚȣ ऑफ रोड Ěांसपोट[ एंड हाइवेज ने 
इंͫडयन रोड कांĒेस दोनɉ ͧमलकर Ǔनधा[ǐरत करते हɇ। 
सर, पुलɉ से संबंͬधत ͪवषय भी उठाए गए थे। हमɅ ͪपछले वष[ एक राÏय मɅ एक 
बड़े पुल के ¢ǓतĒèत होने कȧ खबर ͧमलȣ थी, उसके बाद हमने इसे कड़ाई से पालन 
करवाना चालू कर Ǒदया है ͩक जहां पर पुल का Ǔनमा[ण ͩकया जाना है, वहां पर हमारे 
Ïवाइंट ͪविजट हɉगे। हमारे सीǓनयर इंजीǓनयस[ और एसटȣए-पीटȣए दोनɉ ͧमलकर Ïवाइंट 
ͪविजट करɅगे, ताͩक डीपीआर ठȤक बने। अगर उÛहɅ ͩकसी कमी कȧ जानकारȣ ͧमलती है, तो 
वह दूर कȧ जा सकती है।  
सर, हमɅ ͪपछले लाज[ èकेल पर पीएमजीएसवाई पुलɉ के बारे मɅ ऐसी कोई सूचना 
नहȣं ͧमलȣ है। माननीय सदèयɉ ने यह सूचना दȣ है ͩक उनसे राय नहȣं लȣ गई है। हम 
दोबारा पğ ͧलख कर राÏयɉ के सͬचवɉ से आĒह करɅगे। 
 
 
3.5 Adding further on the issue the Secretary (DoRD) stated as under:- 
सर, हम लोगɉ ने बराबर पğ Ǒदया है, एडवाइजरȣ दȣ है और बैठकɉ मɅ भी राÏयɉ को 
यह कहा है ͩक आपको हर चरण मɅ माननीय सांसद से इस पर सहमǓत लेनी है। अगर 
ͩकसी राÏय मɅ यह नहȣं हो रहा है, तो हम उनको ͩफर से Ǔनदȶͧशत करɅगे। 
 
3.6 Further on the issue of road upgradation, JS (RD) stated as under:- 

9 
 
रोड अपĒेडेशन के बारे मɅ जैसा मɇने बताया ͩक Ēामीण सड़कɅ राÏय का ͪवषय है 
और मɇने ͪपछलȣ बार 10 Ǒदसंबर कȧ मीǑटंग मɅ भी बताया था ͩक पीएमजीएसवाई सड़कɅ 
Ǿरल रोɬस कȧ ͧसफ[ 17 परसɅट हɇ, तो इससे कहȣं Ïयादा Ēामीण सड़कɅ राÏय बना रहे हɇ 
और अभी रोड अपĒेडेशन उÛहȣं के सम¢ है। रोड अपĒेडेशन का इसमɅ Ĥावधान नहȣं है। 
ओमास मɅ इंĚȣ ͩकये ǒबना कोई भी ǒबल पास नहȣं होगा। ǒबल जनरेशन हȣ ओमास से 
होता है। पीएमजीएसवाई कȧ कोई भी सड़क का काम ओमास कȧ इंĚȣ के  ǒबना संभव नहȣं 
है, उसका पेमɅट संभव नहȣं है। Èवाͧलटȣ के बारे मɅ भी Ĥæन उठाया गया था। Èवाͧलटȣ एक 
Ǔनरंतर, सतत ĤͩĐया है, हम लोग कोͧशश करते हɇ ͩक इसे कैसे और बेहतर बनाया जा 
सके। इसी के उदाहरणाथ[ हमने Ǒदखाया था, èटेज पॉͧसंग का काÛसेÜट हम यूज कर रहे 
हɇ, एनÈयूएम के ͫडÜलॉयमɅट मɅ हम बदलाव ला रहे हɇ, एसÈयूसी के माÚयम से जब भी 
एनÈयूएम जाते हɇ तो आपको भी सूͬचत ͩकया जाएगा तो ǓनरÛतर हम Ĥयासरत हɇ। 
इसके अलावा फाइंͫडंÊस एंड गैÜस के बारे मɅ भी चचा[ हुई है। कोरापुट और रायगढ़ मɅ जो 
ͪविजट हुई थी, उसके बारे मɅ भी हम सूͬचत कर दɅगे। इससे और सीख लेकर और आगे 
Èया ͩकया जा सकता है, यह भी एक ǐरपोट[ हम दे दɅगे। 
 
 
 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Maintenance of PMGSY roads 
 
4.1 Under PMGSY, maintenance of rural roads is the responsibility of the State/ UT 
Governments. The Ministry had issued guidelines for maintenance of roads constructed 
under the programme. Under PMGSY, roads are covered under a 5-year maintenance 
contract to be entered into along with a construction contract with the same contractor as 
per the Standard Bidding Document (SBD). Since the design life of PMGSY roads is ten 
years, the States have to undertake further five years of maintenance. A MoU has been 
signed with States/UTs to emphasize on maintenance of roads constructed under 
PMGSY.  
4.2 The Ministry has also implemented e-MARG i.e. software module for maintenance 
payments to the contractor during the defect liability period. The post five-year 
construction module of e-MARG incorporates initial rehabilitation, renewal, pre- renewal 
routine maintenance, post-renewal maintenance and emergency repair works, as 
required. Maintenance funds to service the contract are required to be budgeted by the 
State Governments and placed at the disposal of the SRRDAs in a separate 
maintenance account. On expiry of this 5 year post construction maintenance, PMGSY 
roads are required to be placed under Zonal maintenance contracts consisting of 5 year 
maintenance including renewal as per cycle, from time to time. 
 
4.3 During the course of evidence, JS (DoRD) on the issue of maintenance of roads 
stated as under:- 
कई माननीय सदèयɉ ने सवाल उठाया है ͩक एबनॉम[लȣ लो ǒबɬस आती हɇ, जो 
कम ǒबɬस आती हɇ, वे एलाऊ Èयɉ हो रहȣ हɇ? इस पर हमने कई बार चचा[ भी कȧ है और 
हमने यह देखा है ͩक हमारे जो फाइनɅͧशयल Ǿãस हɇ, उनमɅ ऐसी सीͧलंग लगाना संभव 
नहȣं है।    
हमारे èटɇडड[ ǒबͫडंग डॉÈयुमɅट मɅ यह भी Ĥावधान ͩकया गया है ͩक जहां पर कोई 
भी एबनॉम[लȣ लो-ǒबड देता है, उससे हम एͫडशनल परफॉमɏस गारंटȣ लɅगे, ताͩक उसको एक 

11 
 
ͫडसइंसɅǑटव भी होगा ͩक वह Ïयादा एबनॉम[लȣ लो ǒबड न दे पाएं। उसमɅ यह भी होता है 
ͩक मान लȣिजए ͩक वह काम खराब करता है, तो जो उसकȧ परफॉमɏस गारंटȣ है, उसको 
पीनलाइज भी ͩकया जा सकता है। इस पर कई कोट[ केसेज भी हुए हɇ। जो भी कोट[ केसेज 
हुए हɇ, उसमɅ यहȣ माना गया है ͩक उसमɅ अभी ͧसͧलंग लगाना संभव नहȣं है। हमने 
आपका सुझाव नोट कर ͧलया है, लेͩकन िèथǓत यह है। 
4.4 Adding further on the issue the Secretary (RD) stated as under:- 
हम लोग इसको गंभीरता से एÊजाͧमन कर लɅगे। अभी तक का हमारा जो Ĥावधान 
है, इसमɅ ͩकसी Ĥकार कȧ ͧसͧलंग नहȣं रखी गई है, ͩकसी Ĥकार का Ýलोर नहȣं रखा गया 
है। जैसा ͩक इÛहɉने पूव[ मɅ कहा है ͩक कुछ मामले माननीय हाई कोट[ मɅ गए। वे वहां 
राÏय हȣ लेकर गए। हमारा वहां पर यहȣ èटɇड था ͩक हमारे गाइडलाइंस मɅ कोई Ýलोर 
नहȣं है, इससे टɅडर ͫडसटॉट[ होता है। माननीय हाई कोट[ के ɮवारा इसको अपहोãड ͩकया 
गया। जो सुझाव आए हɇ, इन पर हम गंभीरता से एÊजाͧमन करɅगे। यǑद कोई संशोधन 
संभव होगा तो उस पर ͪवचार करɅगे। 
सर, जैसा ͩक हम लोगɉ ने Ǔनवेदन ͩकया है, हमारे गाइडलाइंस मɅ Ĥावधान है ͩक 
अगर कोई एबनॉम[लȣ लो ǒबड होता है, तो हम उसमɅ एͫडशनल परफॉमɏस गारंटȣ लेते हɇ।  
सर, दूसरा यह है ͩक इसमɅ Ýलोर नहȣं रखने से इस बात पर भी चेक रहता है। 
कई राÏयɉ मɅ इस Ĥकार कȧ भी Ĥवृͪƣ रहती है ͩक जो शेɬयुल ऑफ रेɪस हɇ, वहȣ इंÝलेटेड 
रहता है। इस पर भी चेक रहता है ताͩक शेɬयुल ऑफ रेɪस को इंÝलेटेड नहȣं बनाया 
जाए। 
                                        
 
  
 
 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Monitoring Mechanism under PMGSY 
 
5.1    On-Line Management, Monitoring and Accounting System 
  
In order to effectively monitor the entire Programme and bring about greater 
efficiency, accountability and transparency in implementation, a modern web based On-
line Management, Monitoring and Accounting System (OMMAS) has been set up for 
PMGSY. The main Application Software Modules include Rural Road Plan & Core 
Network, Proposals, Tendering & Contracting, Execution (Physical and Financial 
Progress), Quality Monitoring, Funds Flow and Receipt & Payment Accounts (work 
accounts). The web site is www.omms.nic.in. e-Payment and e-Procurement are the new 
dimensions being integrated to it. 
  
5.2    Citizen information boards 
  
Citizen Information Boards and Work Information Boards are displayed in local 
language at prominent locations on PMGSY roads, in the benefited habitations indicating 
details of work and volume of materials used in each layer of the pavement.  A new 
development is the provision of a “Maintenance Board” providing necessary information 
to the citizens about the provisions of 5 year maintenance of PMGSY roads. 
  
5.3   Inspection/monitoring of PMGSY works by public representatives 
  
5.3.1          State Governments have been advised to arrange joint inspection of ongoing 
as well as completed works under PMGSY by Hon’ble MPs, Hon’ble MLAs and 
representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions.  
  
5.3.2         At District level, the District Development Coordination and Monitoring 
Committee (Disha) headed by a Member of Parliament (LS) monitors the implementation 
of various schemes of Government of India including PMGSY.   
  
5.4   Monitoring through Regional Review Meetings, etc 
  
  The progress of implementation of PMGSY is regularly reviewed by way of 
Regional Review Meetings (RRMs), Performance Review Committee (PRC) Meetings & 
Pre-Empowered/Empowered Committee Meetings with the States. In Regional Review 
Meetings aspects relating to Planning, Project Preparation and Scrutiny, Procurement 
and Contract Management are discussed in detail. The aspects of quality receive the 
topmost priority for monitoring and separate session are organised to discuss these 
issues. The meetings of Empowered Committee chaired by the Secretary (RD) are also 
utilized as a forum for detailed review of the programme implementation in various 
States.  The Minister (RD) reviews the programme at regular intervals encompassing 
planning, progress of implementation, quality, maintenance, funds availability etc.  In 
addition to this, special review meetings/ monthly review meetings are also held by 
Secretary/ Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development with Chief 

13 
 
Secretaries/Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries/Chief Executive Officer-
SRRDAs of the States through Video Conferencing.   
  
5.5   Independent assessment through third party 
  
The Ministry of Rural Development has evolved a comprehensive mechanism for 
monitoring the implementation of its programmes, including PMGSY, through third party 
independent monitors, called National Level Monitors (NLMs). These Monitors are drawn 
from a panel of selected reputed non-government institutions having experience in 
monitoring and evaluation of the programmes of the Government of India. In addition, the 
Ministry has been organizing Annual Common Review Missions (CRMs) to have an 
independent assessment of the progress of the various programmes and schemes of the 
Department of Rural Development, including PMGSY. 
 
 
5.6 During the course of evidence, JS (DoRD) on the issue of monitoring mechanism 
stated as under:- 
Èया पंचायत, लोकल बॉडीज़ का इसकȧ मॉǓनटǐरंग के ͧलए सलैÈशन ͩकया गया है। 
अभी ऐसा कोई Ĥावधान नहȣं है। एसआरडीए के लोकल एÊजीÈयूǑटव इंजीǓनयर कांĚेÈट के 
माÚयम से इàपलȣमɅटेशन करते हɇ। पंजाब मɅ कुछ काय[ पɇͫडंग पड़े हɇ। पीएमजीएसवाई-3 
के अंतग[त शुǾआत मɅ एक साथ ĤोजेÈट नहȣं आए थे। राÏयɉ ने समय-समय पर ĤोजÈट 
भेजे थे। ͪपछले साल जो èवीकृǓत ͧमलȣ थी, वे काय[ अभी-भी चल रहे हɇ। हमारा Ĥयास है 
ͩक  पीएमजीएसवाई का एÈसटɅशन हो जाए ताͩक सारे काम पूरे ͩकए जा सकɅ। 
महोदय, पीएमजीएसवाई 1, 2 और 3  मɅ िजतनी भी सड़कɅ बनी हɇ, उनकȧ ͫडजाइन 
लाइफ दस साल है। दस साल कȧ अवͬध के बाद राÏयɉ को अÛय èकȧम के अंतग[त 
टेकअप ͩकया जाता है। यह भी Ĥæन पूछा गया था ͩक पांच साल कȧ अवͬध के बाद 
ǐरपेयर करने कȧ आवæयकता Èयɉ होती है। हमारे मानकɉ मɅ ͧलखा हुआ है ͩक  पांच वष[ 
बाद ǐरनुएल कोड देना चाǑहए, उस कोड के देने से अगले पांच साल और अÍछे तरȣके से 

14 
 
परफाम[ कर सकती हɇ। रोड साɃस के Ǒहसाब से पांच साल बाद ǐरनुएल होता है और बाद 
मɅ मैÛटेनɅस होती है।  
                                                      
  

15 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
PMGSY-IV 
 
A new vertical under Pradhan Mantri Gram SadakYojana (PMGSY) which is called 
PMGSY-IV has been launched with a focus to provide all-weather connectivity to 
unconnected habitations of  500+ population in plain areas and 250 + population in NE 
and Hill States/UTs, special category areas (Tribal Schedule-V, Aspirational 
Districts/Blocks, Desert Areas) and 100+ in LWE affected districts as per Census 2011.  
The scheme will be implemented from financial year 2024-25 to 2028-29 with a total 
outlay of Rs. 70,125 crore (Central share Rs. 49,087.50 crore and State share Rs. 
21,037.50 crore) with a target to provide connectivity to 25,000 habitations. 62,500 km of 
all-weather roads will provide connectivity to unconnected habitations. Construction of 
necessary bridges along the alignment of all weather roads will also be provided. 
                                                      
 
PMGSY-IV will increasingly use new technology and green techniques. Earlier 
also, roads have been constructed under this initiative in various phases of PMGSY. PM 
Gati Shakti portal is being used for planning under PMGSY-IV. For accurate planning, 
NRIDA has also developed a mobile application called “Gram Sadak Survey” for Pradhan 
Mantri Gram SadakYojana-IV. 
                                                                                          
 
6.1     Objectives of PMGSY-IV 
6.1.1 The primary objective of PMGSY-IV is to provide all-weather road connectivity to 
about 25,000 unconnected habitations of population size 500+ in plains, 250+ in Hill 
States/ UTs and North-Eastern Region (NER), Special Category Areas (Tribal Schedule-
V Areas, Desert Areas, Aspirational Blocks/Districts) and 100+ in LWE affected Districts 
(areas notified by MHA) in 9 States as per Census 2011. 
 
6.1.2 The Government is keen to facilitate easier and faster movement to and from 
educational, health, market and growth centres. Therefore, under PMGSY-IV, while 
connecting a habitation, the nearby government educational and health institutions, 

16 
 
market and growth centres should be connected as far as feasible with the all-weather 
road for the benefit of the rural masses. 
 
6.2    Guiding Principles of PMGSY-IV and Definitions: 
  
6.2.1 The objective of the PMGSY-IV is to provide all-weather road connectivity to the 
eligible unconnected Habitations. A habitation that was earlier provided all-weather 
connectivity would not be eligible even if the present road condition is bad. 
 
6.2.2 The unit for this programme is a habitation and not a revenue village or a 
Panchayat. A habitation is a cluster of populations living in an area, the location of which 
does not change over time. Desam, Dhanis, Tolas, Majras, Hamlets, etc., are commonly 
used terminology to describe the habitations. 
 
6.2.3 An all-weather road is one which is negotiable during all weathers, with some 
permitted interruptions. Essentially this means that at cross drainage structures, the 
duration of overflow or interruption at one stretch shall not exceed 24 hours at a time and 
not more than 6 times in a year. 
 
6.2.4 An unconnected habitation is one with a population of designated size located at a 
distance of at least 500 meters or more (1.5 km of path distance in case of Hills) from an 
all-weather road or a connected habitation.  
 
6.2.5 The rural road network required for providing the ‘basic access’ to all villages/ 
habitations is termed as the Core Network. Basic access is defined as one all-weather 
road access from each village/ habitation to the nearby Market Centre or Rural Business 
Hub (RBH) and essential social and economic services. A Core Network comprises of 
Through Routes and Link Routes. Through routes are the ones which collect traffic from 
several link roads or a long chain of habitations and lead it to a market centre or a higher 
category road, i.e. the District Roads or the State or National Highways. Link Routes are 
the roads connecting a single habitation or a group of habitations to Through Roads or 
District Roads leading to Market Centres. Link Routes generally have dead ends 

17 
 
terminating on habitations, while Through Routes arise from the confluence of two or 
more Link Routes and emerge on to a major road or to a Market Centre. 
The Core Network may not represent the most convenient or economic route for all 
purposes. However, since studies show 85-90%ofrural trips are to market centres, the 
Core Network is likely to be a cost-effective conceptual framework for investment and 
management purposes, particularly in the context of scarce resources. 
 
6.2.6 The population, as recorded in the Census 2011, shall be the basis for 
determining the population size of the habitation. The population of all habitations within 
a radius of 500 meters (1.5 km of path distance in the case of Hills) shall be clubbed 
together to determine the population size. In the blocks bordering the international 
boundary in the Hill States (as identified by the Department of Home Affairs), however, 
all habitations within a path distance of 10 kms may be treated as a Cluster for this 
purpose. Further, the Cluster approach in respect of Arunachal Pradesh State has been 
extended from International border blocks to International border districts of the State by 
clubbing population within a path distance of 10 km and treating as a Cluster for 
eligibility. This Cluster approach would enable the provision of connectivity to a larger 
number of Habitations, particularly in the Hill/ mountainous areas. The population, as per 
Census 2011, is to be certified by a competent State Department/ field official. 
 
6.2.7 The eligible unconnected habitations are to be connected to nearby habitations 
already connected by an all-weather road or to another existing all-weather road so that 
the services (educational, health, marketing facilities, etc.), that are not available in the 
unconnected habitation, become available to the residents. 
 
6.2.8 The PMGSY envisages providing only single-road connectivity. If a habitation is 
already connected by way of an all-weather road, then no new work can be taken up 
under the PMGSY for that habitation. 
 
6.2.9 Provision of all-weather connectivity to eligible unconnected habitations would be 
termed as new connectivity. The habitations/connectivity through earthen formation 
with/without adequate CDs will be eligible for connectivity under PMGSY-IV. The 
construction in hill roads, where Stage-I formation has been constructed under PMGSY-I 

18 
 
but no crust (Sub-base/base coarse/bituminous coarse/concrete pavement) has been 
provided will also be eligible under this programme. 
 
6.2.10 The existing implementation arrangement for PMGSY through the National Rural 
Infrastructure Development Agency (NRIDA) and State Rural Road Development 
Agencies (SRRDAs) will continue under PMGSY-IV. 
 
6.3    Maintenance under PMGSY-IV 
The States/ UTs shall enter into a MoU with the Ministry prior to submission of 
proposals for the first batch under PMGSY IV. This MoU shall inter alia specify thatthe 
State/ UT has demonstrated through e-MARG that the routine maintenance of PMGSY 
roads constructed in their State, post 5 years of construction of the road, has been 
carried out. The post five-year construction module of e-MARG incorporates initial 
rehabilitation, renewal, pre-renewal routine maintenance, post-renewal maintenance and 
emergency repair works, as required; 
  
6.4   Survey to identify eligible habitations under PMGSY-IV   
6.4.1 States have carried out survey through Gram Sadak Survey App to identify the 
eligible habitations to be taken up under PMGSY-IV. A list of habitations tentatively 
identified by the States for coverage through this app is enclosed as Annexure-II. The 
States have to process the proposals with the approval of the Block and district 
Panchayats, taking into consideration the recommendations of the Hon’ble Members of 
Parliament as per the guidelines. These proposals are thereafter to be approved by the 
State level Standing Committee (SLSC) before sending these to the Department of Rural 
Development for consideration. Detailed Project Reports are prepared only after approval 
of SLSC.  
6.4.2 Further, the Empowered Committee meeting to sanction first batch of roads to the 
UT of J&K has taken place and after receiving the detailed compliance report from UT 
the same will be sanctioned. Other States have informed about their readiness for 
submission of Detailed Project Reports and these will be taken up in batch-wise, phased 
manner during the year. 
 
 

19 
 
 
 
6.5 Funding and Allocation 
6.5.1 Cost sharing pattern: 
 
(i) Under PMGSY IV, the cost-sharing pattern of the construction cost for the Central 
and States/ UTs shall be as under: 
 
(a) All States and UTs with legislature 
except North-Eastern & Himalayan 
States 
 
60% Centre and 40% State/UT 
(b) In the case of UT of Jammu & 
Kashmir, North-Eastern and Himalayan 
States and Union Territories (UTs)with 
legislature 
 
90% Centre and 10% State/UT 
(b) UTs without legislature 100% Centre 
 
(ii) Cost of maintenance covering routine maintenance for an initial 5 years after 
construction and also for a further 5 years, including periodic renewal as per requirement, 
special repairs, and emergency maintenance, shall be fully borne by the respective 
State/UT. 
 
(iii) PMGSY-IV will be implemented in the “SNA SPARSH” model, as per instructions 
of the Department of Expenditure, for releasing of funds to the States/ UTs. 
 
 
6.6  Monitoring 
 6.6.1 Effective monitoring of the Programme being critical, the State Governments/UTs 
will ensure that the officials are prompt in sending the requisite reports/information to the 
SRRDA as well as the NRIDA. The OMMAS, developed for the purpose will be the chief 
mechanism for monitoring the Programme. To this end, the officials are required to 
furnish, 'Online', all the data and information, as may be prescribed by the NRIDA from 
time to time, in the relevant module of the OMMAS. They shall be responsible for 
uninterrupted maintenance of the Computer Hardware and Software as well as the 
Internet connectivity. The Software for the OMMAS developed by the NRIDA shall not be 

20 
 
modified at any level in the States; any requirement or suggestion for change shall be 
intimated to the NRIDA. 
 
6.6.2  The State Government would provide necessary manpower, space and facilities to 
set up the Computer Hardware at the District and State Level.  
 
6.6.3  It shall be the responsibility of the Executive Engineer / Head of the PIU to ensure 
effective up-time and Internet connectivity of the computers at the PIU / District level. He 
shall be responsible for ensuring placement of all Master data including the Rural Roads 
Plan in the database and for the constant updating and accuracy of data relating to the 
progress of road works, record of Quality control tests as well as the payments made. 
Secretary in-charge of PMGSY implementing department in the State shall also ensure 
regular updating of data on OMMAS. In case of continued failure to update data on the 
OMMAS, further releases to the State / District concerned shall not be taken. 
 
6.6.4 Each State Government would identify one officer of sufficient seniority and having 
adequate knowledge of Information Technology to function as State IT Nodal Officer. His 
function will be to oversee the regularity and accuracy of the data being furnished by the 
districts. The IT Nodal Officer, who shall form part of the SRRDA, shall also be 
responsible to oversee the upkeep of the hardware and software as well as the computer 
training requirements of the personnel dealing with the PMGSY-IV. 
 
6.6.5  The implementation of projects under PMGSY-IV will be monitored through 
Regional Review Meetings, Empowered Committee Meetings, and periodic reports on 
OMMAS etc. The web-based OMMAS would be a transaction-based management 
system to monitor the projects continuously. OMMAS would enable PMGSY-IV to 
function as a paperless management programme, and regular updation of OMMAS data 
by the implementing agency would be the prerequisite for holding Empowered 
Committee meeting as OMMAS would function as a decision support system. NRIDA will 
issue detailed guidelines on procedures required to move into paperless management of 
the programme. 

21 
 
6.6.6 The District Vigilance & Monitoring Committee/ District Development Coordination 
and Monitoring Committees (DISHA) set up by the Department will also monitor the 
progress and exercise vigilance in respect of PMGSY-IV. 
 
 
6.7 Audit  
6.7.1 The SRRDA will ensure that the accounts (including those of PIUs) are audited 
by a Chartered Accountant selected from a panel approved by the C&AG, This account 
will be supported by a statement of reconciliation with the accounts of PIUs and a 
certificate of the Chartered Accountant on its accuracy. The auditor will not take up any 
other work of SRRDA to ensure his independence. No auditor will continue to be 
SRRDA auditor for a period exceeding three years 
6.7.2 The OMMAS based audited financial statements (for all funds i.e. Admn, 
Program and Maintenance) including the audit report shall be sent to the SRRDA within 
six months of closing of the financial year. 
6.7.3 In addition to the Audit by the Chartered Accountant, the works under this 
Programme would be subject to audit by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India (C&AG)/ Internal Audit Wing, O/o Chief Controller of Accounts, DoRD. 
The Audit of the work done by the C&AG may cover aspects of quality, in addition to 
financial audit. 
6.7.4 Both the State level Agency and the PIUs must provide all relevant information to 
State and district level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees/ DISHA. 
 
6.8 Convergence 
6.8.1  Rural connectivity and consolidation of the rural road network is not an end in 
itself; it is a means for providing access to services and ensuring service delivery. It is 
expected that the PMGSY-IV will improve indicators of education, health, rural incomes 
etc., provided as a follow up, and in consultation with the local Panchayati Raj 
Institutions, convergence is achieved with other ongoing Programmes in these sectors. 
It is expected that the District Panchayat will focus on these issues. Before the start of 
work on Rural Roads, the benchmark development indicators may be measured and 
attached to the detailed project report. The PM Gati Shakti portal will be used for 
obtaining data on institutions likely to be benefited through the new connectivity. 
6.8.2 District mining/ minerals funds shall be used for the construction and 
maintenance of rural roads under PMGSY in the convergence model in the case of 
mining areas keeping in view the mining traffic load on these roads. 
6.8.3 The NRIDA would assist in independent studies to establish the impact of rural 
connectivity in a District from time to time. 

22 
 
6.8.4 Some of the schemes in convergence with PMGSY are as under: 
a) Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan: Under this Abhiyan, it is proposed 
to provide connectivity to targeted habitations in convergence with PMGSY. Ministry of 
Rural Development has taken up this scheme in convergence with the PMGSY-IV and 
priority will be given to unconnected habitations identified under Dharti Aaba. Eligible 
habitations are being finalized after conducting a survey of potential habitations and 
approvals by designated authorities.   
b) Pradhan Mantri Anusuchit Jaati Abhyuday Yojana (PM-AJAY): Under the Yojana 
villages with more than 40% SC population and a total population of 500 or more will be 
prioritized for giving connectivity under PMGSY-IV. Eligible habitations are being 
finalized after conducting a survey of potential habitations and approvals by designated 
authorities. 
 
6.9 During the course of evidence, JS (DoRD) on the issue of monitoring under 
PMGSY-IV stated as under:- 
सर, इसमɅ èटेट Èवाͧलटȣ मॉनीटर हȣ नहȣं, बिãक नेशनल Èवाͧलटȣ मॉनीटर भी 
जाते हɇ। वे अनुर¢ण देखते हɇ। जहां पर भी यह पाया जाता है ͩक मेÛटेनɅस ठȤक से नहȣं 
हो रहȣ है, तो राÏयɉ से एÈशन टेकन ǐरपोट[ भी मंगवाई जाती है। हमारे सं£ान मɅ जैसे 
हȣ आता है, तो हम कार[वाई करते हɇ। 
पीएमजीएसवाई-4 के अंतग[त हम एक Ĥणालȣ डेवलप करने जा रहे हɇ, िजसका 
नाम है- Ǿरल रोɬस एसेट मेनटेनɅस ͧसèटम। इसके अंतग[त राÏयɉ से परामश[ करके हम 
Ǔनयͧमत Ǿप से सवȶ कराएंगे ताͩक उनके हेडÈवाट[र को भी पता चल सके ͩक कहाँ पर 
Ǔनͬध ͫडÜलॉय करने कȧ आवæयकता है, जहाँ पर जǾरȣ है। इसͧलए आपने जो खराब 
सड़कɉ का ͪवषय उठाया, कुछ आईटȣ के माÚयम से, कुछ राÏयɉ के साथ बैठक करके एवं 
कुछ अÛय Ĥयास लगाकर हम इसमɅ आवæयक Ĥयास करɅगे। 
                                                        
  

23 
 
CHAPTER – VII 
 
Role of Public Representative 
 
7.1     PMGSY Guidelines provides key role to the public representatives and Hon’ble 
Members of Parliament in the implementation of the programme including selection and 
construction of roads.  Consultation with Members of Parliament is provisioned at both 
the DRRP finalization and Annual Proposals stages.  In addition, at the stage of 
preparing DPRs, the DPIU conducts a transect walk along the road alignment, involving 
the local panchayat. State Governments are required to arrange joint inspection of 
ongoing as well as completed works under PMGSY by Hon’ble MPs, Hon’ble MLAs and 
representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions.  
7.2    Some important provisions of PMGSY-III guidelines, which provide detailed 
procedure for consultation with the Members of Parliament during the process of 
planning and selection of roads, are detailed below: 
Para 3.6 The suggestions given by the Members of Parliament are to be given full 
consideration while finalizing the District Rural Roads Plan (DRRP). 
Para 5.5 The Annual proposals will be based on the CUCPL following the Order of 
Priority (subject to PCI). However, it is possible that there are inadvertent errors or 
omissions, particularly in the selection of Through Routes. Accordingly, it is desirable to 
also associate public representatives while finalizing the selection of road works in the 
annual proposals. The proposals of the Members of Parliament are required to be given 
full consideration, for this purpose:  
  
(i)     The CUCPL should be sent to concerned MPs with the request that their proposals 
on the selection of works out of the CUCPL should be sent to the District Panchayat. It is 
suggested that at least 15 clear days may be given for the purpose. 
  
(ii)    In order to ensure that the prioritization has some reference to the funding available, 
the size of proposals expected may also be indicated to the Members of Parliament while 
forwarding the CUCPL list to them. District wise allocation may be indicated to enable 
choice with the requisite geographical spread.  It is expected that such proposals of 
Members of Parliament which adhere to the Order of Priority would be invariably 

24 
 
accepted subject to consideration of equitable allocation of funds and need for 
upgradation. 
  
 (iii)     The proposals received from the Members of Parliament by the stipulated date 
would be given full consideration in the District Panchayat which would record the reason 
in each case of non-inclusion. Such proposals that cannot be included would be 
communicated in writing to the Members of Parliament with reasons for non-inclusion of 
such proposals in each case.  It would be preferable if the communication is issued from 
the Nodal Department at a senior level. 
  
Para 7.1: After approval by the District Panchayat, the proposals would be forwarded by 
the PIU to the SRRDA. The PIU will at that time prepare the details of proposals 
forwarded by the Members of Parliament, and action taken thereon, in Proforma MP-I 
and MP–II and send it along with the proposals. In all cases where the proposal of an MP 
has not been included, cogent reasons shall be given based on the reasons given by the 
District Panchayat.  
Para 7.3      The State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) would scrutinize the proposals 
to see that they are in accordance with the Guidelines and that the proposals of the 
Members of Parliament have been given full consideration.  
In order to ensure that the State Government give due attention towards this aspect of 
the guidelines while submitting the proposals to the Ministry of Rural Development for 
sanction, the Ministry has issued a fresh advisory to the States on 29th October, 2024. 
The State Governments have been advised, inter-alia, to communicate the final list of 
proposals in the order of priority to the Member of Parliament with the reasons for non-
inclusion of certain roads in the proposals and incorporate their recommendations with 
the proposals sent to NRIDA/Ministry for approval. A copy of the advisory dated 29th 
October, 2024 is enclosed at Annexure-III.  
 
7.3 During the course of evidence, JS (DoRD) on the role of public representative 
stated as under:- 
महोदय, एक मह×वपूण[ पद èटेट Èवाͧलटȣ कंĚोलर का है। इनका काय[ यह 
सुǓनिæचत करना है ͩक फèट[ टȣयर और सैकɅड टȣयर पɮधǓत ठȤक से काय[ कर रहȣ है। 

25 
 
ͪपछलȣ मीǑटंग मɅ यह ͪवषय उठाया गया था ͩक एनÈयूएम ͪविजट कȧ सूचना कई बार 
माननीय सांसदɉ को नहȣं ͧमलती है। हमने èटेट Èवाͧलटȣ कोआͫड[नेटस[ हɇ, उÛहɅ दोबारा 
अनुरोध ͩकया है ͩक राÏय èतर पर दोबारा कोआͫड[नेट करɅ ͩक माननीय सांसदɉ को 
सूचना ͧमले। रखरखाव के ͧलए पीएमजीएसवाई के मूल ͧसɮधांतɉ के अनुसार काय[ ͩकया 
जाएगा। पांच वष[ तक ͫडफ ेÈट लायǒबͧलटȣ पीǐरयड माना जाता है।  
  

26 
 
CHAPTER – VIII 
 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) in Rural Roads 
 
8.1 “Meri Sadak” App for grievance redressal 
  
8.1.1      With the view to achieve the objectives of e-Governance and Digital India, a new 
Mobile App for PMGSY roads, “Meri Sadak” was launched on 20th July, 2015 and 
integrated into OMMAS for user friendly and transparent Citizen Feedback and complaint 
redressal system.  
 
The citizens, with the use of this application, can express their concerns related to slow 
pace, abandoned work or bad quality of PMGSY works. 
  
8.1.2   Meri Sadak mobile application has been localized in Indian Languages and 
available in Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Odiya, 
Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu. 
  
8.1.3 Out of 1,56,951 complaints received through this App, which are mainly about 
poor construction quality, non-availability of roads, corrective action wherever required 
has been taken and suitable reply has been sent to the complainant in most of the cases. 
  
The details of complaints received on Meri Sadak mobile app between 20/07/2015 to 
05/11/2024 is as under- 
 
No. of complaints 
received 
Complaints related to 
PMGSY 
Complaints of which 
final reply has been 
sent 
Disposed complaints 
(%) 
1,56,951 69,300 60,565 87.40% 
 
 
 
8.2 During the course of evidence, JS (DoRD) on the issue of grievance redressal 
mechanism in rural areas stated as under:- 
  ĒीवɅस ǐरĜेसल मɅ दो पɮधǓत हɇ। एक सीपीĒाàस है, जो केÛġ सरकार का Ǔनधा[ǐरत 
पोट[ल है और दूसरा मेरȣ सड़क है। इन दोनɉ पर जो भी ͧशकायतɅ आती हɇ, उन पर हम काय[वाहȣ 
करते हɇ। 
 

27 
 
PART – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. Low Bidding of Tenders 
  
The Committee observe that bidding through tenders for obtaining projects 
for construction of roads under PMGSY is an integral part of the scheme and the 
contractors who are awarded construction contracts through tenders are, perhaps, 
the central figures who through their activities more often than not determine the 
very quality of roads constructed under PMGSY. The Committee note with concern 
that, in order to win the bid for acquiring the rights for the construction of projects, 
under PMGSY the contractors often quote 25-30% lower amount than the minimum 
bidding amount. The so called practice of low-tendering by contractors are often 
brought to fore by the Members of the Committee during their deliberations. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the DoRD to entail all measures for curbing the 
practice of low bidding and should bring out a mechanism/provision at least by 
which a certain quantum of amount component equivalent to the difference 
between bidding and actual quoting is kept aside as security and may be released 
only after ensuring that the constructed road satisfy the stipulated quality norms. 
Therefore, a fair bidding mechanism is required to ensure an equitable and 
transparent process where bidders compete for contracts or opportunities without 
manipulation or unfair advantages. The Committee also recommend the 
Government to set up a Committee to assess the effect on quality of road by 
quoting low amount by the contractors than the minimum bidding amount. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
2. Quality of Construction of Roads 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that the quality of road construction 
under PMGSY is a glaring issue affecting the whole country and has wider 
ramification in the lives of rural people. Building roads build nations as quality 
roads serve in manifold ways for the prosperity of a country. The scheme was 
launched by the Government with various welfare oriented goals in foresight and 

28 
 
has been one of the flagship rural development schemes over the years. There are 
many instances wherein the attention of the Committee have been drawn towards 
the non-compliance of stipulated norms and standards of construction and poor 
quality of road materials used in the construction of roads at many places which 
are not able to sustain the rigours of weather and traffic volume even 
 for one season and are washed away with the onset of monsoon. Therefore, the 
Committee implore upon DoRD to take stronger measures to ensure that the 
quality norms as prescribed under the provisions of PMGSY should not at all be 
compromised so that the roads built have strong durability and the noble goal of 
the scheme to provide all weather road to rural habitation get achieved as early as 
possible, as it is an important issue affecting the entire rural progress of the 
country. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
3. Maintenance of PMGSY Roads-Post Completion 
 
The Committee find that the usual design life of roads constructed under 
PMGSY is 10 years and as per the programme guidelines, responsibility of the 
maintenance of roads within Defect Liability Period (DLP) (initial 5 years) falls on 
the Contractor, while post DLP (next 5 years) is the responsibility of the concerned 
State Government and the funds for the same need to be provided by the 
concerned State Governments. The Committee note with concern that the 
guidelines are not being followed sincerely and the roads constructed under 
PMGSY at various places suffer from poor maintenance and start getting degraded 
before 5 years of warranty. Even the monitoring mechanism of the elaborately laid 
down principle for the maintenance aspect of roads constructed under PMGSY 
remains a cause of concern. The Committee note that the issue require equally 
strict regulation and compliance by the Contractors. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommend the DoRD to ensure that the guidelines governing post 
construction maintenance of roads of PMGSY may be strictly complied with in 
‘letter and spirit’ by the contractors so that the roads do not get deteriorated at an 
early stage, rather serve the purpose of connectivity for a longer period of time.  

29 
 
Erring contractors should also be short-listed and strict action should be 
taken to declare them black-listed. The Committee further recommend the DoRD to 
ensure due coordination with the nodal agencies regarding surveillance for proper 
maintenance of the PMGSY roads post construction. Quality Control Mechanism 
should be geared up sincerely to achieve the aim of the scheme. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
4. Linkage of Unconnected Habitations 
 
The Committee note that one of the issue associated with the rural 
connectivity projects through linkage of habitations with roads came to the fore 
was that of roads merely touching the outskirt or periphery of villages without  
reaching the actual habitation where majority resides. This defeats the purpose 
behind habitation linkage and many needy habitations especially, Desam, Dhanis, 
Tolas, Majras, Hamlets, etc., are in most of the cases lies at least 2-3 Km inside the 
periphery of the village and are thus, not getting the benefit of connectivity. The 
Committee, therefore, in view of this ground reality recommend the DoRD to 
review the policy of road connectivity comprehensively and create means so that 
the roads constructed under PMGSY actually reach the unconnected habitations 
to achieve the aim of providing all weather road to rural populace living in far flung 
areas of the country without any compromise, so that socio-economic progress 
may be achieved for rural populace in the country. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
   
5. Increasing the Load Bearing Capacity of PMGSY Roads 
 
The Committee note that rural roads built under PMGSY are of the mandated 
thickness of 20 mm. In this era of modernization when industrial setups at far flung 
areas and the construction works of highways and bridges often necessitate 
movement of heavy load bearing vehicles, particularly those of NHAI to also utilize 
the roads built under PMGSY, cause irreversible damages to the rural roads 
because these are generally low volume roads and were never meant to bear the 

30 
 
load of heavy vehicles. It, thus, becomes imperative to protect and get repaired the 
existing roads under PMGSY from the damaging NHAI vehicles and increasing the 
thickness of roads under PMGSY to 30 mm for bearing the load of heavy vehicles 
that would keep on plying on them in future. Therefore, keeping in view the traffic 
intensities depending on the village population, the Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend DoRD to have urgent constructive dialogue with NHAI to ensure that 
the damages are repaired by NHAI in accordance with the provisions of PMGSY 
and at the same time also urge, DoRD to increase the thickness of the PMGSY 
road from the existing 20 mm to 30 mm by making appropriate amendments in the 
provisions of the PMGSY at the earliest to protect them from getting further 
damaged by heavy vehicles. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
6. Delay/Stalling of Projects under PMGSY 
 
Rural roads are akin to the arteries of the body which connect the hinterland 
of the vast stretch of the country with the cycle of ongoing development in every 
sphere of the society. The Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) was 
launched with the aim of providing all-weather road connectivity to unconnected 
habitations, thereby boosting rural infrastructure and economic development. 
However, it has been observed that a significant number of projects under PMGSY 
remain incomplete within their designated timeframe, leading to delays in 
infrastructure and socio-economic development of the areas. Such delays result in 
cost overrun, especially the escalation of cost of raw material and labour 
component. The Committee found during deliberations with the representatives of 
the Department and through the on ground reality witnessed during the study 
visits, the presence of umpteen cases wherein the contractor left the project mid-
way or just after start, due to the rising cost of construction owing to delay in 
projects on account of various logistical issues ranging from non-availability of 
land clearance to non-release of funds. These obstacles or hindrances have been 
a significant hurdle in the timely completion of road construction projects, 
affecting the most disadvantaged and vulnerable rural populace who rely solely on 
improved connectivity for economic and social mobility. In light of the above facts, 

31 
 
the Committee strongly recommend that ‘no stone should be left unturned’ in the 
efforts of the DoRD to ensure that the remaining pendency are completed on ‘war 
footing’ by taking appropriate measures, viz., effective coordination with State 
Governments to ensure timely release of funds, streamlining approval processes, 
and facilitating better convergence with other Ministries. The Committee, therefore 
stress that it is imperative for the DoRD to address these issues on a priority basis 
to ensure that PMGSY projects are completed as per scheduled time period 
without any cost escalation. The implementation of all sanctioned work under the 
scheme should be monitored sincerely through the existing mechanism evolved 
for the purpose. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 7. Relaxation of Road Construction Norms and Standards under PMGSY 
 
The Committee are of the view that construction of rural roads is an ongoing 
process and there is always scope for improvement and inclusion of better ideas 
for bolstering the rural connectivity much more holistically. Rural roads is a State 
subject, and the responsibility for the execution of road works and their 
maintenance under PMGSY lies with the State Governments, who are the 
implementing authorities of the scheme. The roads constructed under this Yojana 
are based on the prescribed norms and standards under the provisions of PMGSY. 
The Committee were enlightened during their study visit about the non-availability 
of land/space for road construction and narrow width as per the prescribed norms 
under PMGSY. 
Therefore, for effective implementation of the scheme the Committee urge 
DoRD to relax the road construction norms by amending the provisions and 
guidelines of PMGSY to give flexibility to State Governments to adjust road width 
and design norms based on their local geographical conditions and transportation 
needs. The Committee also recommend that the construction of an additional 100 
km of roads be allocated based on the recommendation of the local representative 
of Parliament, and that the funds for the same be allocated from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 

32 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
8. Periodic and Mandatory Physical Inspection of the Roads under PMGSY 
 
Building roads build nations as quality roads serve in manifold ways for the 
prosperity of a country in terms of economic strengthening via boost in domestic 
trade and commerce, providing employment opportunities and ultimately 
achieving the goals of development associated with better livelihoods of people. 
The scheme was launched by the Government with various welfare oriented goals 
in foresight and has been one of the flagship rural development schemes over the 
years. But the Committee are concerned to note that the scheme is affected by the 
malaise of poor maintenance post-construction and after being handed over to the 
States. The entire effort of constructing quality roads to provide rural connectivity 
gets marred by inadequate maintenance. The Committee note the concerns raised 
from various quarters and through their own experiences during study visits that 
roads constructed under PMGSY at various locations suffer from poor 
maintenance and begin to deteriorate at an early stage. It has been noted that 
while provisions for maintenance exist in the guidelines, there is a lack of 
adherence to them, and there is no accountability. The wherewithal for honesty 
and transparency seems to be lacking in the implementation of such an important 
scheme. Even though a monitoring mechanism is elaborately laid down, the 
maintenance of roads constructed under PMGSY remains a serious concern. 
It has also been noticed that contractors, after the stipulated period under 
their supervision, hand over the roads by merely carrying out cosmetic patchwork 
on damaged roads. Therefore, the Committee are of the firm opinion that the 
evaluation of roads should be conducted on a periodic basis even after the 
completion of construction, both through physical inspections and by utilizing 
virtual techniques such as geo-tagging and mobile applications, to ensure roads 
are not neglected and are maintained properly. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the DoRD to earmark specific teams 
for periodic and mandatory physical inspections of roads under PMGSY. For those 
roads that are already neglected and are in disrepair conditions, the Committee, 
further recommend that these roads be identified and either rehabilitated under a 

33 
 
dedicated initiative or included in the new PMGSY allotment to improve rural 
connectivity and accessibility. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 9. Revised Road Survey under PMGSY-IV 
 
A new vertical under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) which is 
called PMGSY-IV has been launched with a focus to provide all-weather 
connectivity to unconnected habitations of 500+ population in plain areas and 250 
+ population in NE and Hill States/UTs, special category areas (Tribal Schedule-V, 
Aspirational Districts/Blocks, Desert Areas) and 100+ in LWE affected districts as 
per Census 2011.  The scheme will be implemented from financial year 2024-25 to 
2028-29 with a total outlay of Rs. 70,125 crore (Central Share: Rs. 49,087.50 crore, 
State Share: Rs. 21,037.50 crore) with a target to provide connectivity to 25,000 
habitations. It is proposed that 62,500 km of all-weather roads will be provided to 
these unconnected habitations. Additionally, the construction of required bridges 
along the alignment of these roads will also be undertaken. This new vertical act 
as catalyst for the expected socio-economic development and transformation of 
remote rural areas. The Committee, however, express concern that the PMGSY-IV 
road survey is currently based on the obsolete 2011 Census, which does not 
reflect the present population, settlement expansions, and evolving infrastructure 
needs. Since the new Census has not yet been conducted, the survey lacks an 
accurate picture of ground realities, leading to ineligible habitations receiving 
priority while genuine beneficiaries are overlooked. The Committee therefore 
recommend that, to ensure equitable and last mile rural connectivity, the road 
survey under PMGSY-IV should be revised based on the latest available population 
figures or an interim assessment. This will help to identify genuine beneficiaries, 
address infrastructural bottlenecks, and ensure that roads are allocated fairly to 
areas most in need. Furthermore, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
local Member of Parliament (MP) must be consulted before the survey, and each 
survey must be vetted and approved by the local parliamentary representative. The 
Committee emphasize that  
  

34 
 
Parliamentary oversight is crucial in ensuring that the road network benefits 
those who need it the most and that no eligible habitation is left out due to 
bureaucratic lapses or outdated data. Such steps are essentially required to 
provide all -weather road connectivity to eligible unconnected rural habitations 
thereby improving access to economic and social services and fostering rural 
development. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
10. Proper Coordination between Centre and State 
 
  The Committee note that one of the most important aspects associated with 
the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) relies on the strong Centre-State 
coordination for its effective implementation. This coordination involves various 
aspect such as funding, project planning, quality control and monitoring. The 
scheme was launched in the year 2000 as a 100% centrally sponsored scheme. 
However, the funding pattern was revised to 60:40 ratio between Centre and State 
from the financial year 2015-16, in all the States barring eight North Eastern States 
and three Himalayan States where it is 90:10 ratio. Thus, the seamless flow of 
funds is very important for the timely completion of projects under PMGSY. 
Although the issue of fund release is of paramount importance, rural roads being a 
State subject, the onus of effective implementation also depends upon various 
other factors which require the prompt and preemptive approach of the State 
Government. In this context, the Committee find that various projects in many 
States get delayed or stalled due to logistics issue or non-timely release of funds 
either by Centre or State Government or both. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department of Rural Development to ensure that the projects 
under PMGSY do not get hampered due to lack of coordination between Centre 
and State rather a better cohesive mode of coordination along with effective 
monitoring mechanism may be devised for providing a positive impetus to the 
scheme. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 

35 
 
 
11. Slow Progress of Work in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) Areas 
 
The Committee note that Road Connectivity Project for Left Wing Extremism 
Areas (RCPLWEA), a very important intervention under PMGSY, was launched in 
2016 with the primary goal of ensuring socio-economic development of the areas 
affected by left wing extremism in such States of the country. The deadline for the 
completion of this vertical under PMGSY was March, 2020 which was extended till 
March, 2025. In this regard, the Committee are concerned to note that out of total 
of 12,228 Km sanctioned road length only 9,523 Km is completed as on 14th May, 
2025 and length of 2,705 km is still left even after extended deadlines. Though, the 
Committee have taken into account the unique nature of challenges that  left wing 
extremism areas throw in terms of insurgency, tough terrain, law and order 
situation, forest clearance issues etc. Still, the Committee feel that such 
bottlenecks can be removed by proper planning and strong coordination between 
all the stakeholders. Special efforts and perhaps area specific professionals who 
are skilled to work in combat and insurgent zones such as Border Roads 
Organisation (BROs) might serve as a boost to the lagging projects under 
RCPLWEA. Therefore, the Committee recommend that DoRD should come up with 
sincere innovative ideas and guide the concerned States and all the stakeholders 
accordingly so as to ensure that the projects under RCPLWEA do not suffer 
further delay and are completed on a faster basis for the time-bound realization of 
the objectives of this vertical. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
12. Consideration of Gram Panchayats as Reference Point/Unit 
 
The Committee note with concern that the survey to identify eligible 
habitations under PMGSY-IV is currently based on the 2011 Census which lacks an 
accurate picture of ground realities, leading to ineligible habitations receiving 
priority while genuine beneficiaries are overlooked. While examining the subject of 
PMGSY and during their deliberations, the Committee were apprised about 
demands from local Members of Parliament (MPs) to choose Gram Panchayats as 

36 
 
reference point/unit for providing rural connectivity rather than utilizing the 
population criteria of a habitation. The provision may be conceptualized in terms 
of connecting all the villages under a specific Gram Panchayat and so on. This 
would ensure that all Gram Panchayats are covered step by step which inter-alia 
would cover all the habitations/villages automatically. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the DoRD to explore the feasibility of picking up Gram Panchayats as 
reference points/units for providing connectivity to ensure that the genuine 
beneficiaries are not excluded enabling the eligible rural households to reap the 
benefits of the scheme. A proper mechanism may be evolved to ensure 
transparency for the purpose. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
13. Robust and Effective Monitoring Mechanism 
 
The Committee acknowledge and appreciate the fact that there is a well 
structured monitoring mechanism under PMGSY. The tools include Online 
Management, Monitoring and Accounting System (OMMAS), Project Management 
Information System (PMIS), Citizen Information Board, National Level Monitors 
(NLM), Regional Review Meetings (RRM) among others. ‘Meri Sadak’ App has also 
been launched through which any person can register the complaint relating to 
slow pace of work, abandoned work, poor quality, ensuring on-ground monitoring 
of road construction on a real time basis. District Development Coordination and 
Monitoring Committees (DISHA) set up by the Department will monitor the 
progress and exercise vigilance in respect of PMGSY-IV. The Committee take due 
note of all the existing systems of monitoring of PMGSY projects but are still not 
satisfied with the effectiveness of such monitoring mechanisms. Through the on-
ground experiences of the Members and the insight gained by the Committee 
during their study visits, startling revelations of by-passing the monitoring 
mechanism by the erring stakeholders involved in PMGSY projects can be found 
out. Poor condition of PMGSY roads both in terms of construction quality and 
maintenance aspect can be noticed even after all such monitoring mechanisms in 
place. It is evident that monitoring needs to be tighter. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that DoRD should entail creative and innovative solutions like 

37 
 
uploading of real time videos of roads at the duration of every six months, 
increase in surprise inspections during the Defect Liability Period specifically 
along with concerned Members of Parliament among others need to be explored 
on priority basis. Sincere efforts may be initiated to bring greater efficiency, 
accountability and transparency for proper implementation of the scheme. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
14. Prior Intimation and Mandatory Involvement of Members for Inspection  
 
The Committee are concerned to note that the prior information to the 
Members of Parliament regarding inspection of sites which are carried out by the 
State Government officials and the National Quality Monitors are often not 
received by the concerned Members and the information about inspection team’s 
departure or their non-arrival reaches the Members. Despite the presence of clear 
cut theoretical provisions in the scheme, these have been violated umpteen times 
and the protocol of the Members of Parliament are compromised. It is imperative 
for both the nodal agency (Centre and State) of the scheme to ensure that the 
mandatory provision mentioned under the scheme regarding the involvement of 
Members of Parliament in carrying out inspection of construction sites are 
complied scrupulously. Moreover, the information to the concerned Members of 
Parliament about the arrival of inspection teams from Centre or State should be 
disseminated to them through all possible modes of communication at least one 
week in advance so that they can make themselves available for the inspection of 
construction sites. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Department of Rural 
Development should relook into this matter earnestly and ensure the strictest 
compliance of the provisions of PMGSY in ‘letter and Spirit’. Further, the 
Committee also recommend, rather request, both the nodal agency (Centre and 
State) to come up with a joint and harmonious approach without shying away from 
fulfilling their own responsibilities to achieve the aim of the scheme i.e. economic 
growth, social development and improved living standards in rural areas. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 

38 
 
 
15. Selection of Roads as per Members Suggestions 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that adequate attention is not given to 
the provision under the scheme that the suggestions/advise given by the Members 
of Parliament are to be given due consideration while sanctioning / selection of 
roads for construction under the scheme. Being the Elected Representatives, the 
MPs represent the sentiments and ethos of local population in an extremely 
efficient manner. Utilizing the wealth of local knowledge in various aspect of the 
welfare scheme like PMGSY would perhaps only help to strengthen and enrich the 
policy formulation.  In this regard, Members of Parliament have expressed their 
concern that even though there is explicit role assigned to them under the scheme 
relating to the finalization of road projects, this rule is not given due sanctity by 
the implementing agencies. The Committee are of the view that, inspecting teams, 
DPR preparation teams etc. should definitely avail the benefits of the inputs from 
the local MPs to have a real picture of the issues concerning that locality. Thus, if 
Members of Parliament (MPs), on merit, gauging the requirement felt by the locals, 
place their suggestions for inclusion of such roads/sites under PMGSY, then the 
Department of Rural Development must look into the request with promptness and 
should explore all the option of inclusion of such suggestions/advise which could 
allay the concerns of local rural populace, even at a later stage. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that Department of Rural Development should take into 
account the preference of roads suggested by the Members on priority basis and 
utilize their experience/skills/advice in best manner for efficacious implementation 
of the scheme. The suggestions/recommendations of the Members of Parliament 
may be considered sincerely for planning, implementation and monitoring of road 
projects ensuring that their perspectives and concerns are incorporated. 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
16. Invitation to Members for Foundation Laying and Inauguration Ceremonies 
 
The Committee have been frequently informed about the violation of 
norms/provisions of PMGSY pertaining to the protocol to be adhered to in cases of 

39 
 
stone laying of any project under PMGSY and later at the time of inauguration of 
the constructed roads vis-à-vis involvement of the Member of Parliament of the 
concerned District. This is yet another area of concern wherein the reality and the 
facts on ground are completely different on numerously reported occasions. Even 
though this was highlighted by the Committee through the previous 
recommendations, continuous prevalence of non-adherence to these norms are a 
matter of concern to the Committee. Thus, the Committee recommend to 
Department of Rural Development to relook into this matter and ensure that the 
Members of Parliament (MPs) are compulsorily invited at the time of foundation 
laying and inauguration ceremonies of PMGSY works. Authorities at State level 
should also be impressed upon to scrupulously adhere to these norms/provisions. 
Further, the Committee also recommend that a good quality photograph (each) of 
the inauguration and foundation laying ceremonies, containing clear picture of MP 
along with the plaque must be uploaded on Online Management, Monitoring and 
Accounting System (OMMAS). The concerned Department/State may take the 
sincere steps for proper implementation of guidelines laid down for the purpose. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
17. Redressal of Complaints raised by the Members 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that complaints/grievances raised by 
the Members of Parliament about promptly taking up and redressing the 
grievances regarding the inaction/irregularities in the works of PMGSY highlighted 
by them are casually taken up by the Department of Rural Development. The 
Committee feel that this approach of DoRD needs to be rectified immediately. 
Members of Parliament are constitutional figures and represent the 
voices/concerns of major chunk of population. Through them, the issues of 
common man is heard by the authorities at top echelons. Hence, it is imperative 
that the genuine concern/plight of the scheme at ground level highlighted by a 
Member of Parliament needs to be taken up seriously and redressal of such 

40 
 
complaints needs to be done on priority basis with due information to the 
concerned Members. Hence, the Committee urge the Department of Rural 
Development to sort out the areas of grievance raised by Members and ensure 
their prompt disposal to achieve the targets of the scheme within a specified time 
frame. 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
06 August, 2025 
15 Shraavana,1947 (Saka)   
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development  & 
Panchayati Raj 
  
  

41 
 
Annexure - I 
 
 


42 
 
 


43 
 
 


44 
 
Annexure – II 
 
State-wise details of habitations tentatively identified under PMGSY-IV 
  
S. 
No. 
State /UTs Habitations tentatively identified by 
States 
1 Andhra Pradesh 4132 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 829 
3 Assam 5117 
4 Bihar 787 
5 Chhattisgarh 2524 
6 Gujarat 3873 
7 Himachal Pradesh 1506 
8 Jammu And Kashmir 2506 
9 Jharkhand 3447 
10 Karnataka 118 
11 Kerala 2367 
12 Ladakh 75 
13 Madhya Pradesh 5863 
14 Maharashtra 206 
15 Manipur 264 
16 Meghalaya 798 
17 Mizoram 62 
18 Nagaland 228 
19 Odisha 6118 
20 Punjab 2 
21 Rajasthan 1839 
22 Sikkim 363 
23 Tamil Nadu 8 
24 Telangana 227 
25 Tripura 679 
26 Uttar Pradesh 280 
27 Uttarakhand 1490 
28 West Bengal 3741 
Total: 49449 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
                                                                                                                      Annexure – III


46 
 


47 
 


48 
 


49 
 


50 
 


51 
 


52 
 


53 
 


54 
 


55 
 


56 
 
 


57 
 
Annexure-IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 10th DECEMBER, 2024 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1705 hrs. in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Raju Bista 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri K. Radhakrishnan  
10. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
11. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh Alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
12. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
13. Shri Ganesh Singh  
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Samirul Islam 
15. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
16. Shri Sant Balbir Singh  
17. Shri Vaiko 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Des Raj Shekhar - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Vinay P. Barwa  - Director 
3. Shri L. Singson  - Deputy Secretary  
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development  
(Department of Rural Development) 
1. Shri Shailesh Kumar Singh Secretary (RD) 
2. Shri T K Anil Kumar Additional Secretary (RD) 
3. Ms. Tanuja Thakur Khalkho JS&FA, RD 
4. Ms. Rohini R Bhajibhakare Joint Secretary (RE) 
5. Shri Gaya Prasad DDG, Rural Housing 

58 
 
6. Shri Amit Shukla Joint Secretary (RC) 
7. Shri Devinder Kumar Director (RC), Dir (P-II)&(F&A), 
NRIDA 
8. Shri Pawan Kumar Director (RC) 
9. Mrs. Reena Nagar Director (RC) 
10. Shri Pradeep Aggrawal Director (P-I), NRIDA 
11. Shri I. K Pateriya Director (P-III), NRIDA 
12. Shri Vishal Srivastava Director (ICT), NRIDA 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of Draft Report on action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 37th Report on ‘Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) – An insight into wage 
rates and other matters relating thereto’ pertaining to the Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development) and for having a briefing by the 
representatives of Department of Rural Development (MoRD) on the subject ‘Review  of 
the Progress made under Pradhan  Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana  (PMGSY)’. 
 
The Chairperson communicated to the Members that as advised by the 
Secretariat, the ATR is first to be sent for the perusal/consideration of the HS before it 
could be adopted by the Committee, the proposed meeting for consideration and 
adoption is postponed.   
 
 [Thereafter the representatives from the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Rural Development) were called in] 
 
3. After welcoming the representatives, the Chairperson in his opening remarks 
stressed upon the origin and objectives of PMGSY-I while also bringing to fore the 
significance of the subject in the mitigation of poverty and welfare of rural masses.  
 
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) 
after taking permission from the Chairperson directed the Joint Secretary (Department of 
Rural Development) to make a Power Point Presentation on the overview of the PMGSY. 
During the presentation, the Joint Secretary (Department of Rural Development) 
highlighted the progress made by the Scheme since its inception in the year 2000 
through PMGSY-I and discussed about the figures with regard to habitations and 

59 
 
achievement. The details about other verticals of the scheme like PMGSY-II, RCPLWEA 
and PMGSY-III were also elaborated throwing light upon their targets and funds.  
 
5. Subsequently, Members raised their individual queries. The queries of the 
Members were replied by the Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Rural Development). Certain issues which remained unanswered along with those which 
warranted elaborate reply, the Ministry were requested to send written replies thereto in 
writing within 15 days.  
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
   
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
      

60 
 
Annexure-V 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 5th AUGUST, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1000 hrs to 1040 hrs in Committee Room 'B',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka , Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
8. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
9. Shri Imran Masood 
10. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
11. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
12. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha       
13. Shri Samirul Islam 
14. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
15. Shri Nagendra Ray 
16. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3.  Smt Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports: 
a. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX.; and 
b. Draft Report on Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) pertaining to the 
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development). 
 
3. Above mentioned draft Reports were taken up for consideration one-by-one and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any modifications. The Committee then 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Draft Reports and present the same to the 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 