STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
      
 
        EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ  
 
   
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj'] 
 
 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
 
39 


THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT& PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-26) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
  


CRD No. 230 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____ Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)............................................................... ii 
INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................................... iii 
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................................... 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 9 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies.................................................. 
19 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee...................................... 
20 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited............................................................ 
25 
ANNEXURES 
I  Inputs given by the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
(DDWS) 26 
II  State-wise progress of SVAMITVA Scheme 28 
III  Office Memorandum regarding Extension for the Survey of 
Villages and Mapping with Improvised Technology in Village 
Areas (SVAMITVA) 
29 
IV  Extracts of Minutes of the  Twenty-Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 07.08.2026……………………………………………………... 
31 
V  Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj………………………………………………………….. 
33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
26. Smt. Rajathi 
27. Shri Nagendra Ray 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Smt. P.T. Usha 
30. Shri Karamvir Singh Boudh 
31. Shri Baidyanath Ram 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt Juby Amar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sushil Kumar   - Under Secretary 
  

 
 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati 
Raj (2025-26) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present the 39th Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27) of 
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj'. 
2.  The Twenty-Seventh Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 09.03.2026 and 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09.03.2026. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 08.06.2026. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
07.08.2026. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
10 August, 2026 
19 Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
(2025-26) deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Twenty-Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
'Demands for Grants’ (2026-27) pertaining to Ministry of Panchayati Raj'. 
1.2 The Twenty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 09th March 2026 and 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09th March 2026. The Report contained 10 
Observations/ Recommendations. 
1.3  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Report have been received from the Government. These have been examined and 
categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8 & 10 
 Total: 07 
Chapter II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: NIL 
    Total: NIL 
Chapter III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Serial Nos. 5, 6 & 9 
Total: 03 
 Chapter IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter V 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where 
it is not possible for any reasons to implement the recommendations in letter and 
spirit, the matter shall be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that Final Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 

 
 
2 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Creation of Institutional Mechanism for Maintenance of Sanitation 
1.6 In respect of Creation of Institutional Mechanism for Maintenance of Sanitation, the 
Committee had recommended as under 
“The Committee note that a substantial portion of Finance Commission tied 
grants devolved to Rural Local Bodies is earmarked for basic services including 
sanitation and drinking water. During the course of deliberations, the Committee 
expressed concern that while assets are being created under various schemes, 
institutional arrangements for their long-term maintenance remain weak, resulting in 
deterioration of sanitation infrastructure at the village level. The Committee are of the 
considered view that absence of a dedicated and accountable maintenance 
mechanism undermines the sustainability of investments made through tied grants 
and dilutes service-delivery outcomes. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry, in consultation with States, issue guidelines for creation of a dedicated 
Village Sanitation Maintenance Committee at the Gram Panchayat level, empowered 
to utilise the sanitation component of tied grants for operation and maintenance of 
sanitation assets. The mechanism should clearly assign responsibility for upkeep of 
sanitation infrastructure, mandate periodic maintenance audits with digital reporting 
through e-GramSwaraj, ensure Gram Sabha oversight and social audit, and 
prescribe measurable service-level benchmarks. The Committee, further emphasise 
that sustainability of sanitation assets must be accorded equal priority as their 
creation, and tied funds should systematically support assured long-term 
maintenance and functionality. “ 
1.7 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
 
“Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), being the Nodal 
Department for Tied grants, was requested to furnish inputs in respect of this 
observation. The inputs received from DDWS is enclosed at Annexure-I” 
  
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.8 The Committee had recommended creation of a dedicated Village Sanitation 
Maintenance Committee at the Gram Panchayat level to ensure long-term upkeep of 
sanitation infrastructure created through Finance Commission tied grants, with 
clearly defined responsibilities, periodic maintenance audits, digital reporting through 
e-GramSwaraj, Gram Sabha oversight and measurable service delivery standards. The 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR), in its Action Taken Reply, has merely stated that 
the matter has been referred to the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation for 
furnishing inputs and has not indicated any concrete action proposed on the 

 
 
3 
 
recommendation. The Committee are not convinced by the reply of the MoPR. The 
Committee are of the considered view that merely referring the matter to another 
Department does not adequately address the concerns raised by them regarding the 
long-term sustainability and functionality of sanitation infrastructure created through 
public funds. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
the MoPR, in consultation with the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation and 
the State Governments, issue suitable guidelines for establishing a dedicated 
institutional mechanism at the Gram Panchayat level for operation and maintenance 
of sanitation assets. Such a mechanism should clearly assign responsibility for 
upkeep of sanitation infrastructure, provide for periodic maintenance audits, digital 
reporting through e-GramSwaraj, Gram Sabha oversight and social audit, prescribe 
measurable service-level benchmarks and ensure that long-term maintenance of 
sanitation assets receives the same priority as their creation. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
Rationalisation/Merger of Tied and Untied Funds 
 
1.9 With regard to Rationalisation/Merger of Tied and Untied Funds, the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee further note that the total Budget Estimate of the Ministry for 
FY 2026–27 is ₹1190.16 crore, with substantial allocations directed towards 
strengthening Panchayats, and that the Ministry has indicated its intent to maximise 
disbursement of 16th Finance Commission grants during 2026–27. During course of 
evidence, the Committee raised concerns regarding fiscal devolution patterns and 
the effective discretion available to Panchayats in utilisation of funds. The Committee 
observe that although successive Finance Commissions have significantly enhanced 
transfers to Rural Local Bodies, a substantial proportion of these grants are “tied” to 
specific sectors such as sanitation and drinking water. While such earmarking 
ensures sectoral focus. The Committee are of the considered view that excessive 
tying of funds constrains Panchayats’ ability to address locally determined priorities 
identified through Gram Panchayat Development Plans (GPDPs).The Committee 
further note that improvements in financial discipline—such as reduction of unspent 
SNA balances from ₹216 crore (as on 31.03.2025) to ₹10.59 crore (as on 
20.02.2026) — demonstrate improved fund flow management The Committee 
strongly recommend that the Ministry, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and 
State Governments, undertake a structured review of Finance Commission grants 
with a view to rationalising and partially merging tied and untied components so as to 
enhance meaningful untied fiscal space for Panchayats. The Committee emphasise 
that such rationalisation must ensure a balanced proportion between tied and untied 
funds, preserve sectoral accountability through measurable service-delivery 
indicators, mandate digital transparency through e-Gram Swaraj, PFMS and Audit 
Online, and require Gram Sabha approval for utilisation of untied funds. The 
Committee further recommend annual publication of State-wise data indicating the 
quantum and percentage share of tied and untied funds devolved to Rural Local 

 
 
4 
 
Bodies under the 16th Finance Commission. The Committee further recommend that 
the fiscal decentralisation must translate into genuine decision-making autonomy in 
accordance with Article 243G, strengthening Panchayats as institutions of self-
government rather than merely implementing agencies of earmarked schemes.”  
1.10 In respect of the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
 
“In respect of rationalising and partially merging tied and untied components, 
it is submitted that the structure of Finance Commission grants, including sector-
specific tied and untied components, is determined based on the recommendations 
of the Finance Commission and accepted by the Government. The earmarking of 
funds towards critical sectors such as drinking water and sanitation (National Priority 
Sector) is intended to ensure basic standard of service delivery across all States. As 
the design and composition of tied and untied grants fall within the purview of the 
Finance Commission, the Ministry has limited powers in effecting changes. 
 
The 16th Finance Commission (FC-16) highlighted the strong impact of 
flagship Centrally Sponsored Schemes—Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM), AMRUT, 
and Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM)—in improving drinking water and sanitation 
nationwide. These programs have created substantial infrastructure, fostered citizen 
awareness, and driven behavioural change, with durable results achieved up to 2025 
through sustained government funding, including tied grants from the 15th Finance 
Commission (FC 15). 
 
The Commission noted that this progress demonstrates India’s commitment 
to Sustainable Development Goal 6 (Clean Water and Sanitation) and climate 
resilience. It also observed that FC 15 tied funds were utilized more effectively in 
Sanitation and Solid Waste Management than in Drinking Water Supply, showing 
stronger gains in sanitation and highlighting untapped potential in water 
management. 
 
In view of the above, the Commission has recommended that 50 per cent of 
the Basic Grant be tied, while the remaining 50 per cent of the Basic Grant and the 
entire Performance Grant remain untied. The tied component is to be earmarked for 
Sanitation and Solid Waste Management and/or Water Management, with adequate 
flexibility provided to Local Bodies for addressing local priorities, including Operation 
and Maintenance (O&M) expenditures under these sectors. 
 
So far as the recommendation regarding annual publication of State-wise 
data, it is submitted that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has already 
published State-wise data on its website regarding allocations and releases, 
including the quantum and share of funds devolved to Rural Local Bodies under the 
FC15. The recommendation of the Committee in this regard is, however, noted for 
further compliance. 
 
The Ministry also reiterates its commitment to strengthening Panchayats as 
institutions of self-government in line with Article 243G of the Constitution. Efforts are 
being made to enhance functional, financial, and administrative devolution, so that 
PRIs evolve beyond implementing agencies into vibrant units of local governance.  
 
Article 243G of the Constitution empowers State Legislatures to endow 
Panchayats with the necessary powers, responsibilities, and authority to function as 
self-governing institutions, enabling them to prepare plans for economic development 

 
 
5 
 
and social justice, and implement schemes related to the 29 subjects in the Eleventh 
Schedule, which includes the key areas of rural infrastructure and services.  
 
However, the MoPR supplements the efforts of State Governments through 
various Capacity Building & Training programmes & providing financial assistance 
through various schemes and Finance Commission grants to enhance the effective 
functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs).” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.11 The Committee had recommended that the Ministry undertake a structured 
review of Finance Commission grants with a view to rationalising the proportion of 
tied and untied grants so as to provide greater fiscal flexibility to Panchayats while 
maintaining sectoral accountability. The Committee had also recommended annual 
publication of State-wise data indicating the quantum and percentage share of tied 
and untied grants devolved to Rural Local Bodies. In its Action Taken Reply, the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has stated that the structure of Finance 
Commission grants is determined on the basis of the recommendations of the 
Finance Commission accepted by the Government and that it has limited powers to 
effect changes in the composition of tied and untied grants. The MoPR has, however, 
reiterated its commitment to strengthening Panchayats as institutions of self-
government in accordance with Article 243G of the Constitution. The Committee are 
not fully satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. While appreciating the constitutional 
position regarding the recommendations of the Finance Commission, the Committee 
observe that the MoPR, being the nodal Ministry for Panchayati Raj Institutions, has 
an important role in articulating the concerns of Panchayats before the Ministry of 
Finance, the Finance Commission and the State Governments. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the MoPR pursue the matter with 
the concerned authorities with a view to examining suitable mechanisms for 
rationalising the proportion of tied and untied grants so as to enhance meaningful 
fiscal autonomy of Panchayats while preserving sectoral accountability and 
transparency in utilisation of public funds. The Committee further reiterate that as tied 
and untied grants balance the goals of the Government with the needs of local people 
therefore, State-wise data indicating the quantum and percentage share of tied and 
untied grants devolved to Rural Local Bodies should be published annually to 
facilitate greater transparency and informed policy review. The Committee desire to 
be apprised of the concrete action taken in this regard. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
Effective Implementation and Monitoring of the PESA Act, 1996 

 
 
6 
 
1.12 Regarding Effective Implementation and Monitoring of the PESA Act, 1996, the 
Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee notes that the Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) 
Act, 1996 (PESA) was enacted to empower tribal communities by recognizing the 
central role of the Gram Sabha in governance of Fifth Schedule Areas. However, 
nearly three decades after its enactment, the Committee observes with concern that 
the implementation of PESA across States remains uneven and inadequate. Several 
States have either not fully aligned their Panchayati Raj laws with the provisions of 
the Act or have failed to operationalize the powers of Gram Sabhas in matters 
relating to natural resource management, minor forest produce, land acquisition, and 
local dispute resolution. While the Committee takes note of the initiatives undertaken 
by the Ministry, including the preparation of training manuals, conduct of training 
programmes for State Level Master Trainers, and the establishment of a Centre of 
Excellence on PESA at the Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak, the 
Committee are of the view that these efforts have yet to translate into meaningful 
empowerment at the grassroots level. The Committee further observes that 
awareness among tribal communities regarding the provisions and entitlements 
under PESA remains limited, and institutional mechanisms for monitoring its 
implementation continue to be weak. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in close coordination with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and 
the concerned State Governments, formulate a time-bound national action plan for 
the effective operationalisation of PESA in all Fifth Schedule Areas. Such a plan 
should include large-scale awareness campaigns, structured capacity-building 42 
programmes for elected representatives of Gram Sabhas and Panchayats, and 
dedicated training modules for district and block level officials to ensure proper 
understanding of the statutory powers vested in Gram Sabhas. The Committee 
further recommend that mandatory district-level training programmes be 
institutionalised for Panchayat representatives, including Sarpanches, Panchayat 
Secretaries, and members of Gram Sabhas in Scheduled Areas, with a special focus 
on provisions relating to control over natural resources, management of minor forest 
produce, social sector schemes, and consultation in land acquisition and 
development projects. The Committee also emphasise the need to establish a robust 
monitoring and accountability framework for tracking the implementation of PESA 
provisions across States. In this regard, the Ministry may consider developing a 
national PESA implementation dashboard, supported by periodic reporting from 
States and independent social audits at the Gram Sabha level. The Committee are of 
the view that measurable indicators should be developed to assess the extent to 
which the powers of Gram Sabhas are being exercised in practice.”  
1.13 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“Panchayat, being "Local Government", is a State Subject and part of the 
State List in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. Panchayats are set up 
and operate through the respective State Panchayati Raj Acts. Accordingly, all 
matters relating to Panchayats, including the formation of time bound action plan for 
effective operationalization in the 5th schedule areas, spreading awareness among 
tribal communities regarding provisions and entitlements under PESA, 
implementation of PESA Act, training of ER, WER, panchayat functionaries for 
capacity building, independent social audits fall within the purview of the State 
Government concerned. Out of the ten PESA States, nine States have notified their 
respective PESA Rules. The provisions contained in PESA Rules vary across the 
States, along with the differences in the extent of Fifth Schedule areas, demographic 
composition, tribal communities, etc. In the view of such diversity, a uniform national 

 
 
7 
 
action plan applicable to all PESA States may not be feasible. It would be more 
appropriate for each State to frame its own action plan in accordance with its specific 
needs and priorities. In addition to that, every year under the Revamped Rashtriya 
Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), each State prepares an Annual Action Plan outlining 
institutional needs, capacity building, etc. 
The training provision for States is undertaken under the Revamped 
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), Centrally Sponsored Scheme being 
implemented by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) to strengthen the capacity 
building of Panchayati Raj Institutions. PESA is included under specialized training of 
RGSA. For large-scale capacity building under PESA, the training themes have been 
divided into nine sub-themes, based on key PESA subjects and to enable structured 
and theme-based capacity-building. These include (i) Strengthening of PESA Gram 
Sabhas; (ii) Minor Forest Produce and the Forest Rights Act (FRA); (iii) Minor 
Minerals; (iv) Land Acquisition and Prevention of Alienation of Land and 
Management of Minor Water Bodies; (v) Control over money lending; (vii) 
Enforcement of Prohibition and Regulation of Sale and Consumption of Intoxicants; 
(vii)Customary Modes of Dispute Resolution; (vii) PESA-based Gram Panchayat 
Development Planning (GPDP); and (ix) PESA Act and State PESA Rules, Legal 
Provisions, Constitutional and Regulatory Framework and Alignment with State 
Panchayati Raj laws. During FY 2025–26, a total of 1,744 training batches were 
conducted across 10 PESA States, covering 103,384 participants at State, District, 
and Block levels including members of Gram Sabha, ER, WER, panchayat 
functionaries. 
As far as establishing a monitoring and accountability framework for tracking 
the implementation of PESA provisions across States is concerned, this Ministry 
would like to bring to the notice of the Committee that, the Ministry developed a set of 
PESA indices, based on parameters such as amendments made by State 
Governments in Panchayati Raj laws and other subject matter laws in accordance 
with PESA, conformity of State PESA Rules with the PESA Act, deployment of PESA 
staff, and training and orientation under PESA, etc., and will be released annually. 
The ranking of PESA States starting from 2024-2025 has been released on the eve 
of Republic Day 2026, with Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, and Himachal Pradesh 
securing the top three positions. 
The ministry also developed a dedicated PESA Portal to provide a single 
platform for accessing all PESA-related information, including legal provisions, State 
Rules, training materials, reports, and multimedia resources.”  
  Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.14  The Committee had recommended formulation of a time-bound national action 
plan for effective operationalisation of the PESA Act in all Fifth Schedule Areas, along 
with large-scale awareness campaigns, structured capacity-building programmes, 
institutional monitoring and development of a national implementation dashboard. In 
its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has referred to various 
initiatives relating to capacity building, development of PESA indices and creation of 
a dedicated PESA portal. However, MoPR has stated that Panchayats are a State 
subject and that a uniform national action plan may not be feasible in view of the 
diversity among the PESA States. The Committee are not fully satisfied with the reply 

 
 
8 
 
of the Ministry. While appreciating the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj, the Committee are of the view that the MoPR, being the nodal Ministry for 
implementation of the PESA Act, has an important responsibility to facilitate a 
coordinated and consistent approach for its effective implementation across the Fifth 
Schedule Areas. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
the Ministry, in consultation with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and the State 
Governments, pursue the formulation of an appropriate national framework or action 
plan with clearly defined milestones, measurable performance indicators and a robust 
monitoring mechanism for effective implementation of the PESA Act, while providing 
adequate flexibility to the States to address their specific requirements. The 
Committee also reiterate that institutional monitoring, periodic reporting and 
outcome-based assessment should form an integral part of the framework to ensure 
effective implementation of the provisions of the Act. The Act ensures tribal self-rule 
by granting village assemblies (Gram Sabhas) legal authority to manage their own 
resources, protect their culture and make local decisions. 
 
  

 
 
9 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Budget Estimation and BE–RE Variations 
2.1  The Committee notes from the examination of Budget Utilisation Trends (2022–23 to 
2025–26) that during FY 2025–26, against the Revised Estimate (RE) of ₹772.30 crore 
under RGSA, an expenditure of ₹743.83 crore had been incurred as on 23 February 2026. 
While utilisation against RE appears satisfactory, the Committee observe that recurring 
adjustments from Budget Estimates (BE) to RE stage over successive financial years 
indicate a pattern of over-projection at BE stage or delayed implementation during the initial 
quarters of the financial year. The Committee further note that although unspent balances in 
Single Nodal Agency (SNA) accounts have reduced significantly from ₹216 crore as on 31 
March 2025 to ₹10.59 crore as on 20 February 2026, such financial streamlining must be 
accompanied by realistic demand forecasting and timely execution of approved activities. 
The Committee are of the considered view that repeated downward revisions at RE stage 
reflect gaps in expenditure planning, pacing and early-year fund absorption. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry adopt a realistic, evidence-based and data-
driven budgeting methodology grounded in past utilisation trends, quarterly expenditure 
benchmarks and early approval of Annual Action Plans (AAPs). The Committee further 
recommend that strict mid-year expenditure reviews and corrective measures be taken to 
ensure that allocations made at BE stage are not subjected to avoidable compression at RE 
stage. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has taken cognizance of the Committee’s 
observations and recommendations regarding budget utilisation trends and expenditure 
planning under the Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA). The Ministry has 
noted the recommendation for adopting a realistic and evidence-based budgeting approach 
based on past utilisation patterns, quarterly expenditure trends, and timely approval of 
Annual Action Plans (AAPs). 
 
In FY 2024–25, due to the General Elections in the first quarter, funds released to 
States/UTs could not be utilised on time, resulting in a slower pace of expenditure and 
accumulation of balances in Single Nodal Agency (SNA) accounts. The unspent balances 
were subsequently carried forward to FY 2025–26. Further, the migration of State Nodal 
Accounts to the SNA SPARSH platform during the second quarter of FY 2025–26 also led to 
delays in expenditure and affected the pace of fund utilisation by States/UTs. However, the 
Ministry has closely monitored fund utilisation and unspent balances under the SNA 
framework, resulting in a substantial reduction in unspent balances during FY 2025–26. 
Efforts are being made to further strengthen expenditure planning, periodic reviews, 
and monitoring mechanisms to ensure the timely implementation of approved activities and 

 
 
10 
 
optimal utilisation of funds. The Ministry also proposes to undertake mid-year expenditure 
reviews and corrective measures, wherever necessary, to minimise avoidable revisions at 
the Revised Estimate stage. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
Continuation of SVAMITVA in Modified Form 
 
2.3 The Committee note that drone flying under SVAMITVA has been completed in 
approximately 3.29 lakh villages, representing nearly 96 percent of the targeted coverage. 
Further, 3.08 crore property cards have reportedly been generated across 1.87 lakh villages. 
The Committee also take note that saturation has been achieved in certain States/UTs 
including Haryana, Uttarakhand, Goa, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Puducherry, 
Lakshadweep and Tripura. While acknowledging this substantial physical progress, the 
Committee observe that critical post-survey processes — including ground verification, 
correction of maps, resolution of objections, integration of property data with State revenue 
databases and operationalisation of credit linkages — are still ongoing. The Committee 
further note that despite the scale of national geospatial assets created, no budgetary 
allocation has been proposed for SVAMITVA in FY 2026–27 on the ground that the Scheme 
is scheduled to conclude in March 2026. The Committee are of the considered view that 
financial closure of a Scheme cannot be equated with institutional completion. Abrupt 
discontinuation of budgetary support at a stage when database integration and grievance 
redressal processes are underway may risk weakening administrative continuity, 
undermining long- term benefits and limiting the full realisation of the Scheme’s objectives, 
particularly in terms of rural asset monetisation and dispute reduction. The Committee 
strongly recommend continuation of SVAMITVA in modified form beyond March 2026 with a 
calibrated and focused allocation aimed at completion of residual villages and post-survey 
corrections; Time-bound integration of property data with State revenue databases; 
Establishment of a structured grievance redressal and updating mechanism; Monitoring and 
facilitation of credit linkage based on issued property cards; Convergence of SVAMITVA 
geospatial datasets with Gram Manchitra and GPDP-based spatial planning frameworks; 
and Development of a sustainable protocol for periodic updating of property records to 
preserve the long-term utility of the geospatial infrastructure created. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4  As on 1 June 2026, drone survey has been completed in 3.30 lakh villages out of the 
targeted 3.38 lakh villages, 3.18 crore property cards have been prepared for 1.93 lakh 
villages. Furthermore, Drone survey is completed in Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Ladakh, Mizoram, Odisha, J&K, Arunachal Pradesh, Kerala and 
Assam and Scheme is saturated in Haryana, Uttarakhand, Dadra Nagar Haveli Daman & 
Diu, Goa, A&N Island, and Puducherry, Lakshadweep and Tripura (State-wise progress is at 
Annexure-II). To cater the remaining work of drone survey and property cards preparation, 

 
 
11 
 
the D/o Expenditure vide letter dated 19 March 2026 has approved the extension of 
SVAMITVA Scheme for a period of six months till September 2026. (Annexure-III). Fund 
provision is being requested for the scheme for the extended period. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
Independent Research Study Commission on Bihar and West Bengal Models Vis-a- 
vis SVAMITVA 
 
2.5 The Committee note that certain States, including Bihar and West Bengal, have not 
adopted the SVAMITVA Scheme on the ground that pre-existing Record of Rights systems 
are already in place. During the oral evidence, the Committee expressed concern that mere 
existence of legacy land records does not automatically ensure geospatial precision, digital 
validation, property card-based clarity or integration with modern spatial datasets. Further, 
the Committee were suggested that a structured comparative assessment be undertaken to 
ascertain whether the land record systems in these States are equivalent, superior or 
deficient in comparison to the SVAMITVA framework. The Committee are of the considered 
view that given the scale of national investment and the long-term implications for rural 
property governance policy disengagement by major States should not rest solely on 
administrative correspondence. A structured evidence- based evaluation is essential both for 
policy credibility and cooperative federalism. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry constitute an independent Research Study Commission or Expert Technical 
Committee to undertake a comparative assessment of : (i) The Record of Rights and land 
record systems prevailing in Bihar and West Bengal vis-à-vis SVAMITVA standards; (ii) 
Geospatial accuracy, digitisation levels and legal robustness of issued property 
documentation; (iii) Impact on land dispute reduction for the benefit of common man, 
mutation processes and credit facilitation; (iv) Integration with revenue databases and spatial 
planning tools; and (v) Administrative and technological gaps, if any. The Committee further 
recommend that such study be completed within a defined timeframe and in the event that 
the comparative analysis demonstrates substantive advantages under the SVAMITVA 
framework and the Ministry should initiate structured technical dialogue with the concerned 
States for harmonisation and if innovative best practices are identified in the land record 
systems of non-adopting States. Further the Committee recommend the Ministry should 
examine their possible incorporation into national guidelines. in the spirit of cooperative and 
competitive federalism. For the purpose, the Committee recommend the structural 
comparative assessment of the land in Bihar, West Bengal and North Eastern States where 
there is common land ownership. 
  

 
 
12 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The Terms of Reference (ToR) to undertake the structural comparative assessment 
of the land records in U.P., Bihar, West Bengal and North Eastern States where there is 
community land ownership, has been finalized and the work is being awarded. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
Continuation of Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) 
 
2.7 The Committee note that the Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme with an approved outlay of ₹5,911 crore (including Central 
share of ₹2,211 crore) for the period up to March 2026, is scheduled to conclude at the end 
of the current financial cycle. The Ministry has proposed its continuation with an enhanced 
outlay of ₹7,860.83 crore, and a Budget Estimate of ₹1,017.10 crore has been provided for 
FY 2026–27. The Committee acknowledge that RGSA has supported capacity building of 
over 24.15 lakh elected representatives across 2.56 lakh Gram Panchayats, with nearly 49.6 
percent representation of women. However, during the course of evidence, the Committee 
raised substantive concerns regarding the qualitative outcomes of training programmes, 
effectiveness of modules in PESA areas, certification processes, digital governance 
outcomes under e-GramSwaraj, audit compliance, geotagging of assets, and measurable 
improvements in Gram Sabha functioning, third-party evaluation, impact assessment of 
training on financial management, and adequacy of Panchayat infrastructure including 
Panchayat Bhavans and digital equipment. The Committee further note that while evaluation 
studies have reportedly been conducted by institutions such as IRMA and NITI Aayog, 
outcome-based linkage between financial outlay and measurable governance transformation 
has not been clearly articulated in the documentation placed before the Committee. The 
Committee strongly recommend continuation of Revamped RGSA beyond March 2026, 
subject to the adoption of a robust outcome-based framework. The Scheme should link 
capacity building to measurable governance indicators, including audit compliance, timely 
GPDP preparation and upload, augmentation of Own Source Revenue, asset geotagging, 
digital transaction compliance and effective functioning of Gram Sabhas. The Committee 
further recommend mandatory third-party impact assessment of training interventions, 
introduction of structured certification and post-training evaluation mechanisms, integration 
of digital governance metrics into performance assessment, and time-bound saturation of 
Panchayat infrastructure including Bhavans and digital equipment. The Committee 
emphasise that continued financial support under RGSA must be demonstrably linked to 
measurable strengthening of grassroots democratic governance rather than mere 
expenditure achievement. 
  

 
 
13 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 Panchayats, being “Local Governments,” are a State subject under the Constitution. 
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj implements the revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan 
(RGSA) for strengthening Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) through capacity building and 
limited infrastructural support by building Panchayat infrastructure, computers, and 
peripherals.  
Under RGSA, support is provided for training of elected representatives, 
functionaries, and other stakeholders through orientation, refresher, thematic, specialised, 
and GPDP-related training programmes. These initiatives have strengthened participatory 
planning and implementation of Gram Panchayat Development Plans (GPDPs).  
The Ministry has partnered with premier institutes such as IIMs and IITs under the 
Leadership/Management Development Programme (MDP) to strengthen leadership, 
management, and governance capabilities of Panchayat representatives and functionaries, 
under which 3,381 participants have been trained. Further, specialised modules on Own 
Source Revenue (OSR) and Women Elected Representatives (WERs) have been developed 
to strengthen financial self-reliance of Gram Panchayats and promote women-led 
governance, respectively. Under these modules, 2,55,290 participants have been trained on 
OSR and 1,48,908 Women Elected Representatives have been trained on OSR. 
The Ministry is also promoting the concept of Model Women-Friendly Gram 
Panchayats to create gender-equal, inclusive, and safe Gram Panchayats; strengthen 
women-led governance as a driver of sustainable development; and ensure that women’s 
voices, needs, and rights are mainstreamed in planning, budgeting, and service delivery at 
the Gram Panchayat level. A total of 744 Model Women Friendly GPs has been identified—
one in each district across 32 States/UTs. 
The Ministry has taken cognizance of the Committee’s recommendations regarding 
continuation of RGSA beyond March 2026 and has proposed continuation of the scheme 
with greater focus on measurable governance outcomes and institutional strengthening of 
PRIs. The proposed framework emphasises indicators such as timely GPDP preparation, 
audit compliance, augmentation of Own Source Revenue, digital governance through 
eGramSwaraj, asset geotagging, and effective functioning of Gram Sabhas, along with third-
party assessment and post-training evaluation mechanisms, subject to approval of the 
Scheme and availability of funds. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
Freedom from Violence & Gender Sensitization Initiatives under RGSA 
  
2.9 The Committee note that for the first time, specific allocations of ₹17.00 crore for 
“Freedom from Violence: Capacity Building of Elected Women Representatives under 
Nirbhaya Fund” and ₹13.00 crore for “Sensitization of Men 40 towards Women-related 
Issues including Safety and Security of Women” have been approved under RGSA for FY 
2026–27. The Committee further note that women constitute approximately 49.6% of elected 
representatives in Panchayati Raj Institutions given the substantial presence of women in 
grassroots governance, targeted interventions to enhance their legal awareness, institutional 
confidence and protection against gender-based violence assume critical importance. The 
Committee are of the considered view that these newly introduced components represent an 
important step towards gender-responsive governance. However, the impact of such 

 
 
14 
 
allocations will depend upon structured implementation, measurable outcomes and 
convergence with existing legal and institutional frameworks. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the ₹30.00 crore allocation under the two newly introduced components be 
implemented through a clear, outcome-oriented framework with defined performance 
indicators. The Ministry should standardize training modules on legal safeguards for Women 
Elected Representatives, incorporate gender-sensitization programmes for male 
representatives and functionaries, and prescribe measurable indicators relating to grievance 
redressal, safety mechanisms and effective participation of women in decision-making. An 
annual status report indicating targets, expenditure and outcomes achieved under these 
interventions should be placed before Parliament. The Committee emphasise that the 
allocation must result in tangible strengthening of safety, confidence and leadership capacity 
of women in Panchayati Raj Institutions, thereby reinforcing substantive grassroots 
democracy. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has noted the Committee’s observations and 
recommendations regarding implementation of the gender-focused components under the 
Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA). The Ministry will endeavour to adopt 
an outcome-oriented framework for effective implementation of interventions relating to 
capacity building of WERs and sensitisation of men towards women-related issues. 
Under RGSA, training support is provided to elected representatives, functionaries, 
and other stakeholders through orientation, refresher, thematic, specialised, and GPDP-
related programmes to strengthen participatory planning and grassroots governance. The 
Ministry has also collaborated with premier institutions such as IIMs and IITs under the 
Leadership/Management Development Programme (MDP), under which 3,381 participants 
have been trained. 
Specialised modules on Own Source Revenue (OSR) and Women Elected 
Representatives (WERs) have been developed to strengthen financial self-reliance of Gram 
Panchayats and promote women-led governance, benefiting 2.55 lakh and 1.48 lakh 
participants respectively. Further, 744 Model Women-Friendly Gram Panchayats have been 
identified across States/UTs to promote gender-equal, inclusive, and safe Panchayats and to 
mainstream women’s concerns in planning and service delivery. 
The Ministry has also initiated two projects under the Nirbhaya Fund to strengthen 
women’s safety and gender-responsive governance at the grassroots level through the 
Panchayati Raj network. Efforts are being made to develop standardised training modules 
on legal safeguards, gender sensitisation, leadership, and institutional support mechanisms, 
along with measurable indicators relating to women’s participation, grievance redressal, and 
safety mechanisms. Emphasis is also being laid on strengthening monitoring, reporting, and 
impact assessment mechanisms to improve the safety, confidence, and leadership capacity 
of women in Panchayati Raj Institutions. As the Fund is administered by the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development (WCD), it is the WCD Ministry which 
submits reports indicating targets, expenditure and outcomes achieved under these 
interventions before Parliament. 
  

 
 
15 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
 
Enhancing Revenue Generation for Panchayats 
  
2.11 The Committee note that Panchayats currently rely heavily on grants from the 
government, limiting their ability to respond to local needs and priorities. Stressing upon the 
need for enhancing revenue generation and their financial independence, the Committee 
recommend that Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) should be empowered to generate their 
own revenues through property taxes, user fees, and other local levies. Capacity-building 
programs should be 41 introduced to help panchayats develop sustainable revenue models, 
reducing their dependency on state and central grants. Incentives should be provided for 
self-sufficient panchayats that effectively mobilize local resources. The committee also 
recommend using digital platforms like eGramSwaraj to improve transparency and efficiency 
in financial management, and making better use of government schemes to create assets 
and increase income of PRIs.  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has been continuously working towards 
strengthening the financial framework of panchayats through improved mobilization of Own 
Source Revenue (OSR) of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). In this regard, the Ministry has 
undertaken various initiatives to enhance the overall financial resilience of the Gram 
Panchayat. The key initiatives are as follows: 
  
(i) The Ministry, in collaboration with IIM Ahmedabad, has developed a training 
module on OSR to strengthen the financial self-reliance of Gram Panchayats. The module 
enables elected representatives and Panchayat functionaries to understand OSR generation 
through tax and non-tax sources. It covers local resource mobilization, behavioural insights 
to improve tax compliance, revenue forecasting, project financing, and innovative project 
financing options etc. It also links OSR planning with the preparation of effective Gram 
Panchayat Development Plans (GPDPs). 
 
(ii) The Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has also undertaken a significant step to 
digitise the OSR collection of the Panchayats by developing the “SAMARTH Panchayat 
portal”, a dedicated digital platform that facilitates the generation of tax & non-tax demands, 
maintenance of tax registers, and online tracking of revenue. This digital empowerment is 
designed to bring transparency, efficiency, and scalability to local financial administration. 
  
(iii) The Sixteenth Finance Commission (FC16) has also emphasised strengthening 
the OSR of Panchayats to promote fiscal self-reliance and reduce dependence on grants 
from the Union and State Governments. The Commission has recommended linking a 
portion of grants to Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) with their performance in raising OSR, 
including achievement of prescribed benchmarks or annual growth in revenue collection. In 
this regard, 20% of the total grants recommended for Rural Local Bodies, amounting to 
approximately ₹87,048 crore, has been proposed as performance-based grants linked to 
improvement in Own Source Revenue and other governance reforms.  
(iv) The Commission has encouraged Panchayats to improve revenue mobilisation 
through property tax, user charges, license fees, market fees and better utilisation of 

 
 
16 
 
community assets. It has also recommended digitisation of records, GIS-based property 
mapping, transparent accounting systems and capacity building of Panchayat functionaries 
to strengthen revenue administration. The recommendations aim to create financially 
empowered and accountable Panchayats capable of delivering better local governance and 
public services. 
  
(v) The MoPR has formulated and launched the ‘Atmanirbhar Panchayat Programme’ 
-- a challenge based technical support programme aimed at enhancement of Own Source 
Revenue of Panchayats. The objective of this initiative is to extend technical assistance to 
Panchayats, with a view to enabling them to attain economic self-sufficiency through 
sustainable, professionally designed, and locally relevant revenue generating projects. 
  
(vi) The MoPR has also launched the Atma Nirbhar Panchayat Special Award 
(ANPSA) on National Panchayati Raj Day (NPRD), 2025, and it is for the first time that the 
Ministry has institutionalised dedicated Special Category Awards to incentivise and 
acknowledge exemplary efforts of Gram Panchayats in Atmanirbharta (Self-Reliance) 
through augmentation of OSR.  
  
To improve transparency and efficiency in financial management of PRIs, the 
Ministry has launched eGramSwaraj (https://egramswaraj.gov.in), a user-friendly web-based 
portal, which aims to bring in better transparency in the decentralized planning, progress 
reporting, financial management, work-based accounting and details of assets created. The 
application has been further integrated with Public Fund Management System (PFMS), 
Government e-Marketplace (GeM), AuditOnline applications for hassle-free payment, 
transparent procurement, and auditing of Panchayats accounts. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
Capacity Building and Availability of Trained Manpower in Panchayats 
 
2.13 The Committee notes that the Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) 
has been designed to strengthen Panchayati Raj Institutions through systematic capacity 
building of Elected Representatives (ERs) and other stakeholders. The Committee 
appreciate the efforts of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in leveraging modern training tools, 
including digital platforms, mobile applications, IP-based systems, and social media, as well 
as its collaboration with premier institutions such as the Indian Institutes of Management 
(IIMs) and Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) for leadership development programmes. 
The Committee also note that a substantial number of Elected Representatives and 
stakeholders have been trained under the scheme since its implementation. However, the 
Committee observe that the capacity constraints at the Gram Panchayat level continue to 
affect the effective functioning of Panchayati Raj 43 Institutions, particularly in terms of 
administrative support and technical expertise required for planning, implementation and 
monitoring of development programmes. The Committee are of the view that while capacity 
building efforts have expanded in scale, greater emphasis is required on improving the 
quality, accessibility and continuity of training programmes. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj further strengthen the national capacity-

 
 
17 
 
building architecture under the Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) by 
expanding partnerships with additional Institutes of Excellence, national training institutions 
and reputed academic bodies for designing advanced leadership, governance and sectoral 
training programmes for Panchayati Raj representatives, while also developing standardised 
digital training modules and e-learning platforms to facilitate continuous and on-demand 
learning for elected representatives and Panchayat functionaries across the country. Such 
initiatives should include specialised thematic modules covering areas such as local 
development planning, financial management, convergence of centrally sponsored schemes, 
digital governance, climate-resilient rural development and social accountability 
mechanisms, so as to enhance the functional capacity of Panchayati Raj Institutions in 
delivering development outcomes. The Ministry may also establish a national-level 
monitoring and evaluation framework, incorporating structured feedback mechanisms, 
outcome-based indicators and periodic impact assessments, to assess the effectiveness of 
training programmes conducted under RGSA and other capacity-building initiatives and to 
ensure that such interventions translate into improved governance and service delivery at 
the grassroots level.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has taken note of the Committee’s recommendations 
regarding strengthening the capacity-building architecture under the Revamped Rashtriya 
Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA). Under the scheme, training and capacity-building support is 
provided to elected representatives, functionaries, and other stakeholders through 
orientation, refresher, thematic, specialised, and GPDP-related programmes to strengthen 
participatory planning and grassroots governance. 
The Ministry has collaborated with premier institutions such as IIMs and IITs under 
the Leadership/Management Development Programme (MDP), under which 3,381 
participants have been trained. Specialised modules on Own Source Revenue (OSR) and 
Women Elected Representatives (WERs) have also been developed, benefiting 2.55 lakh 
and 1.48 lakh participants respectively. In addition, 744 Model Women-Friendly Gram 
Panchayats have been identified across States/UTs to promote inclusive, gender-
responsive, and women-led local governance. 
To strengthen governance and monitoring, the Ministry has developed the Panchayat 
Advancement Index (PAI) aligned with Localization of Sustainable Development Goals 
(LSDGs), and is implementing the e-Panchayat Mission Mode Project (MMP), including 
eGramSwaraj, AuditOnline, Training Management Portal (TMP), and citizen-centric 
platforms to enhance transparency, accountability, and digital governance in Panchayats. 
Emphasis is also being laid on standardised digital learning modules, e-learning 
platforms, and strengthened monitoring and evaluation mechanisms through structured 
feedback, outcome-based indicators, and periodic impact assessments to improve the 
effectiveness of training interventions and governance outcomes at the grassroots level. 

 
 
18 
 
Ministry has already commissioned an evaluation study of RGSA which was 
conducted by the Institute of Rural Management Anand (IRMA). The study revealed that the 
revamped RGSA has evidently enhanced the ability of PRIs to govern effectively and deliver 
on the Localisation of Sustainable Development Goals (LSDGs). The scheme comprises of 
structured and well-designed capacity building programs, which empowers a significant 
proportion of the Elected Representatives (ERs) by enhancing their knowledge, skills, and 
digital tools to improve governance at the grassroots level. The study has also highlighted 
that the revamped RGSA did not just make cosmetic interventions in trainings, but the post 
training assessments of the stakeholders highlighted significant improvements in their 
understanding of Panchayat operations, planning and implementation, digital governance, 
citizen engagement, and financial sustainability. 
 
  

 
 
19 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
20 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE  
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
4.1 The Committee note that a substantial portion of Finance Commission tied grants 
devolved to Rural Local Bodies is earmarked for basic services including sanitation and 
drinking water. During the course of deliberations, the Committee expressed concern that 
while assets are being created under various schemes, institutional arrangements for their 
long-term maintenance remain weak, resulting in deterioration of sanitation infrastructure at 
the village level. The Committee are of the considered view that absence of a dedicated and 
accountable maintenance mechanism undermines the sustainability of investments made 
through tied grants and dilutes service-delivery outcomes. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry, in consultation with States, issue guidelines for creation of a 
dedicated Village Sanitation Maintenance Committee at the Gram Panchayat level, 
empowered to utilise the sanitation component of tied grants for operation and maintenance 
of sanitation assets. The mechanism should clearly assign responsibility for upkeep of 
sanitation infrastructure, mandate periodic maintenance audits with digital reporting through 
e-GramSwaraj, ensure Gram Sabha oversight and social audit, and prescribe measurable 
service-level benchmarks. The Committee, further emphasise that sustainability of sanitation 
assets must be accorded equal priority as their creation, and tied funds should 
systematically support assured long-term maintenance and functionality.  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), being the Nodal Department 
for Tied grants, was requested to furnish inputs in respect of this observation. The inputs 
received from DDWS is enclosed at Annexure-III 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
4.3 The Committee further note that the total Budget Estimate of the Ministry for FY 
2026–27 is ₹1190.16 crore, with substantial allocations directed towards strengthening 
Panchayats, and that the Ministry has indicated its intent to maximise disbursement of 16th 
Finance Commission grants during 2026–27. During course of evidence, the Committee 
raised concerns regarding fiscal devolution patterns and the effective discretion available to 

 
 
21 
 
Panchayats in utilisation of funds. The Committee observe that although successive Finance 
Commissions have significantly enhanced transfers to Rural Local Bodies, a substantial 
proportion of these grants are “tied” to specific sectors such as sanitation and drinking water. 
While such earmarking ensures sectoral focus. The Committee are of the considered view 
that excessive tying of funds constrains Panchayats’ ability to address locally determined 
priorities identified through Gram Panchayat Development Plans (GPDPs).The Committee 
further note that improvements in financial discipline—such as reduction of unspent SNA 
balances from ₹216 crore (as on 31.03.2025) to ₹10.59 crore (as on 20.02.2026) — 
demonstrate improved fund flow management The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and State Governments, undertake a 
structured review of Finance Commission grants with a view to rationalising and partially 
merging tied and untied components so as to enhance meaningful untied fiscal space for 
Panchayats. The Committee emphasise that such rationalisation must ensure a balanced 
proportion between tied and untied funds, preserve sectoral accountability through 
measurable service-delivery indicators, mandate digital transparency through e-Gram 
Swaraj, PFMS and Audit Online, and require Gram Sabha approval for utilisation of untied 
funds. The Committee further recommend annual publication of State-wise data indicating 
the quantum and percentage share of tied and untied funds devolved to Rural Local Bodies 
under the 16th Finance Commission. The Committee further recommend that the fiscal 
decentralisation must translate into genuine decision-making autonomy in accordance with 
Article 243G, strengthening Panchayats as institutions of self-government rather than merely 
implementing agencies of earmarked schemes 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 In respect of rationalising and partially merging tied and untied components, it is 
submitted that the structure of Finance Commission grants, including sector-specific tied and 
untied components, is determined based on the recommendations of the Finance 
Commission and accepted by the Government. The earmarking of funds towards critical 
sectors such as drinking water and sanitation (National Priority Sector) is intended to ensure 
basic standard of service delivery across all States. As the design and composition of tied 
and untied grants fall within the purview of the Finance Commission, the Ministry has limited 
powers in effecting changes. 
 
The 16th Finance Commission (FC-16) highlighted the strong impact of flagship 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes—Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM), AMRUT, and Jal Jeevan 
Mission (JJM)—in improving drinking water and sanitation nationwide. These programs have 
created substantial infrastructure, fostered citizen awareness, and driven behavioural 
change, with durable results achieved up to 2025 through sustained government funding, 
including tied grants from the 15th Finance Commission (FC 15). 
  
The Commission noted that this progress demonstrates India’s commitment to 
Sustainable Development Goal 6 (Clean Water and Sanitation) and climate resilience. It also 
observed that FC 15 tied funds were utilized more effectively in Sanitation and Solid Waste 

 
 
22 
 
Management than in Drinking Water Supply, showing stronger gains in sanitation and 
highlighting untapped potential in water management. 
  
In view of the above, the Commission has recommended that 50 per cent of the 
Basic Grant be tied, while the remaining 50 per cent of the Basic Grant and the entire 
Performance Grant remain untied. The tied component is to be earmarked for Sanitation and 
Solid Waste Management and/or Water Management, with adequate flexibility provided to 
Local Bodies for addressing local priorities, including Operation and Maintenance (O&M) 
expenditures under these sectors. 
  
So far as the recommendation regarding annual publication of State-wise data, it is 
submitted that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has already published State-wise data 
on its website regarding allocations and releases, including the quantum and share of funds 
devolved to Rural Local Bodies under the FC15. The recommendation of the Committee in 
this regard is, however, noted for further compliance. 
  
The Ministry also reiterates its commitment to strengthening Panchayats as 
institutions of self-government in line with Article 243G of the Constitution. Efforts are being 
made to enhance functional, financial, and administrative devolution, so that PRIs evolve 
beyond implementing agencies into vibrant units of local governance.  
  
Article 243G of the Constitution empowers State Legislatures to endow Panchayats 
with the necessary powers, responsibilities, and authority to function as self-governing 
institutions, enabling them to prepare plans for economic development and social justice, 
and implement schemes related to the 29 subjects in the Eleventh Schedule, which includes 
the key areas of rural infrastructure and services.  
  
However, the MoPR supplements the efforts of State Governments through various 
Capacity Building & Training programmes & providing financial assistance through various 
schemes and Finance Commission grants to enhance the effective functioning of Panchayati 
Raj Institutions (PRIs). 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
4.5 The Committee notes that the Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 
(PESA) was enacted to empower tribal communities by recognizing the central role of the 
Gram Sabha in governance of Fifth Schedule Areas. However, nearly three decades after its 
enactment, the Committee observes with concern that the implementation of PESA across 
States remains uneven and inadequate. Several States have either not fully aligned their 
Panchayati Raj laws with the provisions of the Act or have failed to operationalize the 
powers of Gram Sabhas in matters relating to natural resource management, minor forest 
produce, land acquisition, and local dispute resolution. While the Committee takes note of 
the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry, including the preparation of training manuals, 
conduct of training programmes for State Level Master Trainers, and the establishment of a 
Centre of Excellence on PESA at the Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak, 
the Committee are of the view that these efforts have yet to translate into meaningful 

 
 
23 
 
empowerment at the grassroots level. The Committee further observes that awareness 
among tribal communities regarding the provisions and entitlements under PESA remains 
limited, and institutional mechanisms for monitoring its implementation continue to be weak. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in close 
coordination with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and the concerned State Governments, 
formulate a time-bound national action plan for the effective operationalisation of PESA in all 
Fifth Schedule Areas. Such a plan should include large-scale awareness campaigns, 
structured capacity-building 42 programmes for elected representatives of Gram Sabhas and 
Panchayats, and dedicated training modules for district and block level officials to ensure 
proper understanding of the statutory powers vested in Gram Sabhas. The Committee 
further recommend that mandatory district-level training programmes be institutionalised for 
Panchayat representatives, including Sarpanches, Panchayat Secretaries, and members of 
Gram Sabhas in Scheduled Areas, with a special focus on provisions relating to control over 
natural resources, management of minor forest produce, social sector schemes, and 
consultation in land acquisition and development projects. The Committee also emphasise 
the need to establish a robust monitoring and accountability framework for tracking the 
implementation of PESA provisions across States. In this regard, the Ministry may consider 
developing a national PESA implementation dashboard, supported by periodic reporting 
from States and independent social audits at the Gram Sabha level. The Committee are of 
the view that measurable indicators should be developed to assess the extent to which the 
powers of Gram Sabhas are being exercised in practice.  
Reply of the Government 
4.6 Panchayat, being "Local Government", is a State Subject and part of the State List in 
the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. Panchayats are set up and operate 
through the respective State Panchayati Raj Acts. Accordingly, all matters relating to 
Panchayats, including the formation of time bound action plan for effective operationalization 
in the 5th schedule areas, spreading awareness among tribal communities regarding 
provisions and entitlements under PESA, implementation of PESA Act, training of ER, WER, 
panchayat functionaries for capacity building, independent social audits fall within the 
purview of the State Government concerned. Out of the ten PESA States, nine States have 
notified their respective PESA Rules. The provisions contained in PESA Rules vary across 
the States, along with the differences in the extent of Fifth Schedule areas, demographic 
composition, tribal communities, etc. In the view of such diversity, a uniform national action 
plan applicable to all PESA States may not be feasible. It would be more appropriate for 
each State to frame its own action plan in accordance with its specific needs and priorities. 
In addition to that, every year under the Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan 
(RGSA), each State prepares an Annual Action Plan outlining institutional needs, capacity 
building, etc. 
The training provision for States is undertaken under the Revamped Rashtriya Gram 
Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), Centrally Sponsored Scheme being implemented by the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR) to strengthen the capacity building of Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
PESA is included under specialized training of RGSA. For large-scale capacity building 
under PESA, the training themes have been divided into nine sub-themes, based on key 

 
 
24 
 
PESA subjects and to enable structured and theme-based capacity-building. These include 
(i) Strengthening of PESA Gram Sabhas; (ii) Minor Forest Produce and the Forest Rights Act 
(FRA); (iii) Minor Minerals; (iv) Land Acquisition and Prevention of Alienation of Land and 
Management of Minor Water Bodies; (v) Control over money lending; (vii) Enforcement of 
Prohibition and Regulation of Sale and Consumption of Intoxicants; (vii)Customary Modes of 
Dispute Resolution; (vii) PESA-based Gram Panchayat Development Planning (GPDP); and 
(ix) PESA Act and State PESA Rules, Legal Provisions, Constitutional and Regulatory 
Framework and Alignment with State Panchayati Raj laws. During FY 2025–26, a total of 
1,744 training batches were conducted across 10 PESA States, covering 103,384 
participants at State, District, and Block levels including members of Gram Sabha, ER, 
WER, panchayat functionaries. 
As far as establishing a monitoring and accountability framework for tracking the 
implementation of PESA provisions across States is concerned, this Ministry would like to 
bring to the notice of the Committee that, the Ministry developed a set of PESA indices, 
based on parameters such as amendments made by State Governments in Panchayati Raj 
laws and other subject matter laws in accordance with PESA, conformity of State PESA 
Rules with the PESA Act, deployment of PESA staff, and training and orientation under 
PESA, etc., and will be released annually. The ranking of PESA States starting from 2024-
2025 has been released on the eve of Republic Day 2026, with Maharashtra, Madhya 
Pradesh, and Himachal Pradesh securing the top three positions. 
The ministry also developed a dedicated PESA Portal to provide a single platform for 
accessing all PESA-related information, including legal provisions, State Rules, training 
materials, reports, and multimedia resources.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 
 
25 
 
CHAPTER V 
 RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
10 August, 2026 
19 Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 

 
 
26 
 
ANNEXURE I 
Inputs given by the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS) 
 


 
 
27 
 
 
 
 


 
 
28 
 
ANNEXURE II 
State-wise progress of SVAMITVA Scheme 
S. 
No. 
States/UTs Notified 
Villages 
Drone 
Flying 
Villages 
Number of villages 
for which property 
card prepared 
Number of 
property cards 
prepared 
1 Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands 
186 
186 141 7409 
2 Andhra Pradesh 13321 13321 1067 530351 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 3647 3647 0 0 
4 Assam 946 946 0 0 
5 Chhattisgarh 15791 15791 3134 249813 
6 Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and Daman 
and Diu 
80 
80 75 4397 
7 Delhi 31 31 15 3000 
8 Goa 410 410 410 672646 
9 Gujarat 14951 14949 11136 1803898 
10 Haryana 6260 6260 6260 2515646 
11 Himachal Pradesh 15196 14185 364 5419 
12 Jammu and Kashmir 4497 4497 1699 63542 
13 Jharkhand 757 240 0 0 
14 Karnataka 27753 26093 5070 1059653 
15 Kerala 597 597 0 0 
16 Ladakh 232 232 225 18788 
17 Lakshadweep Islands 10 10 10 13563 
18 Madhya Pradesh 43014 43014 40414 6733512 
19 Maharashtra 37819 37672 23318 3905727 
20 Manipur 2555 207 0 0 
21 Mizoram 568 568 80 10467 
22 Odisha 2724 2724 43 1716 
23 Puducherry 96 96 92 2801 
24 Punjab 12083 10745 319 73681 
25 Rajasthan 36,277 35984 15975 1503930 
26 Sikkim 1 1 0 0 
27 Tamil Nadu 3 3 0 0 
28 Telangana 5 5 0 0 
29 Tripura 898 19 893 571783 
30 Uttar Pradesh 90573 90573 75134 11815000 
31 Uttarakhand 7441 7441 7441 278229 
Total 338722 330527 193315 31844971 
 
  

 
 
29 
 
ANNEXURE III 
Office Memorandum regarding Extension for the Survey of Villages and Mapping with 
Improvised Technology in Village Areas (SVAMITVA) 
 


 
 
30 
 
 
 
 


 
 
31 
 
ANNEXURE IV 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2025-26) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 7TH AUGUST, 2026 
 
 The Committee sat from 1000 hrs to 1008 hrs in Committee Room ‘B’,  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram 
3. Shri Raju Bista 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Dr Sanjay Jaiswal 
6. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
7. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
8. Shri Jugal Kishore 
9. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
10. Shri Janardan Mishra 
11. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
12. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
13. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
14. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
15. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
17. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
18. Smt. Rajathi 
19. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
20. Shri Karamvir Singh Boudh 
21. Shri Baidyanath Ram 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Juby Amar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director  
3. Smt Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for consideration and adoption of five Draft Reports on:- 
(i) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(ii) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 

 
 
32 
 
 
(iii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 27th Report on Demands for Grants (2026-27) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj; 
 
(iv) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(v) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
3. Draft Reports were taken up for consideration one-by-one and after discussion, the 
Committee adopted the same with minor modification. The Committee then authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Draft Reports and present the same to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
____________________________ 
xxxx Not related to the Draft Report. 
 
  

 
 
33 
 
ANNEXURE V 
 [Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT (18TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  11  
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8 & 10 
 
 
 
Total: 07 
Percentage: 70% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:   
Serial Nos. 5, 6 & 9 
 
 
 
 
Total: 03 
Percentage: 30% 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 