 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
   
 
      EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
 
RURAL SKILLING AND MIGRATION: IMPACT STUDY OF DEEN DAYAL 
UPADHYAYA GRAMEEN KAUSHALYA YOJANA (DDU-GKY), DEENDAYAL 
ANTYODAYA YOJNA-NATIONAL RURAL LIVELIHOODS MISSION (DAY-NRLM) 
AND RURAL SELF EMPLOYMENT TRAINING INSTITUTES (RSETIS) 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
40 


 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
RURAL SKILLING AND MIGRATION: IMPACT STUDY OF DEEN DAYAL 
UPADHYAYA GRAMEEN KAUSHALYA YOJANA (DDU-GKY), DEENDAYAL 
ANTYODAYA YOJNA-NATIONAL RURAL LIVELIHOODS MISSION (DAY-NRLM) 
AND RURAL SELF EMPLOYMENT TRAINING INSTITUTES (RSETIS) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   11. 08.2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2026/Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 


 
 
CRD No. 231  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs 
 
 
 
© 2026 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2025-2026)  
Introduction    
REPORT 
PART I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
I. Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana – National Rural Livelihoods Mission 
(DAY-NRLM) 
1 
II. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya - Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) 4 
III. Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETI) 18 
IV. DAY - NRLM 28 
V. Impact Evaluation 34 
VI. Collaboration among Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) and 
MSDE 
36 
VII. Conclusions from Evaluations 37 
 Part - II 
Observations/ Recommendations 
 
39 
ANNEXURES  
I. State-Wise DDU-GKY & RSETI Performance (Cumulative as of 
March 2026) 
45 
II. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee held on 31st October, 
2025 
47 
III. Minutes of the Twenty-Second Sitting of the Committee held on 3rd 
June, 2026 
49 
IV. Extracts of the Minutes of the Twenty-Ninth sitting of the Committee 
held on 07 August, 2026 
52 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
26. Smt. Rajathi 
27. Shri Nagendra Ray 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Smt. P.T. Usha 
30. Shri Karamvir Singh Boudh 
31. Shri Baidyanath Ram 
Secretariat 
1. Smt. Juby Amar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sudhanshu Shekhar  -  Under Secretary 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2025-2026) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present the Fortieth Report on ‘Rural Skilling and Migration: 
Impact Study of Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY), 
Deendayal Antyodaya Yojna-National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM) and 
Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIS)’ of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development).  
2.  The Committee took briefing of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development), at their sittings held on 31st 
October, 2025 and oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development) and Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship on the subject “Rural Skilling and Migration: Impact Study of Deen 
Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY), Deendayal Antyodaya 
Yojna-National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM) and Rural Self Employment 
Training Institutes (RSETIs)” at their sitting held on 3rd June, 2026. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 07.08.2026. 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) and Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship for placing before them the requisite material 
and their considered views in connection with the examination of the subject.  
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
10 August, 2026 
19 Shravana, 1948 (Saka)    
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and  
Panchayati Raj 
 

1 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
RURAL SKILLING AND MIGRATION: IMPACT STUDY OF DEEN DAYAL UPADHYAYA 
GRAMEEN KAUSHALYA YOJANA (DDU-GKY), DEENDAYAL ANTYODAYA YOJNA-
NATIONAL RURAL LIVELIHOODS MISSION (DAY-NRLM) AND RURAL SELF 
EMPLOYMENT TRAINING INSTITUTES (RSETIS) 
 
PART – I  
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
CHAPTER I 
 
Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana – National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM) 
 
Mission Overview 
 
1.1 The Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD), Government of India, is committed to the 
holistic socio-economic transformation of rural India by alleviating poverty and building 
sustainable livelihoods. Central to this mandate is the creation of robust institutional 
frameworks that address the multi-faceted challenges of rural underemployment, low 
productivity, and economic distress, which have historically functioned as the primary drivers 
of involuntary rural-to-urban migration. 
  
DAY-NRLM was launched in 2011 with the mission "To reduce poverty by enabling 
the poor households to access gainful self-employment and skilled wage employment 
opportunities, resulting in appreciable improvement in their livelihoods on a sustainable 
basis, through building strong grassroots institutions of the poor." 
  
The Ministry of Rural Development implements DAY-NRLM through a tiered 
architecture: National Mission Management Unit, State Mission Management Unit, 
District/Block Mission Management Units and Cluster/Area/Community Coordinators. 
  
DAY-NRLM encompasses the following sub-schemes: 
 
• National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM)  
• Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyojana (MKSP)  
• Start-Up Village Entrepreneurship Programme (SVEP)  
• Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETI)  
• Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) 
  
Through its flagship program, the Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana – National Rural 
Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM), and its specialized sub-schemes Deen Dayal Upadhyaya 
Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) and Rural Self Employment Training Institutes 
(RSETIs), the Ministry has successfully structured a comprehensive skilling and enterprise 
ecosystem. 
  

2 
 
1.2 Cumulative Achievements of Mission (as of March 2026) 
  
Parameter Achievement 
Women mobilised in Self Help Groups 
(SHGs) 
10.05 Crore 
Geographical Coverage 755 Districts, 7,178 Blocks, 2.56 Lakh GPs, 5.94 
Lakh Villages 
Capitalisation Support ₹ 64,405 Crore 
Bank Credit (Financial Inclusion) ₹ 12.88 Lakh Crore 
Livelihoods – Non-Farm Enterprises ~81 Lakh Enterprises 
Livelihoods – Farm (Mahila Kisans) ~5 Crore Mahila Kisans 
Community Resource Persons (CRPs) Over 9 Lakh 
Lakhpati Didis (Annual HH income ≥ ₹1 
Lakh) 
Over 3 Crore 
DDU-GKY  Trained: 18.38 Lakh; Placed: 11.94 Lakh 
RSETI  Trained: 61.45 Lakh; Settled: 44.9 Lakh 
 
1.3  Budget Outlay & Expenditure (2021–26) 
(All figures in ₹ Crore) 
S. 
No. 
Component Budget 
Approved 
Budget 
(RE) 
Expenditure 
1 National Rural Livelihood Mission 
(NRLM) 
51,314.17 60,804.12 60,685.06 
2 Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyojana 
(MKSP) 
1,821.54 603.04 526.18 
3 Start- up Village Enterprise Programme 
(SVEP) 
2,466.75 565.29 553.78 
4 National Rural Economic Transformation 
Project (NRETP) 
1,173.89 1,606.70 1,588.98 
5 Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen 
Rozgar Yojana (DDU-GKY) 
10,114.53 1,161.99 977.74 
6 Rural Self Employment Training Institutes 
(RSETIs) 
1,864.12 1,033.23 1,005.02 
7 District Rural Development Agency 
(DRDA) Admin 
245.00 128.05 128.05 
  Grand Total 69,000.00  65,902.42 65,464.81 
 
1.4 On being asked about the reduction in budget outlay and expenditure under various 
component of the Mission, AS (DoRD) stated as under:- 
 
“सर, एक िवषय बजट का आया है। इसम¤ Ö टाटª-अप िवलेज एंटेरÿीनयोरिशप ÿोúाम, मिहला 
िकसान सशिĉकरण पåरयोजना और डीडीयूजीके ववाई म¤ ए³ सप¤िडचर कम है। इसका कारण यह था िक ये 
ÿोजे³ ट बेÖ ड ÿोúाÌ स ह§। 
एमके एसपी और एसवीईपी म¤ तीन से चार साल का ÿोजे³ट होता है। चूंिक वषª 2021 म¤ कोिवड आ 
गया था, इसिलए उसका इफे ³ट वषª 2020-21, वषª 2021-22 और वषª 2022-23 तक रहा। ए³चुअल म¤ 
हमने मैि³समम ÿोजे³ट्स वषª 2022-23 और वषª 2023-24 म¤ अÿूव िकये थे। इसीिलए जो ए³सप¤डीचर 

3 
 
होना चािहए था, वह नहé हो पाया। पहले दो सालŌ म¤ कोिवड के  चलते यह Öलो रहा। मैि³सम ÿोजे³ट्स वषª 
2023-24 म¤ अÿूव हòए ह§। उनका ए³सप¤डीचर हम लोग इस साल देख पाएंगे। आगे कì कड़ी म¤ हम लोग 
कोिशश कर¤गे िक जो एलोके टेड बजट है, वह इन ÿोजे³ट्स के  िलए िदया जाए।“ 
 
  

4 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya - Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) 
 
2.1 Background 
 
Special Project on Skills and placement was being implemented implemented under 
Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) and the same continued under NRLM. With 
an ambitious agenda to benchmark placement-linked wage employment programs to global 
standards, Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) revamped the Placement linked skill 
development program under National Rural Livelihood Mission as Deen Dayal Upadhyaya 
Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) on 25th September, 2014. In doing so the Ministry 
has used its knowledge gained over 15 years in implementing skill training programs. DDU-
GKY is a nationwide placement-linked skill training program funded by the Ministry of Rural 
Development (MoRD), Government of India (GoI).   
   
DDU-GKY is one of the cluster of initiatives aimed at livelihood diversification and 
poverty reduction under Deen Dayal Antyodaya Yojana - National Rural livelihoods Mission 
of the Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India. DDU-GKY aims to skill rural 
youth who are poor. DDU- GKY seeks to promote sustainable livelihoods for rural youth 
through placement linked skilling programs. MoRD pursues its goal of rural poverty reduction 
by adopting a multi-pronged strategy. DDU-GKY derives importance from its potential to 
reduce poverty with speed by diversifying incomes thereby reducing overall vulnerability. 
Market oriented standard Led placement linked skilling efforts differentiate DDU-GKY from 
other skilling initiatives of departments in Government of India. The scheme focuses on 
transforming rural poor youth into an economically independent and globally relevant 
workforce through demand-driven skilling for employment. 
 
2.2 Objective of Scheme 
  
• To provide the placement to rural poor youth in the age group of 15–35 years (up 
to 45 years for women, PwD, and other vulnerable groups) and provide them with 
jobs having regular monthly wages at or above the minimum wages. This 
objective is sought to be achieved by targeted mobilisation of rural poor youth, 
proper counselling of youth and parents, selection for skilling based on aptitude, 
and imparting standard led training on specific set of skills, knowledge and 
attitude there by enhancing employability, based on market demand and 
requirement in the economy. 
• To provide industry-led skill training opportunities. 
• To facilitate safe and gainful migration for rural youth seeking employment 
beyond their native areas. 
• To contribute to the national goal of inclusive growth by connecting rural youth to 
mainstream economic activities. 
 
2.3 Key Features 
• Placement-linked Skill Development Programme targeting Rural Poor Youth, 
minimum 70% placement (minimum 50% wage employment and maximum 20% 
Self/Gig employment of total trained).  

5 
 
• Minimum 6 months placement and 12 months of tracking. 
• State Led Scheme implemented in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode 
• Mandatory coverage  
o Scheduled Caste & Scheduled Tribes (50%),  
o Women (33%) of candidates trained &  
o 5% People with Disability 
 
2.4  Key Programme Components 
 
Parameter Details 
Target Beneficiaries Rural Poor Youth – 15 to 35 years (up to 45 years for 
Special Groups) 
Mandatory Placement Minimum 70% of trained candidates (Wage: min 50%; Self-
employment: max 20%) 
Training Duration Minimum 576 hours (~3 months) to Maximum 2,304 hours 
(~12 months) 
Mandatory Coverage SC & ST: 50%; Women: 33%; Persons with Disability (PwD): 
5% 
Training Content Trade- specific skills, Soft skills, Basic Spoken English, IT 
Awareness, Entrepreneurship skills 
Implementation Mode Public-Private Partnership 
Special Initiatives ‘Himayat’ in J&K UT & Ladakh UT (Rural & Urban);  
‘Roshni’ in Left Wing Extremist and Aspirational Districts 
(100% Residential, min 40% women) 
 
2.5 Sub Components 
 
• Himayat: Implemented in Jammu & Kashmir (J&K) and Ladakh for Rural and 
Urban youth with 100% central funding. 
• Roshni:  
o 27 Left Wing Extremist districts from 9 states 
o 100% Residential 
o Minimum 40% women candidates. 
• Unnati:  
o Convergence with Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme (MGNREGS) 
o Skilling two family members of the Household who have completed minimum 
60 days of employment under MGNREGS 
 
2.6  Implementation Architecture 
 
The DDUGKY implementation architecture operates across three levels. At the 
national level, the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) is responsible for policy 
formulation, including guidelines and standard operating procedures (SOPs), allocating 
targets to States, and overall monitoring. At the State/UT level, State Rural Livelihood 
Missions (SRLMs) empanel and sanction projects to Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs), 
while ensuring SOP compliance, mobilisation support, capacity building, skill gap analysis, 
and migration support. At the implementation level, PIAs comprising private training 

6 
 
organisations, industry partners, NGOs, government/semi-government institutions, and 
educational bodies, undertake end-to-end project execution, including candidate mobilisation 
and selection, training with NSQF-aligned courses, enabling third-party assessments, 
placements, post-placement support for six months, and tracking candidates for up to 12 
months. 
 
2.7 On the issue of implementation architecture under DDU-GKY, during the course of 
evidence, AS (DoRD) explained as under:- 
  
“इन दो Ö लाइडŌ म¤ इंÈ लीम¤टेशन आिकª टे³ चर िदखाया गया है। नेशनल लेवल पर úामीण िवकास 
िवभाग कì तरफ से पॉिलसी फॉमूªलेशन, अÿूवल, Ö टेट ए³ शन È लाÆ स और मॉिनटåरंग है। इसम¤ Ö टेट का 
बड़ा इंपोट¦ट रोल है। इसम¤ एसआरएलएम या Ö टेट िÖकल डेवलपम¤ट िमशन के  तहत उनका काम है ÿोजे³ ट 
इंÈ लीम¤िटंग एज¤सी, जो िÖकल ÿोवाइडर ह§, उनका इमपैनल करना, उनके  ÿोजे³ ट्स को स§³ शन करना और 
एसओपी के  तहत उनका इंÈ लीम¤टेशन मॉिनटर करना। ÿोजे³ ट इंÈ लीम¤िटंग एज¤सी जो िÖकल ÿोवाइडसª ह§, वे 
ÿाइवेट ůेिनंग ऑग¥नाइजेशंस हो सकती ह§, इंडÖ ůी एÌ पलॉयसª हो सकते ह§, नॉनगवनªम¤टल ऑग¥नाइजेशंस हो 
सकते ह§, गवनªम¤ट, सेमी गवनªम¤ट इंÖ टीट्यूशंस, ओटोनोमस बॉडीज़ हो सकती ह§, एº युके शनल इंÖ टीट्यूट्स 
हो सकते ह§। इनका काम है, िÖकल गैप का एनालाइिसस करना, युवाओं को मोबलाइज करके  Ö øìिनंग और 
सले³ शन करना, ůेिनंग स¤टर ओपेन करके  ůेिनंग, उनका एसेसम¤ट और फाइनली È लेसम¤ट करने का उनका 
रोल है। इस Ö लाइड म¤ जो ÿोसेस िदखाया है, Ö टेट का Ö टेट िÖकल गैप Ö टडी करता है, िजससे से³ टर और 
कोस¥ज आइड¤िटफाई करने के  बाद वह एमओआरडी को अपनी åर³ वेÖ ट भेजता है। एलोके शन ऑफ टारगेट 
होने क े  बाद Ö टेट ओपेन िबड ÿपोजल, ए³ सÿेसन ऑफ इंटरेÖ ट देता है, िजसके  तहत ÿोजे³ ट इंÈ लीम¤टेशन 
एज¤सीज़ एÈ लाई करती ह§। उनका ÿपोजल Ö टेट लेवल पर अÿेजल होता है और फाइनली Ö टेट लेवल पर 
एक कमेटी है, ÿोजे³ ट अÿूवल कमेटी, जो एिडशनल चीफ सेøे टरी/िÿंिसपलसेøे टरी/सेøे टरी, łरल 
डेवलपम¤ट कì चेयरमैनिशप पर यह ÿोजे³ ट अÿूवल होता है। इस Ö लाइड म¤ ³ यूÌ यूलेिटव ÿोúेस दशाªयी गयी 
है। आज के  हाल पर तकरीबन 18 लाख से º यादा लोग इस Ö कìम का लाभ उठा चुके  ह§, उसम¤ से तकरीबन 
12 लाख लोगŌ को È लेसम¤ट िमला है। हमने 36 से³ टसª और 816 ůेड्स म¤ ůेिनंग ÿदान कì है। टॉप से³ टसª 
आप देख सकते ह§, इसम¤ दशाªये गये ह§, इंफॉम¥शन एंड टे³ नोलॉजी, åरटेल, पåरधान और वÖ ý, ट्यूåरº म और 
हॉिÖपटैिलटी और हेÐ थ टॉप से³ टसª ह§ और टॉप ůेड्स भी हमने इस Ö लाइड म¤ िदखायी ह§। इस Ö लाइड म¤ 
हमने वषª 2014-15 से वषª 2025-26 कì ÿोúेस िदखायी है। इसम¤ एक िवषय यह है िक कु ल क§ िडडेट्स म¤ 
से 50 परस¤ट से º यादा मिहलाओं को ůेिनंग दी गयी है।“ 

7 
 
 
  
2.8 Training 
 
• DDU-GKY allows Qualification Packs (QP)/Course/Job roles approved by 
National Skills Qualification Council (NSQC), NCVET & made available on 
National qualification Register or portal of Ministry of skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship.  
• Mandatory components of every training course under DDU-GKY  
o Course duration-576 hours to 2304 hours : 
o Trade specific skills-National Skill Qualification Framework aligned courses 
o Soft skills 


8 
 
o Basic spoken English – curriculum standardized 
o Information Technology awareness - curriculum standardized 
o Entrepreneurship Skills – curriculum standardized 
 
2.9 During the course of evidence on the issue of training given to women under DDU-
GKY, AS DoRD) stated as under:- 
 
“इस Ö लाइड म¤ हमने मिहलाओं को दी गयी ůेिनंग का िववरण िदया है। सर, अगर हम से³ टसª देख¤, 
िजनम¤ ůेिनंग दी गयी है, तो आईटी-आईटीईएस, पåरधान और गृह सº जा का सामान म¤ 17 परसेट है, रीटेल 
है, ट्यूåरº म एंड हॉिÖपटैिलटी, हेÐ थके यर और इले³ ůॉिन³ स है। माक¥ ट िडमांड के  अनुसार इस Ö कìम के  
तहत ůेिनंग दी जा रही है। सर, अगर हम È लेसम¤ट हòए क§ िडडेट्स का डेटा देखते ह§, तो िÖकिलंग के  बाद 
तकरीबन 21 परस¤ट लोगŌ को अपने ही िजले म¤ वेज एंÈ लॉयम¤ट िमलता है, तकरीबन 40 परस¤ट को अपने ही 
Ö टेट म¤ एंÈ लॉयम¤ट िमलता है और 39 परस¤ट लोगŌ को Ö टेट के  बाहर वेज एंÈ लॉयम¤ट िमलता है। इस Ö कìम 
के  तहत पोÖ ट È लेसम¤ट सपोटª िदया जाता है, इसका उĥेÔ य गेनफु ल माइúेशन सपोटª देने का है। पोÖ ट 
È लेसम¤ट सपोटª 1270 Łपये ÿित माह छह महीने तक देने का ÿावधान है और माइúेशन सपोटª स¤टर भी 
Ö थािपत करने का ÿोिवजन है, िजसम¤ 18 Ö टेट्स ने माइúेशन सिवªस स¤टसª ओपेन िकए ह§। सर, इस 
Ö लाइड म¤ इस Ö कìम के  बारे म¤ कì गयी एक Ö टडी है, जो ůांस łरल एúी कं सिÐटंग सिवªसेज़ ÿाइवेट 
िलिमटेड Ĭारा कì गयी है। वषª 2016 से 2023 तक कì ůेिनंग को उÆ हŌने एसेस िकया है, तकरीबन 5000 
ůेनीज़ का इÆ हŌने सव¥ िकया है, इसकì मेन फाइंिडंग है ब ेिस³ ली 65 परस¤ट का È लेसम¤ट हòआ है और 
तकरीबन 86 परस¤ट जो È लेसम¤ट असाइन हòआ है वह िÖकल म¤ जो ůेिनंग िमली है, उसी से अलाइंड है। 
इसका मतलब मीिनंगफु ल ůेिनंग दी गयी थी और वे उस ůेड म¤ लग पाए थे। सैलरी úोथ अगर देखी जाए, तो 
करीब तीन साल म¤ उनको 30 परस¤ट कì बढ़त िदखी है और एवरेज सैलरी 16500 Łपये के  आसपास है। 
सर, इस Ö लाइड म¤ आईटी और हॉिÖपटैिलटी के  ůेनीज़ के  कु छ उदाहरण हमने िदए ह§, िजनको वेज 
एंÈ लॉयम¤ट िमला है। कु ल 576 Ö टूड¤ट्स ऐसे भी ह§, िजनको फॉरेन È लेसम¤ट भी िमला है, जैसे यूएसए और 
माÐ टा म¤ भी ůेिनंग के  बाद लोग गए ह§।“ 
 

9 
 
  
2.10  Candidate Lifecycle 
 
The candidate lifecycle under DDUGKY follows a structured progression to ensure 
effective skill development and employment outcomes. It begins with mobilisation of 
candidates, followed by aptitude testing and counselling to assess suitability and guide 
career choices. Selected candidates undergo training, leading to formal assessment and 
placement in jobs. Post-placement, candidates may receive on-the-job training, and their 
progress is tracked to ensure retention and stability. After 12 months of verified employment, 
candidates become eligible for upskilling or reskilling to enhance their career growth. 
 
2.11  Achievements (as of March 2026) 
 
Under the Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY), a total 
of 18.38 lakh rural youth have been trained, out of which 11.94 lakh candidates have been 
placed in gainful employment, including 576 foreign placements, reflecting the programme’s 
expanding global outreach. The skilling ecosystem under DDU-GKY spans 37 sectors and 
816 trades, ensuring alignment with diverse industry requirements. In terms of gender 
distribution, the programme demonstrates balanced participation, with 9.64 lakh male 
candidates and 8.73 lakh female candidates placed (Refer to Annexure I: State-Wise 
Cumulative Performance as of March 2026). 
 
The major sectors driving employment outcomes include Information Technology, 
Retail, Apparel & Textiles, Tourism & Hospitality, and Healthcare, which together account for 
a significant share of placements. At the trade level, the programme has focused on high-
demand job roles such as Garment Sewing Machine Operator, Retail Sales Associate, Food 
& Beverage Service-Steward, Accounts Assistant using Tally, Warehouse Packer, General 
Duty Assistant (Healthcare), Hospitality Assistant (Tourism), Domestic Data Entry Operator 
(IT sector), DTP and Print Publishing Assistant, and Customer Care Executive, thereby 


10 
 
ensuring that beneficiaries are equipped with skills relevant to both domestic and 
international labour markets. 
 
2.12  
 
 
 
 
 
2.13  Gainful Migration Support 
 
DDUGKY facilitates gainful migration of rural youth to secure sustainable 
employment beyond their local areas while ensuring their safety, stability, and career 


11 
 
progression. The programme promotes informed migration through pre-departure 
counselling, provision of safe accommodation, and linkage to jobs in the organized sector. It 
emphasizes fair wages, adherence to minimum employment standards, and continuous 
post-placement support to help candidates integrate into new environments. With ongoing 
tracking and dedicated handholding, it ensures retention and well-being, positioning 
migration as a pathway to long-term socio-economic advancement. 
 
Key steps taken to facilitate youth migration and placement: 
 
• Counselling of youth and parents on course selection and career opportunities 
• NSQF-led skilling aligned with market demand combined with employability and 
life skills 
• Migration Support Centres (MSCs): 18 States have set up MSCs 
• Post-Placement Support of ₹1,270/month for 6 months to support relocation 
costs 
 
2.14  Impact Evaluation  
 
An independent evaluation of DDUGKY for the period 1 April 2016 to 31 December 
2023 across 10 states (30 districts) assessed its outcomes based on a sample of 5,000 
trainees, along with inputs from 80 employers, 80 PIAs, and 80 training centre managers. 
DDUGKY has demonstrated strong impact in improving employment outcomes for rural 
youth, with an average placement rate exceeding 65%. A high degree of job relevance is 
evident, with about 86.73% of placements aligned to the trainees’ trades, ensuring better 
skill utilization. The programme has also contributed to income enhancement, reflected in an 
average salary growth of 30.79%, with candidates earning an average monthly salary of 
around ₹16,500, highlighting its effectiveness in promoting sustainable livelihoods. The 
impact evaluation was conducted by Transrural Agri Consulting Services Pvt. Ltd. 
 
2.15 On being asked about the non-placement of 6 lakh candidates under DDU-GKY and 
RSETI, Dir. (DoRD) stated as under:- 
 
“सर, एक िबÆदु उठाया गया िक 6 लाख क§ िडडेट्स डीडीयूजीके वाई म¤ Èल¤सम¤ट नहé पाए ह§। यहां 
पर म§ यह तÃय रखना चाहóंगा िक ओवरऑल कं ůी का जो 65 ÿितशत का करंट Èलेसम¤ट रेÔयो है, वह फै ³ट 
है। परÆतु, यह Öटेटवाइज़ वैरी करता है। जो ÿाइवेट Èलेयसª इंडीिवजुअल ÿोजे³ट्स लेकर ÿोजे³ट्स चलाते 
ह§, उसम¤ वे जो भी Èलेसम¤ट करते ह§, उसक े  िलए हम उÆह¤ इंडीिवजुअल ÿोजे³टवाइज़ पेम¤ट करते ह§। अगर 
वह पीआईए Èलेसम¤ट के  70 परस¤ट मानक को पूरा नहé करती है, तो उसे ÿोजे³ट कì पूरी रािश नहé दी 
जाती है। उससे åरकवरी भी होती है और रािश को काट िलया जाता है। इसम¤ इंस¤िटव का भी ÿावधान है। जो 
पीआईए 70 परस¤ट से अिधक Èलेसम¤ट करती ह§, उÆह¤ इस¤िटव भी िदया जाता है। फॉरेन Èलेसम¤ट्स के  िलए 
भी अलग से इंस¤िटव है। इसिलए मंýालय का ÿयास यही रहता है िक ये Èलेसम¤ट्स बढ़¤। लेिकन, कई बार 
मिहलाएं और बि¸चयां, जो पलायन कर गईं और कु छ िदनŌ बाद लौट आईं, तो पहले 3 महीने के  िमिनमम 
रोजगार का हमारा जो मानक था, अब उसे बढ़ाकर 6 महीने कर िदया गया है। अगर वह मानक पूरा नहé होता 
है, तो भी हम उस पीआईए को उस चीज के  पैसे नहé देते ह§। इसीिलए कई बार यह गैप छूट जाता है। 
हालांिक, हमारा ÿयास हमेशा इसे बढ़ाने का रहता है। इस िदशा म¤ हम हमेशा राºयŌ के  साथ बैठक¤  करते ह§, 

12 
 
पीआईएज़ के  साथ Öटेक होÐडर कं सलटेशन करते ह§ और इÌÈलॉयर एवं इÌÈलॉई के  बीच इंडÖůी मीट भी 
कराते भी ह§, िजससे िक हम इस िफगर को और आगे बढ़ा सक¤ ।  
सर, इसी ÿकार से आरसेटी म¤ भी यह िबÆदु उठाया गया िक 61 लाख के  सÆदभª म¤ िसफª  44 लाख 
ही सेटÐड हòए ह§। वहां भी यही कारण है। कई बार वहां भी मिहलाएं और बि¸चयां होती ह§, जो शादी होने बाद 
अपनी एंटरÿेÆयोरिशप छोड़ देती ह§ या कहé और चली जाती ह§, लेिकन हमारा हमेशा ÿयास रहता है िक 
उनकì अिधक से अिधक ह§ड होिÐडंग करक े हम अिधक से अिधक सेटलम¤ट कराएं।“ 
2.16 Introduction of Revised Guidelines under DDU-GKY 2.0  
 
The revised guidelines, forming the basis of DDU-GKY 2.0, have officially come into 
effect from April 1, 2025. These updated guidelines incorporate several major changes 
aimed at improving the effectiveness, efficiency, and industry relevance of the scheme. The 
key modifications introduced are as follows: 
 
S. 
No. 
Particulars / 
Revisions 
DDU-GKY 1.0 DDU-GKY 2.0 Reason 
i. Placement 3 months 6 months Sustainable Employment 
Focus 
ii. Funding 
Individual 
Projects to 
funding 
batches, based 
on achievement 
of milestones 
There is provision of 4 
installments i.e. 25% 
each of Total Project 
cost, wherein 1 st 
instalment releases to 
Project Implementing 
Agency (PIA) as 
advance and rest 3 
installment releases 
based on the 
prescribed milestones. 
There is provision of 
4 installments i.e. 
30%, 20%, 20% and 
30% of 1 batch of 
maximum 35 
candidates. The 
installment to be 
released based on 
the prescribed 
milestones. 
  
The provision of advance 
has been removed and 
also the releases to be 
made batch wise instead 
of against total project 
cost. It has been revised 
in the interest of 
protecting public money 
by avoiding misuse and 
parking of funds PIAs. 
iii Employment 
type 
Wage Employment Wage Employment, 
Self and Gig 
Employment 
(Minimum 70% 
placement -minimum 
50% wage 
employment and 
maximum 20% 
Self/Gig employment 
of total trained).  
The scope of the scheme 
has been expanded to 
cover self-employment 
and gig economy 
opportunities, fostering 
entrepreneurial skills and 
local enterprise 
development among rural 
youth. 
iv Eligibility for a 
PIA 
 (i) Registered under 
Indian Trust Acts or any 
State Society 
Registration Act or any 
State Cooperative 
Societies or Multi-State 
Co-operative Acts or 
the Companies Act 
2013 or the Limited 
Liability Partnerships 
(i) Captive Employer 
(ii) Existing PIAs 
having experience of 
greater than 50% 
placement with 
DDU-GKY. 
(iii). Skilling 
Agencies who do not 
have any DDU-GKY 
experience. 
Industry Collaboration via 
Captive Employment: The 
scheme now promotes 
deeper engagement with 
industry partners through 
Captive Employment 
models, which aim to 
enhance job quality and 
ensure long- term 
employability. 

13 
 
Act 2008, or  
 (ii)  A Government or a 
semi-government 
organization at the 
State and National 
Level. 
(iv) Start-ups for 
Skilling recognised 
by Dept of Industrial 
Policy & Promotion, 
Ministry of 
Commerce & 
Industry, GoI 
  
Encouraging Startups as 
PIAs: The revised 
guidelines also enable 
startups to act as Project 
Implementing Agencies 
(PIAs), encouraging 
innovation in training 
delivery and expanding 
the capacity for 
employment generation. 
 
2.17 Additional Provisions under DDU-GKY 2.0  
 
Additional provisions under DDU-GKY 2.0 
• Upskilling & Reskilling for trainees who were placed for 12 months 
• Inclusion of Entrepreneurship skills as non-domain module  
• DBT for Candidates  
• Integrated Digital Platform: For End-to-End lifecycle of projects under both the 
schemes of Rural Skills Division i.e. DDU-GKY and RSETI. 
 
Year-wise performance 
Year Trained Placed 
2014-15 43,038 21,446 
2015-16 2,36,471 1,09,512 
2016-17 1,62,586 1,47,883 
2017-18 1,31,527 75,787 
2018-19 2,41,509 1,37,251 
2019-20  2,47,177 1,50,214 
2020-21 38,289 49,563 
2021-22 97,006 45,612 
2022-23 2,35,599 1,60,546 
2023-24  2,00,033 1,61,230 
2024-25  1,00,883 84,946 
2025-26 till Sept'25  49,829 15,542 
Total 17,83,947 11,59,532 
 
  

14 
 
2.18
 


15 
 


16 
 


17 
 
 
 
 


18 
 
                                                            CHAPTER III 
 
Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETI) 
 
3.1 Introduction  
 
RSETIs were launched in 2009 as a sub-scheme under DAY-NRLM to provide short-
duration residential skill training for self-employment. It is based on the RUDSETI (Rural 
Development and Self Employment Training Institute) model. It aims to strengthen RSETIs 
as credible Centres of Excellence for livelihood promotion through demand-driven skill 
development, entrepreneurship facilitation, and promotion of sustainable self-employment 
among rural youth. As of May 2026, a total of 636 RSETIs are operational, covering 623 
districts across 27 States and 6 Union Territories. 
 
3.2  Key Programme Components 
 
The RSETI model comprises six integrated components that ensure comprehensive 
support for rural youth: mobilisation from villages, followed by short, intensive residential 
training, and a focus on promoting self-employment and entrepreneurship. This is reinforced 
by two years of post-training handholding support, facilitation of credit linkage through bank 
loans, and independent assessment and certification to validate skills and outcomes. 
Parameter Details 
Target Beneficiaries Rural Youth – 18 to 50 years (priority: Women, SC/STs, 
PwDs, SHG members) 
Settlement Target Minimum 70% 
Post-Training Support 2 years (including credit linkage support) 
Partnership Model Government of India + State Governments + Sponsor Banks 
(at least one RSETI per district) 
Courses 77 NSQF- aligned Entrepreneurship Development 
Programme (EDP) courses; Duration: 60–720 hours 
Convergence NRLM, PMEGP, PMAY-G, MUDRA and other schemes 
Assessment Independent assessment and certification; 25 Sponsor 
Banks 
 
Course Portfolio 
Category Number of Courses 
General EDP 9 
Process (Services) 35 
Agriculture 19 
Product (Manufacturing) 14 
Total 77* 
*Of these 77 courses, 13 are new courses 
  

19 
 
3.3 Implementation Architecture 
 
The implementation architecture of RSETI operates across national, state, and 
district levels with clearly defined roles. At the national level, the Ministry of Rural 
Development (MoRD) is responsible for policy formulation, funding, and infrastructure 
support, along with oversight through a National Level Monitoring Committee that reviews 
performance, settlement outcomes, and infrastructure development. At the state level, State 
Governments and SRLMs oversee programme implementation, route funds to banks, 
monitor credit linkage through the State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC), and allocate 
districts to Lead Banks. At the district level, Lead Banks establish and manage RSETIs and 
training delivery, while the district administration supports land allotment, mobilisation, and 
convergence with other rural schemes; overall progress is regularly reviewed by the District 
Level Review Committee (DLRC).  
 
3.4  Candidate Lifecycle 
 
The RSETI candidate lifecycle follows a structured path to support entrepreneurship 
among rural youth, beginning with identification and mobilisation of candidates from local 
communities. This is followed by training and assessment through short, intensive residential 
programmes. Post-training, candidates receive continuous handholding support along with 
progress reporting to ensure stability and readiness. They are then facilitated with credit 
linkage through banking channels, culminating in the setup of their own enterprises, thereby 
promoting sustainable self-employment. 
 
3.5  Achievements (as of March 2026) 
 
Since its inception in 2009, the Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) 
have trained a total of 61.45 lakh candidates, out of which 44.9 lakh candidates have been 
successfully settled in self-employment. The programme has also facilitated credit linkage 
for over 23.5 lakh beneficiaries, enabling them to establish and expand their enterprises. 
Notably, RSETIs have maintained a strong focus on women’s participation, with 
approximately 43.6 lakh women beneficiaries, accounting for about 71% of the total 
trained candidates, thereby contributing significantly to women-led rural entrepreneurship 
and livelihood promotion (Refer to Annexure II: State-Wise Cumulative Performance as of 
March 2026). 
 
It is observed that eight major sectors account for nearly 69% of the total RSETI 
training courses, reflecting a strong focus on demand-driven livelihood opportunities. The 
training portfolio includes key courses such as Tailoring (Women’s Garments), Junior 
Beauty Practitioner (Laghu Udyami), Mushroom Cultivation, Krishi Udyami, Basics of 
Homemade Agarbatti Making, Basics of Making Jute Products, Laghu Udyami (Fast 
Food Stall), Essentials of Making Creative Jewellery, Masonry and Concrete Work, 
and Bank Mitra under Mission ‘One GP One BC Sakhi’, thereby covering a wide 
spectrum of agriculture, services, manufacturing, and financial inclusion-linked livelihoods. 
 
3.6 On being asked about the issue of credit linkage under RSETI, Dir. (DoRD) stated as 
under:- 
 

20 
 
“सर, øे िडट िलंके ज कì बात भी कì गई है। øे िडट िलंके ज कì िदशा म¤ मंýालय ने सुधाराÂमक 
कदम उठाए ह§। पहले टोटल ůेÆड क§ िडडेट्स का øे िडट िलक¤ ज 35 ÿितशत था, िजसे िपछले वषª बढ़ाकर 
50 परस¤ट कर िदया गया है। अब ब§कŌ को यह म§डेट है िक उÆह¤ ůेÆड क§ िडडेट्स का सेटलम¤ट िमिनमम 50 
परस¤ट øे िडट िलंके ज के  माÅयम से करना है। उसके  िलए हमारा आरसेटी और भी कई पहलुओं पर ÿिश±ु 
और ÿिश±ण ÿाĮ ब¸चŌ को लाभ पहòंचाता है, जैसे ÿोजे³ट åरपोटª कै से बनाई जाएगी, लोन एिÈलके शÆस 
कै से भरी जाएंगी और डॉ³यूम¤टेशन सपोटª कै से होगा। इस िदशा म¤ जो 25 ÖपॉÆसåरंग ब§³स ह§, मंýालय के  
लेवल पर आदरणीय सिचव महोदय कì अÅय±ता म¤ उनके  साथ िनरंतर मीिटंµस होती ह§। उनम¤ हम 
िडपाटªम¤ट ऑफ फाइन¤िशयल सिवªसेज़ को भी इÆ³लूड करते ह§। हमारा ÿयास यही रहता है िक हम ब§कŌ को 
अिधक से अिधक स¤िसटाइज़ कर¤ िक वे हमारे आरसेटी ůेÆड क§ िडडेट्स को अिधक से अिधक øे िडट िलंके ज 
द¤। इस िदशा म¤ मंýालय और भी ÿयास करता रहेगा।“ 
 
3.7
 


21 
 
 
 
3.8  Impact Evaluation 
 
An evaluation of RSETIs was undertaken, covering 60 RETIs across 15 states, 
assessing 4,565 trainees. The assessment highlights strong outcomes in training delivery, 
governance, and long-term impact. Women’s participation is notable, with 80% mobilised 
through SHGs and federations under NRLM/SRLM, and a significant share opting for home 
or community-based enterprises. Around 70% of settled trainees operate locally, reinforcing 
the model’s focus on sustainable, community-rooted livelihoods. In terms of infrastructure, 
62% of RSETIs function from permanent premises, while 38% operate from temporary 
facilities. As of now 407 (64%) RSETIs are running in old building out of 636 operational 
RSETIs. The impact assessment was undertaken by Academy of Management 
Studies, Lucknow in 2023. 
 
3.9 During the course of evidence, Dir. (DoRD) on the issue of coverage of RSETI stated 
as under:- 
 
“सर, वतªमान म¤ आरसेटी कì सं´या 636 है। इनका कवरेज अभी 100 परस¤ट िडिÖů³ट्स म¤ नहé 
है, परÆतु मंýालय कì इस योजना का ÿावधान यही है िक हर िजले म¤ एक आरसेटी सेÆटर होना चािहए। यह 
िजले के  अúणी ब§क कì िजÌमेदारी है िक वह संÖथान खोलेगा। उसके  िलए उसे राºय सरकार के  माÅयम से 
एक एकड़ जमीन मुहैया कराने का ÿावधान है। भारत सरकार कं Öů³शन úांट कì मदद के  łप म¤ दो करोड़ 
Łपये कì रािश देती है। इस रािश को अगले फाइन¤स कमीशन और ईएफसी म¤ बढ़ाए जाने का ÿावधान भी 
ÿÖतािवत िकया गया है, ³यŌिक कई जगहŌ पर ऐसी मांग कì गई थी िक यह रािश कम है और उसे बढ़ाया 
जाए। इस िदशा म¤ भी हम ÿयास कर रहे ह§।  
हालांिक, 227 से अिधक संÖथान अभी िकराये कì ÿेिमसेस पर चल रहे ह§। उनके  िलए भी मंýालय 
का यही ÿयास है िक हम ब§कŌ को जÐद से जÐद जमीन िदला सक¤ । भूिम एक स¤िसिटव इÔयू है, ³यŌिक Öटेट 
म¤ कई बार एक एकड़ जमीन सुलभ नहé हो पाती है। उस िदशा म¤ भी मंýालय ने कदम उठाए ह§ िक यिद 


22 
 
िमिनमम आधा एकड़ जमीन भी िमल रही है, तो वह दे दी जाए। इसके  िलए एक एसओपी बनी हòई है। ब§कŌ को 
उस एसओपी के  माÅयम से िबिÐडंग बनवानी होती है। इसके  िलए हम िनरंतर ÿयास करते रहते ह§ िक अिधक 
से अिधक ब§कŌ को र¤टेड ÿेिमसेस से हटाकर जÐद से जÐद ओन ÿेिमसेस म¤ ले जाया जाए, तािक वहां अ¸छे 
तरीके  से रेिजड¤िसयल ůेिनंग ÿोवाइड कराई जा सके ।“ 
3.10 On the same issue, Dir. (DoRD) further, clarified as under:- 
“सर, आरसीटी म¤ आज िजतने िजले छूटे ह§, इसम¤ ³ या होता है िक  कई बार अ³ सर राº यŌ म¤ जब 
नए िजले बन जाते ह§, तो वे िजले पहले िजस िजले म¤ थे, वहां का जो आरसीटी स¤टर था, हमने आरसीटी को 
और िजला ÿशासन को यह िनद¥श िदया हòआ है िक  आप उनको कवर कर¤गे। हमारी तरफ से सारे िजले कवडª 
ह§। जहां आरसीटी नहé है, वहां उनको आस-पास के  िजलŌ से जोड़ कर रखा गया है िक  वे उस िजले के  ब¸ चŌ 
को ले कर अपने यहां ÿिश±ण ÿदान कर¤गे। इसके  अलावा भी हमारा ÿयास यही है िक  हम हर िजले म¤ 
आरसीटी खोल¤। परंतु कई बार राº यŌ का भी यह होता है िक हमारा यह िजला बहòत छोटा है, यहां बहòत कम 
आबादी है या वे दुगªम इलाके  म¤ है, वहां आरसीटी हम नहé खोल सकते ह§, पर हम इसके  िलए भी यह म¤डेट 
करते ह§ िक आप आरसीटी आज कì तारीख म¤ नहé खोल पा रहे ह§ तो भी आप वहां कì जो जनसं´ या है, 
और जो लाभाथê ह§, उनको आप पास के  स¤टर पर ले कर आएं और लाभ ÿदान कर¤। इसका एक म¤डेट हमने 
राº य सरकार को कहा है।“ 
 
3.11 
 


23 
 


24 
 


25 
 


26 
 


27 
 
  
 
  


28 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
DAY - NRLM 
 
4.1 DAY-NRLM comprises key components focused on institution building and capacity 
development, financial inclusion, promotion of farm and non-farm livelihoods, as well as 
advancing social inclusion and development. 
 
Under DAY-NRLM, extensive community mobilisation has been undertaken through 
a three-tier institutional structure that organizes rural women at scale. At the grassroots, Self 
Help Groups (SHGs) comprising 10–20 women at the hamlet level have mobilised over 
10.05 crore members. These SHGs are federated into Village Organisations (VOs), with 92 
lakh SHGs forming around 5.4 lakh VOs at the village level. At the sub-block level, 34,140 
Cluster Level Federations (CLFs) have been formed of which 10,189 CLFs have been 
nurtured as model CLFs, bring together multiple VOs, creating a robust and scalable 
platform for collective action, financial inclusion, and livelihood promotion. 
 
4.2 During the course of evidence, AS (DoRD) on the aspect of eligibility criteria under 
DAY-NRLM stated as under:- 
 
 “ सर, पहला िवषय एिलिजिबिलटी कं डीशन के  बारे म¤ उठाया है िक एसएचजी वीमेन के  
िलए एिलिजिबिलटी ³ या है। वषª 2011 म¤ जब यह Ö कìम लांच हòई थी तो एक एसईसीसी सव¥ हòआ 
था। उस सव¥ म¤ गरीब पåरवारŌ कì पहचान कì गई थी। सव¥ म¤ आठ करोड़ का टारगेट था। उसम¤ 
टारगेट था िक आठ करोड़ दीिदयŌ को इस Ö कìम से जोड़ा जाएगा।“ 
4.3 Adding further on the issue of basis of eligibility criteria, AS (DoRD) stated as under:- 
“सर, इंिडिवजुअल हाउस आइड¤िटफाइड थे। वे डेपरीिवएशन इंडे³ स के  तहत 
आइड¤िटफाई िकए गए थे। सात इंडे³ स थे। अगर कोई िसंगल इंडे³ स होता है तो वह घर िडÿाइÓ ड 
माना जाता है। उन हाउसहोÐ ड्स को एनआरएलएम से जोड़ने कì बात हòई थी। जब Ö कìम लांच हòई 
थी तो आठ करोड़ को जोड़ने कì बात हòई थी। जब हम जमीनी Ö तर पर जाते ह§ तो कई लोग सव¥ म¤ 
नहé होते ह§, इसिलए उनको भी जोड़ना पड़ता है। पािटªिसपेटरी आइड¤िटिफके शन ऑफ द पुअर का 
एक काÆ सेÈ ट िनकला, िजसम¤ दीिदयां ही घर- घर जाती ह§ और वही आइड¤िटफाई करती ह§ िक यह 
घर सचमुच म¤ गरीब का है और इनको जोड़ना चािहए। एक तो आठ करोड़ का एसईसीसी का डाटा 
था। उसके  बाद पािटªिसपेटरी आइड¤िटिफके शन ऑफ द पुअर हòआ। उसम¤ भी कई लोग जोड़े गए।“ 
 
4.4 Annual Outreach (Capacity Building) 
 
DAY NRLM has developed a robust capacity building and training ecosystem 
characterised by extensive annual outreach, enabling sustained peer led learning and strong 
grassroots support. A key feature of this architecture is the large network of trained 
community cadres. Overall, nearly 9 Lakh women have been developed as Community 
Resource Persons (CRPs), who deliver a wide range of training and capacity building 
interventions across the SHG ecosystem, reaching about 7 Crore women. 61,453 women 
function as Financial Literacy Community Resource Persons (FL CRPs), collectively training 
nearly 3.5 Crore women in financial literacy. In addition, around 7 Crore women are covered 

29 
 
under insurance schemes and related training, strengthening financial security across SHG 
households. 
 
The programme also places strong emphasis on livelihoods, with approximately 1.5 
Crore women trained in farm and non-farm activities, enhancing income generation 
opportunities. Further, approximately 5 crore women have been trained in areas related to 
Food, Nutrition, Health and Water (FNHW) and gender, underscoring the programme’s 
comprehensive approach to empowerment and social development. 
 
4.5  Capacity Building Architecture (CRPs) 
 
Community Resource Persons (CRPs) are trained SHG members who act as para-
professionals to foster mission activities across thematic areas: 
 
Thematic Area No. of CRPs* (Lakh) 
Institution Building / Social Inclusion 5 Lakh 
Financial Inclusion 2 Lakh 
Farm Livelihoods 4.05 Lakh 
Non-Farm Livelihoods 0.64 Lakh 
*Over 2.74 Lakh CRPs have been certified by external institutions. 
  
The Mission has 619 Community Managed Training Centres (CMTCs) that are 
community owned and equipped with infrastructure to facilitate training and capacity building 
activities. 
 
4.6 Key Outcomes 
 
  (i) Financial Inclusion 
 
Under DAY-NRLM, significant progress has been made in advancing financial 
inclusion and strengthening rural financial ecosystems. A cadre of 58,340 Financial Literacy 
Community Resource Persons (CRPs) has been deployed to enhance financial awareness 
at the grassroots level. The programme has further promoted digital and doorstep banking 
through 1.54 lakh BC Sakhis (IIBF certified), who have collectively facilitated over 45.76 
crore digital transactions. Strong linkages with the formal banking system have enabled 
cumulative bank credit mobilisation of ₹12.88 lakh crore for rural households. In addition, 
14.89 lakh individual members have been financed for enterprise activities, with a total credit 
support of ₹18,269 crore, thereby fostering entrepreneurship. The Mission has also 
strengthened access to social security schemes, with coverage under PMJJBY (Life 
Insurance) reaching 6.22 crore members, PMSBY (Accident Insurance) covering 7.46 crore 
members, PMJAY (Health Insurance) covering 8.60 crore members, and APY (Pension 
scheme) benefitting 1.31 crore members, contributing to improved financial security among 
rural households. 
 
(a) On being asked about the bank linkage of SHGs under DAY-NRLM, AS 
(DoRD) stated as under:- 
 

30 
 
“एक ब§क का इÔ यु भी आया है। अगर हम िपछले 15 साल का आंकड़ा देख¤ तो एसएचजी 
ब§क िलंके ज म¤ ब§कसª आगे आ रहे ह§। हम लोगŌ ने लगभग 70 ÿितशत एसएचजीज को ब§क से िलंक 
कर िदया है। इसम¤ हमारा एनपीए 1.74 से 1.80 है। यह बहòत कम है। इसिलए, ब§³ स आने के  िलए 
तैयार ह§। जब इंिडिवजुअल मिहला ब§क से लोन लेने के  िलए जाती है तो ब§कसª कतराते ह§, ³ यŌिक 
उनको लगता है िक री-पेम¤ट नहé हो पाएगा। िपछले दो-तीन साल से हम लोग एंटरÿाइज ÿमोशन 
पर फोकस कर रहे ह§। हम लोग इंिडिवजुअल लोन देने कì कोिशश कर रहे ह§। िपछले साल हम 
लोगŌ ने करीब सात लाख मिहलाओं को इंिडिवजुअल लोन देने का ÿयास िकया है। आगे के  पांच 
वषŎ म¤  हम लोग इंिडिवजुअल ब§क लोÆ स को इÆ øìज करने कì कोिशश कर¤गे। हमारा टारगेट यही 
है िक हर वषª करीब 20 लाख मिहलाओं को इंिडिवजुअल लोन िदया जाए। इसम¤ समÖ याएं ह§। हम 
ब§क के  साथ िनरंतर काम कर रहे ह§ और एंगेजम¤ट कर रहे ह§। हम इसको इÌ ÿूव करने का ÿयास 
कर¤गे।“ 
(b) On the documentation issue as demanded by the banks from women 
members of SHGs, AS (DoRD), further clarified as below:- 
 
“सर, इस िदशा म¤ हम लोगŌ ने 13 ब§कŌ के  साथ एúीम¤ट िकया है। उनसे हमने ÿोसीजर 
को िसंÈ लीफाई करने कì बात कì है। हम वह एमओयू ए³ सट¤ड कर¤गे। हमने िडिजटल एÈ लीके शÆ स 
ऑफ लोÆ स कì भी शुłआत कì है। यह फरवरी महीने म¤ लांच हòआ था। अगर हम सभी लोन 
िडिजटल तरीके  से द¤गे तो हम उसकì मॉिनटåरंग भी कर पाएंगे। उस िदशा म¤ हम लोग काम कर रहे 
ह§।“ 
(c) On being asked about the credit linkage under DAY-NRLM, AS (DoRD), 
stated as under:- 
 
“सर, øे िडट िलंके ज कì बात भी हòई थी। हमने 12.88 लाख का øे िडट िलंके ज ÿाĮ िकया 
है। जैसा िक माननीय सदÖय ने बताया है िक हमने यह लाÖट 14 वषŎ म¤ अचीव िकया है। यह एक 
बहòत हाई अमाउंट नहé है। यह एक अचीवम¤ट है, लेिकन इसे और बढ़ाने कì जłरत है। अगले पांच 
वषŎ म¤ हमने 10 लाख करोड़ के  आंकड़े को टच करने का टाग¥ट िदया है। अगर एøॉस िद कं ůी 
एवरेज लोन िडसबसªम¤ट देख¤, तो एवरेज लोन 3.55 लाख Łपए िदया जाता है। बहòत सारे ऐसे 
Öटेट्स ह§, जहां पर एक लाख या डेढ़ लाख Łपये का लोन भी िदया जा रहा है। आगे कì कड़ी म¤ हम 
लोग SHGs का लोन अमाउंट बढ़ाने कì कोिशश कर¤गे और 12 लाख का जो टाग¥ट अचीव िकया 
है, उसे दो गुना करने का भी ÿयास कर¤गे।“ 
 
(ii) Farm Livelihoods Outcomes 
 
Under DAY-NRLM, significant progress has been achieved in strengthening farm-
based livelihoods through collective and diversified approaches. A total of 2.15 lakh 
Producer Groups have been formed, covering approximately 42 lakh members, along with 
755 Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs) supporting around 60,000 members. In addition, 
585 Large Size Producer Enterprises have been promoted with a membership base of about 
12 lakh, enabling scale and market access. 
The Mission has also facilitated the adoption of improved and sustainable agricultural 
practices at scale, with 5.01 crore households adopting agro-ecological practices and 2.91 
crore households benefitting from livestock-based interventions. Further, 30 lakh households 
have been supported under natural and organic farming initiatives, while 15 lakh households 

31 
 
have been covered under integrated farming clusters, thereby enhancing productivity, 
diversification, and sustainability of rural livelihoods. 
 
(iii) Non-Farm Livelihoods Outcomes 
 
Under DAY-NRLM, a total of 81 lakh entrepreneurs have been supported through 
both individual and group-based enterprises, reflecting a strong push towards non-farm 
livelihood diversification in rural areas. Of these, 41 lakh (51%) are engaged in trading 
activities, 26 lakh (31%) in services, and 14 lakh (18%) in manufacturing, indicating a 
balanced spread across different sectors of the rural economy. 
The programme supports these enterprises through a range of institutional and ecosystem-
based interventions, including Artisan Clusters, Sectoral Clusters, Start-Up Village 
Entrepreneurship Programme (SVEP), Micro Enterprise Development initiatives, One Stop 
Facilities, Incubators, and the Aajeevika Gramin Express Yojana, thereby providing end-to-
end support for enterprise promotion, capacity building, credit access, and market linkages. 
 
(iv) Lakhpati Didi Initiative 
 
A Lakhpati Didi is defined as a Self Help Group (SHG) member whose annual 
household income is ₹1 lakh or more, corresponding to an average monthly income of 
₹10,000 or above, sustained over at least four agricultural seasons or business cycles. 
Under the DAY-NRLM framework, the initiative has led to the creation of over 3 crore 
Lakhpati Didis, with 4.09 crore potential beneficiaries identified for further inclusion. To 
support this scale, around 4 lakh Community Resource Persons (CRPs) have been identified 
and trained to provide handholding and livelihood guidance. The Mission has set an 
ambitious target to create an additional 3 crore Lakhpati Didis, taking the total to 6 crore, 
thereby strengthening income enhancement at scale. 
 
To build institutional capacity for this initiative, two rounds of structured training 
programmes for National and State Level Resource Persons have been conducted Round 1 
in December 2023 and Round 2 in March 2025. These trainings have covered 6,611 Master 
Trainers and over 4 lakh CRPs, equipping them with the necessary knowledge and tools for 
livelihood planning, enterprise development, and implementation support at the grassroots 
level. 
  
(a) On being asked about the strategies to be followed by DoRD to create an 
additional 3 crore Lakhpati Didis under DAY-NRLM, Secretary (DoRD) stated 
as under:- 
 
“सर, एक िवषय रह गया था, आपने पूछा था िक अगली तीन करोड़ लखपित दीदी बनाने 
के  िलए आपकì रणनीित ³ या है। इसम¤ हमने एक िवÖ तृत रणनीित तैयार कर ली है। हमने करीब 
चार करोड़ पोट¤शल लखपित दीदी कì राº यवार एक सूची बना ली है िक कौन-कौन बन सकती है। 
हमने यह देखा िक उनकì वतªमान म¤ इनकम िकतनी है और इस इनकम को हम कै से आगे ले कर 
जाएंगे। सर, आपकì तरफ से एक सुझाव यह भी आया था िक महा लखपित दीदी या दस लाख के  
िलए देखा जाए, ³ यŌिक  एक लाख कम है। उसम¤ भी हम काम कर रहे ह§ और हम¤ बताते हòए खुशी हो 
रही है िक हमारी कु छ दीिदयां अभी करोड़पित भी ह§, हालांिक वह नंबर कम है, लेिकन कु छ दीिदयां 

32 
 
करोड़पित भी ह§, जो एक करोड़ तक इनकम बना रही ह§। माननीय ÿधान मंýी जी ने हम¤ लà य िदया 
है िक  अगले तीन सालŌ म¤ तीन करोड़ और लखपित दीिदयां बनानी ह§ तो उसम¤ हम ÿयासरत ह§।“ 
 
4.7
 
  
 
 
4.8
 
  


33 
 
 4.9 During the course of evidence, on the issue of marketing of products by SHGs under 
DAY-NRLM, AS (DoRD) stated as under:- 
“सर, माक¥ िटंग का भी एक इÔयू था। माक¥ िटंग म¤ हम लोग आगे कì कड़ी म¤ ÖटेÈस ल¤गे। आज के  हाल 
म¤ हम लोग ‘सरस मेला’ के  Ňू माक¥ िटंग करते ह§। हमारे पास ‘ई-सरस पोटªल’ है और ‘सरस’  कì एक गैलरी भी 
है। Öटेट्स म¤ अलग-अलग āांिडंµस के  Ňू माक¥ िटंग कì सुिवधा कì जाती है। िडिÖů³ट से लेकर Öटेट तक 
Āे मवकª  बनाने कì जो जłरत है, हम लोग उस डायरे³शन म¤ भी काम कर रहे ह§।“ 
 
  


34 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
  Impact Evaluation 
 
5.1   International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie) Baseline Evaluation (2019-20) 
 
Parameter Details 
Coverage 9 States: Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh &West 
Bengal 
Sample ~27,000 respondents and 5,000 SHGs 
Income Increased by 19% 
Informal Loans Declined by 20% 
Savings Increased by 28% 
Female Secondary Occupation Up by 4% 
Access to Social Schemes Increased by 6.5% 
 
5.2  3ie Follow-up Evaluation (2024) 
 
Parameter Details 
Coverage 9 States (same as baseline); evaluated DAY- NRLM and 
NRETP (NRETP completed in June 2024) 
Sample ~23,000 households and 5,000 SHGs 
Household Income Increased by 27% 
Financial Inclusion Improved; decline in informal borrowing 
Women's Economic Participation Enhanced 
SHG/VO membership in CLF Increased from 62% (2019) to 79% (2024) 
Social Impact Decline in regressive gender norms; stronger social 
networks 
 
5.3 DRSPL Evaluation on SVEP (2024) 
 
Parameter Details 
Coverage 1,159 enterprises across 17 states, 33 districts, 165 
villages 
CRP-EP Survey 157 Community Resource Persons – Enterprise Promotion 
surveyed 
Women-owned enterprises ~71% 
Prior inactivity ~35% had no prior income-generating activity 
SVEP as main income source 74% now rely on SVEP as main source of income 
Median Initial Investment ~₹40,000 (personal/family savings) 
Credit Availed ~72% availed loans through CEF and SHG 
Operational & Profitable ~96% enterprises operational; ~80% report profitability and 
reinvest in growth 
Sector Composition >50% trading-based; ~23% traditional arts and crafts 
 
  

35 
 
5.4 DRSPL Evaluation on MKSP (2024) 
 
Parameter Details 
Coverage 2,425 Mahila Kisans in 6 States across 240 villages, 48 
blocks, 24 districts 
Practice Adoption ~79% adopted and sustained MKSP-supported agricultural 
practices 
Producer Collective Participation ~64% are part of producer collectives (47% Producer 
Groups, 17% FPOs/PEs) 
Yield Improvement 52% reported higher grain yields 
Confidence Enhancement 48% increased confidence 
Agricultural Knowledge 40% improved agricultural knowledge 
Decision-Making 32% have better decision- making with reduced labour 
costs 
Income Gains ~18% of households reported annual income gains of over 
₹9,000 
Diversification 63% adopted kitchen gardens; 56% crop planning; 49% 
double cropping 
 
  
  

36 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
Collaboration among Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) and MSDE 
 
6.1 MoRD and MSDE have signed a MoU on 25th June, 2025 to design, implement and 
scale skill development and entrepreneurship initiatives for Self-Help Group (SHG) women. 
The partnership leverages MSDE’s technical expertise in skilling and MoRD’s extensive 
grassroots network under the DAY-NRLM to co-develop demand-driven training modules 
aligned with evolving market needs. These interventions aim to enhance employability, 
promote entrepreneurship, and enable SHG members to access diversified and sustainable 
livelihood opportunities, particularly in emerging and future-oriented sectors. 
 
A key aspect of the scope includes end-to-end capacity building and ecosystem 
strengthening. MSDE is responsible for curriculum development, training of trainers, 
certification through the Skill India Digital Hub, and leveraging its national skilling 
infrastructure such as ITIs, NSTIs, and entrepreneurship institutes. In parallel, MoRD 
focuses on beneficiary mobilization, contextualization and dissemination of training content, 
institutional convergence at district and state levels, and ensuring grassroots adoption 
through SHG networks. The collaboration also emphasizes awareness generation, financial 
literacy, market linkages, mentoring and enterprise development support to enable SHG 
women to transition into sustainable income-generating activities. 
As on 27th May 2026, Proposal for Training of Trainers (ToT) for 3,250 target for 
Capacity Building Programme of Master Trainers (350) and Facilitators (2,900) for 
Community Resource Persons- Enterprise Promotion approved under PMKVY 4.0 to be 
executed through NIESBUD and IIE in collaboration with Ministry of Rural Development. 
  
6.2 During the course of evidence on the issue of collaboration among DoRD and MSDE, 
AS (DoRD) stated as under:- 
“सर, जो पहली सब-Ö कìम है वह दीन दयाल उपाÅ याय úामीण कौशल योजना है। डीडीयू – 
जेके वाई डीएवाई-एनआरएलएम कì एक उप-योजना है, िजसका उĥेÔ य कौशल िवकास के  माÅ यम से Ö थायी 
आजीिवका को बढ़ावा देना है। इसम¤ वेज एंÈ लॉयम¤ट पर फोकस है और हम डीडीयू-जीके वाई म¤ जो िÖकिलंग 
देते ह§ वह िमिनÖ ůी ऑफ िÖकल डेवलपम¤ट और एंटरÿÆ योरिशप के  Āे मवकª  के  तहत ही हम काम करते ह§। 
नेशनल िÖकल ³ वािलिफके शन Āे मवकª , एनएस³ यूएफ और जो कॉमन कोÖ ट नॉमसª ह§, जो एमएसडी तय 
करता है, उसके  तहत ही हम िÖकिलंग ÿोवाइड करते ह§। यह सब-Ö कìम वषª 2014 म¤ Ö टाटª हòई थी, इसम¤ 
टारगेटेड बेिनिफिशयरी úामीण गरीब युवा ह§ जो 15-35 साल के  है। मैनडेटरी कवरेज एससी/एसटी 50 
परस¤ट है, वूमेन का 33 परस¤ट है और पीडÊ Ð यूडी का 5 परस¤ट है। इसम¤ िÖकिलंग के  अलावा उनको 
मैनडेटरी È लेसम¤ट का टारगेट भी िदया जाता है। इस Ö कìम म¤ 70 परस¤ट लोगŌ का È लेसम¤ट करने का मैनडेट 
है। यह एक पिÊलक-ÿाइवेट पाटªनरिशप है, ³ यŌिक हम úाउंड पर जो िÖकिलंग पाटªनर लाते ह§, Ö टेट ओपन 
िबिडंग ÿोसेस के  तहत उनको बुलाते ह§। इसम¤ अगर देख¤ तो जो ůेिनंग ÿदान कì जाती है वह तीन महीने से 
लेकर बारह महीने तक का ůेिनंग ÿोúाम है। ůेड िÖकÐ स के  अलावा इसम¤ सॉÉट िÖकÐ स, बेिसक इंिµलश 
Ö पोकन, आईटी अवेयरनैस और एंटरÿÆ योरिशप िÖकÐ स कì भी ůेिनंग दी जाती है।“ 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER – VII 
 
Conclusions from Evaluations 
 
7.1 DAY-NRLM's Role in Addressing Distress Migration 
 
• Income enhancement under DAY-NRLM reduces economic distress, a key driver 
of rural migration 
• Cluster-based livelihood promotion builds local employment ecosystems, limiting 
the need for out-migration 
• Promotion of rural non-farm enterprises generates local jobs, helping curb 
distress migration 
 
7.2 RSETI's Role in Enabling Local Self-Employment 
 
• Skill development aligned with local opportunities equips rural youth for self-
employment and wage employment, reducing distress migration 
• Entrepreneurship and micro-enterprise support enables individuals with 
sustainable livelihoods locally, creating income sources within rural areas 
 
7.3 DDU-GKY's Role in Enabling Aspirational Migration 
 
• Placement-linked skill training connects rural youth to quality job opportunities in 
urban and industrial sectors, enabling aspirational and gainful migration beyond 
limited local options, including global placements 
• Exposure to organised sector employment and higher wages allows youth to 
access better career pathways and upward mobility, positioning migration as a 
choice-driven aspirational opportunity rather than distress 
  
7.4 Overall Conclusions from Evaluations 
 
• All three schemes demonstrate high relevance, inclusivity, and tangible impact on 
rural livelihoods 
• Significant progress has been achieved in income enhancement, enterprise 
development, and women's empowerment 
• A strong community-based institutional framework is driving rural transformation 
• DAY-NRLM and its sub-schemes continue to contribute to inclusive and 
sustainable growth   
7.5  On the issue of distress migration, AS (DoRD) stated as under:- 
“हम बताना चाहते ह§ िक डीडीयूजीके वाई म¤ हमारा फोकस वेज इंÈ लायम¤ट पर है, इसम¤ िÖकिलंग 
के  बाद माइúेशन होता है और उस माइúेशन को गेनफु ल माइúेशन म¤ कनवटª करने के  िलए डीडीयूजीके वाई 
के  Ňू सपोटª िदया जाता है। आरसेटी जो है, िÖकल डेवलपम¤ट लोकल अपॉचुªिनटीज़ के  तहत एलाइन करने 
का ÿयास करते ह§। इसम¤ माइúेशन को कम करने कì एक कोिशश है। डेएनआरएलएम जो तहत है, उसके  
तहत इनकम एनह§सम¤ट और ÿमोशन ऑफ लाइवलीहòड होता है। इससे माइúेशन को कम करने का ÿयास 
होता है।“ 

38 
 
 
7.6 Adding further on the issue, Dir. (DoRD) stated as under:- 
 
“सर, आज का िवषय यही था िक माइúेशन को कै से रोका जाए। आज यहां िजन तीन Ö कìमŌ पर 
यहां िडÖ कशन हòआ, दो Ö कìम¤ माइúेशन रोकने के  िलए ही ÿयासरत ह§। एक म¤ हम गेनफु ल माइúेशन का 
ÿयास करते ह§, ³ यŌिक  उसम¤ वैज इंÈ लॉयम¤ट म¤ ब¸ चा बाहर जाता है तो हम उसको कै से सपोटª कर पाएं, 
तािक वह िडÖ ůेÖ ड माइúेशन न हो। इस िदशा म¤ मंýालय का ÿयास रहता है।“ 
 
 
 
  

39 
 
PART – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. Bridging Placement Gaps and Strengthening Post-Placement Support under 
DDU-GKY  
 
The Committee are concerned to note the significant gap in placements under 
the Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) where a large 
number of trained rural candidates remain without employment outcomes alongside 
inadequate average post-placement salaries that contribute to high dropout rates and 
distress migration. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of 
Rural Development (DoRD) must ensure near 100 percent placement tracking as far as 
possible with mandatory industry linkages, localized placement drives, regular post-
training follow-ups, mentorship and credit facilitation. Enhanced post-placement 
support, including extended migration assistance, retention monitoring, skill 
upgradation and raising minimum wage employment targets should be 
institutionalized. A special placement cell at the district level should be created to 
address shortfalls and improve overall outcomes. The Committee are of the view that 
Performance of Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs) should also be assessed on the 
basis of sustained employment and retention of beneficiaries in addition to initial 
placements to improve long-term livelihood outcomes.  
                                                                                   (Recommendation No. 1)  
 
2. Adessing Budget Under-Utilization and Reducing Implementation Bottlenecks  
 
The Committee are concerned to note the persistent under-utilization of funds 
across skilling schemes such as DDU-GKY, DAY-NRLM, and RSETIs along with delays 
in fund release and other implementation bottlenecks that have adversely affected 
scheme performance. When funds are left unspent, the negative impacts trigger a 
chain re-action from the grass roots level up to national policy planning. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend a comprehensive review of bottlenecks at state and 
district levels, timely release of funds through Direct Benefit Transfer, better 
alignment of budgetary allocations with absorption capacity and stricter monitoring of 
expenditure. The Department of Rural Development (DoRD) should streamline bank 
linkages, ensure interest subvention benefits reach beneficiaries promptly, lower 
financial burdens on States (particularly special category States) and submit quarterly 
utilization reports with corrective action plans for low-performing states.  

40 
 
                                                                                 (Recommendation No. 2) 
3. Expanding SHGs, Credit Linkage, Lakhpati Didi Programme and Marketing 
Support under DAY-NRLM  
 
The Committee are concerned to note that despite mobilizing a large number of 
women into Self-Help Groups (SHGs) the credit linkage per group remains low and the 
Lakhpati Didi initiative requires accelerated scaling with many rural women facing 
challenges in accessing sustainable livelihoods. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend significantly enhancing credit flows, increasing average loan sizes, fast-
tracking the Lakhpati Didi programme, developing robust marketing support systems 
including common branding, e-commerce portals, corporate partnerships, working 
capital assistance, product standardization and market intelligence. Focused support 
for value addition in agriculture, livestock, and micro-enterprises along with regular 
impact assessments should be prioritized to ensure long-term viability and higher 
incomes.  
                                                                                (Recommendation No. 3) 
  
4. Expanding RSETIs, Decentralizing Training Infrastructure and Aligning Skilling 
with Local Economy 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that the current network of RSETIs is 
insufficient to meet skilling needs across all districts with training often conducted far 
from villages and limited alignment with local demands. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend expanding functional RSETIs to cover every district, establishing block-
level training centres for greater accessibility (especially for women and local youth) 
and redesigning curricula under DDU-GKY and RSETIs to align with local resources, 
agro-based industries, tourism, renewable energy, digital services, and emerging 
sectors. Emphasis should be placed on market-aligned trades, self-employment, 
demand-driven skill mapping in consultation with local industries and Panchayats, 
and seamless credit linkage post-training. 
 (Recommendation No. 4) 
 
5. Reducing Regional Disparities and Strengthening Constituency-wise Data 
Sharing  
 
The Committee are concerned to note wide inter-state variations in the 
performance of skilling and livelihood schemes with lagging outcomes in several 
backward and aspirational districts. The Committee, therefore, recommend adoption 
of a need-based allocation formula factoring in rural distress, migration patterns and 

41 
 
poverty levels along with special packages for lagging states. The Ministry should 
promptly compile and share detailed constituency-wise and state-wise data on key 
indicators such as household coverage, income enhancement, employment 
generation, bank linkages and migration impact with special emphasis on backward 
districts in States like Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Odisha and the Northeastern 
region.  
                                                                                 (Recommendation No. 5)  
 
6. Enhancing Awareness, Mobilization, Last-Mile Delivery and Digital Literacy  
 
The Committee are concerned to note the lack of adequate awareness about 
skilling, training, and livelihood opportunities among rural populations leading to 
under-utilization of schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommend launching a 
massive nationwide Information, Education and Communication (IEC) campaign using 
local languages, digital platforms and community resource persons. Special drives 
for mobilization through SHGs and Gram Panchayats should be intensified. 
Comprehensive digital literacy, financial literacy, soft skills, career counselling cells at 
block level and migration counselling desks should be integrated to guide youth on 
local opportunities and reduce distress migration. The Committee further recommend 
that awareness and mobilisation activities should also be strengthened to ensure 
greater participation of rural youth, women and vulnerable sections in emerging 
sectors identified under the national skilling initiatives.  
                                                                               (Recommendation No. 6)  
7. Strengthening Grassroots Infrastructure, Stakeholder Involvement and 
Streamlining Guidelines 
 
The Committee are concerned to note issues with grassroots infrastructure, 
restrictive guidelines affecting beneficiaries and limited stakeholder involvement. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend upgrading block-level infrastructure for SHGs with 
proper offices and staffing, involving local MPs, MLAs, and Panchayati Raj 
institutions in monitoring and convergence and reviewing convergence guidelines 
between rural skilling, housing, roads and livelihood programs to prevent wrongful 
exclusions. Clear protocols for inter-scheme coordination should be issued.  
                                                                                (Recommendation No. 7) 
  

42 
 
8. Strengthening Monitoring, Evaluation, Grievance Redressal and Robust Data 
Frameworks  
 
The Committee are concerned to note gaps in robust monitoring, timely 
grievance redressal and real-time tracking mechanisms. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend monthly progress reporting to the Committee on key indicators such as 
placements, income levels, and migration reduction. A unified digital dashboard for 
real-time tracking, independent third-party evaluations, a strengthened digital 
grievance portal with fixed timelines, performance-based incentives for high retention 
and low migration, and regular public disclosure meetings should be established.  
                                                                                  (Recommendation No. 8) 
  
9. Capacity Building of Field Functionaries, Community Resource Persons and 
Convergence Mechanisms  
 
The Committee are concerned to note capacity gaps among field-level 
functionaries, Community Resource Persons (CRPs), Panchayat representatives and 
limited convergence across schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommend a 
comprehensive capacity-building programme covering new guidelines, digital tools, 
enterprise development and convergence mechanisms (including with MGNREGA and 
PMEGP). Special focus should be given to training women CRPs and local leaders to 
enhance grassroots implementation and overall effectiveness. 
                                                                                 (Recommendation No. 9) 
 
10. Promoting Gender-Responsive Skilling and Inclusive Participation  
 
The Committee are concerned to note that despite significant mobilization of 
women into SHGs under DAY-NRLM, women’s participation in DDU-GKY and RSETI 
training programmes remains relatively low with limited focus on gender-specific 
barriers such as safety, childcare support and suitable trade options. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the introduction of gender-responsive skilling modules, 
dedicated women-only batches, mobile training units and provision of crèche 
facilities at training centres. Special incentives for the training and placement of 
women, SC/ST and differently-abled candidates should be institutionalised along with 
targeted campaigns to enhance their participation and leadership in rural enterprises. 
Such steps should be taken to guarantee high levels of female workforce enrolment 
and long-term placement.  
                                                                              (Recommendation No. 10) 
 

43 
 
11. Integrating Climate Resilience, Green Skills and Sustainable Livelihoods  
 
The Committee are concerned to note the increasing vulnerability of rural 
livelihoods to climate change and the limited integration of green skills and climate-
resilient practices in current skilling programmes. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the incorporation of climate-resilient agriculture, renewable energy, water 
conservation, and sustainable livestock management modules across DDU-GKY, 
RSETIs and DAY-NRLM. Special focus should be given to training rural youth in green 
jobs such as solar technician, organic farming and waste management, supported by 
convergence with relevant environmental schemes and dedicated funding for climate-
adaptive livelihood models. 
 (Recommendation No. 11) 
  
12. Leveraging Technology and Digital Platforms for Scheme Implementation  
 
The Committee are concerned to note the slow adoption of technology in 
scheme delivery, monitoring and beneficiary outreach resulting in inefficiencies and 
leakages. The Committee, therefore, recommend the development of a comprehensive 
digital ecosystem including AI-driven skill demand forecasting, mobile applications 
for real-time enrolment and tracking, blockchain-enabled certification and geo-tagged 
monitoring of training centres and placements. The Department of Rural Development 
(DoRD) should ensure last-mile digital connectivity in rural areas and capacity 
building of functionaries for effective use of these tools. The Committee, further 
recommend that DoRD undertake periodic assessment of district-wise skill 
requirements and employment trends so that training programmes, choice of traders 
and implementation strategies remain aligned with labour market requirements and 
local livelihood opportunities.  
 (Recommendation No. 12)  
13. Focus on Long-Term Impact Assessment and Livelihood Sustainability  
 
The Committee are concerned to note the absence of robust long-term impact 
studies to assess the sustained income levels, enterprise survival rates and reduction 
in poverty and migration three to five years after training or SHG formation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend institutionalising periodic longitudinal impact 
assessments through independent agencies and linking scheme outcomes to 
measurable improvements in household income, asset creation, and multi-
dimensional poverty indices. Based on findings facilitate evidence-based policy 

44 
 
interventions, appropriate mid-course corrections and outcome-based funding 
mechanisms should be introduced.  
 (Recommendation No. 13) 
  
14. Strengthening Public-Private-Community Partnerships and Innovation  
 
The Committee are concerned to note that partnerships with the private sector, 
startups and civil society organisations remain limited, restricting the scale, 
innovation and market relevance of skilling and livelihood initiatives. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the creation of a dedicated Innovation and Partnership Cell 
within the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) to foster collaborations with 
corporates, industry associations and social enterprises for co-creation of courses, 
establishment of rural skill hubs, incubation support and adoption of best practices. 
Performance-linked incentives should be provided to private partners demonstrating 
high placement and retention outcomes in rural areas.  
 (Recommendation No. 14) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
10 August, 2026 
19 Shravana 1948 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj 
  
  

45 
 
Annexure – I 
State-Wise DDU-GKY Performance (Cumulative as of March 2026) 
S. No. State Trained Placed 
1 Andhra Pradesh 1,49,721 1,24,054 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 2,834 1,184 
3 Assam 86,136 54,502 
4 Bihar 80,518 49,005 
5 Chhattisgarh 59,575 34,716 
6 Gujarat 32,404 21,196 
7 Haryana 56,073 42,069 
8 Himachal Pradesh 20,197 12,009 
9 Jammu & Kashmir 72,746 45,824 
10 Jharkhand 83,352 45,093 
11 Karnataka 56,911 37,605 
12 Kerala 77,086 47,047 
13 Madhya Pradesh 93,391 55,400 
14 Maharashtra 71,989 48,498 
15 Manipur 8,203 4,357 
16 Meghalaya 9,070 5,496 
17 Mizoram 3,478 2,155 
18 Nagaland 8,240 5,471 
19 Odisha 2,19,111 1,77,986 
20 Punjab 55,518 30,184 
21 Rajasthan 87,409 49,052 
22 Sikkim 3,390 1,970 
23 Tamil Nadu 80,214 76,465 
24 Telangana 77,047 54,506 
25 Tripura 13,275 7,996 
26 Uttar Pradesh 2,55,010 1,09,714 
27 Uttarakhand 25,769 16,421 
28 West Bengal 45,360 31,051 
29 Puducherry 3,214 2,035 
30 A & N Islands 1,037 582 
  TOTAL 18,38,278 11,93,643 
 
State-Wise RSETi Performance (Cumulative as of March 2026) 
S. No. State/UT Trained Settled Credit Linkage 
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 5,874 4,649 2,748 
2 Andhra Pradesh 1,92,292 1,42,616 48,941 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 5,216 3,333 2,143 
4 Assam 1,99,654 1,34,820 62,720 
5 Bihar 4,01,776 2,91,464 1,23,208 
6 Chhattisgarh 1,80,599 1,30,196 61,147 
7 D & N Haveli 9,265 6,118 2,795 
8 Goa 368 57 0 
9 Gujarat 3,63,462 2,57,628 97,105 
10 Haryana 2,01,621 1,35,379 43,340 
11 Himachal Pradesh 89,662 63,648 25,629 

46 
 
12 Jammu & Kashmir 1,24,162 92,140 46,736 
13 Jharkhand 2,52,816 1,76,566 81,838 
14 Karnataka 4,45,385 3,26,194 1,40,603 
15 Kerala 1,67,344 1,28,839 68,865 
16 Lakshadweep 2,671 1,626 694 
17 Madhya Pradesh 4,83,480 3,44,464 1,48,440 
18 Maharashtra 3,54,134 2,63,911 1,31,444 
19 Manipur 9,863 7,207 4,518 
20 Meghalaya 25,573 15,109 5,787 
21 Mizoram 10,428 8,439 3,592 
22 Nagaland 5,190 3,555 1,477 
23 Odisha 3,13,250 2,43,410 1,23,797 
24 Pondicherry 11,973 9,022 3,778 
25 Punjab 1,66,524 1,16,278 42,890 
26 Rajasthan 4,60,893 3,41,187 1,31,938 
27 Sikkim 6,360 4,567 2,087 
28 Tamil Nadu 3,63,879 2,76,918 1,24,024 
29 Telangana 1,09,826 85,797 34,952 
30 Tripura 42,229 28,139 14,866 
31 UT Ladakh 6,233 4,185 1,626 
32 Uttar Pradesh 8,20,767 6,07,042 2,60,951 
33 Uttarakhand 1,07,635 78,579 40,086 
34 West Bengal 2,03,104 1,48,359 77,529 
  TOTAL 61,43,508 44,81,441 23,52,415 
 
 
  

47 
 
Annexure – II 
 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY,  
31st OCTOBER, 2025 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1335 hrs in Committee Room No. ‘2’, First Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe Extension (EPHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram 
3. Shri Raju Bista 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
6. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
9. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
10. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
11. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
12. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
13. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
14. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
15. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
16. Shri Nagendra Ray. P. T. Usha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development  
(Department of Rural Development) 
1. Shri Shailesh Kumar Singh Secretary 
2. Shri T.K. Anil Kumar Additional Secretary 
3. Ms Smriti Sharan Joint Secretary 
4. Ms Swati Sharma Joint Secretary 

48 
 
5. Shri Pankaj Yadav Joint Secretary 
6. Dr. Molishree Director 
7. Shri Raj Priy Singh Director 
8. Shri Santosh Kumar Tiwari Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for having a briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development) on the subject “Rural Skilling and Migration: Impact 
Study of Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY), Deendayal 
Antyodaya Yojna-National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM) and Rural Self 
Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs)”. 
 
 [Thereafter the representatives from the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Rural Development) were called in] 
 
3. After welcoming the representatives, the Chairperson in his opening remarks 
stressed upon the various important aspect of the “Rural Skilling and Migration: Impact 
Study of Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY), Deendayal 
Antyodaya Yojna-National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM) and Rural Self 
Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs)”. The Chairperson, then asked the representatives 
of the Ministries to introduce themselves and place their views on the subject. The 
Secretary, Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) after taking 
permission from the Chairperson directed the Joint Secretary, to make a Power Point 
Presentation on the above-mentioned subject. 
 
4. Subsequently, Members raised their individual queries. The queries of the Members 
were replied by the Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development). Certain issues which remained unanswered along with those which 
warranted elaborate reply, the Ministry were requested to send written replies thereto in 
writing within 15 days. 
  
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
  

49 
 
Annexure - III 
 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 03 JUNE, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1650 hrs in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Janardan Mishra   -- Acting Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
3. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
8. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
9. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
10. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
11. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
12. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
13. Shri Ganesh Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
15. Shri Samirul Islam 
16. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
17. Shri Nagendra Ray 
18. Smt P.T. Usha 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
2. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development)  
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1. Shri Rohit Kansal Secretary 
2. Shri T.K. Anil Kumar Additional Secretary 
3. Smt Swati Sharma Joint Secretary 
4. Shri S. Sasikumar Joint Secretary 

50 
 
5. Dr Molishree Director 
6. Smt Rajeshwari SM Director 
7. Shri Raj Priy Singh Director 
8. Shri Santosh Kumar Tiwari Director 
9. Shri K.M. Singh Director 
10. Shri Shakti Kant Singh Director 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1.  Shri Niranjan Kumar Sudhansu Additional Secretary 
2.  Ms. G. Madhumita Das AS & FA 
3.  Ms. Manisha Sensarma Senior Economic Advisor 
4.  Ms. Hena Usman Joint Secretary 
5.  Shri Sunil Kumar Gupta DDG 
6.  Shri Pritam Dutta Director 
7.  Shri J.K. Singh Director (Parl.) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for having an oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development) and Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship on the subject “Rural Skilling and Migration: Impact Study of Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY), Deendayal Antyodaya Yojna-National 
Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM) and Rural Self Employment Training Institutes 
(RSETIs)”. 
 
[Thereafter the representatives from the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural 
Development) and Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship were called in] 
 
3. After welcoming the representatives, the Acting Chairperson in his opening remarks 
stressed upon the various important aspects of the above-mentioned schemes including 
their key impacts on the rural skilling and migration. The Acting Chairperson, then asked the 
representatives of the Ministry to place their views on the subject. The Secretary, 
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) after taking permission 
from the Acting Chairperson directed the Additional Secretary, to make a Power Point 
Presentation on the above-mentioned subject.  
 
4.        During the PPT, Ministry outlined the facts that the DAY-NRLM has mobilized over 10 
crore rural women into more than 92 lakh Self-Help Groups (SHGs), 5 lakh Village 
Organizations, and 34,000 Cluster Federations, providing them with bank credit linkages 
exceeding ₹12.88 lakh crore, supporting 81 lakh non-farm livelihoods, and empowering 
around 5 crore women farmers through financial inclusion, skill training via Community 
Resource Persons, enterprise development, and linkages to agriculture, livestock, and other 
sectors, with a major focus on creating "Lakhpati Didis" (women with household income over 

51 
 
₹1 lakh annually). Complementing this, the DDU-GKY scheme has trained over 18 lakh rural 
youth aged 15-35 across 36 sectors and 816 trades, achieving job placements for around 12 
lakh candidates along with post-placement and migration support, while the RSETIs 
operating in 623 districts have trained more than 61 lakh people and enabled 44 lakh to start 
self-employment ventures through residential training and strong bank linkages. 
 
5.        It was followed by an extensive question-and-answer session where Hon’ble 
Members raised several critical issues viz., low placement rates and modest salaries in 
DDU-GKY, under-utilization of revised budgets, need for more RSETI centres, inadequate 
awareness in rural areas, small loan sizes for SHGs, regional disparities and procedural 
hurdles in convergence with schemes like PMAY and rural roads.  
 
6.        Subsequently, in response to the queries raised by the Members, Ministry clarified 
eligibility criteria (poverty/SHG-based), full training and placement mechanisms, ongoing 
improvements (digital loans, simplified SHG linkages, migration support centres) and 
commitments to address placement gaps and delays via better monitoring, state 
coordination, and guideline revisions. They also noted COVID impacts on timelines and 
plans for scaling Lakhpati Didis and improve job placements for trained youths. 
 
7.            Overall, Members appreciated the efforts made by the Ministry but at the same 
time also stressed the need for establishment of block-level training centres, simplifying 
procedures, enhancing awareness drives, improving post-training support, and addressing 
migration-related issues. 
 
8.     Certain issues which remained unanswered along with those which warranted 
elaborate reply, the Ministry was requested to send written replies thereto in writing as early 
as possible.  
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
  

52 
 
Annexure – IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2025-26) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE 
COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 7TH AUGUST, 2026 
 
 The Committee sat from 1000 hrs to 1008 hrs in Committee Room ‘B’,  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
17. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram 
18. Shri Raju Bista 
19. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
20. Dr Sanjay Jaiswal 
21. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
22. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
23. Shri Jugal Kishore 
24. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
25. Shri Janardan Mishra 
26. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
27. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
28. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
29. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
30. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
Rajya Sabha 
31. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
32. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
33. Smt. Rajathi 
34. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
35. Shri Karamvir Singh Boudh 
36. Shri Baidyanath Ram 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Juby Amar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director  
3. Smt Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of five Draft Reports on:- 

53 
 
(i) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(ii) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(iii) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(iv) Draft Report on the subject “Rural Skilling and Migration: Impact Study of 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY), Deendayal 
Antyodaya Yojna-National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM) and Rural 
Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs)” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Rural Development (Department of Rural Development); and 
 
(v) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
3. Draft Reports were taken up for consideration one-by-one and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same with minor modification. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Draft Reports 
and present the same to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
____________________________ 
xxxx Not related to the Draft Report. 