 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
   
 
      EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
 
 
 
 
RIGHT TO FAIR COMPENSATION AND TRANSPARENCY IN LAND ACQUISITION, 
REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT ACT, 2013 - IMPLEMENTATION AND 
EFFECTIVENESS 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
24 


 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
 
 
 
RIGHT TO FAIR COMPENSATION AND TRANSPARENCY IN LAND ACQUISITION, 
REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT ACT, 2013 - IMPLEMENTATION AND 
EFFECTIVENESS 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
  


 
 
CRD No. 215  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs 
 
 
 
© 2025 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2025-2026) ii 
Introduction  iii  
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
PART I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
 
A. Background of RFCTLARR Act, 2013 1 
B. Application of the Act 1 
C. Land Acquisition Laws in India (1894–2013) 2 
D. Brief Comparison between Land Acquisition Act of 1894 and RFCTLARR 
Act 2013 
3 
E. Social Impact Assessment (SIA) 5 
F. Return of unutilized land 5 
G. Implementation of the RFCTLARR Act, 2013 5 
H. Evidence of different Ministries and Departments on Polavaram Irrigation 
Project, Ken-Betwa Link Project and Railway Projects 
6 
I. In order to understand the applicability of the LARR Act regarding land 
acquisition in tribal and forest areas, the Committee also took evidence of 
the representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change and Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 14-07-2025. 
7 
J. Submissions by various Civil Society Organisation: Land Conflict Watch 
and other stakeholders affected by the alleged faulty implementation of 
this Act. 
26 
K. Non-official witnesses and experts from the State of Gujarat 28 
L. Submissions by various stakeholders and experts from the State of Odisha 29 
M. Submissions by various stakeholders and experts from UT of 
Lakshadweep 
30 
N. Submissions by various stakeholders and experts from UT of Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands 
30 
 Part - II 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the ninth sitting of the Committee held on 17th December, 2024 55 
II. Minutes of the tenth sitting of the Committee held on 7th January, 2025 57 
III. Minutes of the seventeenth sitting of the Committee held on 3rd March, 
2025 
61 
IV. Minutes of the twenty-fifth sitting of the Committee held on 27th May, 2025 64 
V. Extracts of the Minutes of the thirtieth sitting of the Committee held on 14th 
July, 2025 
67 
VI. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee held on 16th December, 
2025 
70 
 
  

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-2026) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh Alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh Alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
25. Shri Samirul Islam 
26. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
27. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
28. Smt. Rajathi 
29. Shri Nagendra Ray 
30. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
31. Smt. P.T. Usha 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Atul Singh   - Executive Officer 

 
 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2025-2026) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present the Twenty-Fourth Report on ‘Right to Fair Compensation 
and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 - 
Implementation and Effectiveness’ of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Land Resources).  
2.  The Committee held briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Land Resources) on 17th December, 2024. 
3.  The Committee held further briefings by the representatives of the Department of 
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development), Non-Government Organizations, 
experts and other stakeholders, Department of Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation (Ministry of Jal Shakti) [with regard to land acquisition for Ken-Betwa 
Link Project and Polavaram Irrigation Project], Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
and National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) [with regard to land acquisition for Roads 
and Highway projects], Ministry of Railways [with regard to land acquisition for Railways], 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) [with regard to land acquisition for Metro 
Rail projects] on 07-01-2025. 
4.  The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development), Non-Government Organizations, 
experts and other stakeholders regarding issues of land acquisition on 03-03-2025 and 
27-05-2025. 
5.  The Committee also took oral evidence of the representatives of the Department 
of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development), Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change and Ministry of Tribal Affairs on the subject "Right to Fair Compensation 
and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 - 
Implementation and Effectiveness" on 14-07-2025.  
6. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
16 December, 2025. 

 
 
iv 
 
7.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Land Resources), Non-Government Organizations, experts 
and other stakeholders, Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation), Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs and Civil Society Organisations for placing before them the 
requisite material and their considered views in connection with the examination of the 
subject.  
8. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
17 December, 2025 
26 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj 
 

 
 
1 
 
 TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
PART – I  
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
A. Background of RFCTLARR Act, 2013 
  
Introduction 
 
1.1 Introduction 
 
The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR Act, 2013) was enacted on 
26th September, 2013. The objective of the Act is to ensure, in consultation with 
institutions of local self-government and Gram Sabhas established under the 
Constitution, a humane, participative, informed and transparent process for land 
acquisition for industrialisation, development of essential infrastructural facilities and 
urbanisation with the least disturbance to the owners of the land and other affected 
families and to provide just and fair compensation to the affected families whose land 
has been acquired or proposed to be acquired or are affected by such acquisition and 
make adequate provisions for such affected persons for their rehabilitation and 
resettlement and for ensuring that the cumulative outcome of compulsory acquisition 
should be that affected persons become partners in development leading to an 
improvement in their post-acquisition social and economic status and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. The RFCTLARR Act, 2013 has been 
operational from 1st January, 2014. It contains 13 Chapters with 114 sections, and 4 
Schedules. 
 
Objective 
 
1.2 RFCTLARR Act 2013 has provisions to provide fair compensation to those whose 
land is taken away, bring transparency to the process of acquisition of land, to setup 
factories or buildings, infrastructural projects and assure rehabilitation of those affected. 
 
B. Application of the Act 
 
1.3 The “appropriate Government” for implementation of the RFCTLARR Act, 2013 is 
the State /UT Governments. The provisions of the Act relating to Land Acquisition, 
compensation, rehabilitation and resettlement apply when appropriate Government 
acquires land for own use, hold and control including PSUs and for public purpose, such 
as: 
 For strategic purposes  
 For Infrastructure projects 

 
 
2 
 
 Project for project affected families 
 Project for housing for income groups as specified 
 Project for planned development 
 For PPP projects 
 For Private companies for public purpose 
 
1.4 The Act stipulates that: 
 
 At least 80% of affected families must provide consent for private companies. 
 At least 70% of affected families must consent for public-private partnership 
projects. 
 
C. Land Acquisition Laws in India (1894–2013) 
 
1.5 The first legislation in respect of acquisition of land was the Bengal Regulation 
of 1824. Many amendments were promulgated at various times for Madras, Bombay 
and for other regions under British India. Eventually, a Land Acquisition Act was 
passed in 1894; this legislation continued with several amendments even after 
independence. The Land Acquisition Act of 1894 specifically mentioned that the 
acquisition of land would take place for public purposes where the ―State‖ (central, 
provincial or local, societies registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and 
the cooperative societies established under the Cooperative Societies Act) would 
acquire land from government agencies or individual owners. The act of 1894 defined 
public purpose for land acquisition as those pertaining to the establishment of 
educational institutions, rural planning, housing, establishment of government offices, 
health or slum clearance schemes. The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 went through many 
amendments: in 1914, 1919, 1920, 1921, 1923, 1933, 1938, 1951, 1984 and 2007. But 
even after several amendments, its original nature remained intact. Land was leased and 
purchased by successive governments as ―eminent domain. ‖ Governments also 
purchased land from individuals and farmers to fulfil private demands for land. In the two 
and a half decades after neo-liberal and market reforms were initiated, land acquisitions 
for public and private purposes have increased manifold, drawing criticisms and protests 
across the country. Such public furore forced the government to pass a new land 
acquisition act— The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR Act, 2013) 
which replaced the century-old 1894 act.1 The Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (RFCTLARR) Act, 
2013 has shaped a distinguished land acquisition management categorized by market-
linked reimbursement, socioeconomic appraisal and proper rehabilitation and 
resettlement ways for affected people. Since its enactment, it is found to be vital, in the 

 
 
3 
 
interest of the sustainable land procurement framework for manufacturing and 
infrastructural projects. 
 
D. Brief Comparison between Land Acquisition Act of 1894 and RFCTLARR Act 
2013 
 
1.6 Prior to RFCTLARR Act 2013, the Land Acquisition Act of 1894 governed land 
acquisition.  A brief comparison between the two Acts is given in Table below: 
 
Item Land Acquisition Act 1894 RFCTLARR Act 2013 
Compensation 
Market Value of Land Average value of last three 
years registered transactions 
Average value of 50% of highest 
value transactions registered in last 
three years.  
Multiplying factor  Not available  Between 1-2 (from urban to rural)  
Solatium 30% (60% urgency)  100% after multiplying factor  
Total Compensation  1.3 times the Market value  2-4 times the Market value  
Payment of 
compensation  
Not necessary before 
dispossession  
Necessary before dispossession  
Rehabilitation &Resettlement (R&R) 
Enforceability of R&R Not binding  Binding  
Inclusive of Project 
Affected Families  
Compensation to only those 
whose land is acquired  
Compensation to those whose land 
is acquired, labourers and artisans  
Land for land  No provision  Essential in case of irrigation project 
Infrastructural Facilities and Basic Minimum Amenities 
Amenities No provision Roads within the resettled villages 
and an all-weather road link to the 
nearest pucca road, passages and 
easement rights, Proper drainage 
as well as sanitation plans, Assured 
sources of safe drinking water, Fair 
Price Shops, Panchayat Ghars, 
Village level Post Offices, Burial or 
cremation ground, Drinking water 
and grazing land for cattle etc. 
 
 
  

 
 
4 
 
 
 


 
 
5 
 
E. Social Impact Assessment (SIA) 
 
1.7 The RFCTLARR Act makes necessary for the appropriate Government to 
undertake a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) study before any land acquisition. This 
process aims to evaluate the potential social, economic, and environmental impacts of 
the proposed project. The SIA must:  
 Engage with affected communities. 
 Analyse potential risks and benefits. 
 Propose measures to mitigate adverse effects.  
 
While undertaking a Social Impact Assessment study, the appropriate Government 
shall, amongst other things, take into consideration the impact that the project is likely to 
have on various components such as livelihood of affected families, public and community 
properties, assets and infrastructure particularly roads, public transport, drainage, 
sanitation, sources of drinking water, sources of water for cattle, community ponds, 
grazing land, plantations, public utilities such as post offices, fair price shops, food storage 
godowns, electricity supply, health care facilities, schools and educational or training 
facilities etc. 
 
F. Return of unutilized land 
 
1.8 When any land acquired under this Act remains unutilized for a period of five years 
from the date of taking over the possession, the same shall be returned to the original 
owner or owners or their legal heirs, as the case may be, or to the Land Bank of the 
appropriate Government by reversion in the manner as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government.  
 
G. Implementation of the RFCTLARR Act, 2013 
 
1.9 Land is a State Subject and each State has its own specific revenue Laws to deal 
with ‘Land’ and its administration. This Department though administers the RFCTLARR 
Act, 2013, the provisions of the Act relating to Land Acquisition, Compensation, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement are being implemented by the “appropriate Government” 
i.e. the State / UT Governments. 
 
Also, the RFCTLARR Act, 2013 allows the Central Government to direct that 
certain provisions of the Act apply to land acquisition under 13 Central Acts specified in 
the Fourth Schedule of the Act. The provisions that can be applied must be beneficial to 
the affected families. Any exceptions or modifications must not reduce the compensation 
or dilute the Act's provisions.  
 

 
 
6 
 
In these 13 Central Acts, the provisions of the Act relating to Land Acquisition, 
Compensation, Rehabilitation and Resettlement are being implemented by the respective 
Ministries / Departments such as Ministry of Coal for “The Coal Bearing Areas Acquisition 
and Development Act, 1957”, Ministry of Railways for “The Railways Act, 1989”, Ministry 
of Road Transport and Highways for “The National Highways Act, 1956” etc. 
 
1.10 In their written submission, the Department has stated the rationale behind this Act 
as under: 
“The provisions of the Land Acquisition Act of 1894 were found inadequate 
in addressing certain issues related to the exercise of the statutory powers 
of the State for involuntary acquisition of private land and property. The Act 
also did not address the issues of rehabilitation and resettlement to the 
affected persons and their families. The RFCTLARR Act seeks to rectify 
these issues by providing a more equitable framework for land acquisition 
and addressing the needs of displaced individuals and communities”   
 
H. Evidence of different Ministries and Departments on Polavaram Irrigation 
Project, Ken-Betwa Link Project and Railway Projects 
In order to understand the effective implementation of the RFCTLARR Act, on 07 
January 2025, the Committee had a briefing on the subject ‘Right to Fair Compensation 
and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 - 
Implementation and Effectiveness’ from:  
(i) Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
(Ministry of Jal Shakti), with regard to land acquisition for Ken-Betwa Link 
Project and Polavaram Irrigation Project.  
(ii) Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and National Highways Authority of 
India (NHAI) with regard to land acquisition for Roads and Highway projects. 
(iii) Ministry of Railways with regard to land acquisition for Railways.  
(iv) Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) with regard to land acquisition 
for Metro Rail projects 
 
1.11 With regard to land acquisition for Polavaram Irrigation Project, the 
representatives of Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation (Ministry of Jal Shakti) submitted before the Committee:  
“Polavaram Project is a multi-purpose reservoir project contemplated 
across the river Godavari near Ramayyapeta village, Polavaram Mandal in 
Eluru district (erstwhile West Godavari District) of Andhra Pradesh. The 

 
 
7 
 
Project is under construction in accordance with the provisions of Inter-State 
Agreement, dated 02.04.1980 concluded among co basin States and the 
Godavari Water Disputes Tribunal (GWDT) Award 1980. All the requisite 
clearances have been obtained from various agencies of Government of 
India.” 
 
1.12 In their written note to the Committee the Department submitted as under:  
“Polavaram Project – Salient Features 
 
Polavaram Project is a multi-purpose reservoir project contemplated across 
the river Godavari near Ramayyapeta village, Polavaram Mandal in Eluru 
district (erstwhile West Godavari District) of Andhra Pradesh. The Project is 
under construction in accordance with the provisions of Inter-State 
Agreement, dated 02.04.1980 concluded among cobasin States and the 
Godavari Water Disputes Tribunal (GWDT) Award 1980. All the requisite 
clearances have been obtained from various agencies of Government of 
India.” 
 
1.13 Main Components of the Project include: 
 2467.50 m length of Earth-Cum Rock Fill (ECRF) dam / Concrete dam in three 
gaps (Gap-I: 564m, Gap-II:1750m and Gap-III: 153.50m) 
 1121.20 m long spillway to cater a design flood of 50 lakh Cusecs 
(1,41,535Cumec). 
 182km long Left Main Canal (LMC) and 178.81 km long Right Main Canal 
(RMC) 
 The reservoir with a gross and live capacity of 194.60 TMCft and 75.20 TMCft 
respectively at FRL of +45.72 m (+150 ft) 
 
1.14 Benefits of the Project include: 
 Irrigation to 2.91 Lakh ha with Annual Irrigation of 4.36 Lakh ha 
 23.44 TMC of Drinking and Industrial Water supply to Visakhapatnam 
 Domestic water supply to 28.5 lakh population in 611 villages 
 Stabilisation of Godavari Delta of 9.51 Lakh ha 
 Diversion of 80 TMC of water to Krishna River as per GWDT Award 
 Hydro power with installed capacity of 960 MW (12 x 80 MW). 
 Sharing of 5 TMC and 1.5 TMC water with Odisha and Chhattisgarh 
Respectively from reservoir 
 
1.15 Polavaram Project Authority (PPA) 
The Government of India, recognizing the importance of the Polavaram Irrigation 
Project (PIP), declared the Project as a National Project vide Section-90 of A.P. 
Reorganization Act, 2014 and declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the 
Union should take under its control the regulation and development of the Polavaram 
Irrigation Project for the purpose of irrigation. It also specified that the Central Government 

 
 
8 
 
shall execute the project and obtain all requisite clearances including 
environmental, forest, rehabilitation and resettlement norms. 
 
Accordingly, Government of India constituted the Governing Body to Polavaram 
Project Authority and the Polavaram Project Authority to perform the mandated functions 
vide the Gazette Notification No.129 dated28.05.2014. 
 
1.16  Inter State Issues 
The Project is under construction in accordance with the provisions of Inter-State 
Agreement, dated 02.04.1980 concluded among co-basin States and the Godavari Water 
Disputes Tribunal (GWDT) Award 1980. Major part of submergence area of the project 
(i.e. 97%) falls in the state of Andhra Pradesh and remaining area is in the states of 
Odisha and Chhattisgarh. As per GWDT Award, 1980, to protect the lands above +150 
feet in the territory of Odisha and Chhattisgarh likely to be affected due to Polavaram 
Project, the respective states can opt either for protection embankments with adequate 
pumping arrangements and /or drainage sluices or for compensation towards all buildings 
with their appurtenant lands on the same pattern as below +150 feet at the project cost. 
Accordingly, WRD, GoAP made necessary provision for construction of protection 
embankments in both the states in the project DPR. 
 
WRD, GoAP, PPA, MoJS continuously pursuing with Odisha and Chhattisgarh states for 
conducting public hearing as per EIA notification, 2006, which are yet to be carried out by 
the respective states. 
 
1.17 Current status of the Project: 
Overall Progress of project as per WRD, GoAP is as under: 
 


 
 
9 
 
 
1.18 About the current status of Land Acquisition (LA) and Rehabilitation & 
Resettlement(R&R), the Department updated: 
”The State Government has assessed that due to construction of Polavaram 
irrigation project, there will be submergence of 371 habitations in 222 
revenue villages in ASR District (erstwhile East Godavari) and Eluru District 
(erstwhile West Godavari) of Andhra Pradesh. Besides 371 habitations, one 
habitation in LMC and one in RMC will also get displaced due to the 
alignment of canals passing through these habitations (Total affected 
habitations 373). GoAP assessed the total Project Displaced Families 
(PDFs) due to the project in Andhra Pradesh as 1,06,006 and the 
demographic details are given below: 
 
The Central and State Governments are committed to complete Land 
acquisition as per parameters laid down in Schedule-I of the RFCTLARR 
Act, 2013 in respect of Polavaram Irrigation Project. The Central and State 
Governments are committed to rehabilitate the PDFs as per provisions of 
RFCTLARR Act, 2013. The necessary action is being taken to protect rights 
of the tribes as per PESA Act, 1996.The R&R is programmed in such a way 
that the entire Page 5 of 7 R&R activities of the project will be completed 
well before the actual impoundment of water in the reservoir.” 
 
1.19 Land Acquisition 
 
The Central and State Governments are committed to complete Land acquisition 
as per parameters laid down in Schedule-I of the RFCTLARR Act, 2013 in respect of 
Polavaram Irrigation Project. The details of land required and acquired up to November, 
2024, as reported by GoAP, for the project as a whole is tabulated below: 
 
  
1.20 As per 141st meeting of Advisory Committee for 2nd RCE, assessed the land 
requirement for the project excluding Government and forest land as 1,55,465 acres. The 


 
 
10 
 
Revised Cost Committee constituted by MoJS in its report of March 2020 assessed the 
land requirement as 1,27,262.79 acres. As informed in the earlier paragraphs, to accrue 
the early benefits from the project, the project is being implemented in two Phases viz. 
Phase-I (Water Storage up to El +41.15m) and Phase-II (water storage up to FRL EL 
+45.72 m). The details of land required and acquired up to November, 2024 for the Phase- 
I of the project, as reported by GoAP, is tabulated below: 
 
Description 
of item 
Required 
in Acres 
Cost in 
Rs. 
Crore 
Acquired 
in Acres 
Cost in 
Rs. 
Crore 
Balance 
land to be 
acquired 
in Acres 
Balance 
Cost in 
Rs. 
Crore 
Land 
Acquisition 
100099.5
8 6233.62 83659.10 3853.35 16440.48 2830.27 
 
The Revised Cost Committee (RCC) constituted by MoJS for the Phase-I of the project 
vide its report of March 2024 assessed the land required for the Phase-I of the project as 
65,205.62 acres excluding Government and forest land. 
 
1.21 Rehabilitation& Resettlement 
The Central and State Governments are committed to rehabilitate the PDFs as per 
provisions of RFCTLARR Act, 2013. The necessary action is being taken to protect rights 
of the tribes as per PESA Act, 1996.The R&R is programmed in such a way that the entire 
R&R activities of the project will be completed well before the actual impoundment of 
water in the reservoir. 
 
1.22 R & R Benefits as per RFCT LARR Act, 2013 is listed below: 
 


 
 
11 
 
 
1. On an average, each SC/ST PDF receives Rs. 6.86 lakh; Other than SC/ST 
category PDF receives Rs. 6.36 lakh. 
2. As per Second Schedule of the Act, 2013, the SCs & STs land-losers will be 
provided land equivalent to land acquired (or) 2.50 acre, whichever is less. 
3. In addition to the above entitlements, a housing unit (plot extent 5 cents or 243.6 
sq. Yards) as per IAY specifications will also be provided to each eligible Project 
Displaced Family as part of R&R colony with 24 amenities as per the Act. 
 
1.23 R&R Physical & Financial Status: 
 
The status of R&R works implemented up to November, 2024 for the Phase-I as well as 
overall project as reported by GoAP is as follows: 
 
 
1.24 R & R Implementation mechanism at the state and national Level  
 
Following Committees exist at State level under provisions of “Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement Act, 
2013” to monitor the implementation of R&R works of the project: 
 District Collector of the concerned District for proposed land acquisition; 
 Commissioner (R & R), Andhra Pradesh for supervising formulation of R &R 
schemes or plans and proper implementation of such schemes or plans; is also 
the chairman of the State Level Grievance Redressal Cell. 
 GoAP has appointed Project Administrator and Ex-Officio Joint Collector to 
expedite the LA &RR works with office at Rajamahendravaram. All officers 
related to R&R brought under single line control of the Project Administrator. 


 
 
12 
 
 A Monitoring Committee for Rehabilitation and Resettlement works of the project 
with Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Govt. of India as its Chairperson has 
been constituted on 12.09.2017 to oversee the implementation of Land 
Acquisition and R & R works. 
 National Monitoring Committee had been constituted on 2nd March 2015 to 
provide under section 48 of Right to fair compensation and transparency in Land 
Acquisition and Rehabilitation & Resettlement Act 2013. 
 
1.25 Completion Schedule 
 
The works of PIP with water storage up to +41.15m is scheduled to be completed by 
March 2026, however, in view of technical challenges inherent to the project, provision 
for one year extension with the approval of MoJS is made in the latest cabinet approval. 
 
1.26 During the course of evidence on 07-01-2025, the representative from Department 
of Water Resources submitted as under: 
 
“The project is being executed as per the Inter-State Agreement dated April 
1980 and as per the GWDT Award, 1980. Around 97 per cent of the 
submergence area is situated within Andhra Pradesh only and only 3 per 
cent is spread over Odisha and Chhattisgarh. जीडÞãयूडीटȣ एवॉड[ के अंतग[त, 
वॉटर लेवल एबव एफआरएल के ͧलए ओͫडशा और छƣीसगढ़ के पास भी दो ऑÜशंस हɇ। 
The provisions were included in the DPR for construction of the protection 
embankments for both the States to avoid any submergence. ओͫडशा और 
छƣीसगढ़ पिÞलक Ǒहयǐरंग नहȣं कर पाए हɇ। GoAP as well as  PPA are consistently 
pursuing with both the Governments for conducting public hearings for 
these protective embankments” 
 
1.27 Regarding R&R settlement of the project, the ministry further stated:  
 
“R&R implementation mechanism is at the State level. Basically 
Commissioner (R&R), Andhra Pradesh is looking after all the R&R plan. He 
is the implementing authority as well as the Chairman of the State level 
Grievance Redressal Cell. The GoAP has created one Project 
Administrator, especially for the Polavaram Project, who has been aligned 
with LA and R&R officers so that it can be done in a seamless fashion. The 
Government of AP has created one website e-LARRM. Now, they are 
carrying out all the LA R&R activities in a digitalised fashion through it. A 
public notice for around 1,250 acres has been issued through this website.” 

 
 
13 
 
 
1.28 On being asked about since the Government of Andhra Pradesh is executing the 
PIP on behalf of the Government of India, including land acquisition and rehabilitation and 
resettlement work, what will be the provisions for other two states i.e. Chhattisgarh and 
Odisha? Whether, this will only be specific to Andhra Pradesh only? The representative 
of the Ministry stated as under 
“जैसा ͩक इनीͧशयल èलाइड मɅ बताया गया है, जो टोटल सÞमजɏस एǐरया है, वह 97 
परसɅट आंĢ Ĥदेश मɅ है, िजसके बारे मɅ यह पूरȣ èलाइड ĤेजɅटेशन Ĥèतुत कȧ गई है। तीन 
परसɅट छƣीसगढ़ और ओͫडशा मɅ है। सर, जो तीन परसɅट एǐरया है, उसमɅ एक फंडामɅटल 
इæयू ओͫडशा कȧ साइड से उठाया गया है। One is normal submergence which will 
be there because of FRL, that is, when the reservoir is at FRL. Then, the 
Government of Odisha has raised the issue of backwater. It says: What will 
be the area under submergence in case the project is at FRL and then a 
flood comes? That study has been done by the Central Water Commission 
and they have identified certain area which will get affected because of 
backwater. So, for that, a provision has been kept in the cost estimate that 
there could be protective embankments to protect that area against the 
backwater of flood. So, now that mechanism is not finalized, but we are 
following it with the Government of Odisha that you finalize the option. 
Based on the finalized option, either people can be rehabilitated or they can 
be provided with the protective embankment so that money can be 
transferred. Of course, within the State, the work will be carried out by the 
respective State. So, I am telling this based on the normal thing. 
So far, a decision has not been taken as to who will implement that, 
but my understanding is that if some protective embankments are to be 
made within Odisha, it will be done by the State Water Resources 
Department and we will be funding for that.  
They also submitted that: there is a second issue also. Odisha is 
saying that the flood which you are considering, it is lesser in intensity, and 
you should go in for a higher intensity of flood, which will further inundate 
certain area. On that, Central Water Commission has certain reservations. 
The Central Water Commission says, ‘We never consider such high 
intensity flood for backwater study’. That issue is currently even under 
consideration of hon. Supreme Court also. The final thing is yet to be 
evolved for that.” 
1.29 While answering the specific query that “If you make a national project which 
affects three States, how is it only one State will drive the eventualities? Why are the 
stakeholders of Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, and Chhattisgarh not being considered?” the 
representative stated that: 

 
 
14 
 
“Actually, we have been writing to the State of Odisha and Chhattisgarh to 
undertake survey of the area likely to be affected and then carry out the 
public hearing, so that we can evolve the solution for that. But since Odisha 
is taking a stand that whatever studies you have done need to be revisited 
by considering higher intensity flood. So far that issue has not been 
resolved. The matter has been referred to the hon. Supreme Court. The 
Supreme Court initially directed the Central Water Commission to find a 
solution. The Central Water Commission also held several inter-State 
meetings under the chairmanship of Central Water Commission and they 
have also given their views. But still Odisha is not agreeable to that. the 
Central Water Commission has filed its affidavit stating the position Central 
Water Commission has taken. They have considered 36 lakh cusecs as the 
flood for which backwater studies have been done and they are still insisting 
that that should be sufficient” 
1.30 Durning the course of evidence, when asked about the issue of the environment 
clearance being granted without due process, and Environment Impact Assessment, the 
ministry submitted as under:  
“Sir, basically in 2005, a study has been done. Accordingly, the MoE&F has 
given the environmental clearance. Sir. It has been started in 2004 itself. 
So, it has been continuing with that one. सर, इसमɅ बीच मɅ एमओईएफ मɅ यह 
बताया गया, तो ĤोटेिÈटव एàबɇकमɅट करने के ͧलए ओͫड़शा और छƣीसगढ़ दोनɉ राÏयɉ 
से सàपक[ ͩकया जाए। We have been continuously approaching both the States 
stating that these are the embankments that we are going to construct and 
if these embankments are in position, then everything will be cleared and 
no submergence will be there. But we are not getting proper response from 
them. As I was saying, the discussion is going on and nothing is coming 
out.” 
1.31 During the course of evidence, on the suggestion given by the Committee for 
conducting a Public Hearing and Survey in Odisha, the Department stated: 
“सर, सवȶ के ͧलए भी हम लोग ओͫड़शा और छƣीसगढ़ राÏय सरकारɉ को ǐरÈवेèट कर रहे 
हɇ, and till now Odisha is not coming forth for the survey. I cannot get the 
survey done without their cooperation. छƣीसगढ़ मɅ एक Ïवायंट सवȶ हो गया था। 
We were able to establish certain amount of the foundation stones and they 
are doing their own survey whereas Odisha is not even accepting for a joint 
survey until and unless 36 lakh and 50 lakh cusecs get resolved. This is the 
major issue. Hence, we cannot come out with the figures also.” 

 
 
15 
 
1.32 With regard to land acquisition for Ken-Betwa Link Project, the representatives 
of Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
(Ministry of Jal Shakti) in their written reply submitted as under:  
“Ken-Betwa Link Project (KBLP) envisaged transfer of surplus water from 
Ken basin to Betwa basin to provide water to water deficit areas of Betwa 
basin keeping the needs of the in-basin requirements of Ken basin involving 
both the States of UP and MP for ensuring equity, optimization of water use 
and cost effectiveness. Ken-Betwa Link Project (KBLP) is the first inter-
linking rivers (ILR) project which is under implementation. The project will 
provide irrigation to about 10.62 lakh hectares of land in Madhya Pradesh 
and Uttar Pradesh, provide drinking water to 62 lakh population to both the 
States. All the statutory and technical clearances of the project have been 
obtained. A tripartite MoA amongst the States of MP and UP and Union 
Government for implementation of the Ken-Betwa link project has been 
signed on 22.03.2021 in the august presence of Hon’ble Prime Minister. 
Further, Ken-Betwa Link Project Authority has been constituted along with 
Steering Committee for overall execution of the project vide Gazette 
Notification dated 09.02.2022. As per the provision under para 8.0 of MoA, 
the Rehabilitation and Resettlement(R&R) of Project Affected 
Families(PAFs) and Land Acquisition for the project within their territorial 
jurisdiction would be carried out by respective State Government in a time 
bound and transparent manner as per the Right to fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act,2013 or as per the respective State policy and as per approved 
Environmental Management Plan. Hon’ble Prime Minister has laid 
foundation stone of Ken-Betwa Link National Project on 25.12.2024 at 
Khajuraho, MP.” 
 
1.33 During the course of evidence, briefing the Committee about the project, their 
official submitted: 
“महोदय, केन-बेतवा ͧलंक ĤोजेÈट मुÉयत: दो नǑदयɉ के बीच मɅ वॉटर Ěांसफर करने कȧ 
पǐरयोजना है, िजसमɅ से केन बेͧसन के अÛदर जो सरफ े स वॉटर है, उसको बेतवा बेͧसन के 
पारȣछा बैराज से ऊपर वॉटर Ěांसफर करना है। इसी के साथ-साथ उƣर Ĥदेश सरकार और 
मÚय Ĥदेश सरकार के भी ĤोजेÈɪस हɇ, जो पहले इससे हट कर चल रहे थे, लेͩकन अब 
उनको भी इसमɅ शाͧमल ͩकया गया है, जैसे मÚय Ĥदेश सरकार के बीना नदȣ पर मͫड़या 
डैम, चकरपुर डैम, और बेतवा नदȣ पर कोठा डैम  है। हमारा जो मेजर ͧलंक ĤोजेÈट है, वह 
केन नदȣ पर है। वहां से एक 220 ͩकलोमीटर कȧ कैनाल है, जो बǾआ सागर होते हुए, 
पारȣचा मɅ पानी को Ĝॉप करेगी। केन-बेतवा ͧलंक ĤोजेÈट के अंतग[त कमांड एǐरयाज 
Ǒदखाए गए हɇ। ĤोजेÈɪस के जो अलग-अलग कंपोनɅɪस हɇ, उनकȧ िèथǓतयɉ को Ĥदͧश[त 
ͩकया गया है।” 
 
 

 
 
16 
 
1.34  Regarding the current status of the project, the official further submitted: 
 
“This brief status of the Ken Betwa Link Project with the allocation of 
budget under R.E., the implementation of the project has started. The 
Government of India wide Gazette Notification dated 9th February, 2022 
constituted a Steering Committee and KBLPF for implementation of Ken 
Betwa Link Project. The Greater Panna Landscape Council was also 
constituted under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary, Government of 
Madhya Pradesh on 27th February, 2023. Its first meeting was held in 
Bhopal on 5th September, 2023. Along with this, a Monitoring 
Committee for R&R was also constituted under the chairmanship of 
Secretary D.O.L.R, M.O.R.D., in February 2023. Initial focus is on land 
acquisition and R&R. There is a stipulation of 80 per cent land 
acquisition before making expenditure on any component. All statutory 
clearances, stage-II forest final approval, environment, wildlife and 
technical clearances have been obtained. दौधन डैम के कंèĚÈशन इसकȧ 
सहायक संरचनाओं कȧ Ǔनͪवदा के ͧलए èवीकृǓत पğ Ǒदनांक 18 नवंबर, 2024 को 
इæयू कर Ǒदया गया है। इस ĤोजेÈट के ͧलए माननीय Ĥधानमंğी जी ने 25 Ǒदसंबर, 
2024 को खजुराहो मɅ आधारͧशला रखी है।” 
 
1.35  With regard Status of Land acquisition and R&R, the Department, in their reply, 
have submitted as under: 
 
“Land acquisition and Rehabilitation & Resettlement (R&R) works are 
involved in two districts of Chhatarpur & Panna only. The LA, R&R works 
are being undertaken by respective Collectors as per RFCTLARR Act, 
2013. The progress is as given below. a) Total private land 1223.637 ha 
(Chhatarpur-529.507 ha &Panna- 694.130 ha=1223.637 ha) has been 
acquired and mutated in favour of MP Forest department and notified 
under section -29 of Indian forest Act-1927. b) In addition, Award have 
been passed for 1384.310 ha private land under submergence of Dam 
and the same has been mutated in favour of MP, WRD. 
c) A total of 22 villages have been affected. Out of this, 9 villages of 
Bijawar Tehsil, District Chhatarpur are under submergence (7 fully 
submergence +2 partial). 5 villages of Chhatarpur and 8 villages of 
Panna are being displaced (relocated) out of PTR to compensate 
affected forest land of 6017 ha.”  
 
1.36 Regarding Rehabilitation and Resettlement, the Department in their written 
submission stated as under: 
“All the PAFs of the 22 villages are under PTR and to be 
shifted/displaced entirely only after development of R&R colony with all 
amenities as per RFCTLARR Act, 2013 or as per Special Package as 
may be opted by the PAFs. In view of the needs and aspirations of local 
people the Government of MP has approved Special Package on 
13.9.2023 for Project Affected Families of Ken-Betwa Link Project. 

 
 
17 
 
Based on Survey data, the total no. of PAFs have been worked out as 
7193 (5228 Chhatarpur +1965 Panna). Total Population have been 
worked out as 16515. SC & ST population have been worked out as 
1565 (1527 Chhatarpur +38 Panna) & 10187 (5947 Chhatarpur + 4240 
Panna) respectively. In view of the needs and aspirations of local people 
the Government of MP has approved Special Package on 13.9.2023 for 
Project Affected Families of Ken-Betwa Link Project.  
 
Collector, Chhatarpur and Collector, Panna has completed the land 
acquisition process as per the RFCTLARR Act,2013 and Notified in the 
Gazette of MP. After completing the valuation of22 villages (14- 
Chhatarpur + 8- Panna) through respective Departments of the State 
Government as per RFCTLARR Act, 2013, the Awards have been 
passed by the respective Collectors of Chhatarpur & Panna districts on 
20-09-2023 and 27-09-2023 respectively.” 
 
1.37 With respect to Gram Sabha Meetings and Consent of PAFs, they further 
submitted in writing:  
“During the Gram Sabha meetings, all PAFs were informed about the 
provisions made for compensation in the Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
Plan and Special Package approved by the Govt. of M.P. All the affected 
families of Panna District (1965) have given their consent for adopting 
Special Package approved by Government of M.P. In respect of 
Chhatarpur district, about 4772affected families (Out of 5228) have 
given their consent to opt for Special Package approved by Government 
of M.P. and 65 have given their consent for R&R colony.  
 
After disbursement of entire compensation to the PAFs of 22 villages, 
as per LA, R&R Act, 2013 or as per Special Package of Govt. of M.P. as 
may be opted by PAFs, the PAFs will be displaced before submergence 
of dam.” 
 
1.38  During the course of evidence, in response to issue regarding inadequate 
monetary compensation to affected families, the official of the department replied as 
under: 
 
“सर, उसमɅ बहुत लोगɉ के पास जमीन नहȣं हɉगी। रȣसैटãड लोगɉ का नंबर अलग है। उसमɅ 
वयèक पुǽष भी फ ेͧमलȣ कȧ पǐरभाषा मɅ आ जाते हɇ। यह इस वजह से है। उस Ěाइबल 
एǐरया मɅ ĚांजैÈशन नहȣं होता है, Èयɉͩक वहां Ěाइबल टू Ěाइबल हȣ बेच पाएंगे। इस वजह 
से वहां ĚांजैÈशन नहȣं होता है, इसͧलए गवन[मɅट ने èपेशल पैकेज घोͪषत ͩकया। जो 
कंपैǐरǑटव चाट[ यहां Ǒदया है, यह इसी को दशा[ता है। सपोज कलेÈटर गाइडलाइन Üलस इस 
एÈट के अंतग[त भू-अज[न करते हɇ तो 1,942 हेÈटेअर के ͧलए 156.95 करोड़ ǽपये आते 
हɇ। èटेट ने èपेशल पैकेज अनाउंस करके उसको 267.68 करोड़ ǽपये Ǒदए हɇ। जो èपेशल 
पैकेज है, इसमɅ सपोज भू-अज[न अͬधǓनयम के अंतग[त न जाकर èपेशल पैकेज मɅ जाते हɇ 

 
 
18 
 
तो ĤǓत हेÈटेअर 12 लाख ǽपये शासन देता है। वहां कȧ लɇड वैãयू बहुत कम है, इसͧलए 
12 लाख ǽपये ĤǓत हेÈटेअर èवीकृत ͩकया है। वहां समèत लोगɉ ने जो पैकेज ͧलए हɇ, वह 
èपेशल पैकेज से हȣ जमीन Ǒदया है।”  
 
1.39 During the sitting, with regard to land acquisition for the Railways, 
representatives of the Ministry of Railways submitted that:  
“Railways are undertaking procurement of land under “The Railway Act 
1989” and “The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR)” for 
creation of assets for new lines, multi-tracking, etc. It has been observed 
that as per the procedure laid down in the Railway Act, 1989, it takes around 
27 Months for Land acquisition as against 47 - 50 months as per “The Right 
to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation 
and Resettlement Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR). Ministry of Railways has issued 
instructions to Zonal Railways stating that all Doubling, Gauge Conversion 
and only important new Line projects should be declared as Special Railway 
Projects and land acquisition should be done as per Railway Amendment 
Act, 2008. The authority to declare any project as “Special Railway Project” 
vests with General Manager of Zonal Railway.” 
 
 
  
 


 
 
19 
 
 


 
 
20 
 
1.40 Comparison between RFCTLARR Act 2013 & Railways Act,1989 
  
1.41 During the Course of evidence, the CEO Railway Board submitted before the 
Committee: 
“Land acquisition, basically it is done through two modes. Either it is done 
by the Railways Act 1989 or it is done through the RFCTLARR Act. So, if 
you see the distinction, basically whenever we require new projects, line 
upgradations, or new railway lines, there, we are going by the Railways Act, 
1989 and for other cases we are going by the second provision. Largely, we 
are doing the land acquisition as per the Act of 1989. So, as per the Clause 
37A of the Railway Act 1989, we have to invoke the provision of Railways 
Act 1989. Under that, we declare that project as a special railway project. It 
is because those are the projects which are for the large public use and they 
have to be expeditiously sanctioned and expeditiously executed. So, what 
happens is this. The Chief Administrative Officer, which is one in each Zonal 
Railways, issues a Gazette notification declaring those projects as the 
special railway projects. जनरल मैनेजेर के अĤूवल के बाद वे उसको जारȣ कर सकते 
हɇ। यǑद आप Èलॉज 7ए देखɅ तो जोनल रेलवे का जो सीईओ होता है, वह लɇड एिÈविजशन 
के ͧलए कंͪपटɅट ऑथोǐरटȣ नोͧमनेट कर सकता है। वह रेवेÛयू ऑͩफसर होता है। यह उस 
ͫडिèĚÈट के Ǒहसाब से होता है। 
यह केवल एक लेटर है, िजसके माÚयम से सभी रेलवे जोन को बताया गया है ͩक आपको 
ͩकस तरह से रेलवे लɇड का अͬधĒहण करना है। This is a letter. Whenever there are 


 
 
21 
 
new projects, we go by the special projects. That is a direction to all the 
Zonal Railways which come under the Railway Board. So as far as the 
competent authority is concerned, largely they are the Revenue Officials. 
When we write to the District Magistrate, he identifies one of the SDMs or 
Tehsildars. He is nominated at the CALA. Basically, we make a request to 
the State Government, and once he nominates it, then we notify it in the 
Gazette.” 
1.42 In response to query regarding absence of Social Impact Assessment provision in 
the Railways Act 1989, and suggestion to use RFCTLARR Act, 2013 for compensation 
at Market value and rehabilitation, the official replied as under:  
“Sir, only social impact analysis is not followed, otherwise the rates and all 
the other things are followed by this Act only through Section 26. If you see 
the rates, they will be same whether we do by this process or that process 
Èयɉͩक जहां तक रेट कȧ बात है, शेɬयूल-1 के सैÈशन-26 मɅ, जहां एसडीएम को यह पावर 
दȣ गई है। उसका सेट Ǿल है, उसके दो-तीन Ǔनयम हɇ। It is highest of those values.”   
1.43 With regard to land acquisition for the Metro Rail projects, representatives of 
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) submitted that: 
“Metro Rail Companies across the country have built and are building huge 
infrastructure for providing clean and comfortable commuting services to 
the people. To meet its requirements of land, they have to resort to various 
options for land procurements as per the suitability in the particular situation. 
Metro Companies require land from Central and State Government 
Departments, agencies, autonomous bodies, statutory bodies as well as 
sometime private land. As per Metro Rail Policy, 2017, the cost towards 
land acquisition and related Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) are to 
be borne the State Government. Govt. Land for the metro rail projects is 
mostly provided by the State Govt. free of cost to the metro companies. 
Private land is being acquired under Land Acquisition Act. Prior to 
enactment of new act i.e. “Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in 
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement Act, 2013 land was being 
acquired under Land Acquisition Acts applicable in the respective States, 
since the land acquisition and related Rehabilitation & Resettlement are 
State subjects. As land is the State subject and most of the metro rail 
companies are on 50:50 equity partnership between Central Government 
and State Government, land acquisition and related rehabilitation and 
resettlement is done by the Metro Rail Companies and State Government 
concerned. The project affected persons are provided necessary 
rehabilitation as per the policy of the State Government by providing 
alternative residence, commercial shops/establishments or compensation 
etc.” 
 
1.44 Raising issue with regard to delay in land acquisition under the Act, they also 
suggested modification in RFCTLARR Act, 2013: 

 
 
22 
 
“Metro projects are not required to seek Environmental Clearance under 
Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) notification for the purpose of land 
acquisition. Similarly, as the process of Social Impact Assessment (SIA) is 
time consuming, it is proposed that in the Central Act, 2013 itself, the Social 
Impact Assessment (SIA) for land acquisition in case of Metro Projects may 
be exempted since metro rail projects which are important infrastructure 
projects and are of linear nature” 
1.45 With regard to land acquisition for Roads and Highway projects, 
representatives of the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and National 
Highways Authority of India (NHAI) submitted that: 
“The amount of compensation, rehabilitation and resettlement entitlements 
are determined by the Competent Authority for Land Acquisition (CALA). 
Provisions of First, Second and Third Schedule of the Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act (RFCTLARR), 2013 are applicable for acquisition done 
under NH Act w.e.f. 01.01.2015. Sections 26-30 of the RFCTLARR Act are 
the guiding Sections for calculation of compensation for land acquisition” 
1.46 On the query regarding non-applicability of SIA in National Highway Projects; the 
official of the NHAI submitted during the evidence: 
“सोशल इàपेÈट असेसमɅट आम तौर पर लȣǓनयर ĤोजेÈɪस पर नहȣं होता है। एनएच एÈट 
1956 के Ĥोसीजस[ काफȧ ĤोजेÈɪस पर लागू नहȣं होते हɇ। इसके सैÈशन 3 मɅ ĤोवीजÛस 
मɅ स ब ĤोजेÈɪस लȣनयर हɇ।” 
I. In order to understand the applicability of the LARR Act regarding land 
acquisition in tribal and forest areas, the Committee also took evidence of 
the representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change and Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 14-07-2025.  
1.47 The representative of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
submitted before the Committee: 
“This Voluntary Village Relocation Plan is currently underway, operating 
only in tiger reserves, and it's fully aligned with the Wildlife Act and our 
Recognition of Forest Rights Act. No relocation process can be initiated 
without a resolution from the Gram Sabha. I'd like to bring this to your 
attention again. Furthermore, Sir, another important point is that the 
provisions provided in Section 2B of the Recognition of Forest Rights Act 
recognize critical wildlife habitats, including national parks and sanctuaries. 
However, we haven't yet been able to implement this plan in national parks 
and sanctuaries because it requires a small amount of funding, which is a 
problem. Secondly, in the important core areas of Tiger Reserves, the 
process was accelerated a bit after the problems that arose after 2012-13, 

 
 
23 
 
but even then, only one-third of the people who came forward voluntarily 
have been relocated. This arrangement is completed only after keeping 
their rights fully in mind. One thing that becomes clear from this is that we 
do not resort to and do not implement the provisions of the Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013 in our voluntary village relocation. It is a long-drawn 
process which involves seeking their mutual consent and then offering them 
the land and seeking their voluntary acceptance. Only after that we are able 
to do it.” 
1.48 In their brief note submitted by National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), 
the Department stated:  
“NTCA is not implementing the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
(RFCTLARR) Act, 2013; The Act does interact with environmental 
concerns, especially regarding the Social Impact Assessment (SIA) which 
falls under the purview of MoEFCC for environmental clearances. A crucial 
component of the Act is the requirement for a Social Impact Assessment 
(SIA) for every land acquisition project. This assessment, involves public 
hearings and community involvement, where environmental considerations 
are evaluated. MoEFCC plays a role in the environmental clearance 
process related to projects requiring land acquisition. While the Department 
of Land Resources is the lead agency for the Act, the environmental impact 
of land acquisition is a critical aspect that MoEFCC's environmental 
clearance process addresses, particularly through the SIA. regarding 
rehabilitation and resettlement mentioned in the LARR Act, even though it 
is not implemented, similar kind of rehabilitation and resettlement is taken 
up in case of voluntary village relocation as per guidelines issued vide F. 
No. 15-4/2010-NTCA (Part-III) by the National Tiger Conservation Authority 
is as per the provisions of Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 and Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) 
Act, 2006. The guidelines issued by NTCA with respect to voluntary village 
relocation has to be implemented by the concerned State Government and 
its authorities as land is subject matter of the state. Therefore, the National 
Tiger Conservation Authority assists the tiger range states by hand holding 
and providing necessary funding support subject to availability of funds after 
duly scrutinizing the detailed proposal for voluntary village relocation 
submitted by State Government.”  
1.49 Regarding Forest Rights Act, 1980; the department submitted in their written reply: 
“The Van (Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan) Adhiniyam, 1980 was enacted 
on 25th Oct 1980. It is a unique piece of legislation and a regulatory 
mechanism intended to protect the country’s rich biodiversity and natural 
heritage. It is regulatory in nature and not a prohibitory Act and permits 
unavoidable use of forest land for various developmental purposes.” 
  

 
 
24 
 
 
1.50  Adhiniyam vis-à-vis Forest Rights Act, 2006 and LARR Act, 2013 
The statutory processes as envisaged under the Van (Sanrakshan Evam 
Samvardhan) Adhiniyam, 1980 does not abrogate or infringe the sanctity of the provisions 
of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act, 2006.  
The Adhiniyam and Rules made thereunder do not bar or infringe upon the 
operation of other laws which mandate prior consent of Gram Sabhas, such as Right to 
Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013. The said Act provides for acquisition of rights of land owners 
including persons granted rights under the FRA, 2006.  
Cases which involve R&R of the villagers from the Protected Areas are dealt and 
disposed of in accordance with the order dated 28.03.2008 Hon’ble Supreme Court i.e. 
these proposals are exempted from the payment of NPV and CA.   
1.51 During the course of evidence, the officials of the Department submitted before the 
Committee:  
“फॉरेèट कंजवȶशन एÈट, िजसको वन संर¢ण एवं संवध[न अͬधǓनयम कहते हɇ, उसके 
संबंध मɅ यह ĤेजɅटेशन Ĥकाश डालेगा। आप अवगत हɇ ͩक जब ͩकसी वन ¢ेğ से कोई 
लȣǓनयर इÛĥाèĚÈचर या Ǔनमा[ण काय[ होना होता है, तो ऐसे वन ¢ेğ का डायवज[न भारत 
सरकार कȧ पूवा[नुमǓत से होता है। वन संर¢ण एवं संवध[न अͬधǓनयम के तहत Ĥèताव 
राÏय सरकार से आते हɇ और भारत सरकार समी¢ा उपरांत उनकȧ पूवा[नुमǓत देती है। 
इसमɅ कई बार ऐसा होता है ͩक जब यह ͪवषय सामने आता है ͩक डायवज[न होने से पहले 
जो फॉरेèट कàयूǓनटȣ जंगल ¢ेğ को यूज़ कर रहȣ है या उसके आस-पास रह रहȣ है, उसके 
राइɪस का सेटलमɅट एफआरए के तहत हो जाना चाǑहए।” 
1.52 The official further added: 
“सर, वन संर¢ण एवं संवध[न अͬधǓनयम 1980 के तहत वष[ 2022 व 2023 मɅ वन 
संर¢ण एवं संवध[न Ǿãस आए हɇ, िजनमɅ इस बात कȧ åयवèथा सुǓनिæचत कȧ गई है ͩक 
जब भी कोई डायवज[न होगा, तो दो चरणɉ मɅ होगा। डायवज[न के èटेज 1 मɅ Ĥाथͧमक 
अĤूवल ͧमलता है और èटेज 2 मɅ फाइनल अĤूवल ͧमलता है। Ǿल कȧ धारा के उपधारा-7 
मɅ इस बात का Ĥावधान है। मɇ उसको पढ़ना चाहता हूं-  
“The State Government and the Union Territories administration as the case 
may be after receiving the final approval of the Central Government under 
sub-Section 1 of Section 2 of the Adhiniyam and after fulfilment and 
compliance of the provisions of all other Acts and rules made thereunder as 
applicable including ensuring settlement of rights under the Scheduled 

 
 
25 
 
Tribe and other traditional forest dwellers and recognition of Forest Rights 
Act 2006 shall issue orders for diversion, assignment of lease or de 
reservation as the case may be. सर, इस बात का पूरा Éयाल रखा गया है ͩक वन 
¢ेğ कȧ ͩकसी भी भूͧम का डायवज[न करने से पहले फॉरेèट राइट के तहत ĤͩĐया पूण[ होने 
व अÛय ͪवͬधक ĤͩĐयाएं पूण[ होने के बाद हȣ डायवज[न, असाइनमɅट ऑफ लȣज़ या डी-
ǐरजवȶशन राÏय ɮवारा ͩकया जाएगा। हालांͩक डायवज[न मɅ एÈवीजीशन नहȣं होता, लेͩकन 
डायवज[न मɅ फॉरेèट राइɪस का पूरा Éयाल रखा गया है और ͪवशेष åयवèथा Ǿãस मɅ 
मेÛशÛड है ͩक ǒबना उनके राइɪस सेटल हुए राÏय कोई भी डायवज[न नहȣं कर सकता 
है।”” 
1.53 In their power point presentation during the evidence, the Department submitted: 
 
1.54 During their presentation, in response to a clarification whether LARR Act is not 
applicable to Environment and Forest Ministry, or the National Conservation Authority, 
NTCA, why is the Land Acquisition Act not applicable, especially for compensation; the 
Department of Land Resources replied: 
“In the RFCTLARR Act, Schedule 4, 13 Acts are listed. And it is mentioned 
that land acquisition related, these are the 13 central acts to which this act 
will apply. In that, these 13 Acts, they are not listed. 
1.55 During the course of evidence, the representative of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs submitted as under: 


 
 
26 
 
“सर, हम लोग का काफȧ ͧलͧमटेड रोल है। हम लोग ͧसफ[ पɪटा देने का रोल Üले करते हɇ, 
न ͩक लɇड एÈवायर करने का, इस संबंध मɅ हमारा रोल बहुत ͧलͧमटेड है। हम लोग ͧसफ[ 
राइɪस को एंæयोर करने कȧ कोͧशश करते हɇ।“  
“(Sir, our role is quite limited. We only play the role of granting leases, not 
acquiring land. In this regard, our role is very limited. We only try to ensure 
rights.)” 
 
J. Submissions by various Civil Society Organisation: Land Conflict Watch and 
other stakeholders affected by the alleged faulty implementation of this Act. 
During the course of examination, Committee held discussions with various Civil 
Society Organisations and other stakeholders affected by the alleged faulty 
implementation of this Act.  
1.56 During the course of evidence, one of the non-official witnesses representing 
‘Land Conflict Watch’ submitted before the Committee: 
“The LARR is quite clear on land acquisition in Scheduled Areas—
acquisition has to be the last resort, under Section 41 of the act. In the event 
that land has to be acquired, prior consent for acquisition must be obtained 
either from the Gram Sabha, the Panchayats or the Autonomous District 
Councils. Once such consent is granted only then can the authorities issue 
a “preliminary notification,” i.e. the official announcement by the government 
about its intent to acquire land. This preliminary notification is issued under 
Section 11 of the LARR. The PESA also mandates that the Gram Sabha or 
Panchayats must be consulted before any land acquisition in Scheduled 
Areas.” 
1.57 Highlighting the September 2024 report on the Performance Audit of Land 
Management in Scheduled Areas of Odisha, the non-official witness stated that:  
“CAG flagged 136 cases of land acquisition Odisha scheduled areas. In 
each of these 136 cases, state authorities bypassed multiple provisions of 
the LARR and the Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act of 1996 
(PESA), to push through projects. The report, covering the period from 
2017-2022, audits land management in Odisha’s Scheduled Areas–regions 
that fall under Schedule V of the Constitution, mainly inhabited by tribal 
communities, that get special protections for indigenous rights, culture, and 
land.”  
1.58 The non-official witness also submitted that: 
“Despite stricter legal safeguards for land in Scheduled Areas, land across 
the four districts of Kalahandi, Koraput, Mayurbhanj, and Sundargarh, was 

 
 
27 
 
acquired “without conducting GS meetings, disregarding the views of the 
GS, obtaining consent of the GS without the required quorum, conducting 
GS meeting after issue of preliminary notification,” as per the CAG.” 
 
1.59 Regarding land acquisition without conducting GS meetings, he submitted that:  
“In 73 cases of Land Acquisition involving 297.4886 acres of land in 
Koraput, Mayurbhanj, Sundargarh and Kalahandi districts, consent of Gram 
Sabha has not been taken. These are for projects such as the Telengiri 
Major Irrigation Project (TMIP), the Talcher-Bimlagarh Rail Link Project 
(TBRLP), the Ret Irrigation Project (RIP) and for roads and approach roads 
to bridges.”  
  


 
 
28 
 
1.60 Rasing the issue of obtaining consent of GSs, without the required quorum, he 
presented before the Committee that:  
“The audit further revealed that in 24 cases of land acquisition in the 4 
districts, consent of gram sabhas were obtained without the required 
quorum. According to rule 17 of LARR’s Social Impact Assessment and 
Consent Rules of 2014, a valid quorum requires at least 50 per cent of the 
total Gram Sabha members, with at least one-third of the sabha’s total 
women members in attendance. Between April 2021 and July 2022, the 
collectors of Koraput and Nabarangpur districts issued preliminary 
notifications for 41 cases, involving 871.246 acres of land for the Jeypore-
Nabarangpur and Jeypore-Malkanagiri Rail Link Projects. These 
notifications were based on GS consents. However, CAG found that in 24 
of these cases, the gram sabha meeting attendance was just 0.30 to 8.80 
per cent, and the participation of women members was also missing.”  
1.61 Quoting from the CAG report he also pointed out following issues:  
(i) Issue of preliminary notifications, disregarding the views of the GS  
(ii) Conducting GS, after issue of preliminary notification  
 
K. Non-official witnesses and experts from the State of Gujarat 
1.62 During their deposition before the Committee on 03.03.2025, a group of experts 
and stakeholders from Gujarat submitted before the Committee as under:  
“For land acquisition, public purpose, tourism should not qualify is 
our humble submission. If change of public purpose is changed, there 
should be some transparent process where affected people come to know 
on what has happened, why it has happened, and whether it is justifiable. I 
am making these submissions especially because these areas happen to 
fall under Schedule 5 areas. Schedule 5 areas should have some element, 
some level of autonomy. There is the role for Panchayat Extension 
Scheduled Areas law, PESA laws, autonomy, Gram Sabha, etc. The Gram 
Sabha has to be in the picture where any decisions affecting people's lives 
are made.  
On land acquisition, my submission is that there is rampant violation of the 
Land Acquisition Act, whether old or new. For instance, there is the Sardar 
Sarovar project and there is a small weir, Garudeshwar weir. Garudeshwar 
weir has submerged lands of farmers without acquisition. This has 
happened since 2017-18” 
1.63 Raising the need for notifications for land acquisitions to be published in local 
language also, they also submitted: 
“The notification is only in English and Hindi languages. वहां के आǑदवासी लोगɉ 
के ͧलए गुजराती भी उतनी हȣ फॉरेन लɇÊवेज है, िजतनी कȧ Ǒहंदȣ या अंĒेजी। मɇ सिÞमशन 

 
 
29 
 
कर रहा हूं ͩक Ǒहंदȣ ओर अंĒेजी मɅ नोǑटͩफकेशन होगा तो अफ ेÈटेड लोग उसे कैसे पढ़ 
पाएंगे। मेरȣ लायǒबͧलटȣ या ͧलͧमटेशन हɇͫडकैÜड के ͧलए बननी चाǑहए। वहां के लोगɉ को 
Ǒहंदȣ और अंĒेजी मɅ नोǑटͩफकेशन समझ मɅ नहȣं आएगा।“ 
1.64 One of the experts submitted: 
“आǑदवासी के सामने बहुत सारे इæयूज, ĤॉÞलàस और चैलɅजेज हɇ। ये आजादȣ के बाद से 
चलȣ आ रहȣ हɇ। There is a confusion regarding laws. फंडामɅटल जो इæयूज हɇ, 
confusion of laws regarding the administration and protection of the 
scheduled areas and Scheduled Tribes. The Constitution is very clear that 
the Scheduled Areas are protected areas for tribals. The administration and 
legal framework are governed by Article 244(1) – the provisions of the Fifth 
Schedule – for empowerment of these tribal communities for tribal-friendly, 
sustainable development, and progress and welfare. The FRA of 2006, 
PESA Act of 1996, and the Land Acquisition Act of 2013 are fundamentals 
for the protection and development of tribal communities in ensuring land 
rights and forest rights. But the ground reality is very different” 
L. Submissions by various stakeholders and experts from the State of Odisha 
1.65 During their deposition before the Committee on 03.03.2025, a group of experts 
and stakeholders from Odisha also deposed before the Committee raising concerns 
about faulty implementation of LARR Act. Their major submissions were as under: 
“I would like to inform the committee members that there are several 
arbitrary processes have been adopted by the district administrations of 
Rayagada and Kalahandi in Odisha under the direction of the state 
government. The first being, with regard to the diversion of forestlands 
under the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 for Sijimali bauxite mines. The 
second being, diverting village common lands to Industrial Development 
Corporation of Odisha (IDCO) for creation of a land bank in Sijimali region. 
The third being, despite Sijimali being a Fifth Schedule Area under the 
Indian Constitution, the process of land acquisition is being undertaken 
without the knowledge and consent of the Gram Sabhas. The fourth being, 
the legal rights of affected forest-dwelling communities as enshrined under 
the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006 have been arbitrarily set aside by the district 
administration in the entire process of land acquisition. 
 Fake Gram Sabhas for Diversion of Forestlands: No Prior and 
Informed Consent of the People, Falsified Consent of Gram Sabhas 
 Diversion of Village Common Lands for IDCO Land Bank 
 Land Acquisition Without Consent of Gram Sabhas 
 Non-recognition of Rights Under FRA 2006 
 Lack of Informed Consent 

 
 
30 
 
 Absence of Genuine Social Impact Assessment (SIA) 
 Inadequate Compensation and Rehabilitation 
 
M. Submissions by various stakeholders and experts from UT of Lakshadweep 
1.66 During their deposition before the Committee on 03.03.2025, various 
stakeholders and experts from UT of Lakshadweep raised following issues before the 
Committee:  
 Unsustainable levels of acquisition 
 denial of fair compensation  
 denial of equal partnership to natives STs in matters of development in the UT 
of Lakshadweep  
 absolute denial of land compensation to native STs of Minicoy Island, 
 alleged land grabbing by the administration resulting a total of 1250 acres of 
land is proposed to be grabbed and a large portion of grabbed land is to be 
handed over to non-tribals where private hotel/tent cities are being planned,  
 lower compensation oat the rate of 200% in place of 400% value of acquisition, 
lower compensation Rs. 350/sq. mtrs, for lands in more deserving areas and 
Rs 2500/sq. mtrs in other areas etc. 
 
N. Submissions by various stakeholders and experts from UT of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands 
1.67 During the course of evidence, one of the non-official witnesses raising the 
issues of Land acquisition in Andaman Nicobar Islands submitted that 
“a proposal initiated under the aegis of Government of India, titled Holistic 
Development of Great Nicobar Island, was proposed by the Niti Aayog and 
which is proceeding towards initiation by the Andaman Nicobar Islands 
Integrated Development Corporation (ANIIDCO) whereby forested land 
being de-notified from its status as a Tribal Reserved area for use in the 
commercial enterprise of the holistic development proposal and its diversion 
for non-forestry purpose; the said lands are specifically reserved (ANPATR 
1956/7) by the Government of India for the Particularly Vulnerable Tribal 
Group (PVTG) of the Shompen Community, as well as the Scheduled Tribe 
(ST) of Nicobarese in Great Nicobar Island.” 
1.68 The expert mainly raised following concerns:  
“Forested lands reserved for the Shompen (PVTG) and Nicobarese (ST) 
communities are being de-notified for commercial use under the ‘Holistic 
Development of Great Nicobar Island’ project and the acquisition violates 
the spirit and provisions of ANPATR and RFCTLARR 2013 applicable in 
Scheduled Areas. Great Nicobarese were displaced post-2004 tsunami and 

 
 
31 
 
have repeatedly requested return to ancestral lands. Project components 
are being planned on these ancestral lands without community consent, 
undermining their right to return and traditional livelihoods. Shompen 
habitats and foraging grounds near the East-West Road and southern Great 
Nicobar are under threat, risking cultural and ecological collapse. Flawed 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) claims no human habitation in 
project zones, contradicting evidence of Shompen presence and 
Nicobarese dependence on these lands. Internal contradictions in the EIA 
acknowledge Shompen activity in Galathea but dismiss impact concerns. 
Also, the compensation mechanisms are inadequate and fail to consider 
socio-cultural, economic, and environmental needs of the tribes. The 
acquisition process lacked transparency, fairness, and meaningful 
consultation” 
1.69 During the study visit of the Committee in Sri Vijay Puram in November, 2025, a 
group of local civil society organisation raised following concerns regarding the 
project: 
● Over 131 sq km of forest land and 84 sq km of the Tribal Reserve will be destroyed, 
severely impacting the indigenous Shompen (PVTG) and Nicobarese (ST) 
communities. 
● The project threatens one of the most biodiverse rainforests, posing risks to 
endemic flora, fauna, and marine ecosystems. 
● The Shompen and Nicobarese Tribes live in the statutorily protected Tribal 
Reserve, notified under the Andaman & Nicobar Islands Protection of Aboriginal 
Tribes Regulation (ANIPATR), 1956. 
● Section 11 of ANIPATR prohibits any law violating its provisions, yet the project 
proceeds without proper consultation with the Tribal Council. 
● The Andaman & Nicobar (Tribal Councils) Regulation, 2009 mandates 
consultation with the Tribal Council, which has been ignored. 
● In November 2022, the Tribal Council withdrew its NOC, stating that the 
government had misled them about the project’s scale and impact. 
● Despite this, the government proceeded with environmental clearances, making 
the Stage-I Forest Clearance invalid. 
● The National Green Tribunal (NGT) in April 2023 ordered a stay on the project and 
directed a High-Powered Committee to assess the environmental impact. 
● The SIA study was conducted by Probe Research and Social Development Pvt. 
Ltd., a Delhi-based agency, with no expertise in tribal affairs. 
● The assessment ignored the Shompen and Nicobarese tribes, despite their clear 
stake in the project’s impact. 

 
 
32 
 
● No anthropologists or tribal welfare experts were consulted, violating the Land 
Acquisition Act, 2013, which mandates evaluating effects on the entire local 
community. 
● The 8.88 sq. km airport project area falls under deemed forest and Tribal Reserve, 
yet no consideration was given to its impact on tribals. 
● Instead of restoring lost forests, the government proposed afforestation in 
Haryana, thousands of kilometers away, making a mockery of ecological 
compensation. 
● This move benefits private developers while completely disregarding the 
ecological and livelihood loss of the indigenous communities. 
● Scheduled Tribes Commission was not consulted, violating Article 338(9) of the 
Indian Constitution. 
● The government ignored the Andaman administration’s official Shompen Policy 
(2015), which prioritizes tribal welfare over large-scale projects. 
● The Shompen, a nomadic hunter-gatherer tribe, will lose access to forests, food 
sources, and traditional living areas. 
● The Nicobarese, a farming and fishing community, will suffer due to restricted land 
and coastal access. 
● The project will force cultural assimilation, endangering the Shompen’s isolation-
based lifestyle, leading to potential extinction. 
● The project violates constitutional protections for Scheduled Tribes, warranting a 
Presidential reference under Article 143 to the Supreme Court. 
● Environmental and tribal rights laws are being bypassed under the pretext of 
“strategic” importance, setting a dangerous precedent. 
● The NGT’s stay order has not been complied with, raising concerns over judicial 
defiance. 
● The proposed widening of existing roads and the construction of new ones will 
have catastrophic consequences for the Shompen. Contact with outsiders will 
become unavoidable, and the resulting social and ecological impacts will be 
irreversible. Such exposure will not only make the Shompen vulnerable to diseases 
for which they possess no immunity but also to exploitation, stigma, addiction, and 
ridicule. The trauma of witnessing the destruction of their forests and traditional 
lands will be immense. Additionally, the intrusion of non-tribal settlers will likely 
result in encroachment upon indigenous lands and intensify inter-band conflicts 
over scarce space and dwindling natural resources. 
 
1.70 They also submitted: 
“The administration’s repeated claims that tribal communities will not be 
displaced by the Great Nicobar Project are entirely misleading and 
inconsistent with the ground realities of the island. Within the forested 

 
 
33 
 
Galathea basin—an area directly included in the project zone—there exist 
three to four southern Shompen settlements. These lands encompass 
hunting and foraging grounds, as well as sacred spaces that are central to 
their migratory traditions and cultural identity. Furthermore, the Great 
Nicobarese, who own land in the villages of Chingenh, Pulo Bha, Hingloi, 
Pulopucca, and Kokeon, have already become internally displaced 
persons. They now live in Rajiv Nagar and Campbell Bay, far removed from 
their ancestral territories. Thus, the official narrative of “non-displacement” 
is patently false.” 
 
 
  

 
 
34 
 
 
PART – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Strict Implementation of the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR) 
The Committee take note of the alleged faulty implementation of the Right to 
Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR Act), particularly in Scheduled Areas governed 
by the provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 
(PESA). While the Ministry has outlined the statutory framework and reiterated the 
legal safeguards available under the Act, including those relating to fair 
compensation, multiple displacements, Scheduled Tribe protections, and 
procedural steps such as Social Impact Assessment (SIA), the Committee are of 
the considered view that the response is insufficient in addressing the core issues 
raised. The Committee is concerned that, despite the existence of these statutory 
provisions, there continue to be violations in practice like undervaluation of land 
particularly in Scheduled Areas where market transactions are restricted; delayed 
or superficial Gram Sabha consultations without proper documentation or 
availability of materials in the local language; exclusion of women and vulnerable 
groups from the consultation process; and mechanical issuance of compliance 
certificates without genuine engagement with affected communities. These 
practices substantially undermine the intent of the Act and dilute trust in the 
acquisition process. The Committee, therefore, does not endorse the Ministry’s 
view that the presence of statutory safeguards is sufficient. It emphasize that the 
real challenge lies in their consistent and rigorous implementation, particularly in 
Scheduled Areas where constitutional protections under Article 244(1) and the 
Fifth Schedule, read with PESA Section 4, impose a special duty on the State to 
uphold peace, good governance, and participatory decision-making. The 
Committee recommend that every acquisition in Scheduled Areas must follow the 
full procedural sequence laid down in Sections 4 to 8 of the RFCTLARR Act. In 
particular, the Gram Sabha consultation mandated under PESA must be embedded 

 
 
35 
 
within the SIA process, not conducted separately or after key decisions have 
already been taken. The Committee recommend that the SIA, in its statutory scope 
under Sections 4–6 of the Act, must clearly identify all affected families as defined 
in Section 3(c), including livelihood-dependent households reliant on forests, 
commons, water bodies, and minor produce. The SIA must also include mapping 
of community resources, the loss of which would trigger entitlements. The Section 
5 public hearing must fulfil the consultation requirement under PESA by ensuring 
that Gram Sabhas are provided with the draft SIA, proposed compensation 
framework under Sections 26–30, details of Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
entitlements under Schedules II and III, and special protections under Sections 41 
and 42, in the local language and with adequate time for review. The Expert Group 
under Section 7 must record the influence of Gram Sabha inputs on its findings, 
and the Section 8 decision must explicitly apply the statutory tests: assessment of 
public purpose, evaluation of alternatives, benefits outweighing social costs, and 
confirmation that only the bare minimum land is being acquired. The Committee 
further recommend that compensation awards under Sections 26–30 must 
transparently disclose base market value, applicable multiplier, and solatium, with 
public display at the village level. No possession of land should occur until after 
the full Rehabilitation and Resettlement package is delivered or site-ready in 
accordance with Sections 37–38 of the RFCTLARR Act. This includes provision of 
land for land (Section 41(2)) of the Act wherever feasible, with reasons recorded 
where not feasible; subsistence and shifting allowances; housing or housing site; 
annuity or employment options; and community infrastructure. Requirements 
relating to cultural identity and proximity under Section 41(5) of the Act must be 
fulfilled and documented. The invocation of urgency powers under Section 40 of 
the Act must not be used to bypass the procedural safeguards of Sections 4–8 for 
planned projects. For the sake of transparency and public accountability, the 
Committee strongly recommend that all relevant documents, including the SIA 
report, Gram Sabha records, Expert Group appraisal, Section 8 decision, 
compensation details, and R&R implementation status, be published on an official 
portal in the local language. Any instance where the mandated consultation, 
assessment, or appraisal process has been circumvented or post-dated must be 

 
 
36 
 
treated as a material procedural violation, subject to review and, if necessary, 
rectification or re-initiation of the process in accordance with the Act. Therefore, 
the Committee strongly recommend that the RFCTLARR Act, 2013 must be 
implemented in its entirety and true spirit, especially in Scheduled Areas. State-
specific amendments or administrative practices that dilute its core protections 
must be discouraged. The Committee urge the Ministry to adopt a proactive 
monitoring and enforcement role ensuring fair and just treatment of families 
affected by the development projects. 
2. Strengthening Role of Gram Sabha  
The Committee note that The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency 
in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (LARR Act, 2013) 
significantly strengthens the role of the Gram Sabha, ensuring grassroots 
participation in the land acquisition process with key provisions of mandatory Prior 
Consent of Gram Sabha under the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution and Social 
Impact Assessment to empower rural communities, especially tribals and 
marginalized groups, with a decisive role in safeguarding their land and 
livelihoods. The Committee is highly concerned about the growing incidents where 
consent of Gram Sabha is obtained on paper just as a formality without actually 
involving the majority of the population being affected by the respective projects. 
The Committee recommend to give more power to Gram Sabha by making their 
consent mandatory for all land acquisitions, not just in Scheduled Areas and to 
give Gram Sabha the power to veto land acquisition proposals that do not align 
with local development plans or community interests. Recommendations made by 
Gram Sabha during Social Impact Assessment (SIA) processes should be made 
binding for implementation. 
3. Strict compliance of PESA rules  
As per the provision of the LARR Act, for land acquisition in Scheduled 
Areas, consultation with the Gram Sabha shall be in accordance with the 
Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) ‘PESA’ Act, 1996.  
Taking a note of representations made by several experts and non-official 
witnesses before the Committee that such provision is not being followed, the 

 
 
37 
 
Committee is of the view that to ensure just and equitable land acquisition in tribal 
areas, it is essential to align the LARR Act, 2013 with the Panchayats (Extension to 
Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA), that will empower local communities and 
Scheduled Tribes with decision-making authority over land, natural resources, and 
development. The Committee, therefore recommend to codify mandatory consent 
of the Gram Sabha under PESA for all land acquisition in Scheduled Areas within 
LARR provisions and empower Gram Sabhas to review, approve, or reject land 
acquisition proposals as part of the Social Impact Assessment process. The 
Committee urge upon the Department of Land Resources to ensure strict 
compliance of this important provision in letter & spirit. The concerned officials 
must be trained to understand the tribal culture for better and sincere 
implementation of the PESA rules. 
4. Integration with Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006 
The Committee is informed about many instances where forest land is being 
acquired in violation of the provisions of the Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006. The 
Committee feel that linkage between the LARR Act and FRA is essential to 
safeguard forest communities’ land and resource rights, ensure their meaningful 
participation and consent, and provide fair rehabilitation, making land acquisition 
processes more just, transparent and inclusive. The Committee note with concern 
that in several forest land acquisition and relocation packages, affected families 
are offered a meagre uniform cash compensation, often around Rs. 15 lakh per 
family, which does not take into account the real value of land, housing, common 
resources and forest-based livelihoods lost. For instance, in Rajasthan, families 
relocated from the core area of Sariska Tiger Reserve have been offered Rs. 15 lakh 
in cash as one of the options in lieu of relocation, a package that has been 
repeatedly criticised as inadequate in relation to long-term livelihood loss and the 
absence of robust rehabilitation. The Committee, therefore, recommend integrating 
FRA and the LARR Act to ensure that land acquisition in forest areas cannot 
proceed without recognition and settlement of forest rights under FRA and without 
the written consent of the Gram Sabha as required by FRA. The Committee also 
recommend that community forest resource (CFR) titles be incorporated as part of 
the compensation and rehabilitation process and that the loss of customary and 

 
 
38 
 
community forest use rights be explicitly treated as economic displacement, 
warranting full and fair rehabilitation rather than nominal lump-sum payments. 
5. Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) 
The Committee observe that in some cases where Social Impact 
Assessment (SIA) and Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) are being carried 
out just as a formality with reports favouring the acquisitions. The SIA, mandated 
by the LARR Act, focuses on the social and economic consequences of land 
acquisition on local communities while SIA provisions to assess and mitigate the 
environmental impact of projects requiring land acquisition.  These provisions 
help in making informed decisions about projects and mitigating their potential 
adverse environmental effects, alongside addressing the social and economic 
impacts on affected communities. The Committee strongly recommend the DoLR 
to ensure that both EIA and SIA are being strictly followed as per the guidelines 
envisioned in the LARR Act.  
6. Fair and adequate compensation in tribal areas 
The law (Land Acquisition Act 2013) says land value must be worked out 
fairly (sections 26 to 30) with a multiplier in rural areas plus 100 percent solatium 
and it gives extra safeguards for Scheduled Tribes (sections 41 and 42) like land 
for land as far as possible moving people close to their old habitat and protecting 
culture and access to forests. The Committee found in some instances that this 
promise is not met. Circle rates are old or set low, so the base value is weak. 
Distress sale deeds drag prices down. There are very few proper sale deeds, so 
“market value” does not reflect real worth. Common resources that keep tribal 
families alive, grazing land, community forest resource areas, sacred groves, water 
source, shifting cultivation patches, paths to collect bamboo, honey, fuelwood, 
fodder, medicinal plants, wild foods, are left out. Forest rights and community 
forest resource claims are still pending when awards are made. Part of the money 
comes late or in small advance pieces before alternate land or houses are ready, 
and there is no proper adjustment for inflation loss. Land for land is promised, but 
good irrigated plots are not mapped or offered. Women’s names are missing on 
replacement land papers. Forest-dependent families without formal titles and 

 
 
39 
 
pastoral or share‑cropping users are left out or given only token help. All this 
means people lose not just land but daily livelihood and food, and energy security. 
The Committee recommend treating every acquisition in Scheduled Areas and 
other tribal dominated blocks as needing a fuller “livelihood value” along with the 
cash land value. Before starting acquisition, update circle rates using independent 
valuers and real arm’s length sales, and where there are too few sales, use a farm 
productivity and soil quality method. Use the highest allowed rural multiplier in 
hilly and forest zones, and if evidence shows it is still too low, advise raising the 
legal ceiling. Map and test alternative land early and offer land for land first; if the 
plot offered is poor or far, refusal must not push a family into cash only. List and 
value community assets and put that value into a ring-fenced community fund 
managed by the Gram Sabha with clear release steps. Finish all forest rights 
(individual and community) decisions in the project footprint before giving any 
award. Put women as joint owners on new land titles and issue at least half of 
annuity or revenue share papers in joint or women’s names. Add an automatic 
indexed interest if the payment is delayed beyond three months. Bring recognized 
non-title users (proved by Gram Sabha resolution) into livelihood restoration with 
transitional subsistence support. Pay in two stages, so the larger second part 
comes only after the replacement land and basic services are ready. Publish 
parcel-wise details (base value multiplier, solatium livelihood add-on total paid 
dates) on a public portal so people can see and compare. Set up an independent 
panel to check random awards and order corrections. Track each year for five years 
how household income, food diversity, time spent collecting fuel and fodder, and 
farm output compare with the baseline; if recovery is poor, give extra support. This 
makes compensation match real livelihood loss, protects tribal families from 
sliding deeper into poverty, and turns the legal promise of fair payment into a 
working reality. 
7. Strengthening Rehabilitation and Resettlement for Displaced Tribal Families 
The Land Acquisition Act 2013 together with its Schedules and the special 
safeguards for Scheduled Tribes (including land for land to the extent possible, 
relocation near the original habitat, protection of cultural identity and continued 

 
 
40 
 
access to forests and community resources) lays down a legally binding 
rehabilitation and resettlement framework which must be implemented in letter and 
spirit strictly in conformity with the Act, Rules and notified guidelines, not treated 
as discretionary. The goal is to provide fair compensation, new housing and 
restoration of livelihood to improve their socio-economic conditions post 
displacement. The Committee is informed of instances where statutory provisions 
and rules have not been so applied: cash is disbursed before a demarcated and 
service‑ready relocation site exists; “land for land” is offered only on paper or of 
inferior quality; relocation colonies lack potable water, drainage, irrigation access, 
school and functional health sub‑centre; subsistence allowance ends before 
restored income flows; skill training is generic and unlinked to market or project 
demand; assured employment or annuity options do not materialise; community 
grazing land, forest access routes and sacred/cultural sites are not recreated or 
legally secured; women are not recorded as joint owners; non‑title but legally 
recognised forest dependent and pastoral households are excluded; grievance 
redress remains unsatisfactory; and post‑award monitoring is absent. The 
Committee recommend strict operational compliance: no possession or physical 
displacement until (i) replacement house site or agricultural land is surveyed, 
pegged and soil‑tested, (ii) core services (all‑weather access road, safe drinking 
water source, lighting, drainage, primary school access, health sub‑centre) are 
functional, and (iii) community resource mapping (grazing, forest access, 
cultural/sacred paths, local market space) is completed and legal securing 
instruments issued. A family‑wise livelihood restoration plan, cross‑referencing 
pre‑displacement income sources, shall specify concrete replacements 
(productive land, employment commitment, enterprise grant, forest produce value 
addition support, livestock or fishery package) with time‑bound milestones; 
training modules must correspond to verified demand and placement targets. 
Compensation disbursal shall occur in sequenced tranches, with the larger second 
tranche contingent on certified site readiness; indexed interest shall apply 
automatically to delays beyond prescribed periods. “Land for land” shall mean 
land of equal or superior productive potential (or supported by a financed 
improvement plan such as assured irrigation within a defined timeframe); refusal 

 
 
41 
 
of unsuitable land shall not negate the entitlement. All forest rights (individual and 
community) and community forest resource boundaries within the project footprint 
must be finally determined before award implementation in that area. Women shall 
be recorded as joint owners on all replacement titles, and at least 50 per cent of 
annuity or revenue‑share instruments shall bear joint or women’s names. 
Recognised non‑title livelihood dependents identified by the Gram Sabha 
resolution shall receive livelihood restoration and transitional subsistence support 
commensurate with their demonstrated dependence. A public transparency portal 
shall display relocation site status (plots, services, photographs), benefit delivery 
timelines, livelihood restoration progress indicators, and grievance entries with 
disposal status. Independent annual audits for five years post‑displacement shall 
measure household income recovery, land productivity, time required for fuel and 
water collection, school attendance, and basic nutrition diversity; failure to meet 
recovery benchmarks shall trigger supplementary restoration measures. A 
structured, time‑bound grievance mechanism (village desk to district appellate tier) 
with escalation limits shall be instituted. Full compliance in this manner preserves 
statutory intent, secures livelihoods and cultural continuity, reduces conflict and 
litigation, and achieves rights‑consistent development outcomes. 
8. Strengthening the National Monitoring Committee for Rehabilitation & 
Resettlement: 
The Committee find that the functioning of the National Monitoring 
Committee (NMC) under Section 48 of the RFCTLARR Act, 2013 and its periodic 
review of projects such as the Ken–Betwa Link and Polavaram have not been able 
to quell the discontent amongst the settlers. The Committee express serious 
concern that despite such institutional mechanisms, there has been no significant 
reduction in grievances relating to land acquisition, compensation, rehabilitation, 
and resettlement, especially in the context of large-scale inter-basin river linking 
projects. These projects, including Ken–Betwa, involve diversion of water across 
ecological and social boundaries, requiring acquisition or diversion of forest land, 
riverine habitats, floodplains, and community resources. They therefore trigger 
multiple legal frameworks, including the RFCTLARR Act (Social Impact 

 
 
42 
 
Assessment and public hearing under Sections 4–8; compensation valuation under 
Sections 26–30; sequencing of possession under Sections 37–38; and Scheduled 
Tribe safeguards under Sections 41–42), as well as forest, environmental, wildlife, 
irrigation, dam safety, and disaster management laws. The Committee understand 
that several recurring deficiencies such as steps often proceed segment by 
segment without a single basin-wide cumulative social, hydrological and 
ecological assessment; Gram Sabha consultation is conducted late and without 
full documentation; community and individual forest rights remain unsettled at the 
time of diversion; downstream flow alteration, sediment trapping, ecological flow, 
groundwater recharge, and climate resilience are poorly modelled; alternative 
strategies such as reduced storage, phased implementation, cropping pattern 
shifts, watershed recharge, and decentralised irrigation are not transparently 
assessed; and livelihood impacts on fishers, graziers, forest produce collectors, 
women, and other marginalised groups are inadequately represented. As a result, 
projects face protest, litigation, delays, and cost escalation. The Committee 
therefore, recommend that all such projects must begin with a single integrated 
baseline and options framework under the RFCTLARR sequence, starting with a 
basin-to-basin Social Impact Assessment (SIA) that identifies every category of 
affected family under Section 3(c), including cultivators, tenants, labourers, 
fishers, pastoralists, forest dwellers, artisans, Scheduled Tribes, and women-
headed households, while mapping seasonal dependence on water bodies, forests, 
and common lands. This SIA must also cover the likely hydrological and ecological 
impacts of proposed diversion and storage on downstream flows, recharge, 
biodiversity, and livelihoods, so that Section 8 findings on public purpose, 
alternatives, and minimum land requirement are evidence-based. All Gram Sabhas 
in the affected area must receive vernacular summaries, maps, and options at least 
thirty clear days before any decision meetings. No diversion or acquisition 
decision should proceed until all individual and community forest rights, including 
Community Forest Resource (CFR) claims, are fully adjudicated. Consultation or 
consent resolutions must certify that cumulative impacts and alternatives were 
explained. The Committee recommend that Social and Environmental Impact 
Assessments be integrated, with shared datasets and analysis of induced land use 

 
 
43 
 
change. Ecological flow regimes and adaptive management measures, such as 
drought contingency plans, flood release timings, and sediment flushing, must be 
enforceable project conditions, with community and independent expert 
involvement in monitoring. All affected persons, including non-title livelihood 
dependents, must receive compensation under Sections 26–30 of the Act with 
transparent market value, multiplier and solatium, and be entitled to Rehabilitation 
and Resettlement benefits under Schedules II and III, such as subsistence 
allowances, housing, annuity or employment options, skill training, and community 
infrastructure, in a manner that ensures no possession occurs before the R&R plan 
is fully implemented, as per Sections 37–38 of the Act. For Scheduled Tribe 
families, the safeguards under Sections 41–42 of the Act, such as land-for-land, 
relocation near original habitat, cultural identity protection, and continued access 
to forests, must be clearly documented and certified. Replacement or sustained 
access to fisheries, grazing, forest produce, and women’s livelihood spaces must 
be secured as part of the R&R plan, since cash alone is insufficient. The Committee 
recommend the Ministry to strengthen the National Monitoring Committee 
structurally and functionally to actively intervene in such cases, establish clear 
monitoring guidelines and timelines, set up a centralised grievance redressal 
portal, and ensure that cumulative impact assessments, Gram Sabha processes, 
and entitlements are implemented in full letter and spirit of the RFCTLARR Act. The 
Ministry should take all sincere efforts to achieve the goal of the said Act i.e. just 
compensation, rehabilitation and resettlement for the displaced, aiming for a 
humane and transparent process. 
9. Recognition of the livelihood of people in Lakshadweep land acquisition by 
private and Government players under the LARR Act 
The Committee is informed of instances where proposals in Lakshadweep 
have proceeded on the claim that because the foreshore reef flat beach or lagoon 
edge is Government land, its taking or enclosure does not amount to acquisition 
affecting people. The Committee disagrees with this view and records that the Land 
Acquisition Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act 2013 expressly protects livelihood 
dependents on Government and common land. Section 3(c) defines “affected 

 
 
44 
 
family” to include persons whose primary source of livelihood for three years prior 
depends on water bodies, forests or common property resources, as well as 
artisans, small traders, and others whose livelihood is hit and families losing 
access to common property resources. Section 3(d) extends the “affected area” to 
the wider locality losing livelihood or common resource access. Section 3(k) gives 
a broad meaning to land, including benefits arising from land, thus covering 
working beach and reef use. Sections 4 and 5 require the Social Impact 
Assessment and the public hearing to identify and list all such affected families 
and assess impact on livelihoods, fishing grounds, landing beaches, drying and 
net mending spaces, water sources, and common resources, not only titled 
parcels. Sections 6 and 7 of the Act require publication and independent appraisal, 
and Section 8 requires a reasoned decision showing public purpose alternatives 
and bare minimum land need after weighing the livelihood costs, including loss of 
working shore or reef access. As per sections 26 to 30 of the Act and Schedules II 
and III, require fair compensation and Rehabilitation and Resettlement benefits for 
all affected families not only title holders while Sections 37 and 38 of the Act restrict 
possession until award and R and R are in place for those families and Sections 41 
and 42 of the Act (where affected persons are members of Scheduled Tribes) add 
safeguards of land for land cultural identity and proximity to original habitat. The 
Committee recommend strict implementation of these provisions in letter and spirit 
without dilution or procedural bypass so that any project enclosing or reclaiming 
Government coastal or lagoon land first conducts a proper Social Impact 
Assessment listing all livelihood users (fishers gleaners net menders boat 
repairers vendors), documents three year livelihood dependence through 
Panchayat and cooperative records seasonal calendars and photographic or GPS 
evidence, examines and discloses genuine alternative siting or design (alignment 
adjustment shared jetty relocation without blocking traditional access), applies the 
bare minimum land test to avoid alienation of working shore, and integrates 
relocation or replacement access (equivalent landing beach safe navigation 
channel drying and net mending space storage shelter path to market) as part of 
the Rehabilitation and Resettlement plan before any possession. There must be 
some logical reasons for Government ownership or use of urgency clause (Section 

 
 
45 
 
40 of the Act) may be used like strategic purpose to skip identification appraisal or 
consultation steps, and any approval or possession action taken without counting 
such livelihood users as affected families otherwise it is liable to be reviewed. This 
approach gives effect to the Act’s clear text, protects lawful livelihood dependence 
on common coastal spaces, and reduces future conflict delay and cost. 
10. Recognition of livelihood users in Great Nicobar under the LARR Act 
The Committee recommend strict implementation of the Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act 2013 in letter and spirit so that all people 
whose primary livelihood depends on Great Nicobar’s forests coasts creeks 
beaches reef flats and common paths are treated as “affected families” under 
Section 3(c) of the Act even where the land is recorded as Government or forest 
land. Before any further step the acquiring authority must complete a fresh Social 
Impact Assessment (Sections 4–5 of the Act) identifying Nicobarese and Shompen 
livelihood use zones (fishing and landing points canoe routes shifting cultivation 
cycles forest produce and honey gathering sacred and cultural sites), publish the 
report (Section 6 of the Act), obtain independent appraisal (Section 7 of the Act) 
and issue a reasoned decision applying the public purpose alternatives and bare 
minimum land tests (Section 8 of the Act). Compensation (Sections 26–30 of the 
Act of the Act) and full Rehabilitation and Resettlement entitlements (Schedules II 
and III), including livelihood access preservation or equivalent replacement and the 
special Scheduled Tribe safeguards (Sections 41–42 of the Act), must be in place 
before possession (Sections 37–38 of the Act). Any ongoing or granted approval 
that did not enumerate and provide for these livelihood users should be reviewed 
and be made in conformity with the existing Act. 
11. Safeguarding Affected Communities in the Ken–Betwa Inter‑Basin Water 
Transfer 
Inter‑basin river linking projects like Ken–Betwa divert water across 
ecological and social boundaries and require acquisition or diversion of forest 
land, riverine habitat, floodplains and community resource areas, thereby 
triggering the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act 2013 (Social 

 
 
46 
 
Impact Assessment and public hearing, Sections 4–8 of the Act; compensation 
valuation, Sections 26–30; possession sequencing, Sections 37–38 of the Act; 
Scheduled Tribe safeguards, Sections 41–42 of the Act), along with forest, 
environmental, wildlife, irrigation, dam safety and disaster management 
frameworks. The Committee are informed of some instances where steps advance 
segment by segment without a single integrated cumulative social, hydrological 
and ecological assessment in local language; Gram Sabha consultation is late; 
individual, community and habitat/community forest resource rights are unsettled 
when diversion moves forward; downstream flow alteration, sediment trapping, 
dry‑season ecological flow, recharge and climate scenarios are weakly modelled; 
alternative design and demand‑side options (reduced storage, phased 
implementation, efficiency, cropping pattern shift, watershed recharge, 
decentralised micro‑irrigation) are not transparently compared; fisheries, grazing, 
minor forest produce and women’s livelihood roles are under‑represented; and 
protest, litigation, delay and cost escalation follow. The Committee recommend a 
single prior integrated baseline and options framework strictly under the LARR 
sequence: one basin‑to‑basin Social Impact Assessment (Sections 4–5 of the Act) 
covering the full acquisition and influence zone must first identify every category 
of affected family as defined in Section 3(c) of the Act, including cultivators, 
agricultural labourers, tenants, share‑croppers, inland and riverine fishers, 
pastoralists, forest produce gatherers, artisans, small traders, Scheduled Tribe 
households, women headed households and all livelihood users of water bodies, 
forests and common property resources, mapping seasonal dependence on river 
stretches, floodplains, sand bars, grazing patches, fishing pools, collection zones 
and access paths. The Committee are of the view that assessment must also 
document (within its social impact scope) how proposed diversion and storage 
would change hydrology, ecological flow, downstream livelihoods, and 
groundwater recharge so Section 8 of the Act findings on public purpose, 
alternatives, benefits versus social costs, and bare minimum land are evidence-
based. Gram Sabhas must receive vernacular summaries, maps, and option 
comparisons at least thirty clear days before decision meetings; all individual and 
community forest rights (and community forest resource claims where applicable) 

 
 
47 
 
inside the affected tracts must be finally adjudicated before diversion or 
acquisition decisions; consultation or consent resolutions must certify that 
cumulative impacts and alternatives were explained. Social and Environmental 
Impact Assessments must be integrated so that hydrological, biodiversity, 
livelihood, and cultural datasets are shared; downstream cumulative effects and 
induced land use change are explicitly analysed. Ecological flow regimes and 
adaptive management triggers (drought contingency, flood release timing, 
sediment flushing pulses) should become enforceable approval conditions with 
community and independent expert participation in monitoring. All people so 
identified, title holders and non‑title livelihood dependents alike, must receive 
compensation and Rehabilitation and Resettlement entitlements without 
exclusion: compensation determined under Sections 26–30 of the Act with 
transparent market value, multiplier and solatium; Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
benefits under Schedules II and III (subsistence and shifting allowances, housing 
site/house where eligible, annuity or employment option, training, community 
infrastructure, livelihood restoration) sequenced so that no possession occurs 
before award and R&R readiness (Sections 37–38 of the Act). Where Scheduled 
Tribe families are present, Sections 41–42 of the Act safeguards (land for land as 
far as possible, relocation near original habitat, cultural identity, and continued 
access to forest and community resources) must be documented and certified. 
Replacement or sustained access to fisheries grounds, grazing areas, forest 
produce zones, and women’s livelihood spaces must be secured as part of R&R; 
cash alone is insufficient.  
12.  Safeguarding Affected Communities in the Polavaram Project  
The Polavaram (Indira Sagar) multipurpose project, planned for irrigation, 
hydropower and drinking water supply, covers a wide riverine and forest‑fringe 
landscape where, according to project material and submissions, villages and 
dispersed hamlets, agricultural and podu (shifting/settled) cultivation plots 
(including fallows), orchards, riverbank gardens, fishing and ferry ghats, sand bars 
used for seasonal crops, grazing stretches, minor forest produce collection zones, 
sacred groves, burial and cremation grounds, and internal paths to schools, health 

 
 
48 
 
sub‑centres and weekly markets are identified within the influence and 
submergence area. The Committee are informed through community 
representations, expert inputs and Ministry briefings of omissions or late inclusion 
of tribal habitations and seasonal podu plots; segmented rather than integrated 
Social Impact Assessments; Gram Sabha meetings convened before settlement of 
individual and community forest rights; valuation gaps (outdated circle rates, 
exclusion of attached assets and multi‑season crop value) under Sections 26–30; 
R&R sites announced before service readiness; “land for land” for Scheduled Tribe 
families replaced by cash without evidence of informed voluntary choice; 
inconsistent identification of non‑title livelihood users (fishers, boat operators, 
forest gatherers, pastoral users) despite Section 3(c); inadequate recording of 
women’s joint ownership; and weak post‑award livelihood restoration monitoring. 
The Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act 2013 already provides 
a binding safeguard chain which must be applied in letter and spirit to every 
affected person, title holder, and non‑title livelihood dependent alike, without 
dilution or procedural bypass. Section 3(c) requires inclusion of all families whose 
primary livelihood for the preceding three years depends on land, water bodies, 
forests or common property resources (cultivators, share‑croppers, agricultural 
labourers, podu cultivators including fallows, inland/riverine fishers, boat service 
providers, forest produce gatherers, artisans, small traders, pastoral users, 
Scheduled Tribe households, women‑headed households). Sections 4–5 require a 
comprehensive, up‑to‑date Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and genuine 
local‑language public hearing for the entire influence area (not segmented) 
mapping agricultural cycles, podu cycles, fishing ghats and seasons, forest 
produce calendars, grazing routes, women’s collection points (fuelwood, fodder, 
water), cultural and sacred sites, burial grounds, service access routes and 
enumerating every affected family. Section 6 requires publication of the SIA and 
Social Impact Management Plan; Section 7 requires independent Expert Group 
appraisal with written findings on public purpose and whether alternative design, 
height, storage level, phasing or layout could reduce displacement; Section 8 
requires a reasoned Government order demonstrating public purpose, that 
benefits outweigh recorded social costs, that only bare minimum land/area is taken 

 
 
49 
 
and that genuine alternatives and unutilised previously acquired land were 
examined. Compensation must be determined strictly under Sections 26–30 
(market value using appropriate comparables or productivity method where sales 
are thin, application of multiplier, 100% solatium, inclusion of trees, perennial 
crops, attached improvements) with transparent disclosure (village notice boards 
and portal). Sections 37–38 sequencing must be honoured: no possession or 
physical displacement until after award and until all R&R entitlements are in place 
or demonstrably site‑ready. R&R under Schedules II & III must provide subsistence 
and shifting allowances, housing site and house (where eligible), annuity or 
employment option, training, and community infrastructure (all‑weather road, 
potable water, school, health sub‑centre, community hall, place of worship, 
burial/cremation ground, market space) plus livelihood restoration measures 
(replacement/improved fishing ghats, access to minor forest produce zones, 
grazing/fodder arrangements, women’s livelihood spaces). Sections 41–42 
protections for Scheduled Tribes require land for land of equal or better productive 
potential (or with an assured improvement plan), relocation near original habitat, 
protection of cultural identity and continued access to forest and community 
resources, each certified through Gram Sabha resolutions before displacement; 
inability to offer suitable land cannot be converted into implied cash acceptance. 
Urgency (Section 40) is inapplicable to this long‑planned project and must not be 
invoked to bypass safeguards. Accordingly the Committee recommend 
commissioning or updating a single integrated SIA where segmentation or 
outdated baselines persist; completing adjudication of all individual, community 
and community forest resource rights within influence and resettlement footprints 
before awards and relocations in those areas; reviewing and correcting or, where 
necessary, setting aside any prior steps lacking full Sections 4–8 compliance, 
adjudicated rights and certified R&R readiness; and establishing a public 
transparency portal showing, settlement by settlement: SIA disclosure date, public 
hearing record, Expert Group findings, Section 8 rationale, compensation award 
data (de‑personalised), R&R site readiness (plots, water, power, road, school, 
health sub‑centre), land for land allotments (area, soil quality, irrigation status), 
livelihood restoration indicators (post‑relocation income, agricultural yield, fisher 

 
 
50 
 
access continuity, forest produce access, women’s time burden changes), cultural 
site relocation status and grievance entries with resolution. The Committee 
recommend strict, universal implementation of all applicable LARR provisions 
(Sections 3, 4–8, 26–30, 37–38, 41–42 and Schedules II & III) so that any continuing 
actions on Polavaram proceed only on a lawful, evidence‑based, rights‑consistent 
foundation that safeguards affected communities. 
13. Preventing Manipulation in Land Classification and Ensuring Compliance 
under RFCTLARR Act 
As per Sections 41 and 42 of the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 
(RFCTLARR Act), clear protections and consultation requirements are established 
to safeguard the interests of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Scheduled 
Areas. These provisions ensure that fair compensation, comprehensive Social 
Impact Assessments (Sections 4-8), and systematic Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Schemes (Sections 16-19) are meticulously followed. The Committee 
expresses significant concern regarding emerging practices of converting 
Greenfield land into Brownfield and reclassifying rural land into urban areas 
through alterations in administrative boundaries, particularly within infrastructure 
projects such as Bharatmala. These manipulations are deliberately aimed at 
reducing compensation liabilities, undermining the principles of fairness, 
transparency, and accountability embedded within the RFCTLARR Act. To counter 
these issues effectively, the Committee recommend establishing a dedicated 
Central Monitoring and Grievance Redressal Mechanism under Chapters VII and 
VIII of the RFCTLARR Act, explicitly tasked with oversight of land classification 
processes. This mechanism should strictly enforce guidelines prohibiting arbitrary 
conversion of land statuses and inappropriate reclassification without transparent 
justification and public scrutiny. The Committee further recommend mandating 
detailed disclosures, including rationale, administrative orders, and supportive 
documentation for any changes in land classification or administrative boundaries, 
accessible through an online public platform. Rigorous audits and evaluations of 
land acquisition projects, specifically targeting compliance with statutory 

 
 
51 
 
classification norms, must be implemented. The Committee also stresses ensuring 
swift grievance redressal for affected parties challenging inappropriate land 
classification and resultant compensation determinations. Clearly defined 
penalties under Chapter XII (Offences and Penalties) must be enforced against any 
official involved in unauthorized manipulation of land classifications or boundaries 
to diminish rightful compensation entitlements.  
14. Establishment of a Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
Authority 
The Committee note that, under Section 51 of the RFCTLARR Act, 2013, the 
responsibility for establishing Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Authorities (LARRAs) lies with the respective State and Union Territory 
Governments. However, the Committee expresses serious concern that, despite 
the clear statutory mandate, many States have yet to constitute these Authorities, 
even more than a decade after the Act came into force. This failure not only delays 
justice for project-affected families but also undermines the core objectives of 
fairness, transparency, and timely redressal envisaged in the Act. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend for the urgent establishment of LARRAs in all States and 
UTs. In this regard, the Committee strongly urge the Ministry of Rural Development 
to proactively coordinate with State Governments to ensure the timely notification 
and operationalization of these Authorities. The Ministry may also consider issuing 
necessary advisories, providing technical support, and compiling periodic 
compliance reports from the States. Furthermore, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry set up a central monitoring mechanism to assess the 
functionality of LARRAs, with particular focus on the speed of dispute resolution, 
enforcement of compensation and rehabilitation, and retrospective audit of 
acquisitions to ensure adherence to the provisions of the RFCTLARR Act. 
Moreover, recognising the long-term economic vulnerability of farm families whose 
agricultural land is acquired, particularly for revenue-generating commercial or 
industrial projects, the Committee recommend insertion of a new provision 
establishing a mandatory community stake and profit-sharing mechanism. This 
mechanism should guarantee, in addition to existing compensation and R&R 
entitlements, either a share of project equity (held through a statutory trust at the 

 
 
52 
 
Gram Sabha or Panchayat level) or a percentage of gross project revenues, 
whichever is higher, credited annually for a minimum of fifteen years. The trust 
should use these funds transparently for livelihood restoration, education, 
healthcare, infrastructure, and annuity support for the most vulnerable. Such a 
mechanism would give enduring meaning to the Act’s objective of improving the 
post-acquisition standard of living, reduce grievances, and align long-term project 
benefits with community welfare, while retaining the compensation and 
rehabilitation entitlements already due under law. Skill development for the 
displaced and affected persons can also become crucial to integrate them back to 
the labour workforce and contribute their economy. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
17 December, 2025 
26 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
53 
 
Annexure – I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
TUESDAY, THE 17th DECEMBER, 2024 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Raju Bista 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
6. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
7. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
8. Shri Imran Masood 
9. Shri Janardan Mishra 
10. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary  
11. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
12. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh Alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
13. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
14. Shri Ganesh Singh  
Rajya Sabha 
15. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
16. Shri Samirul Islam 
17. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
18. Shri Sant Balbir Singh  
19. Shri Vaiko 
 Secretariat  
1. Shri Vinay P. Barwa  - Director 
2. Shri L. Singson  - Deputy Secretary  
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development  
(Department of Land Resources) 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1.  Shri Manoj Joshi                -    Secretary 
2.  Shri R. Anand                    - Additional Secretary  
3.  Shri Kunal Satyarthi           - Joint Secretary  

 
 
54 
 
4.  Shri P. K. Abdul Kareem    - Economic Advisor 
5.  Dr. Sanjay Kumar               - Deputy Director General 
6.  Shri Sarvadanand Barnwal -  Director 
7.  Shri Vijay Kaushik               - Deputy Secretary 
8.  Shri Mayank Paul                - Section Officer 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Jal Shakti  
(Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation) 
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1.  Shri Praveen Kumar            - Commissioner (SPR) 
2.  Shri Deepak Chandra Bhatt - Sr. Joint Commissioner 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for having a briefing by the representatives of Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) on the subject ‘Right to Fair Compensation 
and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013- 
Implementation and Effectiveness’. 
 
 [Thereafter the representatives from the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Land Resources) were called in] 
 
4. The Secretary, Department of Land Resource (Ministry of Rural Development) 
after taking permission from the Chairperson directed the Additional Secretary 
(Department of Land Resources) to make a Power Point Presentation on the Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act, 2013 - Implementation and Effectiveness’. 
 
5. Subsequently, Members raised their individual queries. The queries of the 
Members were replied by the Secretary, Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural 
Development). Certain issues which remained unanswered alongwith those which 
warranted elaborate reply, the Ministry were requested to send written replies thereto in 
writing within 15 days. 
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
   
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
  

 
 
55 
 
Annexure – II 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
TUESDAY, THE 7th JANUARY, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 16:30 hrs. in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Raju Bista 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
8. Shri Imran Masood 
9. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
10. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh Alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
 
Rajya Sabha 
      
-Nil- 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Vinay P. Barwa  - Director 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development  
(Department of Land Resources) 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness  Designation 
1.  Shri Manoj Joshi -  Secretary 
2.  Shri R. Anand -  Additional Secretary  
3.  Shri P. K. Abdul Kareem -  Economic Advisor 
4.  Dr. Sanjay Kumar -  Deputy Director General 
5.  Shri Sarvadanand Barnwal - Director 
 
 

 
 
56 
 
Non-government Organisations, Experts and other Stakeholders 
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness  Organisation/Designation 
1.  Shri Kumar Sambhav 
Srivasatava 
- Land Conflict Watch 
2.  Shri Tushar Dash -  Independent Research and Expert on FRA 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways  
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness  Organisation/Designation 
1.  Shri Vinay Kumar - Joint Secretary, MoRTH 
2.  Shri Abhay Jain - Director, MoRT&H 
3.  Shri Vibhav Mittal - CGM, NHAI 
4.  Shri Vimal - GM, NHAI 
5.  Shri A. K. Dogra - GM, NHIDCL 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Jal Shakti  
(Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation) 
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness  Organisation/Designation 
1.  Shri Baleshwar Thakur - Director General, NWDA 
2.  Shri Praveen Kumar - Commissioner (SPR), DoWR, RD&GR 
3.  Shri Bhopal Singh - Member, CWC 
4.  Shri Atul Jain - CEO, PPA 
5.  Shri P. K. Dixit - CEO, KBLPA 
6.  Shri Rakesh Kumar - Sr. JC. (BM), DoWR, RD&GR 
7.  Shri Deepak Chandra Bhatt - Sr. JC (SPR), DoWR, RD&GR 
8.  Shri M. Raghuram - Member Secretary, PPA 
9.  Shri John Kingsly - Secretary, WRD, Madhya Pradesh 
10.  Shri O.P.S. Kushwa - Consultant, WRD, Madhya Pradesh 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways 
   
Sr. No. Name of the Witness  Organisation/Designation 
1.  Shri Satish Kumar - Chairman & CEO, RB & Ex.-officio Principal 
Secretary to the GoI 
2.  Shri Naveen Gulati - Member (Infrastructure) RB & Ex.-officio 
Secretary to the GoI 
3.  Shri Dinesh Kumar - Additional Member/ L&A, Railway Board 

 
 
57 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness  Organisation/Designation 
1.  Shri Jaideep - OSD (UT)&E.O. Joint Secretary, MoHUA 
2.  Shri Yogesh Antil - Director (MRTS-I) 
3.  PS Chauhan - Sr. GM, DMRC 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for taking Oral evidence of the representatives of the Department 
of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development, Non-Government Organizations, 
experts and other stakeholders, Department of Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation (Ministry of Jal Shakti), Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), Ministry of Railways  and Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) on the subject ‘Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency 
in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 - Implementation and 
Effectiveness’. Thereafter, the Chairperson apprised the Members about the issues 
regarding cases of inadequate compensation being given in various projects being carried 
out by the Central/ State Government against the spirit of the landmark legislation. 
Members were further informed about the invitation to a few representatives of NGOs and 
experts who had experience of the ground realities associated with the Land conflict 
issues to enrich the Committee’s knowledge on the issues relating to the implementation 
and effectiveness of this Act’. 
 
 [Thereafter the representatives from the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Land Resources) Non-Government Organizations, experts and other stakeholders, 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (Ministry 
of Jal Shakti), Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and National Highways Authority 
of India (NHAI), Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(MoHUA) were called in] 
 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and in his opening remarks outlined the 
importance of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.  The Chairperson, then asked the 
representatives of the Ministries and the NGOs to make their briefing and place their 
views on the subject one by one. The Chairperson further drew the attention of the 
Ministries and others to the directions of Hon’ble Speaker regarding confidentiality of the 
discussions before the start of the meeting. Thereafter, the witnesses introduced 
themselves to the Committee and made their Power Point Presentations. The 
representatives of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) 
briefed and highlighted on key aspects of this Act and provisions for addressing the issues 
of inadequate compensation.  
4. Thereafter, Shri Kumar Sambhav Srivastava and Shri Tushar Dash as experts 
working in the field of Land conflicts, made their submissions before the Committee 

 
 
58 
 
highlighting the issues and challenges while implementation of this Act and gave their 
suggestions for addressing the same.  
5. Following this, the representatives of the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
and National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) briefed the Committee with regard to 
land acquisition for Roads and Highway projects along with the provisions for addressing 
the issues of inadequate compensation. 
 6. Subsequently, the representatives of the Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (Ministry of Jal Shakti) briefed the Committee with 
regard to land acquisition for Ken-Betwa Link Project and Polavaram Irrigation Project 
along with the provisions for addressing the issues of inadequate compensation. 
[Lunch Break] 
7. The representatives of the Ministry of Railways briefed the Committee with regard 
to land acquisition for Railways along with the provisions for addressing the issues of 
inadequate compensation. 
8. The representatives of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) briefed 
the Committee with regard to land acquisition for Metro Rail projects along with the 
provisions for addressing the issues of inadequate compensation. 
10. Subsequently, Members raised their individual queries.     
11. The queries of the Members were subsequently replied by the witnesses. On 
certain issues Ministries/ Departments could not provide immediate reply, so they were 
requested to send written replies thereto as early as possible.  
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
 
A record of verbatim proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
  

 
 
59 
 
Annexure – III 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
MONDAY, THE 3rd MARCH, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1335 hrs. in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
3. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
4. Shri Imran Masood 
5. Shri Janardan Mishra 
6. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
7. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
8. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
9. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha 
      
10. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Vinay P. Barwa  - Director 
3.  Shri L. Singson  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development  
(Department of Land Resources) 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness  Designation 
1.  Shri R. Anand -  Additional Secretary  
2.  Shri P. K. Abdul Kareem -  Economic Advisor 
3.  Dr. Sanjay Kumar -  Deputy Director General 
4.  Shri Sarvadanand Barnwal - Director 
 
 
  

 
 
60 
 
Non-government Organisations, Experts and other Stakeholders 
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Organisation/Designation 
Witnesses from State of Gujarat 
1.  Shri Moses Mazgaonkar (Anan
d) 
Paryavaran Suraksha Samiti 
2.  Dr Rajan Bhagora Adivasi Ekta Manch, Bhiloda, Dist. 
Sabarkantha – North Gujarat 
3.  Shri Shailesh Tadvi Adivasi Ekta Manch, Bhiloda 
4.  Shri Ashish Tadvi  
5.  Lalsing Gamit  
Witnesses from UT of Lakshadweep 
6.  Shri Sharafudden B. President, Island Sense Foundation 
7.  Shri Hussunul Jamhar M.P.  
8.  Shri Kuda Mohamed Manikfan 
Alimalmigothi 
 
Witnesses from UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
9.  Dr. Manish Chandi Anthropologist 
10.  Mr Anstice Justin Anthropologist 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for taking oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development), Non-Government Organizations, 
experts and other stakeholders regarding issues of land acquisition. Thereafter, the 
Chairperson apprised the Members about the issues regarding cases of inadequate 
compensation being given in various projects being carried out by the Central/ State 
Government against the spirit of the landmark legislation. Members were further informed 
about the invitation to a few representatives of NGOs and experts who had experience of 
the ground realities associated with the Land conflict issues to enrich the Committee’s 
knowledge on the issues relating to the implementation and effectiveness of this Act’. 
 
 [Thereafter, the representatives from the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Land Resources) Non-Government Organizations, experts and other stakeholders were 
called in] 
 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and in his opening remarks outlined the 
importance of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.  The Chairperson, then asked the 
representatives of the Ministries and the NGOs to make their briefing and place their 

 
 
61 
 
views on the subject one by one. The Chairperson further drew the attention of the 
Ministries and others to the directions of Hon’ble Speaker regarding confidentiality of the 
discussions before the start of the meeting. Thereafter, the witnesses introduced 
themselves to the Committee and made their Power Point Presentations.  
4. Thereafter, Shri Moses Mazgaonkar (Anand), Shri Sharafudden B. and Dr. Manish 
Chandi as experts working in the field of Land conflicts, made their submissions before 
the Committee highlighting the issues and challenges while implementation of this Act 
and gave their suggestions for addressing the same.  
5. Subsequently, Members raised their individual queries.     
6. The queries of the Members were subsequently replied by the witnesses. On 
certain issues Ministries/ Departments could not provide immediate reply, so they were 
requested to send written replies thereto as early as possible.  
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A record of verbatim proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
  

 
 
62 
 
Annexure – IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
TUESDAY, THE 27th MAY, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1705 hrs in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
8. Shri Imran Masood 
9. Shri Janardan Mishra 
10. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
11. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
12. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
13. Shri Vivek Thakur 
Rajya Sabha 
      
14. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
15. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu  
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3.  Shri L. Singson  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development  
(Department of Land Resources) 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness  Designation 
1.  Shri R. Anand -  Additional Secretary  
2.  Shri P. K. Abdul Kareem -  Economic Advisor 
3.  Dr. Sanjay Kumar -  Deputy Director General 
4.  Shri Sarvadanand Barnwal - Director 
Non-government Organisations, Experts and other Stakeholders 

 
 
63 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Organisation/Designation 
1.  Shri Kumar Sambhav Land Conflict Watch 
2.  Shri Prafulla Samantara Lok Shakti Abhiyan 
3.  Shri Dingar Kumbhar Gandharmardan Bachao Urban Parisad 
4.  Tankadhar Sahu Gandharmardan Bachao Parisad 
5.  Raj Kumar Seth Gandharmardan Surakhaya Yuva Parishad 
6.  Sushil Kumar Gandharmardan Surakhaya Action 
Committee 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for taking oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development), Non-government Organisations, 
experts and other stakeholders on the subject ‘Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 - 
Implementation and Effectiveness’. Thereafter, the Chairperson apprised the Members 
about the issues regarding cases of inadequate compensation being given in various 
projects being carried out by the Central/ State Government against the spirit of the 
landmark legislation. Members were further informed about the invitation to a few 
representatives of NGOs and experts who had experience of the ground realities 
associated with the Land conflict issues to enrich the Committee’s knowledge on the 
issues relating to the implementation and effectiveness of this Act’. 
 
 [Thereafter, the representatives from the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Land Resources) Non-Government Organizations, experts and other stakeholders were 
called in] 
 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and in his opening remarks outlined the 
importance of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.  The Chairperson, then asked the 
representatives of the Ministries and the NGOs to make their briefing and place their 
views on the subject one by one. The Chairperson further drew the attention of the 
Ministries and others to the directions of Hon’ble Speaker regarding confidentiality of the 
discussions before the start of the meeting. Thereafter, the witnesses introduced 
themselves to the Committee and made their Power Point Presentations.  
4. Thereafter, Shri Kumar Sambhav, Shri Prafulla Samantara along with their 
colleagues as experts working in the field of Land conflicts made their submissions 
before the Committee highlighting the issues and challenges while implementation of this 
Act and gave their suggestions for addressing the same. Few cases of alleged non- 
compliance in Odisha where land has been acquired for mining and other activities were 
also brought up before the Committee.  
5. Subsequently, Members raised their individual queries. Committee also enquired 
about the States which are making amendment to bypass certain provisions of the Central 
Act.    

 
 
64 
 
6. The queries of the Members were subsequently replied by the witnesses. On 
certain issues Ministries/ Departments could not provide immediate reply, so they were 
requested to send written replies thereto as early as possible.  
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A record of verbatim proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
 
  

 
 
65 
 
Annexure – V 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 14th JULY, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1255 hrs in Committee Room 'B',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
4. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
5. Shri Jugal Kishore 
6. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
10. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
11. Shri Ganesh Singh 
12. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha 
      
13. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
14. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
15. Shri Iranna Kadadi  
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development  
(Department of Land Resources) 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness  Designation 
1.  Shri Manoj Joshi -  Secretary (LR) 
2.  Shri R. Anand -  Additional Secretary (LR) 
3.  Shri Sarvadanand Barnwal - Director (LR) 

 
 
66 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness  Designation 
1.  Shri Tanmay Kumar -  Secretary 
2.  Shri Sushil Kumar Awasthi - DG(F) & SS 
3.  Shri Ramesh Kumar Pandey - Additional Director General 
4.  Dr. Sanjayan Kumar -  Inspector General, NTCA 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness  Designation 
1.  Shri Manish Thakur -  Additional Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for (i) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX; and (ii) 
oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of 
Rural Development), Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs on the subject ‘Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 - Implementation and 
Effectiveness’. 
 
3.  XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
XXX XXX. 
 
4. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX.   
 
 [Thereafter, the representatives from the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Land Resources), Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs were called in] 
 
5. The Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and in his opening remarks outlined the 
importance of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.  The Chairperson, then asked the 
representatives of the Ministries to make their oral evidence and place their views on the 
subject one by one. The Chairperson further drew the attention of the Ministries and 
others to the directions of Hon’ble Speaker regarding confidentiality of the discussions 
before the start of the meeting. Thereafter, the witnesses introduced themselves to the 
Committee and made their Power Point Presentations. Representatives of MoEF & CC 
stated that it’s Nodal agency National Tiger Conservation Authority  is not implementing 
the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement (RFCTLARR) Act, 2013 and only  voluntary village relocation is taken up in 
Core and Critical Tiger Habitat areas as per guidelines issued vide F. No. 15-4/2010-
NTCA (Part-III)– under the provisions of Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 and Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. 
Village relocation is voluntary and through informed consent of the Gram Sabha and the 

 
 
67 
 
people. Representative from Ministry of Tribal Affairs submitted that aspects of 
compensation and rehabilitation do not fall in their purview.      
6. Subsequently, Members raised their individual queries. The queries of the 
Members were subsequently replied by the witnesses. On certain issues Ministries/ 
Departments could not provide immediate reply, so they were requested to send written 
replies thereto as early as possible.  
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A record of verbatim proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 
 
  

 
 
68 
 
Annexure – VI 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 16th 
DECEMBER, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1000 hrs to 1012 hrs in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka , Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
8. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
9. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
10. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
 
Rajya Sabha 
      
11. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
12. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
13. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
14. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
15. Smt. Rajathi 
16. Shri Nagendra Ray 
17. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
18. Smt. P. T. Usha 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2.  Smt Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of draft report on the subject ‘Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 
- Implementation and Effectiveness’ pertaining to the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of 
Rural Development). 
3. Above mentioned draft report was taken up for consideration and after discussion, the 
Committee adopted the same with some modifications. The Committee then authorized the 
Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid draft report and present the same to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 