 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
      
 
        EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
   
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department 
of Land Resources)'] 
 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
38 


 
 
 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
& PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-26) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department 
of Land Resources)'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____ Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)............................................................... ii 
INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................................... iii 
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................................... 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 8 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies.................................................. 
13 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee...................................... 
14 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited............................................................ 
17 
ANNEXURES 
I Extracts of the Minutes of the Twenty-Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 07.08.2026……………………………………….................... 
18 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Sixth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj………………………………………………………….. 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
26. Smt. Rajathi 
27. Shri Nagendra Ray 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Smt. P.T. Usha 
30. Shri Karamvir Singh Boudh 
31. Shri Baidyanath Ram 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt Juby Amar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Atul Singh    - Executive Officer 
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
(2025-26) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present the 38th Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Sixth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development & Panchayati Raj on 'Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Land Resources)'. 
2.  The Twenty-Sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 09.03.2026 and was laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09.03.2026. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 25.06.2026. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
07.08.2026. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-Sixth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI 
10 August, 2026 
19 Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati 
Raj 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
(2025-26) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty-Sixth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land 
Resources). 
1.2 The Twenty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 09.03.2026 and was laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09.03.2026. The Report contained 10 
Observations/Recommendations. 
1.3 Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 10 Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government. These have been 
examined and categorised as follows: -  
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos. 1,3,6,7,8 and 10 
Total:06 
Chapter II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
Serial No. Nil. 
Total: Nil 
Chapter III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Serial Nos. 2,4,5 and 9. 
Total: 04 
Chapter IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. Nil. 
Total: Nil 
Chapter V 

 
2 
 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where 
it is not possible for any reasons to implement the recommendations in letter and 
spirit, the matter shall be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that Action Taken Replies to the 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to the 
Committee expeditiously. 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
I.  Fund Allocation under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana- Watershed 
Component (WDC-PMKSY) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
1.6 With regard to Budget allocation for the schemes under the Department of Land 
Resources, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note the benefits of the WDC-PMKSY 1.0 and 2.0 in 
the country. The Committee take into account issues like lack of trained staff, 
maintenance and upkeep of completed assets understand that for extending 
the coverage and spread of the scheme and its stated benefits, the scheme 
needs increased budgetary support every year. Despite, it’s repeated call to 
increase the budget, the Committee are concerned to note that in this year’s 
BE of 2500 crore, there has been a decrease of Rs 5 crore from previous year's 
BE of Rs.2505 crore in 2025-26, which was further reduced by Rs. 1500 crore 
at RE stage. The Committee also note that to complete the projects under for 
current phase of PMKSY 2.0 by March 2027, the scheme needs continuation 
of funding required beyond March 2026.  
            Looking at the overall performance of the scheme and its impact 
in the rural areas, the Committee strongly recommend the DoLR to seek higher 
funds in order to complete the current phase and expand the coverage of the 
scheme by starting new phase of WDC-PMKSY 3 at the earliest. The 
Committee also urge the DoLR to fully utilize the fund allocated at BE so as to 
avoid reduction of funds at RE stage.” 
1.7  In the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department in their action taken 
reply have stated as follows: 
“The Budget Estimates (BE) for WDC-PMKSY 2026-27 have been 
prepared based on overall resource availability and past expenditure trends. 
The Department is committed to ensuring optimal utilization of funds and 
closely monitors physical and financial progress through reviews, field visits, 
and MIS-based systems. States/UTs have been advised to expedite 
implementation and improve fund utilization. Efforts are also underway to 
address operational and technical issues in fund flow and reporting, including 
those related to the SNA-SPARSH system, to ensure smoother expenditure. 
In view of the extension of WDC-PMKSY 2.0 up to 30.09.2026, 
necessary financial support is being provided for timely completion of ongoing 
projects. Any additional requirement of funds will be assessed based on 
progress and budgetary availability. The Department agrees on the need for 
adequate financial support for watershed development and will consider 
resource requirements for expansion, capacity building, asset maintenance, 

 
3 
 
 
and future programmes, including WDC-PMKSY 3.0, subject to approval and 
budget availability.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.8 The Committee had recommended that the Department of Land Resources 
seek higher funds to complete the current phase of WDC-PMKSY and expand the 
coverage of the Scheme by starting WDC-PMKSY 3.0 at the earliest. The Committee 
had also urged the DoLR to fully utilize the funds allocated at the Budget Estimate 
stage so as to avoid reduction of funds at the Revised Estimate stage. In their Action 
Taken Reply, DoLR have stated that the Budget Estimates have been prepared based 
on overall resource availability and past expenditure trends and that any additional 
requirement of funds would be assessed based on progress and budgetary 
availability. DoLR have further stated that resource requirements for future 
programmes, including WDC-PMKSY 3.0, will be considered subject to approval and 
budget availability. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Department 
as no specific assurance has been given regarding seeking enhanced budgetary 
support or commencement of WDC-PMKSY 3.0. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their earlier recommendation that the Department should actively pursue enhanced 
budgetary allocation to ensure timely completion of the current phase and early 
commencement of WDC-PMKSY 3.0, besides ensuring full utilization of Budget 
Estimates to avoid reduction at the Revised Estimate stage. 
II.  Cost Norms of WDC-PMKSY 2.0 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
1.9 With regard to Cost Norms of WDC-PMKSY 2.0, the Committee recommended the 
DoLR:  
“The Committee note that the NITI Aayog has recommended that the 
cost norms for the scheme should be revised as per current market scenario. 
They have also suggested cost norms between Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 30,000 per 
hectare for the plains. Contrary to this, WDC-PMKSY 2.0 goes with the revised 
cost norm of Rs. 28,000 per hectare for hilly and difficult areas, Rs. 22000/- per 
hectare for other areas and up to Rs. 28,000 per hectare for watershed projects 
in Integrated Action Plan Districts. The Committee agree to the fact that higher 
cost norms as per prevalent market condition is utmost requirement for long 
term performance of the assets created under this scheme. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should increase cost norm as 
suggested by expert groups to ensure maintenance and upkeep of ongoing 
projects.” 
1.10 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
“The cost norms under WDC-PMKSY 2.0 are presently ₹22,000 per 
hectare for plain areas and ₹28,000 per hectare for hilly/difficult areas and 
Integrated Action Plan (IAP) districts. These were fixed while balancing 

 
4 
 
 
resource availability and the objective of covering a wide geographical area 
under watershed development. 
The Department acknowledges that rising input, labour, and material 
costs may require periodic review of these norms. Accordingly, 
recommendations of expert bodies such as NITI Aayog will be examined while 
formulating WDC-PMKSY 3.0, keeping in view prevailing market rates, 
inflation, field requirements, and overall resource availability, subject to 
approval of the Ministry of Finance and competent authority.  
The Department also acknowledges the importance of sustainability 
and upkeep of created assets. Suitable provisions for operation, maintenance, 
and long-term durability of watershed structures will be considered in future 
programme design. The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been 
noted and will be duly considered in upcoming watershed development 
programmes.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.11 The Committee had recommended that the Department of Land Resources   
increase the cost norms under WDC-PMKSY as suggested by expert groups so as to 
ensure proper maintenance and upkeep of ongoing watershed projects. The 
Committee had noted that while NITI Aayog had recommended cost norms of ₹25,000–
₹30,000 per hectare for plain areas, the existing norms continue to be ₹22,000 per 
hectare for plain areas and ₹28,000 per hectare for hilly/difficult areas and IAP 
districts. In their Action Taken Reply, the DoLR have stated that the existing norms 
were fixed keeping in view resource availability and that the recommendations of NITI 
Aayog and other expert bodies would be examined while formulating WDC-PMKSY 
3.0, subject to approval of the Ministry of Finance and the competent authority. The 
Committee find that the DoLR have merely stated that the recommendation would be 
examined in future and have not accepted the recommendation for revision of the 
existing cost norms. The Committee are of the view that the continued adoption of the 
existing cost norm of ₹22,000 per hectare for plain areas, against the ₹25,000–₹30,000 
per hectare recommended by NITI Aayog, may adversely affect the quality, 
maintenance and long-term sustainability of watershed assets. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Department should 
revise the cost norms in accordance with prevailing market conditions and expert 
recommendations to accelerate the development of works and objectives of the 
scheme. 
III.  Fund Allocation under Digital India Land Records Modernization Programme 
(DILRMP) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
1.12 Stressing about the need for higher Fund Allocation under Digital India Land Records 

 
5 
 
 
Modernization Programme (DILRMP), the Committee had recommended that: 
“While there was a 91.34% increase at RE stage of 2025-26 for 
DILRMP, the Committee find that BE allocation has only been increased by 
4.17% to Rs. 125 crores from previous year BE of Rs. 120 crores. Considering 
the overall performance of this important scheme and remarkable impact on 
the ground, the Committee feel that the scheme needs big budget impetus to 
complete each component well within set timeline. Taking into consideration 
uneven progress of the scheme in different states, the Committee recommend 
the DoLR to demand higher funds in order to ensure timely implementation 
and further expansion of the scheme for the benefit of the country.” 
1.13 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
“During the FY 2025-26, ₹120.00 crore was allocated at BE stage which 
was further enhanced by ₹109.61 crore to ₹229.61 crore at RE stage. The 
additional fund requirement was for implementation of NAKSHA pilot project, 
settlement of committed liabilities etc. Out of this, ₹226.93 crore (98.83%) was 
utilized during FY 2025-26. 
From the year 2026-27 onwards, the survey/resurvey component of 
DILRMP has been separated from DILRMP 3.0 scheme and would be 
implemented as a new separate Scheme. The total financial outlay for DILRMP 
3.0 for the FY 2026-27 to 2030-31 as recommended by EFC is ₹565.50 crore. 
However, based on the allotment done during BE of FY2025-26, an amount of 
₹125.00 crore has been allocated as BE for the FY 2026-27. 
DoLR would review the fund requirements during 2026-27 based on the 
outlay approved under DILRMP 3.0 and Survey/Resurvey proposal. 
Accordingly, DoLR would demand higher funds in order to ensure timely 
implementation of the Scheme components.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.14 The Committee had recommended that the Department of Land Resources   
demand higher funds in order to ensure timely implementation and further expansion 
of DILRMP for the benefit of the country. The Committee had noted that while the 
allocation under DILRMP was enhanced from ₹120 crore at the Budget Estimate stage 
to ₹229.61 crore at the Revised Estimate stage during 2025-26, the Budget Estimate 
for 2026-27 has been fixed at only ₹125 crore. In their Action Taken Reply, the DoLR 
have stated that the Survey/Resurvey component has been separated from DILRMP 
3.0 and that the Department would review the fund requirements during 2026-27 based 
on the approved outlay under DILRMP 3.0 and the Survey/Resurvey proposal. The 
Department have further stated that higher funds would be demanded based on the 
approved outlay and requirement of the Scheme. The Committee are not satisfied with 
the reply as the DoLR have not accepted the recommendation to seek enhanced 
budgetary allocation and have merely linked the requirement of funds to future 
approvals. The Committee are of the view that the Budget Estimate of ₹125 crore does 
not adequately reflect the expanding scope and financial requirements of the Scheme, 
particularly when the allocation had to be enhanced to ₹229.61 crore during 2025-26. 

 
6 
 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
DoLR should seek adequate budgetary support to ensure timely implementation and 
expansion of DILRMP, which paved the way for a more transparent, accessible and 
efficient land governance system in India. 
IV.  Rural-First Approach in Land Records Modernisation 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
1.15 With regard to Rural-First Approach in Land Records Modernisation, the Committee 
recommended that: 
“The Committee note that while DILRMP has made significant progress, 
rural survey. resurvey and updation of agricultural land records remain 
incomplete in several States. The Committee is of the opinion that rural land 
governance gaps must be addressed before expanding digitisation initiatives 
to urban areas. The Committee are of the considered view that strengthening 
rural land records is integral to agricultural security, dispute reduction and 
effective implementation of rural development schemes. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that rural digitisation and updation be treated 
as the first priority under DILRMP. Any expansion to urban areas should be 
undertaken only after demonstrable saturation of rural coverage in the 
concerned State and must be supported by a clear justification placed before 
Parliament. The Committee further recommend annual State-wise reporting on 
rural survey completion, RoR-map integration, mutation pendency and ULPIN 
linkage to ensure accountability and sequencing discipline.” 
1.16 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
“The component of Survey/Resurvey which was an approved 
component of DILRMP till 31.03.2026 has been proposed as a separate 
scheme viz. Survey/Resurvey for Creation/Updation of Land 
Records.  Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) headed by the Secretary, 
Department of Expenditure in its meeting held on 07.05.2026 has appraised 
this proposal and recommended to undertake it as a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme to cover 20% of total agricultural land area across the country 
(approximately 3 lakhs sq.km.) using modern geospatial technologies over a 
period of three years commencing in FY 2026-27.  The recommended are yet 
to be approved by the Cabinet.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.17 The Committee had recommended that rural digitisation and updation of land 
records be treated as the first priority under DILRMP and that expansion to urban areas 
should be undertaken only after demonstrable saturation of rural coverage in the 
concerned State. The Committee had also recommended annual State-wise reporting 
on rural survey completion, Record of Rights-map integration, mutation pendency and 
ULPIN linkage to ensure accountability. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department of 
Land Resources have stated that the Survey/Resurvey component has been proposed 
as a separate Centrally Sponsored Scheme to cover approximately 20 per cent of the 

 
7 
 
 
total agricultural land area over a period of three years and that the proposal is yet to 
be approved by the Cabinet. The Committee observe that the DoLR have not specifically 
addressed the recommendation regarding according priority to rural land records 
before expansion to urban areas nor have they accepted the recommendation 
regarding annual State-wise reporting. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that rural digitisation and updation should remain the first priority 
under the programme and that annual State-wise reporting on key implementation 
parameters should be institutionalised to ensure transparency, accountability and 
time-bound implementation to achieve the goal of the scheme.  

 
8 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
2.1 The Budget Estimate of the Department of Land Resources for the year 2026-27 is Rs. 
2654.33 crore which includes the total Scheme component of Rs. 2625.00 crore and a non-
scheme component of Rs. 29.33 crore. It may be observed that the Scheme component of the 
Financial Year (FY) 2026-27 at the Budget Estimate (BE) stage has been increased by Rs. 
3.33 crore over the previous BE of FY 2025-26. The allocation at BE stage for FY 2025-26 
was Rs. 2651.00 crore which was further reduced to Rs. 1757.40 crore at the Revised 
Estimate (RE) stage. The Committee note that during the year 2026-27 there has been no 
increase in the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS / Scheme component) of the Department of 
Land Resources (DoLR) over the BE of previous year, which have been kept unchanged at 
Rs. 2625 crore. The Committee also note that the allocation at RE stage in 2025-26 was 
reduced by to Rs.1729.61 crore. Considering the importance of two major flagship schemes 
being implemented by the DoLR i.e. Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (WDC-PMKSY) 
and Digital India Land Records Modernization Programme (DILRMP); the Committee is 
concerned that overall budgetary support to the Department is being reduced year on year 
which impacts the expansion of coverage of these important schemes. Variation in the BE & 
RE during the FY2024-25 and 2025-26 shows that there is either faulty planning from the 
Ministry side in implementation by the State Government that forced the Ministry to keep 
variation in allocation of Land Resources funds. The Committee hope that BE under the head 
would be utilised fully by the Government without variation and reduce it at the RE stage. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that allocated funds will be utilised fully by the 
Department in order to achieve intended benefits to the common masses at a larger scale for 
continuing with WDC-PKSY 3.0 and complete all components of DILRMP within proposed 
extended timeline. 
Reply of the Government  
2.2 Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
(WDC-PMKSY) 
  
Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana  
The Department acknowledges the Committee’s observations on budget allocation 
and utilization under DoLR. The BE 2026-27 has been prepared based on resource 
availability, past expenditure trends, and implementation capacity under WDC-PMKSY with a 
focus on timely and effective fund utilization.  
Variations between BE and RE are mainly due to implementation pace in States/UTs, 
fund availability, procedural requirements under public financial systems, and overall 
expenditure trends. Efforts are ongoing to improve efficiency and project execution. 
The SNA-SPARSH system has improved transparency and fund-flow monitoring, 

 
9 
 
 
though initial challenges in some States/UTs have affected expenditure pace and are being 
addressed. States/UTs have been advised to expedite implementation, enhance fund 
utilization, and adhere to timelines, supported by regular reviews and MIS-based monitoring. 
The Committee’s recommendation for full utilization of funds is noted. The Department 
will continue to optimize fund use, seek additional support where required, and ensure timely 
completion of ongoing projects under WDC-PMKSY. 
 
Digital India Land Records Modernisation Programme  
Digital India Land Record Modernization Programme (DILRMP) is being implemented 
as a Central Sector Scheme with effect from 1st April, 2016 with 100% funding by the Centre. 
The programme was extended from 2021-22 to 2025-26 with an outlay of Rs.875 crore. The 
revised outlay was ₹984.61 crore. Out of this, ₹980.99 crore (99.63%) has been utilized during 
the period 2021-22 to 2025-26. During the FY 2025-26, ₹120.00 crore was allocated at BE 
stage which was further enhanced by ₹109.61 crore to ₹229.61 crore at RE stage. Out of this, 
₹226.93 crore (98.83%) was utilized during FY 2025-26. The BE for DILRMP Scheme for FY 
2026-27 is ₹125.00 crore. 
 Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
2.3 The Committee note that against the completion deadline of March 2026, there has 
been very slow progress in various components vis a vis target set under 2nd phase of WDC-
PMKSY, which seem to be only 40-50%. The Committee feel that WDC-PMKSY 2.0 may 
required extension of one year up to 31.03.2027 with funding support during the extended 
project period for effective completion and achieving desirable outcomes. The Committee 
strongly recommend to gear up all agencies and mobilize increased physical and financial 
resources to complete the set targets within timeline by March, 2027. 
Reply of the Government  
2.4 The implementation delays under WDC-PMKSY 2.0 are due to various factors, such 
as difficult terrain, climatic conditions, availability of limited working seasons in hilly areas, 
frequent changes in payment system, non-singularity of execution agencies/ departments in 
States and procedural delays. Accordingly, the Government has approved extension of 
WDC-PMKSY 2.0 up to 30.09.2026 to ensure completion of ongoing works. 
States/UTs have been directed to expedite implementation, prepare time-bound action plans, 
improve convergence, and ensure efficient utilization of funds. Project progress is being 
closely monitored through regular reviews, field visits, and reporting systems, with financial 
releases linked to performance and utilization. 
The Department concurs with the Committee’s recommendation and is actively working with 
implementing agencies to mobilize resources and ensure timely completion of sanctioned 
projects within the extended timeline and achievement of intended outcomes. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
2.5 The Committee appreciate the initiative of e-Registration along with progress made in 
implementation of all components under DILRMP. While noticing few shortcomings like non-
updation of information regarding the status of court cases resulting in fraudulent transactions 
and slow progress in ULIPIN allotment in several parts of the Country, the Committee strongly 
recommend the DoLR to ensure timely updation of the records with real time data pertaining 
to courts and complete the process for allotment of ULIPIN at a faster pace. 

 
10 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
2.6 Revenue Courts play an important role in adjudicating disputes related to land and 
revenue matters, thereby ensuring transparency, accountability, and timely delivery of justice 
in land administration. Efficient functioning of Revenue Courts is essential for reducing 
pendency of cases and strengthening citizen confidence in the land governance system. 
 
Under DILRMP, the department is implementing Revenue Court Case Management 
System (RCCMS) to computerise the revenue court process across the country and linking it 
with the land records and registration system. The primary objective of this initiative is to have 
a comprehensive software platform that can effectively manage all aspects of revenue court 
operations. The software provides a centralized platform for case management including filing 
of case, document storage, data analysis, reporting, and decision-making. It enables citizens 
to access real-time information, track case progress, obtain court decisions, and make 
informed decisions for approaching higher courts. 
 
Further, the Land Records and Registration database is also being linked with judiciary 
or e-court system. The objective is to make authentic first-hand information available to the 
Courts resulting in speedy disposal of cases and ultimately, reduction in land disputes.  
 
With regards to ULPIN, out of approximately 58.5 crore land parcels in the country, Unique 
Land Parcel Identification Numbers (ULPIN) have been allocated to 39.19 crore 
parcels (66.9%).  The Department is providing targeted support to the remaining states to 
resolve technical constraints and accelerate geo-referencing for faster ULPIN roll-out and is 
aggressively pursuing again in the DILRMP 3.0. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
2.7 The Committee is concerned about empowering women in terms of property rights and 
to promote the same there is a provision for Gender based ownership in Records of Rights 
(RoR). However, several States are still not implementing the same which shows denial of 
property rights to eligible women population of the country. The Committee, strongly 
recommend the DoLR to direct all States to introduce a column for GENDER to promote option 
of land ownership by the women. 
Reply of the Government  
2.8 The Department has addressed to all States and UTs to mandatorily incorporate a 
Gender column in the Record of Rights (RoR) and to upload gender-disaggregated data on 
the Management Information System (MIS) portal of the Digital India Land Records 
Modernization Programme (DILRMP). 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
2.9 The Committee is concerned about the lack of information about ongoing projects 
under both the schemes being implemented by the DoLR and have been suggesting to involve 
elected local representatives especially local MPs in selecting the projects. Since, the 
Government of India is spending huge money on these important Rural Development 
schemes, the involvement of local MPs will ensure transparency in implementation and check 
whether the fund is being spend in a right way. Therefore, the Committee recommend to 

 
11 
 
 
engage local MPs in implementation of these schemes while ensuring complete information 
regarding the ongoing project in their area and the concerned officer should report the physical 
and financial progress on regular basis. 
Reply of the Government  
2.10 Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
The Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
(WDC-PMKSY) is implemented by States/UTs in accordance with approved guidelines, 
following scientific watershed planning and established selection criteria. 
The Department recognizes the important role of Hon’ble Members of Parliament in 
strengthening transparency and improving last-mile delivery of development schemes. To 
support this, States/UTs are encouraged to keep elected representatives, including local MPs, 
informed about project activities in their constituencies. 
Detailed information on sanctioned projects, as well as physical and financial progress, 
is available through the Management Information System (MIS) and is regularly reviewed at 
multiple levels. In addition, monitoring is strengthened through District Watershed 
Development Units, State Nodal Agencies, periodic review meetings, field inspections, geo-
tagging of assets, and online tracking systems. WDC-PMKSY is covered in the list of Schemes 
monitored by the District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committees (DISHAs).  
The Department agrees with the Committee’s recommendation and will continue to 
advise States/UTs to ensure regular sharing of project-related information with local MPs and 
other stakeholders, along with sustained efforts to further improve transparency, 
accountability, and institutional capacity for effective implementation. 
Digital India Land Records Modernisation Programme 
DILRMP is already covered in the list of Schemes monitored by the District 
Development Coordination and Monitoring Committees (DISHAs), formed to ensure 
better coordination among all the elected representatives in Parliament, State Legislatures 
and Local Governments (Panchayati Raj Institutions/Municipal Bodies) for efficient and time-
bound development (copy enclosed). Department of Rural Development vide Order No. Q-
13016/04/2019-DISHA dated 28.11.2024 (copy enclosed) has issued directions to nominate 
Hon'ble Members of Parliament in State Level DISHA committees. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
2.11 The Committee are concerned to note that watershed-related works are being 
implemented by multiple State departments, leading to fragmentation of funds and diffused 
accountability. The Committee observe that such compartmentalised implementation 
undermines the integrated objectives of WDC-PMKSY The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry mandate a State-level Convergence Framework designating a 
single Nodal Authority responsible for planning, fund coordination and outcome reporting of 
all watershed-related interventions. The Committee further recommend that States submit 
annual consolidated outcome reports indicating measurable improvements in irrigation 
coverage, groundwater levels, cropping intensity and farmer benefits. The Committee 
emphasise that watershed development must have clear, unified accountability to ensure 
visible and measurable impact. 

 
12 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
2.12 WDC-PMKSY is implemented as an integrated programme with strong emphasis on 
convergence across agriculture, horticulture, water resources, rural development and 
livelihood-related schemes to avoid duplication and improve impact. At the State level, State 
Level Nodal Agencies (SLNAs) are designated as the primary coordinating bodies for 
planning, convergence, monitoring and supervision of watershed projects. At the district level, 
District Watershed Development Units (DWDUs) facilitate coordination with line departments 
and ensure convergence during implementation.  
The Department agrees that stronger inter-departmental coordination is essential for 
achieving measurable and sustainable outcomes. States/UTs are therefore encouraged to 
further strengthen convergence mechanisms under the leadership of nodal agencies and 
ensure integrated planning and execution of watershed activities.  
A monitoring system is already in place through MIS, geo-tagging, periodic reviews 
and outcome tracking. States/UTs submit regular physical and financial progress reports, and 
efforts are underway to further strengthen outcome-based monitoring. 
The recommendation for consolidated annual outcome reporting has been noted and 
will be suitably considered. The Department will continue to promote convergence, improve 
coordination, and strengthen accountability to ensure better outcomes in irrigation, 
groundwater recharge, agricultural productivity and rural livelihoods. 
 

 
13 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW  
OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
14 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
4.1 The Committee note the benefits of the WDC-PMKSY 1.0 and 2.0 in the country. The 
Committee take into account issues like lack of trained staff, maintenance and upkeep of 
completed assets understand that for extending the coverage and spread of the scheme and 
its stated benefits, the scheme needs increased budgetary support every year. Despite, it’s 
repeated call to increase the budget, the Committee are concerned to note that in this year’s 
BE of 2500 crore, there has been a decrease of Rs 5 crore from previous year's BE of Rs.2505 
crore in 2025-26, which was further reduced by Rs. 1500 crore at RE stage. The Committee 
also note that to complete the projects under for current phase of PMKSY 2.0 by March 2027, 
the scheme needs continuation of funding required beyond March 2026.  
            Looking at the overall performance of the scheme and its impact in the rural areas, the 
Committee strongly recommend the DoLR to seek higher funds in order to complete the 
current phase and expand the coverage of the scheme by starting new phase of WDC-PMKSY 
3 at the earliest. The Committee also urge the DoLR to fully utilize the fund allocated at BE so 
as to avoid reduction of funds at RE stage. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The Budget Estimates (BE) for WDC-PMKSY 2026-27 have been prepared based on 
overall resource availability and past expenditure trends. The Department is committed to 
ensuring optimal utilization of funds and closely monitors physical and financial progress 
through reviews, field visits, and MIS-based systems. States/UTs have been advised to 
expedite implementation and improve fund utilization. Efforts are also underway to address 
operational and technical issues in fund flow and reporting, including those related to the SNA-
SPARSH system, to ensure smoother expenditure. 
In view of the extension of WDC-PMKSY 2.0 up to 30.09.2026, necessary financial 
support is being provided for timely completion of ongoing projects. Any additional requirement 
of funds will be assessed based on progress and budgetary availability. The Department 
agrees on the need for adequate financial support for watershed development and will 
consider resource requirements for expansion, capacity building, asset maintenance, and 
future programmes, including WDC-PMKSY 3.0, subject to approval and budget availability. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
4.3 The Committee note that the NITI Aayog has recommended that the cost norms for 
the scheme should be revised as per current market scenario. They have also suggested cost 
norms between Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 30,000 per hectare for the plains. Contrary to this, WDC-

 
15 
 
 
PMKSY 2.0 goes with the revised cost norm of Rs. 28,000 per hectare for hilly and difficult 
areas, Rs. 22000/- per hectare for other areas and up to Rs. 28,000 per hectare for watershed 
projects in Integrated Action Plan Districts. The Committee agree to the fact that higher cost 
norms as per prevalent market condition is utmost requirement for long term performance of 
the assets created under this scheme. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Department should increase cost norm as suggested by expert groups to ensure maintenance 
and upkeep of ongoing projects. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 The cost norms under WDC-PMKSY 2.0 are presently ₹22,000 per hectare for plain 
areas and ₹28,000 per hectare for hilly/difficult areas and Integrated Action Plan (IAP) districts. 
These were fixed while balancing resource availability and the objective of covering a wide 
geographical area under watershed development. 
 
The Department acknowledges that rising input, labour, and material costs may require 
periodic review of these norms. Accordingly, recommendations of expert bodies such as NITI 
Aayog will be examined while formulating WDC-PMKSY 3.0, keeping in view prevailing market 
rates, inflation, field requirements, and overall resource availability, subject to approval of the 
Ministry of Finance and competent authority. 
  
The Department also acknowledges the importance of sustainability and upkeep of 
created assets. Suitable provisions for operation, maintenance, and long-term durability of 
watershed structures will be considered in future programme design. The recommendation of 
the Hon’ble Committee has been noted and will be duly considered in upcoming watershed 
development programmes. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
4.5 While there was a 91.34% increase at RE stage of 2025-26 for DILRMP, the 
Committee find that BE allocation has only been increased by 4.17% to Rs. 125 crores from 
previous year BE of Rs. 120 crores. Considering the overall performance of this important 
scheme and remarkable impact on the ground, the Committee feel that the scheme needs big 
budget impetus to complete each component well within set timeline. Taking into consideration 
uneven progress of the scheme in different states, the Committee recommend the DoLR to 
demand higher funds in order to ensure timely implementation and further expansion of the 
scheme for the benefit of the country. 
Reply of the Government  
4.6 During the FY 2025-26, ₹120.00 crore was allocated at BE stage which was further 
enhanced by ₹109.61 crore to ₹229.61 crore at RE stage. The additional fund requirement 
was for implementation of NAKSHA pilot project, settlement of committed liabilities etc. Out of 
this, ₹226.93 crore (98.83%) was utilized during FY 2025-26. 
From the year 2026-27 onwards, the survey/resurvey component of DILRMP has been 

 
16 
 
 
separated from DILRMP 3.0 scheme and would be implemented as a new separate Scheme. 
The total financial outlay for DILRMP 3.0 for the FY 2026-27 to 2030-31 as recommended by 
EFC is ₹565.50 crore. However, based on the allotment done during BE of FY2025-26, an 
amount of ₹125.00 crore has been allocated as BE for the FY 2026-27. 
DoLR would review the fund requirements during 2026-27 based on the outlay approved under 
DILRMP 3.0 and Survey/Resurvey proposal. Accordingly, DoLR would demand higher funds 
in order to ensure timely implementation of the Scheme components.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
4.7 The Committee note that while DILRMP has made significant progress, rural survey. 
resurvey and updation of agricultural land records remain incomplete in several States. The 
Committee is of the opinion that rural land governance gaps must be addressed before 
expanding digitisation initiatives to urban areas. The Committee are of the considered view 
that strengthening rural land records is integral to agricultural security, dispute reduction and 
effective implementation of rural development schemes. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that rural digitisation and updation be treated as the first priority under DILRMP. 
Any expansion to urban areas should be undertaken only after demonstrable saturation of 
rural coverage in the concerned State and must be supported by a clear justification placed 
before Parliament. The Committee further recommend annual State-wise reporting on rural 
survey completion, RoR-map integration, mutation pendency and ULPIN linkage to ensure 
accountability and sequencing discipline. 
Reply of the Government  
4.8  The component of Survey/Resurvey which was an approved component of DILRMP 
till 31.03.2026 has been proposed as a separate scheme viz. Survey/Resurvey for 
Creation/Updation of Land Records.  Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) headed by the 
Secretary, Department of Expenditure in its meeting held on 07.05.2026 has appraised this 
proposal and recommended to undertake it as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme to cover 20% 
of total agricultural land area across the country (approximately 3 lakh sq.km.) using modern 
geospatial technologies over a period of three years commencing in FY 2026-27.  The 
recommended are yet to be approved by the Cabinet. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
17 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
10 August, 2026 
19 Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati 
Raj 
 
 
 
 
  

 
18 
 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2025-26) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE 
COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 7TH AUGUST, 2026 
 
 The Committee sat from 1000 hrs to 1008 hrs in Committee Room ‘B’,  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram 
3. Shri Raju Bista 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Dr Sanjay Jaiswal 
6. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
7. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
8. Shri Jugal Kishore 
9. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
10. Shri Janardan Mishra 
11. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
12. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
13. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
14. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
15. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
17. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
18. Smt. Rajathi 
19. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
20. Shri Karamvir Singh Boudh 
21. Shri Baidyanath Ram 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Juby Amar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director  
3. Smt Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of five Draft Reports on:- 

 
19 
 
 
(i) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 26th Report on Demands for Grants (2026-27) pertaining to 
the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development); 
 
(iii) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(iv) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(v) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
3. Draft Reports were taken up for consideration one-by-one and after discussion, 
the Committee adopted the same with minor modification. The Committee then 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Draft Reports and present the 
same to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
____________________________ 
xxxx Not related to the Draft Report. 
 
  

 
20 
 
 
ANNEXURE II 
 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
 ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT (18TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYATI 
RAJ 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  10  
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 6, 7, 8 and 10 
 
 
 
Total: 6 
Percentage: 60% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:   
Serial Nos. 2, 4,5 and 9. 
 
 
 
Total: 04 
Percentage: 40% 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
 