 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
   
 
     EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2024-
25) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)'.] 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
11 


 
 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the First Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development)'.] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.07.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.07.2025 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2025/ Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CRD No.  202 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____ 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-2025) ii 
INTRODUCTION iii 
   
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
26 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
40 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
41 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
56 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I Extracts of the Minutes of the 30 th Sitting of the Committee held on 
14.07.2025 
 
57 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati 
Raj. 
59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-2025) 
 
          Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Shri Nagendra Ray 
27. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Shri Vaiko 
30. ---Vacant--- 
31. ---Vacant--- 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Shri L. Singson    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sudhanshu Shekhar  - Executive Officer 
 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj (2024-2025) having been authorised by the Committee to present 
the Report on their behalf, present the 11th Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (18th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands 
for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development). 
2.  The First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 12.12.2024 and was laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2024. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 09.04.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 14.07.2025. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
21 July, 2025 
30 Ashadha, 1947(Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural  
Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2024-
25) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their First Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development) for the year 2024-2025. 
1.2  The First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 12.12.2024 and 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2024. The Report contained 
18 Observations/Recommendations.  
1.3  Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 18 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been received 
from the Government. These have been examined and categorised as 
follows: -  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
     Serial Nos. 1, 2, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18      
                             Total: 7
          Chapter-II 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
      Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL      
        Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
      Serial No. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,10, 11, 13, 14     
  
 Total: 11 
   Chapter-IV   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
      Serial No. NIL        
 Total: NIL 
              Chapter-V 
 

 
 
2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case 
where it is not possible for any reasons to implement the recommendations in 
letter and spirit, the matter shall be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration/merit 
comments.  
I. Low Wage Rate under MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
1.6 With regard to the low wage rate under MGNREGA, the Committee had 
recommended as under: - 
           “An oft repeated concern of the Committee pertaining with 
MGNREGA has been that of increase in wage rate. Despite several 
recommendations in this regard, there has been no noticeable change 
in the stance of DoRD. While DoRD has always been sending 
stereotype response regarding revision of wages every financial year, 
but realistically, the quantum of revision, in all earnest, merits a relook. 
Rising inflation and cost of living, be it is urban or rural setting, has 
risen manifold and is evident to all. Even at this moment, going by the 
notified wage rates of MGNREGA, per day wage rate of around Rs. 
200/- in many States defies any logic when the same State has much 
higher labour rates. It becomes inexplicable as to why the wages under 
MGNREGA still can’t be linked to a suitable index commensurate with 
the existing inflation. Aware of the demand of increase in wages under 
MGNREGA from various quarters, the Committee urge DoRD 
unequivocally to revisit their stand and devise a mechanism for raising 
the wages under MGNREGA. 
1.7 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows: - 
“As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the 
Central Government may by notification, specify the wage rate for its 
beneficiaries. Further, section 6 (2) of the Act, provides that until such 
time a wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in respect of any 
area in a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State Government 
under section 3 of the Minimum wages Act, 1948 for Agricultural 
Labourers shall be considered as the wage rate applicable to that area. 
Accordingly, as per provision of Section 6(2) of the Act, from the 
inception of the scheme till the financial year 2010-11, the wage rate in 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA was determined on the basis of the 
minimum wage set by the respective State Governments. However, 

 
 
3 
 
from the financial year 2011-12, the Government of India started 
determining the wage rates using the Consumer Price Index for 
agricultural labour (CPI-AL).  
   
  To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers against 
inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development revises the wage rate every 
financial year, based on change in Consumer Price Index for 
Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The index is different for different 
States/UTs as notified by Labour Bureau Shimla. If the calculated wage 
rate of any State/UT is coming lower than the wage rate of previous 
year, it is being protected by maintaining the previous year's wage rate. 
The wage rate is made applicable from 1st April of each financial year.  
The overall % increase in wage rate for FY 2024-25 from the FY 2023-
24 is about 7 %.  
 
However, each State/UT can provide wages over and above the 
wage rate notified by the Central Government.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.8 Rising inflation and cost of living, be it is urban or rural setting, has 
risen manifold and is evident to all. The Committee do understand that 
MGNREGA is a demand driven scheme, but at the same time find that, per day 
wage rate of around Rs. 200/- in many States is completely unacceptable and 
not in consonance with the rising cost of living. Such low wage rates is one of 
the major reasons for the workers to opt out of MGNREGA and force them to 
move out in search of better opportunities and thereby hampering the 
percentage of work completed under MGNREGA. The Committee have time 
and again urged DoRD to increase the wage rates under MGNREGA by linking 
it with an index commensurate with national inflation.  But the wage rates 
under MGNREGA continue to remain stagnant on account of no change in 
indexation. Therefore, the Committee strongly reiterate the earlier 
recommendation regarding the prevailing ‘low wage rates’ across the 
States/UTs of the country and why it can’t be linked to a suitable index 
commensurate with the existing inflation and hence, implore upon DoRD to 
empathetically look into this issue for a positive revision of the wages under 

 
 
4 
 
MGNREGA earliest for benefitting beneficiaries. The said increase in wage rate 
is essential to keep up with inflation and to meet the objective of providing 
financial security to the beneficiaries. 
II. Seeking Parity in Wages 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
1.9 With regard to seeking parity in wages, the Committee had recommended as 
follows: - 
"One of the main areas of concern that has always attracted the 
attention of the Committee is that of the existing disparity between the 
wage rate assured under MGNREGA in different States/UTs. It is still 
beyond comprehension as to how is it possible that a single scheme 
having the provision of giving hundred days of guaranteed work to poor 
people in rural areas can have different yard- stick when it comes to 
the payment of wages across the length and breadth of the country. 
The Committee further observe that as per clause (d) of Article 39 of 
the Constitution directing certain principles of Policy to be followed by 
the State provides that there is a provision of equal pay for equal work 
for both man and woman. Hence under the directive there cannot be 
different wages for different States under the MGNERGA. In view of 
Article 39 of the Constitution and to have parity in wages, the 
Committee strongly recommend that MGNREGA beneficiaries must be 
paid wages without any disparity in order to bring equality in wages 
under MGNREGA across all States/UTs urgently."  
1.10 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
  "  As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the 
Central Government may by notification, specify the wage rate for its 
beneficiaries. Further, section 6 (2) of the Act, provides that until such 
time a wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in respect of any 
area in a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State Government 
under section 3 of the Minimum wages Act, 1948 for Agricultural 
Labourers shall be considered as the wage rate applicable to that area. 
Accordingly, as per provision of Section 6(2) of the Act, from the 
inception of the scheme till the financial year 2010-11, the wage rate in 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA was determined on the basis of the 
minimum wage set by the respective State Governments. However, 
from the financial year 2011-12, the Government of India started 
determining the wage rates using the Consumer Price Index for 
agricultural labour (CPI-AL).  
  
  To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers against 
inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development revises the wage rate every 
financial year, based on change in Consumer Price Index for 
Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The index is different for different 

 
 
5 
 
States/UTs as notified by Labour Bureau Shimla. If the calculated wage 
rate of any State/UT is coming lower than the wage rate of previous 
year, it is being protected by maintaining the previous year's wage rate. 
The wage rate is made applicable from 1st April of each financial year.  
The overall % increase in wage rate for FY 2024-25 from the FY 2023-
24 is about 7 %.  
 
However, each State/UT can provide wages over and above the wage 
rate notified by the Central Government." 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.11  There is a provision of equal pay for equal work for both man and 
woman under clause (d) of Article 39 of the Constitution and that to be 
followed by the State in its letter and spirit. Hence, under the directive there 
cannot be different wages for different States under the MGNERGA. Regarding 
the disparity in wages under MGNREGA in different States/UTs, the Committee 
had noted the long-standing stance of the DoRD that the State/UTs were 
allowed to provide wage over and above the wage rate notified by the Central 
Government. The Committee did not subscribe to the stand of the DoRD in this 
context and had recommended that the Department should explore the 
feasibility of notifying a uniform wage rate under MGNREGA for the entire 
country.  However, the action taken reply furnished by the DoRD in this regard 
is still of the same mould as earlier. The Committee do not approve the stereo 
type reply of the Government stating that Section 6 (1) of MGNREGA and the 
procedure for the calculation of present wage rates based on Consumer Price 
Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The Committee do not find their reply 
helpful in any way to resolve the issue of disparity of wages under MGNREGA 
and expect from the DoRD to review it and furnish positive reply in this regard.  
It is also unfathomable as to why the Ministry is not able to notify a unified 
wage rate under MGNREGA across the country to end the disparity across 
States/UTs for good, particularly when the Scheme is mostly funded by the 

 
 
6 
 
Centre. Thus, in light of the above rationale, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation and make a strong appeal to the Ministry to relook into this 
matter urgently by following cogent approach and devise a mechanism to 
bring equality in wages under MGNREGA across all States/UTs to bring relief 
to the poor rural populace. 
III. Wage and Material Pendencies under MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
1.12  In the context of wage and material pendencies under MGNREGA, the 
Committee had recommended as below: 
“A demand driven scheme such as MGNREGA having a 
statutory status and aimed at securing some sort of livelihood for the 
destitute and marginalized having no other ‘fall back options’ is 
defeated in its intent in the wake of pendency of payment of 
Rs.7,056.32 crores (as on 23.10.2024) against the material 
component. While the pending wages are confined to a few States, the 
material share is spread across the States. The Committee feel that 
both the aspect of MGNREGA, i.e. a demand driven nature of the 
scheme and creation of assets under the scheme are severely 
hampered through such pendencies. Any administrative or procedural 
lapse causing delays in wage payments and material fund release in 
the context of a scheme of such enormous proportion like MGNREGA 
which caters to the nook and corners of the country and has millions of 
beneficiaries enrolled as job card holders would only deter the needy 
person from availing the benefits of the scheme. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend DoRD to spruce up its financial management 
of the scheme and tighten their grip on the fallacies that may have 
crept in the implementation of MGNREGA at ground level for the 
earliest eradication of pendencies in wages and material components.” 
1.13 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“Under Mahatma Gandhi Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, wage 
payments are directly credited by the Central Government to the 
account of beneficiaries through the Direct Benefit Transfer protocol.  
 
With the regard of material, States/UTs furnish funds release 
proposals to Government of India. The Ministry releases funds 
periodically in two tranches with each tranche consisting of one or 
more installments, keeping in view the “agreed to” Labour Budget, 
demand for works, opening balance, pace of utilization of funds, 
pending liabilities, overall performance and subject to submission of 
relevant documents by the States/UTs. 
 

 
 
7 
 
Fund release to the States/UTs is a continuous process and 
Central Government is committed in making funds available to 
States/UTs for the implementation of the Scheme as per the demand 
for work on the ground. This Ministry regularly interacts and follows up 
with States/UTs Government regarding timely submission of prescribed 
documents in order to avoid delay in release of funds for the 
implementation of scheme. 
 
Periodic communications based on expenditure projections have been 
made to the Ministry of Finance for making sufficient provisions under 
revised estimates 2024-25 and budget estimates 2025-26.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.14 The Committee are disappointed with disclosure that an amount of Rs. 
7,056.32 crore was lying pending against the material component for a 
welfare-oriented scheme like MGNREGA. While the pending wages are 
confined to a few States, the material share is spread across the States. The 
Committee feel that both the aspect of MGNREGA, i.e. a demand driven nature 
of the scheme and creation of assets under the scheme are severely 
hampered through such pendencies.  While being deeply concerned with the 
adverse impact of such pendency and its impact on upliftment of rural 
workers, the Committee had strongly recommended DoRD to spruce up its 
financial management to overcome pendencies in material component and 
wages at the earliest. The response furnished by DoRD is completely lacking 
of any concrete measure that have been taken and furthermore it is silent 
upon the existing pendencies. The Committee are not satisfied with the same 
old stereotypical approach of DoRD and sending evasive reply on such an 
important matter.  There is an imperative need to gear up the machinery of the 
Department to entail all measures for its rectification expeditiously. Therefore, 
the Committee strongly reiterate their recommendation for the eradication of 
wage and material pendencies under MGNREGA through efficacious 

 
 
8 
 
measures of financial prudence to achieve the goals of the scheme at the 
earliest.  
IV. Increase in Number of Guaranteed Days of Work under MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
1.15 The Committee view the demand for increase in number of days from 100 to 
150 not only beneficial for the needy but also for the aim of the Scheme regarding 
creation of durable assets as it would provide continuity of same experienced 
workforce on a project for a longer time. Although the State Governments may make 
provisions for additional days, still the Committee are of the firm view that the 
mandatory increase in number of guaranteed days should be brought about by the 
DoRD by moving an amendment in the Act in order to make it applicable for the 
entire country, so that the demand of needy beneficiaries may not hinge upon the will 
of the State Governments. Therefore, the Committee recommend for increase in 
number of days of work sought under MGNREGA from 100 to 150 days and implore 
upon DoRD to take up the matter in right earnest and come out with some concrete 
measures in this regard. 
Reply of the Government  
 
1.16 The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act )Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA(, 2005, is an Act to provide for the enhancement of livelihood 
security of the households in rural areas of the country by providing at least one 
hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every 
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
  
      The Ministry mandates the provision of additional 50 days of wage employment  
)beyond the stipulated 100 days  (to every Scheduled Tribe Household in a forest 
area, provided that these households have no other private property except for the 
land rights provided under the Forest Rights Act )FRA(, 2006 . 
  
In addition to this, there is a provision for up to additional 50 days of wage 
employment in a financial year in drought /natural calamity affected notified rural 
areas  . 
  
As per Section 3 )4  (of the Act, the State Governments may make provision 
for providing additional days of employment beyond the period guaranteed under the 
Act from their own funds . 
 
 Details of National average days of employment provided per households 
under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in the last five financial years 2019 -20, 2020 -21, 
2021 -22, 2022 -23 2023 -24 are given below . 
  
Financial Year 2023 -24  2022 -23 2021 -22 2020 -21 2019 -20 
National average days of 
employment availed per 
households 
52.08 47.83 50.07 51.52 48.4 
  

 
 
9 
 
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, the average days of employment per 
household in each financial year in the last five financial years has remained around 
50 days  .Therefore, the Ministry is emphasizing generating awareness about the 
provisions of the Scheme and to provide adequate employment opportunities to rural 
households under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS based on the demand from the ground . 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.17  MGNREGA is a last ‘fall-back’ option for numerous rural people, and the 
amount of expenditure under it also elicits a keen interest in the scheme by the 
poor and marginalized. The scheme needs to be revamped, keeping in view the 
rising population of the country and emerging challenges associated with it. 
DoRD in their reply have stated about the provision of 100 days of guaranteed 
wage employment under MGNREGA and that under Section 3(4) of the Act, 
State Governments are allowed to make provision for additional days of 
employment beyond the guaranteed period from their own funds. The 
Committee find the reply routine and generic in nature, merely highlighting the 
formulated provisions of the Act. Although the State Governments may make 
provisions for additional days, still the Committee are of the firm opinion that 
the mandatory increase in number of guaranteed days should be brought 
about by the DoRD by moving an amendment in the Act in order to make it 
applicable for the entire country, so that the demand of needy beneficiaries 
may not hinge upon the will of the State Governments. Therefore, the 
Committee reiterate their recommendation for increase in number of days of 
work sought under MGNREGA from 100 to 150 days and implore upon DoRD 
to take up the matter in right earnest to achieve the concrete targets of the 
scheme. 
 
 

 
 
10 
 
V. Landless Beneficiaries 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
1.18 Concerning the landless beneficiaries, the Committee had made the following 
recommendation: 
“The documents of DoRD reveal that out of the total 5,73,311 
landless beneficiaries identified under PMAY-G so far 3,60,837 (59%) 
beneficiaries have been provided land for the construction of houses. 
The Committee find that there are still 2,12,474 beneficiaries remaining 
to get land/assistance from the State/UT to construct their house under 
PMAY-G. Therefore, the issue of landlessness is affecting the progress 
of PMAY-G and may also cause delay in the completion of target. In 
this context, the Committee recommend DoRD that in order to ensure 
land to landless people for their own house, a policy be framed in 
public interest within a specified period so that land must be allotted to 
identified persons to expedite the timely construction of houses in their 
respective States under PMAY-G.” 
1.19 In regard to the above recommendation, the DoRD in their action taken reply 
have stated as below: 
            “The Ministry has been actively pursuing this matter with the 
States/UTs for providing land to remaining landless beneficiaries. A 
module for capturing details of landless beneficiaries has been 
developed on the AwaasSoft. Since the land is a State subject, the 
Ministry is not in a position to frame a policy on the matter. However, 
the Ministry during FY 2021-22 has already requested the States/UTs 
for constituting a Task force under the chairpersonship of the Chief 
Secretary concerned with the Secretary (Revenue) and the Secretary, 
in-charge of Department dealing with the PMAY-G. The Ministry in next 
phase of the PMAY-G (2024-29) would further monitor the provision of 
land to all landless beneficiaries.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.20  Providing land to the landless PMAY-G beneficiaries for the 
construction of the houses is of utmost importance since they are the most 
deserving beneficiaries in the Permanent Wait List (PWL) of the scheme. 
Further for achieving the year-wise sub-targets and cumulative targets under 
PMAY-G providing land to such beneficiaries is very crucial. The Committee 
were concerned to find that there are still 2,12,474 beneficiaries remaining to 
get land/assistance from the State/UT to construct their house under PMAY-G. 

 
 
11 
 
Therefore, the issue of landlessness is affecting the progress of PMAY-G and 
may also cause delay in the completion of target. It has been highlighted by 
the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) in their reply that it is the 
responsibility of the States/UT to provide land to landless beneficiaries and 
that the DoRD has been in constant touch with the States/UTs for ensuring 
availability of land to the landless. The Committee appreciate the efforts being 
undertaken by the DoRD, but despite such efforts the Committee find the pace 
of reaching a logical culmination to such issue quite slow. The ‘need of the 
hour’ is to further press upon the State Machinery with a sense of greater 
clarity and increased coordination with all the Stakeholders for expediting the 
mitigation of pendency. Moreover, it has also been submitted that the 
construction of multi-storey building is being encouraged where the land is 
scarcely available to mitigate the issue of landlessness to the beneficiaries.  
Thus, the Committee further reiterate their recommendation and urge DoRD to 
increase their momentum of persuasive efforts with the concerned States/UTs 
on ‘war footing’ and also explore feasibility of construction of multi-storey 
buildings so as to resolve the issue of landlessness for the ultimate benefit of 
the poor beneficiaries under the Yojana, who are most vulnerable schemes of 
rural areas of the country.        
VI. Completion of Houses – PMAY (G) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
1.21 With regard to the completion of houses-PMAY (G), the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
“The Committee observe that as against the PMAY- (G) initial 
target of 2.95 crore houses to be constructed by March, 2025, 2.66 
crore houses were constructed as on 22.10.2024 and 29 lakh houses 
are yet to be completed. An additional target of construction of 2 crore 
houses in next 5 FYs i.e. 2024-2029 has been approved by the 
Government. In light of this, the Committee feel that with proper 

 
 
12 
 
synergy between different agencies and stakeholders including 
availability of skilled manpower and material, the target set as well as 
the intended objective could be achieved. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the DoRD to urge the agencies involved to explore all 
means in order to complete the construction of houses within the target 
fixed by the Government.” 
1.22  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows: 
            “The Ministry had allocated target of 2.95 crore houses to the 
States/UTs which were to be completed by March, 2024. The Union 
Cabinet in its meeting held on 09.08.2024 has approved the 
continuation of the scheme beyond March, 2024 for 5 more years till 
March, 2029 for completion of 2 crore additional houses. The houses 
targeted for completion till 31.03.2024 of the previous phase are also to 
be completed by March, 2025 as per the Union Cabinet’s approval. 
  
It is informed that as on 27.02.2025, 1st installment of assistance has 
been released for 2.82 crore beneficiaries and 2.69 crore houses are 
completed and ~26 lakh houses are yet to be completed. These 
incomplete houses include ~12 lakh houses which are delayed i.e. not 
completed even after 12 months have passed from date of release of 
first installment of assistance. An exercise was conducted with the 
States/UTs to identify the reasons for delay in completion of these 
houses and it was observed that issues such as landlessness, 
unwilling beneficiary, misuse of funds by the beneficiary, death of 
beneficiary without a legal heir, permanent migration, etc. are some of 
the major reasons for non-completion of the delayed houses. 
  
In view of the above, the Ministry has requested the States/UTs to 
mark the delayed houses on the AwaasSoft MIS of the PMAY-G in 3 
categories viz. (a) Houses which can be completed; (b) Houses which 
cannot be completed and recovery of funds is possible; (c) Houses 
which cannot be completed and recovery of funds is also not possible. 
  
Further, the State Level Committee constituted under the 
chairpersonship of the Chief Secretary of the State/UT has been 
empowered to take decisions in respect of the incomplete delayed 
houses. This Committee has been empowered to give 
recommendations to write off the houses which can never be 
completed and funds/ assistance cannot be recovered. The Ministry is 
continuously following up with the States/UTs for completion of the 
incomplete delayed houses within the set deadlines. 
  
The Ministry is regularly following up with the States/UTs to ensure 
completion of all pending houses within stipulated timelines.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.23 The Committee had noted the issue of construction of houses within the 
stipulated deadlines under PMAY-G was a long standing one and required an 

 
 
13 
 
immediate attention without any further delay. In their action taken reply, the 
DoRD have submitted that as on 27.02.2025, 1st installment of assistance has 
been released for 2.82 crore beneficiaries and 2.69 crore houses are completed 
and 26 lakh houses are yet to be completed. These incomplete houses include 
12 lakh houses which are delayed i.e. not completed even after 12 months 
have passed from date of release of first installment of assistance. The DoRD 
have also conducted an exercise with States/UTs to identify the reasons for 
delay in completion of these houses and at the same time also requested the 
States/UTs to mark the delayed houses on the AwaasSoft MIS of the PMAY-G 
in three different categories viz. (a) Houses which can be completed; (b) 
Houses which cannot be completed and recovery of funds is possible; (c) 
Houses which cannot be completed and recovery of funds is also not possible. 
The Committee appreciate the efforts being undertaken by the DoRD in this 
regard. However, the Committee still feel that more cohesive approach and 
proper synergy between all stakeholders is required to achieve the set target 
as well as the intended objective of the said Yojana. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge DoRD to pursue the matter at 
the concerned level more vigorously for completion of all pending houses 
within stipulated time frame, as providing houses to workers will improve their 
quality of life and also enhance rate of achievement of the Government. 
VII. Increase in Per Unit Assistance under PMAY-G 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
1.24 With regard to the increase in per unit assistance under PMAY-G, the 
Committee had recommended as under: 
 “The Committee note that the deadline of PMAY-G has been 
extended to March, 2025 with the target of 2.95 crore houses. An 
additional target of construction of 2 crore more houses in next 5 FYs 
i.e. 2024-2029 has been also approved by the Government. All 

 
 
14 
 
necessary formalities also reportedly seem to have been completed to 
ensure that the list of beneficiaries are updated. The per unit 
assistance under PMAY-G for plain areas is Rs. 1.2 lakh and for hilly 
areas is Rs. 1.3 lakh which has remained static for a considerable 
period of time. With rising inflation having detrimental effect on the cost 
factor associated with the raw material, transportation cost, labours 
cost etc., constructing a new house of the requisite area under PMAY-
G for the poor and needy beneficiary with such assistance amount 
seem to be an arduous task. The vision “Housing for All” may not 
achieve its envisaged target until and unless the beneficiaries are 
provided with proper ‘hand-holding’ in terms of financial assistance of 
right value and at right juncture. Moreover, there are instances wherein 
houses remain incomplete for want of finance and thereby keeping the 
target lagging. In view of the foregoing, the Committee find it utmost 
necessary that a review of per-unit assistance be done on priority 
basis, particularly when the scheme has been extended to March, 
2029. Therefore, the Committee recommend the DoRD to revise the 
per unit assistance under PMAYG through suitable hike in the 
assistance component for the much-required augmented help to the 
needy beneficiaries.”  
1.25  The DoRD in their action taken reply furnished to the Committee have stated 
as follows: 
“The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 09.08.2024 has 
approved the continuation of the PMAY-G for 5 more years to construct 
2 crore additional houses. The scheme has been approved to continue 
with existing unit assistance of Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain areas and Rs. 
1.30 lakh in North Eastern Region (NER) States and Hill States. 
No proposal is under consideration for revision in unit assistance 
of the scheme.”   
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.26 Increase in per-unit assistance under PMAY-G which has remained 
static for a considerable period of time has also been a long-standing demand 
brought before the Committee on numerous occasions during their 
deliberations. The Committee resonated with the idea of hike in per unit 
assistance from the existing Rs. 1.20 lakh in plains and Rs. 1.30 lakh in hilly 
areas considering the ever-increasing cost of logistics and materials required 
in the construction of houses by the rural poor. The Committee had also taken 
note of the fact that the deadline of PMAY-G has been extended to March, 2025 
with the target of 2.95 crore houses. An additional target of construction of 2 

 
 
15 
 
crore more houses in next 5 FYs i.e. 2024-2029 has also been approved by the 
Government. Keeping in view this development, the Committee had 
recommended DoRD to make an upward revision in the per unit assistance 
being provided to the beneficiaries. Responding to the recommendation, DoRD 
in their Action Taken Reply have detailed the existing provision under the 
Scheme and have submitted that at present there is no proposal for revision in 
unit assistance under PMAY-G. The Committee having gone through the brief 
response of the Department feel that a genuine demand of the beneficiaries 
who are facing hard time to construct a house with such meagre assistance 
amount under PMAY-G has not been addressed. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly believe that revising and raising the per unit assistance under PMAY-
G from the existing Rs. 1.2 lakh/Rs. 1.3 lakh at this juncture could still be a 
boon for large number of beneficiaries and would help them in completing the 
construction of their houses at a faster rate. Thus, keeping in view the inflation 
rate the Committee reiterate their recommendation for the suitable hike in per 
unit assistance under PMAY-G to help the intended beneficiaries.  
VIII. Issue of Down-Tendering 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
1.27 The Committee note with concern the behaviour of the contractors at the 
bidding stage to acquire the tender of projects under PMGSY by quoting 25-30% 
lower amount than the minimum bidding amount. This approach by contractors has a 
cascading detrimental effect over the quality of construction of roads under PMGSY. 
This is a strategy which does not augur well for the effectiveness of the scheme. The 
Committee are of the view that the DoRD should bring out a mechanism at least by 
which a certain quantum of amount component equivalent to the difference between 
bidding and actual quoting is kept aside as security and may be released only after 
ensuring that the constructed road satisfy the stipulated quality norms. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the DoRD to entail all measures for curbing the 
down-tendering in PMGSY and review its provision to incorporate the security 
component for quality assurance of roads. 
  

 
 
16 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
1.28 Tendering of PMGSY works are done by the respective State governments 
and they are expected to follow the Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) norms while 
awarding the PMGSY works. In the interest of the quality of roads being built under 
PMGSY and for protection against Abnormally Low Bids (ALBs), provisions of taking 
the additional performance security from the contractor have been made in the SBD. 
All States have been advised to deal with cases of ALBs as per SBD provisions 
which are enumerated as under. 
  
(a) Qualification of the Bidder:  
  
To make sure that contractors who are bidding for the works have sufficient 
backgrounds in execution of good quality works, the following Qualification criteria 
are laid down in clause 4 of the SBD: 
  
(a) Contractor to provide the aggregate monetary value of civil construction projects 
executed in each of the preceding five years. 
(b) Furnish a record of past involvement in projects similar in nature and scale for 
each of the past five years. Additionally, include particulars of ongoing or contracted 
projects, along with endorsements from a relevant authority not lower than the rank 
of an Executive Engineer or its equivalent.  
(c) Present comprehensive information regarding the technical personnel slated for 
engagement in the project.  
(d) Confirm that the contract aligns with the qualifications specified in Clause 4.4 
B(b) (ii) of ITB for the construction.  
(e) Submit a proposed schedule for construction activities and a Quality 
Management Plan outlining the anticipated timeline for project completion in 
adherence to technical specifications and the stipulated completion period. 
  
(b) Additional Bank Guarantee: 
  
As per clause 46, sub-clause 46.1 and 46.2 of the SBD, the Performance 
Security equal to 5% (five percent) of the Contract Price and additional Security for 
unbalanced bids shall be provided to the Employer. 
  
(c) Blacklist/Termination of Contract 
  
As per clause 52, sub-clause 52.1 and 52.2 the Employer can terminate the 
Contract if the Contractor commits a major breach of contract in terms of quality and 
other contractual commitments i.e. failure to correct a specified defect promptly, non-
maintenance of required Security, delaying project completion beyond allowable 
liquidated damages period and not completing a specified portion of work on time. 
  
It may be noted that SBD already has strict provisions to ensure that good 
quality contractors are engaged for the execution of PMGSY works; however, the 
States/UTs have been further advised to ensure strict technical evaluation during the 

 
 
17 
 
technical scrutiny of bids. While reviewing the quality aspects of PMGSY works, it is 
ensured that more focus is given to such works which have been awarded at 
abnormally low rates. Ministry has devised a mechanism whereby special quality 
checks are conducted for such works by deputing a team of NQMs. All such works 
are inspected by NQMs. In case abnormally low bids result in poor quality of works, 
States are advised to take necessary action against such contractor and rectify the 
works at their cost. As such Ministry has always been actively involved in the 
implementation aspects of various provisions of SBD norms and necessary 
instructions are issued as well as hand-holding is undertaken at appropriate levels.  
  
The States are also requested to align their Schedule of Rates (SoRs) with market 
rates so that the instances of down-tendering are minimized. 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.29 The Committee note that the system of bidding through tenders for 
obtaining projects for construction of roads under PMGSY is an integral part 
of the scheme. Thus, the practice of frequent quoting of 25-30% lower than the 
minimum bidding amount by the contractors for winning the bid, leads to 
compromise in the quality of construction work resulting in the early ‘wear and 
tear’ of the roads. In view of such reported instances, the Committee had 
recommended the DoRD to entail all measures for curbing the down-tendering 
in PMGSY and review its provision to incorporate the security component for 
quality assurance of roads. In the Action Taken Reply furnished by the DoRD, 
the provisions for protection against Abnormally Low Bids (ALBs) and 
provisions of taking the additional performance security from the contractor 
have been made in the Standard Bidding Documents (SBD). The Committee 
note that the provisions of ALBS, such as those of Qualification of the Bidder, 
Additional Bank Guarantee, Blacklist/Termination of Contract, etc. laid down in 
the SBD are more or less adequate. Despite such stringent provision put in 
place by the Ministry, the Committee during the onsite visit observed the poor 
quality of construction of roads under PMGSY. The Committee feel that these 
provisions are meant to be implemented scrupulously at the ground level.  

 
 
18 
 
Merely stipulating the provisions alone would perhaps not serve any purpose 
unless they are being followed in letter and spirit. Therefore, the Committee 
reiterate the earlier recommendation and further recommend that the DoRD 
should bring out a mechanism at least by which a certain quantum of amount 
component equivalent to the difference between bidding and actual quoting is 
kept aside as security and may be released only after ensuring that the 
constructed road satisfy the stipulated quality norms. 
IX. Quality of Construction and Maintenance of Roads Post-Completion 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
1.30 The roads constructed under PMGSY at certain sites are not up to the 
stipulated norms and standards of construction and quality of materials used are 
compromised, even if they survive five years of the warranty period. Beside this, the 
effort of constructing quality roads providing rural connectivity gets marred in the 
aftermath of poor maintenance aspect. The Committee note the concern raised from 
various quarters that the roads constructed under PMGSY at various places suffer 
from poor maintenance and start getting degraded before 5 years of warranty. It has 
been noted that there are provisions for maintenance of the road constructed in the 
guidelines but same is not strictly adhered. Even the monitoring mechanism of the 
elaborately laid down principle for the maintenance aspect of roads constructed 
under PMGSY remains a cause of concern. The Committee note that the two 
separate issues starting initially with the quality of construction and later the 
maintenance aspect, both require equally strict regulation and compliance by the 
Contractors. In view of this scenario, the Committee recommend DoRD to ensure 
that the quality norms as prescribed under the provisions of PMGSY should not at all 
be compromised so that the roads built have strong durability. The Committee further 
recommend the DoRD to ensure due coordination with the Nodal agencies and 
requisite surveillance for proper maintenance of the PMGSY roads post 
construction.  
Reply of the Government  
 
1.31 Ensuring the quality of PMGSY works is the responsibility of the State 
Governments, who are implementing the programme. A three-tiered Quality Control 
mechanism is in place under PMGSY for ensuring the construction of quality road 
works and durability of road assets under PMGSY including the works undertaken by 
sub-contractors. 
  
Guidelines to regulate the quality control process have been issued to States 
from time to time. In order to ensure that people engaged in quality checks are 
adequately proficient and well trained, NRIDA has been conducting proficiency tests 
of NQMs, SQMs, PIU, etc. It has been made mandatory for all personnel engaged as 

 
 
19 
 
NQM/SQM to pass the proficiency test. Further, their skills are also developed 
through webinars, and seminars or by sending them to various training institutions, 
etc. 
  
To strengthen the quality check mechanism, the establishment of a field Lab 
has been made compulsory. These labs are also to be geo-tagged. Unless these are 
ensured, no payment is allowed to be made against such roads. Also, a new version 
of the Quality Monitoring System App has been developed to include e-forms and 
other initiatives that have strengthened quality monitoring systems. Consequent 
upon the introduction of e-Marg, payment on account of maintenance to the 
contractor, during the defect liability period, is made commensurate with the quality 
of roads maintained by him/her through a performance-based contract management 
system. 
  
PMGSY roads are constructed by State Governments with a minimum design 
life of 10 years. As per PMGSY guidelines, the responsibility for their maintenance 
rests with the State Governments. Initial maintenance during the first five years is 
governed by contracts signed along with the construction contract, as per the 
Standard Bidding Document, with the same contractor managing both phases. 
Maintenance funds required for this period are budgeted by the State Governments 
and placed with the State Rural Roads Development Agencies (SRRDAs) in a 
dedicated maintenance account. Following the five-year post-construction 
maintenance period, PMGSY roads are transitioned to Zonal Maintenance 
Contracts, encompassing maintenance and periodic renewal works in five-year 
cycles. 
  
To enhance focus on road maintenance during the Defect Liability Period 
(DLP) and streamline routine maintenance processes, the Electronic Maintenance 
of Rural Roads (eMARG) system has been introduced. This system is built on 
Performance-Based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC), where contractor payments 
are linked to the road's condition and compliance with predefined performance 
standards, rather than specific tasks. Payments are based on the maintenance of 
road structures, cross-drainage works, and traffic assets, ensuring better 
accountability and quality. 
  
Building on the success of eMARG during the Pre-5-Year DLP, a Post-DLP 
eMARG module has been developed to extend maintenance responsibilities beyond 
the initial defect liability period. This module covers key activities such as: 
  
1. Initial Rehabilitation: Restoring structural integrity and functionality through 
repairs, overlays, and drainage improvements. 
2. Routine Maintenance: Addressing minor issues like pothole patching, 
cleaning, and repainting to prevent deterioration. 
3. Renewal Works: Periodic resurfacing and surface treatment to extend the 
road's lifespan. 
4. Emergency Works: Repairs to address damages caused by natural disasters 
or unforeseen events. 
  

 
 
20 
 
Moreover, eMARG has been revamped and post DLP maintenance have also been 
included in the revamped eMARG. Under PMGSY, best performing States are 
provided with financial incentive money for maintenance of PMGSY roads post DLP. 
It has been made mandatory to spend incentive money for maintenance of roads 
through eMARG only. Under PMGSY-III, roads are to be maintained for 10 years by 
the states and necessary funds are to be provided by them as per MoU entered into 
with each state. The States are being encouraged and incentivized to undertake 
maintenance post-DLP through eMARG. In the recently launched PMGSY-IV, many 
new initiatives are being taken to strengthen the quality of construction. 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.32 Quality of Construction and post construction maintenance of roads 
under PMGSY are an important issue which has a lasting effect on the 
performance of the Yojana on ground level. The effectiveness of the yojana 
primarily depends on the longevity of the roads constructed and their 
maintenance during the initial and post Defect Liability Period (DLP). Thus, 
taking into account the two separate nagging issues starting initially with the 
quality of construction and later the maintenance aspect, both require equally 
strict regulation and compliance by the Contractors. The Committee had 
recommended the Department of Rural Development to ensure that the quality 
norms as prescribed under the provisions of PMGSY should not at all be 
compromised so that the roads built have strong durability. The Committee 
further recommended the DoRD to ensure due coordination with the Nodal 
agencies and requisite surveillance for proper maintenance of the PMGSY 
roads post construction.  However, from the perusal of the action taken reply 
furnished by the DoRD, the Committee find that an oft-repeated generic 
response has been submitted by the Department which, primarily, highlights 
the responsibility of the State Governments for ensuring the quality of PMGSY 
works as they are the implementing authorities. The reply also enumerates 
various quality control processes formulated and issued to States from time to 
time along with the provision of compulsory establishment of field Labs. 

 
 
21 
 
Further, as per reply of the DoRD, the States have to follow the eMARG 
module. Rigorous monitoring of eMARG implementation is being done and 
extension of 5 years Defect Liability Period (DLP) in the case of poor 
maintenance of roads has been made mandatory.  The Committee while noting 
the primary role of the States in the implementation of the Yojana, expects that 
the nodal Ministry play pivotal role in ensuring all the quality control 
processes so as to ensure that quality of road construction is not 
compromised and all the theoretical provisions are being implemented 
scrupulously at the ground level. On the post maintenance aspect, the 
Committee find the measures taken by the DoRD are in the right direction and 
firmly believe that such steps need to be consistently followed through 
without any callousness.  Therefore, the Committee while reiterating the 
recommendation on both the aspect, urge the DoRD to gear up its machinery 
over monitoring the quality of construction of roads under PMGSY and should 
also ensure that other States/UTs also follow suit with the same seriousness 
for ensuring a stricter adherence to the post construction maintenance of 
roads through the eMARG module. 
X. Increased Load-Bearing Roads and Plying of Heavy Vehicles 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
1.33 In the context of increased load-bearing roads and plying of heavy vehicles, 
the Committee had recommended as below: 
 “The Committee note that PMGSY roads are getting damaged 
due to the heavy vehicles that ply on them because these are generally 
low volume roads and were never meant to bear the load of heavy 
vehicles. In most of the cases, heavy vehicles plying on NHAI roads 
would also use the PMGSY roads as last mile connectivity to meet the 
ever-growing needs and expansion of industrial projects to the rural 
areas as well. The Committee, therefore recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development should take serious view of this 
matter and come out with some concrete and effective solution at the 

 
 
22 
 
earliest to protect the PMGSY roads from getting damaged by heavy 
vehicles.” 
1.34  In their action taken reply to the above recommendation, DoRD have stated 
as follows: 
           “The recommendations of the Committee were taken up with 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH). MoRTH vide letter 
dated 19.01.2024 opined that the National Highways network provides 
arterial connectivity whereas last mile connectivity is invariably 
provided by State Roads including village roads. Considering this, it is 
important that while planning road network and its design, area 
development plans, existing/proposed land use, type & volume of traffic 
is duly considered by road development authorities. Based on road 
network requirement; State Highways, Major District Roads, Other 
District Roads & Village Roads should be designed. It would ensure 
that the roads are adequately designed for service life and are not 
damaged due to movement of commercial traffic. The Ministry states 
that the proposals under PMGSY are appraised for traffic requirements 
and sanctioned as per IRC, etc. norms accordingly. The PMGSY 
guidelines also stipulate that States may use District Mining/Mineral 
funds for construction/maintenance of the roads in convergence model 
in case of mining areas keeping in view the traffic load of these roads. 
This Ministry has further informed that State Authorities are expected to 
enforce regulations on legal loading of commercial vehicles. The 
MoRTH has also mentioned that National Highways are also getting 
damaged in many stretches due to menace of overloading and that 
Ministry had been making efforts to control this by levying penalty and 
toll fee and requesting State Governments to enforce provisions of 
Motor Vehicle Act & rules. The MoRTH also requested MoRD to take 
up the matter with the State Governments for strict enforcement of 
Motor Vehicle rules to discourage overloading. 
Accordingly, this Ministry has written a letter to all states/UTs asking 
them to take up the matter with their concerned Transport Departments 
for strict enforcement of the Motor Vehicle Act & Rules and to 
discourage overloaded vehicles from plying on PMGSY roads, so that 
there may not be damage to these roads by such overloaded vehicles” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.35 The Committee had noted that PMGSY roads are built under such 
guidelines which do not take into account plying of heavy tonnage vehicles 
which nowadays cause immense damage to the rural connectivity roads. In 
this era of modernisation when industrial setups at far flung locales and the 
construction works of highways often necessitate movement of heavy load 

 
 
23 
 
bearing vehicles, particularly those of NHAI to also utilise the roads built under 
PMGSY. Such heavy vehicles cause irreversible damages to the rural roads 
under PMGSY. Since, the protection of PMGSY roads from getting damaged by 
heavy vehicles was of utmost importance, the Committee had recommended 
the DoRD to come out with some concrete and effective solution at the 
earliest.  However, the DoRD in their action taken reply submitted that it is the 
responsibility of the District Administration to ensure that plying of heavy 
vehicles on the PMGSY roads are regulated. In this regard, the Committee, 
strongly reiterate that all the stakeholders including DoRD need to address 
such issues promptly and take some sincere and tangible efforts to check the 
recurrence of such damages to PMGSY roads in future.   
XI.   Increase in Assistance Amount of Pension 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
1.36 Increase in assistance amount of pension, the Committee in this regard had 
recommended as under: 
“National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) is a 100% 
Centrally Funded Centrally Sponsored Scheme which has been 
continued for 15th Finance Commission Cycle (2021-26) also. NSAP 
caters to 3.09 Crore BPL beneficiaries with a scheme-wise ceiling/cap 
for each State/UT on the number of beneficiaries (fixed in Nov., 2012 
and revised in September, 2022). The amount of assistance aimed for 
old aged, widows, disabled persons and bereaved families on death of 
primary bread winner belonging to BPL households, under the sub-
schemes of NSAP, i.e. IGNDAPS, IGNWPS and IGNDPS ranges from 
Rs.200/- to Rs.500/- per month has been a cause of concern to the 
Committee for a long period of time. The Committee note this amount 
abysmally low when the cost of living has increased during the last 
couple of years. The Committee feel that there is an urgent 
requirement for the upward revision of the social assistance provided 
under NSAP. The Committee, therefore, again recommend to the 
DoRD to look into this issue with utmost sincerity and concretize the 
result on ground level as soon as possible.” 
1.37 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“NSAP aims to provide a basic financial support to old age, 
widow and severely disabled persons. As social security, invalid and 
old age pensions figure as items 23 and 24 in the Concurrent List (7th 

 
 
24 
 
Schedule) of the Constitution, both the Central Government and 
States/ UTs have the responsibility for working in tandem in rolling out 
a comprehensive social security framework in the country. Accordingly, 
the State/UTs are encouraged to provide top up amounts at least of an 
equivalent amount to the assistance provided by the Central Govt. so 
that the beneficiaries could get a decent level of assistance. At present, 
the States/UTs are adding Top up amounts ranging from Rs.50 to 
Rs.3200 per month per beneficiary under NSAP schemes. 
   
Based on various recommendations/ evaluation studies, the 
Department submitted the proposal for revamp of NSAP during the 
15thFinance Commission cycle.  In addition to the proposal for 
prescribing the criteria for beneficiary identification on the basis SECC 
(Automatic Inclusion and any two Deprivations), it was also proposed 
to enhance the minimum pension rate for elderly and widows from 
Rs.200/- and Rs.300/- respectively to Rs.800/- per month and for the 
disabled from Rs.300/- to Rs.1000/- per month. For the elderly of 80+ 
years, it was proposed to be enhanced from Rs.500 to Rs.1200. 
Further, one-time lump sum amount of Rs.20,000/- on the death of 
primary breadwinner was proposed to be enhanced to Rs.80,000/-.  
  
The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 19thJanuary 2022, 
however, approved continuation of NSAP in its present form. As such, 
as per the approval, the existing rate of assistance prescribed for 
NSAP scheme will continue till completion of 15thFinance Commission 
cycle i.e. up to FY 2025-26.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.38 The prevalent assistance amount to the tune of Rs. 200/- to Rs. 500/- per 
month under the different components of the National Social Assistance 
Programme (NSAP) is extremely meagre and demands for its revision had 
been made from long back. In the present instance, the reply submitted by the 
DoRD have clearly expressed their inability in carrying out revision of the 
scheme in wake of the decision taken at the highest level in Government to 
continue with the existing system. The Committee note the response and also 
take into account the submission regarding the top ups made by the State 
Government ranging from Rs. 50/- to Rs. 3200/- per month per beneficiary 
under the NSAP schemes. Acknowledging the fact, the Committee are still of 
the view that NSAP Being a 100% Centrally Funded, Centrally Sponsored 

 
 
25 
 
Scheme which caters to 3.09 crore BPL beneficiaries merits a revision at the 
central stage also so that the base assistance amount gets increased for 
providing further relief to the beneficiaries of this scheme. The Department 
need to relook at their stand and should not rely at the discretion of States for 
the success/progress of their scheme. In view of this, the Committee reiterate 
the earlier recommendation and make a strong appeal to the DoRD to review 
its stand and once again explore the feasibility of revision of assistance given 
under NSAP for helping the most vulnerable sections of the society to resolve 
their multiple problems. 
 
  

 
 
26 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
2.1 The Ministry of Rural Development have been entrusted with a huge 
responsibility of implementing and overseeing various schemes of the Government 
of India which are aimed at the upliftment of rural masses of the country. It becomes 
imperative on the part of the Department of Rural Development to ensure that the 
visionary flagship schemes of the Government of India are not left in the lurch for 
want of funds for proper implementation. The Committee note that the funds 
allocated at RE stage of 2023-24 was Rs.1,71,069.46 crore but the actual 
expenditure was Rs.1,50,154.64 crore which is 13.93% less than the funds at RE 
stage of 2023-24, which shows that schemes could not be implemented as 
envisaged by the Government for the benefits of the people. Non-utilisation of 
allocated funds means that deprivation of the targeted people from availing benefits 
from the scheme, and the same could have been meaningfully utilized for the other 
scheme where funds were direly needed. The Committee appreciate that there is an 
increase of 43.33% budgetary allocation under MGNREGA for 2024-25, however 
funds for other major schemes like PMGSY and NSAP, by and large is kept static. 
The role of the Department of Rural Development is very vital for the holistic 
development of rural areas of the country and for that purpose adequate budgetary 
allocation is necessary for sustainable momentum of the important schemes. The 
Committee hope that BE of Rs.184566.19 crore for 2024-25 which is 17.15% more 
than the BE of 2023-24 would be fully utilized for the rural development schemes as 
conceived by the Government in order to extend benefits to the targeted persons. 
    Reply of the Government 
2.2 PMAY-G: - The BE 2024-25 is Rs. 54500.14 crore, was proposed for 
construction of 40 lakh houses in FY 2024-25 in anticipation of an enhanced unit 
assistance of Rs. 2 lakhs in plain areas and Rs. 2.20 lakhs in IAP districts/Hilly/ 
North Eastern States and difficult areas along with the requirement of liability of 
interest repayment for NABARD loan for the year 2024-25 under PMAY-G.  
 
However, Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 09.08.2024 has approved the 
continuation of the PMAY-G for 5 more years to construct 2 crore additional houses 
with existing unit assistance of Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain areas and Rs. 1.30 lakh in 

 
 
27 
 
North Eastern Region (NER) States and Hill States. Accordingly, excess funds are 
surrendered at RE stage. 
 
Out of RE of 32,426.33 crore, expenditure of Rs. 25,719.26 crore has been 
reported under the scheme as on 27.02.2025. 
 
PMGSY: The allocation/release of funds to the States for implementation of PMGSY 
is made based on the fund release proposals received from the States/UTs and 
depends, inter-alia on works in hand, execution capacity of the States/UTs, and 
unspent funds available with the States/UTs. Quarterly and Monthly Action Plans are 
chalked out in advance after proper consultation with States/UTs and in pursuance 
of the guidelines of MoF. In addition, the States are regularly followed up for 
requirement of funds. Under PMGSY there is an unbroken chain of funds release 
and no work has been affected due to a shortage of funds. 
  
The revised estimate of PMGSY for FY 2024-25 is Rs.14,500 crore. This amount 
along with the corresponding State share would be enough to meet the expenditure 
on PMGSY works to be carried out by States/UTs during the FY 2024-25. 
 
 
DAY-NRLM: As far as DAY-NRLM is concerned, BE for the year 2024-25 has been 
increased to Rs.15047.00 Crore from the BE 2023-24 of Rs.14129.17 Crore. This 
Division is closely monitoring the expenditure during the current financial year. 
Annual Action Plans for the year 2024-2025 of all the States/UTs has been approved 
by this Ministry and quarter-wise physical targets to be achieved during the financial 
year 2024-2025 has also been finalized and being monitored. This quarter-wise 
physical targets set to be achieved will aid to booking of expenditure on time and 
claim further installment from Ministry.  
 
During the current financial year, the programme activities affected due to the 
General election during initial period. However, the programme activities have now 
picked up momentum in the States, hence, it is expected the entire amount of budget 
provision for the current year will be utilised.  
 
DDU-GKY Skills: The RE for DDU-GKY during 2023-24 was Rs. 383.71 crore. 
DDU-GKY is a demand driven scheme and due to higher demand of grants from 
States in FY 2024-25, hence, fund allocated for DDU-GKY for FY 2024-25 was 
increased to Rs.500 crore. 
 
NSAP: The total approved budget outlay of NSAP for five years (from 2021-22 to 
2025-26) i.e. up to 15th Finance Commission cycle is Rs. 47,808.31 crore. The 
budget allocation for 2023-24 was Rs. 9636.31 crore at BE stage which was kept at 
Rs. 9652.00 crore at RE stage in which an amount was Rs. 9491.11 was released till 
31.03.2024. The Budget allocation for 2024-25 is Rs. 9652.00 crore and an amount 
of Rs.6536.81 crore has been released till 08.01.2025 and as per the trend it is 
expected to utilize the allocated budget by March, 2025. 
 
DISHA: The primarily objective of the District Development Coordination and 
Monitoring Committees (DISHA) is to monitor the implementation of the 
programmes/Schemes of Central Government. According to Para 6 of the DISHA 

 
 
28 
 
guidelines, the State-Level DISHA Committee must hold meetings at least once 
every six months, while the District-Level DISHA Committee must hold meetings at 
least once per quarter. Funds are released for the reimbursement of amounts 
claimed by the State Government and DRDA or Zila Panchayat as per Para 8 and 
Para 9 of the guidelines for State-Level and District-Level DISHA Committees 
respectively, based on actual expenditures incurred, subject to an overall ceiling of 
Rs. 3.0 lakh and Rs. 2.0 lakh per meeting, respectively. 
  
Further, the under-utilization of funds in DISHA Division is primarily due to non-
submission of bills with all relevant documents by NISG, delayed submission of bills 
for DISHA meetings by States/UTs, lower number of meetings conducted by 
State/UTs than required and a shift in the payment structure for the salaries of 
DISHA PMU personnel. Previously, salaries of DISHA PMU personnel were made to 
the National Institute for Smart Governance (NISG) under Budget Head 2515-00-
800-25-04-28 by the DISHA Division. However, following the termination of the 
contract with NISG, w.e.f. 31.03.2024, the responsibility for managing the salary 
component of the DISHA PMU has been transferred to the IT Division under the 
same Major Head, Management Support to Rural Development Programme 
(MSRDP).  
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
2.3 The presence of unspent balances in almost all the schemes of the DoRD is 
one of the major concerns of the Committee. The Committee note with concern that 
Rs.6,000.35 crores in MGNREGA (as on 23.10.2024), Rs.3,346.86 crores in PMGSY 
(as on 24.10.2024), Rs. 3,062.12 crores in NRLM (as on 30.09.2024), Rs. 1,469.91 
crores in DDU-GKY (as on 18.10.2024), Rs. 7,500.34 crores in PMAY-G (as on 
23.10.2024) and Rs. 4,857.26 crores in NSAP (as on 21.10.2024) lie unspent. The 
Committee, although note the various constraints being faced and measures 
adopted by the DoRD in tackling and mitigating the issue of unspent balances are 
still in a quandary on the meagre increase in fund allocation for the Department on 
one hand, existing pendencies in schemes like MGNREGA as reflected through 
wage and material component liabilities or delay in installment releases in PMAY-G 
on the other hand underutilization of allocated funds. The Committee opine that 
allowing unspent funds allocated for various schemes despite the invariable 
constraints faced by the Department is not going to help in the development of rural 
poor people as envisaged by the Government. The Committee therefore strongly 
recommend the DoRD to take appropriate and effective steps so that unspent 
balances do not keep piling up regularly for various schemes and it should gear up 
its mechanism for proper and effective implementation of all the development 

 
 
29 
 
schemes/programmes for the welfare of poor and marginalized section of the rural 
populace across the country. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.4 MGNREGA: Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is a demand-driven wage employment 
Scheme  .Funds release to the States/UTs is a continuous process depending upon 
the demand on the ground  .Funds released towards Material & Admin component of 
the programme particularly in the terminal month of the financial year becomes 
unspent balance in some States, due to delayed availability of funds to the State 
Govt  .through RBI, subsequent delay in release by State Finance Department to 
Bank Account of Implementing Agency at State, some technical issues come up 
during the fund transfer order generation at field or administrative issues at field .  
The ministry adjusts such unspent balance, if any, at the time of subsequent 
releases in the beginning of next financial year  .Ministry ensures the liquidation of 
last release prior to the subsequent release . 
 
 From the FY 2022 -23, if the unspent balance is more than 25  %of the total of 
Central release and State share, in such a situation, no further Central funds are 
being released to the State/UTs. Further, Ministry of Finance has introduced SNA 
SPARSH mechanism for the release of Material/Admin components of Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS to various States/UTs, which will further improve the situation in the 
following financial years. 
PMAY-G: Liquidation of Unspent balance has an indirect impact in progress of the 
scheme. To minimize the Unspent Balances & ensuring better implementation of the 
scheme, the following steps are being taken by this Ministry 
i. Micro monitoring of house sanction and completion using latest IT tools and 
technologies.  
ii. Continuous review at the levels of Secretary/ Deputy Director General level. 
iii. Focus on completion of those houses where 3rd or 2nd installment of funds 
has been released  
iv. Separate review of States with high target, poor performing States and 
delayed houses 
v. Timely release of funds as per requirements of States/UTs. 
vi. The Aadhaar Based Payment System (ABPS) has been integrated with 
PFMS by linking the beneficiaries’ Aadhaar numbers with their bank accounts 
and other financial details in the PFMS database. This allows for a seamless 
flow of funds from the government to the beneficiaries through ABPS. 
 
 

 
 
30 
 
PMGSY: PMGSY is not a DBT module scheme. Under PMGSY, funds are released 
to States as an advance against the Value of Projects (VoP) sanctioned. As such 
some amount of funds will always remain with the States. However, to avoid 
parking of funds, further funds are released to states only when they spend 75% of 
the previously released funds. The same is tracked through PFMS and fully 
ensured.  Further, the Ministry of Finance has issued fresh guidelines for releasing 
the funds against expenditure to be called "Just in Time" release through SNA-
SPARSH.  Once this is fully implemented, the funds will be released against the 
expenditure and no amount will be available in the bank account of the State/UT. At 
the beginning of the year, a Mother Sanction will be issued indicating the drawing 
limit of each state/UT which can be revised upward and downward depending upon 
the funds flow. The actual release will take place against the bills pushed on PFMS 
by the State Finance MIS portal called “Integrated Financial Management and 
Information System (IFMIS).  In this scenario, no unspent balance will be available 
with states. Upon on-boarding on SNA-SPARSH, the unspent balance available in 
the account of the state nodal account will have to be returned in the Consolidated 
Funds of India/State/UTs in the proportion of existing funding pattern based on the 
pre-defined Standard Operating Procedure. Some States like Assam, Rajasthan, 
and Chhattisgarh have already on-boarded and others will also follow suit very soon. 
DAY-NRLM: With the implementation of guidelines on "Procedure for Release of 
funds under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and monitoring utilization of 
the funds released" by Ministry of Finance, Government of India (Gol), each 
installment is now limited to 25% of the allocation and proposal for next installment 
can be raised only on spending of 75% of the available funds including State Share. 
In case State share is not released, proposal for next installment cannot be 
processed. All the sub-schemes of DAY-NRLM have been on-boarded at PFMS 
platform in all states and all the expenditures is being done through PFMS. This 
enhances transparency in transfer of fund and unspent balances at all levels. 
In addition to the above, this Division rolled out a new electronic fund management 
system namely e-FMAS (e-Financial Management and Accounting System) through 
which expenditure position of the State can be monitored daily. It will help this 
Division to monitor State-wise expenditure and unspent balance position more 
vigilantly and guide lagging States for timely utilization of funds. 
Further, to control the unspent balance, Finance Review Meetings are held with 
States to review the progress of the expenditure and resolve any impediments in 
smooth flow of funds and pace of expenditure. Performance Review Meetings with 
the States are also held regularly at highest level under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (RD) which are attended by the Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal 
Secretaries of all States. 
It is also pertinent to mention that this Division is also in process to implement SNA-
SPARSH model in the States to comply the principle of ‘just-in-time’ release. Once, 

 
 
31 
 
the implementation of SNA-SPARSH completed with all the States, there may not be 
any unspent balances with the States. 
DDU-GKY Skills: DDU-GKY has 3-year Action Plan as the minimum project 
duration. Funds are not released annually but only when there is a demand for the 
same.  
  
Unspent Balances include State Share, Interest earned and miscellaneous receipts 
under the scheme.  
  
The unspent balance lying with the States/UTs under DDU-GKY as on 15.02.2025 
was Rs.1313.43 crores as compared to Rs.1469.91 crores in DDU-GKY as on 
18.10.2024 indicating reduction in unspent balances. 
     
However, to reduce the float following action have been taken: 
 Detailed forecasting of funds requirement 
 75% expenditure before release of next tranche 
 Further under DDUGKY, Implementation of SNA-SPARSH is under 
process which will resolve this issue to a great extent. 
   
Monthly review of balances at State level. 
NSAP: The actual expenditure under BE 2024-25 of NSAP schemes as on 
08.01.2025 is Rs. 6536.81 crore and as per the trend of expenditure the balance 
unspent amount of Rs. 3115.19 is expected to be utilized by March, 2025. The 
unspent balance reported for NSAP in the current year is mostly the recent releases 
made to the States/UTs. As regards unspent funds with States/ UTs, there is an 
inbuilt mechanism of monitoring unspent balances with States/UTs in NSAP 
guidelines where the unspent balance is reduced from the first installment to be 
released to States/UTs.  Now, since grants are released in four tranches of 25% 
each on reporting expenditure of 75% of earlier released funds instead of two 
installments of 50% each on reporting 60% expenditure, the issue of parking of funds 
has been mitigated.  Besides, since pension is released by most of the States/UTs 
on monthly basis, the possibility of building up of unspent balance with States/UTs 
has significantly reduced. 
DISHA: The actual expenditure under DISHA as on 13.02.2025 is Rs.0.71 crore 
which is 7.47% of RE (Rs.9.50 crore). The variations of BE/RE and actual 
expenditure are primarily due to delayed submission of bills for DISHA meetings by 
States/UTs and lower number of meetings conducted by State/UTs than required.  In 
addition, the payment for the salaries of DISHA PMU personnel were previously 
made to National Institute for Smart Governance (NISG) by DISHA Division. 
However, following the termination of contract on 31.03.2024 with NISG, the salaries 
of DIHSA PMU personnel are made by IT Division. 

 
 
32 
 
NIRD&PR:  
Release of grant to SIRDs/ETCs: It is mentioned that fund is released to the 
SIRDs/ETCs under the scheme MSRDP and SDPP as per the demand received 
from them. Till FY 2023-24 funds were released to the SIRDs/ETCs based on 
individual proposals received from SIRDs/ETCs, however from FY 2024-25 onwards 
a training portal has been developed to receive the composite proposal from 
SIRDs/ETCs i.e. Single proposal from one state.  Due to change in the pattern of 
release of grants, funds could not be released in the first two quarters of the FY 
2024-25. However, efforts are being made to release funds in the remaining 
quarters. From FY 2025-26 onwards, funds will be released in timely manner as a 
result of the development of training portal. 
Release of grant to NIRD&PR: Grant is released to NIRD&PR under two heads i.e. 
General and Salary. Grant is released as per the requirement/demand received from 
the institute. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
2.5 The Committee note that one of the issues associated with the rural 
connectivity projects through linkage of habitations with roads came to the fore was 
that of roads reaching the hinterland quite far away from the actual population 
density. The Committee further note that in various cases, the roads touch the 
periphery of villages and get counted in the achievement of target for connecting 
habitations but in actual the habitation residing in majority lies at least 2-3 km inside 
the periphery. This defeats the purpose behind habitation linkage and many needy 
villages especially, Majras/Tolas are not getting the benefit of connectivity. The 
Committee, therefore, in view of this practical need recommend the DoRD to review 
the policy of road connectivity more accurately and create means so that the roads 
constructed under PMGSY actually reach the habitation and are not merely touching 
the outskirts of villages. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.6 Under the newly launched PMGSY-IV, provision has been made that while 
connecting a habitation, the nearby government educational and health 
institutions, market and growth centres should be connected as far as feasible 
with the all-weather road for the benefit of the rural masses. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 

 
 
33 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
2.7 Self-Help Groups (SHGs) under the scheme of DAY-NRLM are a boon to the 
rural women who work together for means of livelihoods. However, the Committee 
note that the women of SHGs may be better served in terms of generating revenue 
for their livelihoods if products prepared by them like dairy products, agriculture, 
handicrafts etc. have a proper platform for their marketing and income generation. 
Various efforts like organisation of Saras Fairs, Saras Gallery and tie-ups with 
national ecommerce platforms like Amazon, Flipkart, Meesho and JioMart have been 
taken for marketing of the SHG products. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the status of such efforts along with the revenue generated by the SGHs.  
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The Ministry of Rural Development has undertaken various steps for the 
enabling marketing access for SHG products. These initiatives include providing 
multichannel market access to SHG’s i.e.:  
 National Saras Mela organised in FY 2024-25 
  
Saras Melas Sales 
Saras Mela Gurugram 12,30,25,216 
Saras Mela IITF, New Delhi 8,42,11,743 
Saras Food Festival, New Delhi 2,64,88,171 
  
ii. A retail store – Saras Aajeevika Gallery is set up in Central Delhi for sale of 
curated products of women SHG. The details are as under: 
  
Saras Gallery 
Particulars Sales (in Cr) from inception (December 2021) 
till 31 December 2024 
Order value of the 
products sold (in Cr)  5.54 
  
iii. Dedicated eCommerce platform eSARAS for selling of curated SHG 
products have been made available on Google Play and App Store. The 
details are as under: 
  
Particulars Sales (in Lakhs) from inception (June 
2022 till 31 December 2024 

 
 
34 
 
eSARAS Platform 16.73 
Other platforms (GeM, 
Amazon, Flipkart, Meesho 
& JioMart) 
19.35 
  
  
iv. eSARAS - ONDC Compliant 
eSARAS was made Seller Network Participant on ONDC. Curated products 
of women SHGs are now available on 11 Apps of ONDC network i.e. Paytm, 
Mystore, Craftsvilla, Jagran, Snapdeal, Novopay, Easypay, Gonuclei, 
Rubaru, Mappls, Himira. As on date 75 orders have been received through 
ONDC platform.  
  
v. Tie-ups/ partnership with other eCommerce players i.e. GeM, ONDC, 
Amazon, Flipkart, Meesho and JioMart have been established. The details are 
as under: - 
 
 
 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
2.9 Time and again, the Committee have taken note of the casual conduct of 
District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA) Meetings. 
The sole aim of such meetings is overseeing the effective utilisation of Government 
money for the welfare of the commons masses and as such these meetings assume 
paramount importance and a tool of great value in the implementation of various 
rural schemes. However, the purpose for holding such Meetings is defeated with the 
non-appearance of responsible Officials at the helm of affairs, in lieu thereof, junior 
officers with no knowledge of the projects attending such DISHA meetings has 
become the order of the day. As on 21st October, 2024, only 135 meetings at District 
Level are conducted while no meetings at the State level have been conducted for 
  
Sellers 
On-boarded 
No. of 
products on-
boarded 
No. of 
Orders 
Total Sales since 
inception 
Amazon 138  3,456 10,401 13,59,214 
Flipkart 145  2,803 5,192 14,42,016 
Meesho 84  300 85 33,708 
GeM  130 1,124 90 4,95,600 
JioMart 31  1,121 101 35,518 

 
 
35 
 
the year 2024-25. The Committee therefore, implore upon DoRD to take serious note 
of this approach of District Development and Monitoring officials in the matter and 
ensure that the Meetings of DISHA Committees are held regularly as per the 
guidelines and also sufficient number of senior level representatives from the 
concerned Department is present there in these committees. 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 Recognizing the critical importance of DISHA, this Ministry is persistently 
working to ensure that these meetings are convened on regular basis. All the 
States/UTs have been requested to take necessary actions and to instruct the 
relevant Member Secretaries to ensure timely convening of the District Level DISHA 
meetings.  A Help Desk has also been established in the Ministry that persistently 
follows up the matter with respective District Administrations about overdue DISHA 
meetings through mails, message services and phone calls. As a result, the 
frequency of DISHA meetings has improved. During 2024-25 total of 462 meeting 
held at District Level as on 12/02/2025. 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
2.11 With a view of developing ‘Adarsh Grams’ which would serve as models for 
other villages to follow, the Members of Parliament were directly involved in Saansad 
Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) that was launched on 11 October 2014. Noseparate 
funds were allocated for SAGY, instead a new approach was mooted under which 
the on-going development schemes would be implemented on priority basis, through 
convergence, in the adopted villages under SAGY by the local MPs. However, the 
Committee are concerned to witness the sorry state of affairs being faced by the 
MPs who have adopted the villages under SAGY but are not able to see any 
prioritized implementation of development schemes in the concerned villages. For 
some reason or other, the real intent and efforts of the MPs are not translated into a 
holistic development of the villages under SAGY. Primarily, there is an urgent need 
to carry out convergence/implementation of Schemes at ground level on priority 
basis. The nodal agencies not only need to be adequately sensitized for providing 
desired impetus to the development of SAGY villages. Therefore, echoing the 
sentiments of MPs, the Committee recommend the DoRD to ensure priority-based 
implementation of Rural Development Schemes in the SAGY villages effectively. 
 

 
 
36 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 SAGY is a 100% convergence-based scheme without allocation of any funds 
for developmental projects undertaken under the scheme. Resources for SAGY 
projects are mobilized from the funds available under Central & State schemes, CSR 
funds and Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) fund 
& Member of Legislative Assembly Development Scheme (MLALAD) Fund. The 
Ministry, however, provides administrative support to States/UTs for monitoring the 
implementation process of SAGY under “Management Support for Rural 
Development Programme” (MSRDP). For smooth convergence of Central & State 
Schemes following actions were taken:   
i. The Ministry has brought out a compilation of 127 Central Sector and 
Centrally Sponsored and 1806 State Schemes for convergence under SAGY. This 
document serves as a ready reckoner especially for the Members of Parliament, 
District and Village level officials about the different schemes for possible 
convergence at the GP level. This document is available on SAGY website 
(saanjhi.gov.in) and is updated periodically. 
ii. 26 Schemes of 17 Ministries of Government of India have been amended / 
appropriate advisories have been issued to accord priority to SAGY in respective 
schemes. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
2.13 The Committee are of the view that the grass-root experience of MPs can be 
much better utilized in the implementation of the Schemes, if they are actively 
involved in the consultative capacity. Being the Elected Representatives, the Hon’ble 
MPs represent the sentiments and ethos of local population and their grass-root 
experience can be used in an extremely efficient manner in the implementation of 
various schemes of the DoRD. The Committee also feel that utilising the wealth of 
local knowledge in various aspect of the different schemes would help in 
strengthening and enriching the policy formulations and implementation of the 
schemes. The Committee desire that inspecting teams, DPR preparation teams, etc. 
should invariably avail the benefits of the inputs from the local MPs to have a real 
picture of the issues concerning that locality. In view of such scenario, the 
Committee recommend the DoRD to review its consultative mechanisms in such a 

 
 
37 
 
way that MPs are mandatorily kept in the loop of advisory set-ups for the effective 
implementation of the schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 MGNREGA: The Ministry of Rural Development extends its gratitude to the 
Standing Committee for their invaluable guidance and constructive feedback on the 
consultative mechanism under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS). The recommendations of the 
Standing Committee have been noted. 
 
PMAY-G: Under the PMAY-G, the role of the Members of Parliament (MPs) is 
already defined in the existing Framework For Implementation (FFI) of the scheme. 
The FFI of the PMAY-G provides important role in the implementation and 
monitoring of the scheme for the MPs. According to the provisions, the district 
DISHA committee headed by the MP will also monitor the progress and 
implementation of PMAY-G. The State Governments/ UT Administration are required 
to extend all support to these committees in monitoring implementation of PMAY-G. 
For some major activities of the PMAY-G such as workshops organised to 
sensitise the beneficiaries, ‘GrihPravesh’ programs, organised on Awaas Diwas of 
PMAY-G, the MPs are invited to attend the functions. The Ministry has time and 
again reiterated the provisions of the scheme guidelines related to the role of the 
MPs, to the States/UTs. 
 
PMGSY: The PMGSY has inbuilt provisions for consultations with the Public 
representatives and an advisory has been issued time and again to the State 
Governments/UTs to meet the provisions of the programme guidelines. Special 
provisions have been made in the newly launched programme guidelines of 
PMGSY-IV for consultation with the Public representative before the preparation of 
DPRs. In the meeting held with States and in the Workshops held in various 
locations for rolling out of PMGSY-IV, this issue has been explained in detail to State 
functionaries.       
 
DAY-NRLM: The Standing Committee’s recommendation on the involvement of 
Members of Parliament (MPs) in the consultative processes for the implementation 
of schemes is appreciable.  
 
While the grassroots experience and local knowledge that MPs bring to the table is 
significant, the Ministry of Rural Development has established structured and robust 
consultative mechanisms for the implementation of the National Rural Livelihoods 
Mission (NRLM) and other schemes. These mechanisms are designed to ensure 
that the schemes are implemented efficiently, with inputs from relevant stakeholders 
such as state and district officials, field experts, and technical support agencies, and 
other voluntary organizations.  
The DAY-NRLM scheme is effectively implemented through the State Rural 
Livelihoods Missions (SRLMs), which are responsible for the on-ground execution 
and monitoring of activities. The SRLMs work closely with local institutions and 
communities, ensuring that the program is tailored to the unique needs of each area. 

 
 
38 
 
Hon’ble MPs are actively engaged through other forms of communication, which 
allows their feedback to be considered via appropriate channels. 
DDU-GKY Skills: The Scheme of Rural Skills Division namely Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) and Rural Self Employment 
Institutes (RSETI) both are covered under DISHA and the same is being monitored 
at District level by Hon’ble Member of Parliament. 
 
Regular inspection teams go as National Level Monitors (NLM) and for Common 
Review Mission (CRM) on periodic basis and coordinating division may take suitable 
action regarding Local MPs of the visit, as per availability and requirement. 
 
NSAP: NSAP provides basic level financial assistance to most vulnerable category 
of citizens identified by States/UTs and assistance under the scheme is disbursed 
through the State Governments/UT Administrations. Review of implementation as 
prescribed in terms of NSAP Guidelines is done through Nodal Officers’ Meeting, 
Periodic Performance Review Committee (PRC) Meetings, National Level Monitors 
(NLMs), etc., NSAP Guidelines also provides for constitution of State Level 
Committee’s for monitoring & evaluation of NSAP Schemes. States/UTs are advised 
in this regard from time to time. 
 
In addition, monitoring of implementation of NSAP is also done by DISHA (District 
Development Coordination & Monitoring) Committees, which have been functioning 
at State Level (State Level DISHA Committee), and District Level (District Level 
DISHA Committee). DISHA seeks to achieve this by facilitating a quarterly review of 
all development activity at the district level. Senior most Member of Parliament (Lok 
Sabha) elected from the district and nominated by the Ministry of Rural Development 
chairs DISHA Committee. 
 
DISHA: District Level DISHA Committees have been re-constituted for 785 districts 
recently under the chairmanship of Hon’ble Member of Parliament with a view to fulfil 
the objective of ensuring better coordination among all the elected representatives in 
Parliament, State Legislatures and Local Governments (Panchayati Raj Institutions, 
Municipal Bodies), in monitoring the progress of major projects aimed at socio-
economic transformation at the district level. Through this unique dispensation, inter 
alia, following are the key objectives envisaged to be achieved: 
 Intensively monitor identified key central sector programmes and schemes. 
 To oversee that identified priorities get needed focus. 
 Ensure adherence to the guidelines associated with the Programme/Scheme. 
 Facilitate coordinated solution to remove implementation constraints.  
 Identify gaps and suggest mid-course correction. 
 Ensure timeliness in delivery of social sector initiatives aimed at universal 
coverage. 
The Guidelines of District Level DISHA Committee provides for organization of 
DISHA meetings at least once in every Quarter. Department actively pursue with the 
State Governments and district administrations to convene meetings.  
  

 
 
39 
 
Similarly, State Development Coordination and Monitoring Committees also have 
been constituted under the chairpersonship of Chief Minister to attend to the matters 
which need to be resolved at the highest level in the State. Recently Ministry of Rural 
Development has nominated 186 Hon’ble Members of Parliament (127 from Lok 
Sabha and 59 from Rajya Sabha) as member for 36 State level DISHA Committees. 
The Secretary, Department of Rural Development in the State/UT is designated as 
Member Secretary of the Committee. As per DISHA guidelines, meetings of the 
State Level DISHA Committees should be held at least once every six months. 
  
The Schemes/ Programme under implementation of Department of Rural 
Development are covered under above said State/ District Development 
Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA).  
 
SAGY: It has been desired by committee that MPs are mandatorily kept in the 
loop of advisory set-ups for the effective implementation of the schemes. As 
regard, SAGY is concerned, the inputs may be as follows: 
  
(i)  Selection of SAGY GPs: 
  
The MP would be free to identify a suitable Gram Panchayat for being developed as 
Adarsh Gram, other than his/her own village or that of his/her spouse.  Primarily, the 
goal was to develop three Adarsh Grams by March 2019 and five such Adarsh 
Grams (one per year) by 2024.  The identification of Gram Panchayats under SAGY 
by the Hon’ble MPs was monitored phase-wise in 8 phases up to 2023-24. Now the 
selection of new GPs under SAGY has already completed on 31st March, 2024. 
However, the implementation of VDPs of the existing GPs identified by Hon’ble MPs 
under SAGY till March 31, 2024, is in progress. 
  
(ii)  Preparation of Village Development Plan (VDP) of SAGY:     
  
The Gram Panchayats adopted under SAGY through a participatory process under 
the guidance of Hon’ble Members of Parliament prepare Village Development Plans 
(VDP) containing prioritised time-bound activities to achieve holistic progress of the 
village through convergence of resources.  
                    (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
  

 
 
40 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Department of Rural Development O.M. No. G-20011/3/2021-B&A dated 07.06.2023) 
 
  

 
 
41 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
4.1 An oft repeated concern of the Committee pertaining with MGNREGA has 
been that of increase in wage rate. Despite several recommendations in this regard, 
there has been no noticeable change in the stance of DoRD. While DoRD has 
always been sending stereotype response regarding revision of wages every 
financial year, but realistically, the quantum of revision, in all earnest, merits a relook. 
Rising inflation and cost of living, be it is urban or rural setting, has risen manifold 
and is evident to all. Even at this moment, going by the notified wage rates of 
MGNREGA, per day wage rate of around Rs. 200/- in many States defies any logic 
when the same State has much higher labour rates. It becomes inexplicable as to 
why the wages under MGNREGA still can’t be linked to a suitable index 
commensurate with the existing inflation. Aware of the demand of increase in wages 
under MGNREGA from various quarters, the Committee urge DoRD unequivocally to 
revisit their stand and devise a mechanism for raising the wages under MGNREGA. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 “As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the Central Government may by 
notification, specify the wage rate for its beneficiaries. Further, section 6 (2) of the 
Act, provides that until such time a wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in 
respect of any area in a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State Government 
under section 3 of the Minimum wages Act, 1948 for Agricultural Labourers shall be 
considered as the wage rate applicable to that area. Accordingly, as per provision of 
Section 6(2) of the Act, from the inception of the scheme till the financial year 2010-
11, the wage rate in Mahatma Gandhi NREGA was determined on the basis of the 
minimum wage set by the respective State Governments. However, from the 
financial year 2011-12, the Government of India started determining the wage rates 
using the Consumer Price Index for agricultural labour (CPI-AL).  
   
  To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers against inflation, the Ministry 
of Rural Development revises the wage rate every financial year, based on change 
in Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The index is different for 
different States/UTs as notified by Labour Bureau Shimla. If the calculated wage rate 
of any State/UT is coming lower than the wage rate of previous year, it is being 

 
 
42 
 
protected by maintaining the previous year's wage rate. The wage rate is made 
applicable from 1st April of each financial year.  The overall % increase in wage rate 
for FY 2024-25 from the FY 2023-24 is about 7 %.  
 
However, each State/UT can provide wages over and above the wage rate notified 
by the Central Government.” 
 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
4.3 One of the main areas of concern that has always attracted the attention of 
the Committee is that of the existing disparity between the wage rate assured under 
MGNREGA in different States/UTs. It is still beyond comprehension as to how is it 
possible that a single scheme having the provision of giving hundred days of 
guaranteed work to poor people in rural areas can have different yard- stick when it 
comes to the payment of wages across the length and breadth of the country. The 
Committee further observe that as per clause (d) of Article 39 of the Constitution 
directing certain principles of Policy to be followed by the State provides that there is 
a provision of equal pay for equal work for both man and woman. Hence under the 
directive there cannot be different wages for different States under the MGNERGA. 
In view of Article 39 of the Constitution and to have parity in wages, the Committee 
strongly recommend that MGNREGA beneficiaries must be paid wages without any 
disparity in order to bring equality in wages under MGNREGA across all States/UTs 
urgently. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4  “As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the Central Government may by 
notification, specify the wage rate for its beneficiaries. Further, section 6 (2) of the 
Act, provides that until such time a wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in 
respect of any area in a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State Government 
under section 3 of the Minimum wages Act, 1948 for Agricultural Labourers shall be 
considered as the wage rate applicable to that area. Accordingly, as per provision of 
Section 6(2) of the Act, from the inception of the scheme till the financial year 2010-
11, the wage rate in Mahatma Gandhi NREGA was determined on the basis of the 
minimum wage set by the respective State Governments. However, from the 

 
 
43 
 
financial year 2011-12, the Government of India started determining the wage rates 
using the Consumer Price Index for agricultural labour (CPI-AL).  
  
  To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers against inflation, the Ministry 
of Rural Development revises the wage rate every financial year, based on change 
in Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The index is different for 
different States/UTs as notified by Labour Bureau Shimla. If the calculated wage rate 
of any State/UT is coming lower than the wage rate of previous year, it is being 
protected by maintaining the previous year's wage rate. The wage rate is made 
applicable from 1st April of each financial year.  The overall % increase in wage rate 
for FY 2024-25 from the FY 2023-24 is about 7 %.  
 
However, each State/UT can provide wages over and above the wage rate notified 
by the Central Government.” 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
4.5 A demand driven scheme such as MGNREGA having a statutory status and 
aimed at securing some sort of livelihood for the destitute and marginalized having 
no other ‘fall back options’ is defeated in its intent in the wake of pendency of 
payment of Rs.7,056.32 crores (as on 23.10.2024) against the material component. 
While the pending wages are confined to a few States, the material share is spread 
across the States. The Committee feel that both the aspect of MGNREGA, i.e. a 
demand driven nature of the scheme and creation of assets under the scheme are 
severely hampered through such pendencies. Any administrative or procedural lapse 
causing delays in wage payments and material fund release in the context of a 
scheme of such enormous proportion like MGNREGA which caters to the nook and 
corners of the country and has millions of beneficiaries enrolled as job card holders 
would only deter the needy person from availing the benefits of the scheme. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend DoRD to spruce up its financial management 
of the scheme and tighten their grip on the fallacies that may have crept in the 
implementation of MGNREGA at ground level for the earliest eradication of 
pendencies in wages and material components. 
 

 
 
44 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 “Under Mahatma Gandhi Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, wage payments are 
directly credited by the Central Government to the account of beneficiaries through 
the Direct Benefit Transfer protocol.  
 
With the regard of material, States/UTs furnish funds release proposals to 
Government of India. The Ministry releases funds periodically in two tranches with 
each tranche consisting of one or more installments, keeping in view the “agreed to” 
Labour Budget, demand for works, opening balance, pace of utilization of funds, 
pending liabilities, overall performance and subject to submission of relevant 
documents by the States/UTs. 
 
Fund release to the States/UTs is a continuous process and Central Government is 
committed in making funds available to States/UTs for the implementation of the 
Scheme as per the demand for work on the ground. This Ministry regularly interacts 
and follows up with States/UTs Government regarding timely submission of 
prescribed documents in order to avoid delay in release of funds for the 
implementation of scheme. 
 
Periodic communications based on expenditure projections have been made to the 
Ministry of Finance for making sufficient provisions under revised estimates 2024-25 
and budget estimates 2025-26.” 
 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
4.7 The Committee view the demand for increase in number of days from 100 to 
150 not only beneficial for the needy but also for the aim of the Scheme regarding 
creation of durable assets as it would provide continuity of same experienced 
workforce on a project for a longer time. Although the State Governments may make 
provisions for additional days, still the Committee are of the firm view that the 
mandatory increase in number of guaranteed days should be brought about by the 
DoRD by moving an amendment in the Act in order to make it applicable for the 
entire country, so that the demand of needy beneficiaries may not hinge upon the will 
of the State Governments. Therefore, the Committee recommend for increase in 
number of days of work sought under MGNREGA from 100 to 150 days and implore 

 
 
45 
 
upon DoRD to take up the matter in right earnest and come out with some concrete 
measures in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
4.8 The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act )Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA(, 2005, is an Act to provide for the enhancement of livelihood 
security of the households in rural areas of the country by providing at least one 
hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every 
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
  
      The Ministry mandates the provision of additional 50 days of wage employment  
)beyond the stipulated 100 days  (to every Scheduled Tribe Household in a forest 
area, provided that these households have no other private property except for the 
land rights provided under the Forest Rights Act )FRA(, 2006 . 
  
In addition to this, there is a provision for up to additional 50 days of wage 
employment in a financial year in drought /natural calamity affected notified rural 
areas  . 
  
As per Section 3 )4  (of the Act, the State Governments may make provision 
for providing additional days of employment beyond the period guaranteed under the 
Act from their own funds . 
 
 Details of National average days of employment provided per households 
under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in the last five financial years 2019 -20, 2020 -21, 
2021 -22, 2022 -23 2023 -24 are given below . 
  
Financial Year 2023 -24  2022 -23 2021 -22 2020 -21 2019 -20 
National average days of 
employment availed per 
households 
52.08 47.83 50.07 51.52 48.4 
  
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, the average days of employment per 
household in each financial year in the last five financial years has remained around 
50 days  .Therefore, the Ministry is emphasizing generating awareness about the 
provisions of the Scheme and to provide adequate employment opportunities to rural 
households under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS based on the demand from the ground . 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

 
 
46 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
4.9 The documents of DoRD reveal that out of the total 5,73,311 landless 
beneficiaries identified under PMAY-G so far 3,60,837 (59%) beneficiaries have 
been provided land for the construction of houses. The Committee find that there are 
still 2,12,474 beneficiaries remaining to get land/assistance from the State/UT to 
construct their house under PMAY-G. Therefore, the issue of landlessness is 
affecting the progress of PMAY-G and may also cause delay in the completion of 
target. In this context, the Committee recommend DoRD that in order to ensure land 
to landless people for their own house, a policy be framed in public interest within a 
specified period so that land must be allotted to identified persons to expedite the 
timely construction of houses in their respective States under PMAY-G. 
Reply of the Government 
 4.10 “The Ministry has been actively pursuing this matter with the States/UTs for 
providing land to remaining landless beneficiaries. A module for capturing details of 
landless beneficiaries has been developed on the AwaasSoft. Since the land is a 
State subject, the Ministry is not in a position to frame a policy on the matter. 
However, the Ministry during FY 2021-22 has already requested the States/UTs for 
constituting a Task force under the chairpersonship of the Chief Secretary concerned 
with the Secretary (Revenue) and the Secretary, in-charge of Department dealing 
with the PMAY-G. The Ministry in next phase of the PMAY-G (2024-29) would further 
monitor the provision of land to all landless beneficiaries.” 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
4.11 The Committee observe that as against the PMAY- (G) initial target of 2.95 
crore houses to be constructed by March, 2025, 2.66 crore houses were constructed 
as on 22.10.2024 and 29 lakh houses are yet to be completed. An additional target 
of construction of 2 crore houses in next 5 FYs i.e. 2024-2029 has been approved by 
the Government. In light of this, the Committee feel that with proper synergy between 
different agencies and stakeholders including availability of skilled manpower and 
material, the target set as well as the intended objective could be achieved. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend the DoRD to urge the agencies involved to 
explore all means in order to complete the construction of houses within the target 
fixed by the Government. 

 
 
47 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.12 “The Ministry had allocated target of 2.95 crore houses to the States/UTs 
which were to be completed by March, 2024. The Union Cabinet in its meeting held 
on 09.08.2024 has approved the continuation of the scheme beyond March, 2024 for 
5 more years till March, 2029 for completion of 2 crore additional houses. The 
houses targeted for completion till 31.03.2024 of the previous phase are also to be 
completed by March, 2025 as per the Union Cabinet’s approval. 
  
It is informed that as on 27.02.2025, 1st installment of assistance has been released 
for 2.82 crore beneficiaries and 2.69 crore houses are completed and ~26 lakh 
houses are yet to be completed. These incomplete houses include ~12 lakh houses 
which are delayed i.e. not completed even after 12 months have passed from date of 
release of first installment of assistance. An exercise was conducted with the 
States/UTs to identify the reasons for delay in completion of these houses and it was 
observed that issues such as landlessness, unwilling beneficiary, misuse of funds by 
the beneficiary, death of beneficiary without a legal heir, permanent migration, etc. 
are some of the major reasons for non-completion of the delayed houses. 
  
In view of the above, the Ministry has requested the States/UTs to mark the delayed 
houses on the AwaasSoft MIS of the PMAY-G in 3 categories viz. (a) Houses which 
can be completed; (b) Houses which cannot be completed and recovery of funds is 
possible; (c) Houses which cannot be completed and recovery of funds is also not 
possible. 
  
Further, the State Level Committee constituted under the chairpersonship of the 
Chief Secretary of the State/UT has been empowered to take decisions in respect of 
the incomplete delayed houses. This Committee has been empowered to give 
recommendations to write off the houses which can never be completed and funds/ 
assistance cannot be recovered. The Ministry is continuously following up with the 
States/UTs for completion of the incomplete delayed houses within the set 
deadlines. 
  
The Ministry is regularly following up with the States/UTs to ensure completion of all 
pending houses within stipulated timelines.” 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 

 
 
48 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
4.13 The Committee note that the deadline of PMAY-G has been extended to 
March, 2025 with the target of 2.95 crore houses. An additional target of construction 
of 2 crore more houses in next 5 FYs i.e. 2024-2029 has been also approved by the 
Government. All necessary formalities also reportedly seem to have been completed 
to ensure that the list of beneficiaries are updated. The per unit assistance under 
PMAY-G for plain areas is Rs. 1.2 lakh and for hilly areas is Rs. 1.3 lakh which has 
remained static for a considerable period of time. With rising inflation having 
detrimental effect on the cost factor associated with the raw material, transportation 
cost, labours cost etc., constructing a new house of the requisite area under PMAY-
G for the poor and needy beneficiary with such assistance amount seem to be an 
arduous task. The vision “Housing for All” may not achieve its envisaged target until 
and unless the beneficiaries are provided with proper ‘hand-holding’ in terms of 
financial assistance of right value and at right juncture. Moreover, there are 
instances wherein houses remain incomplete for want of finance and thereby 
keeping the target lagging. In view of the foregoing, the Committee find it utmost 
necessary that a review of per-unit assistance be done on priority basis, particularly 
when the scheme has been extended to March, 2029. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the DoRD to revise the per unit assistance under PMAYG through 
suitable hike in the assistance component for the much-required augmented help to 
the needy beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government 
4.14 “The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 09.08.2024 has approved the 
continuation of the PMAY-G for 5 more years to construct 2 crore additional houses. 
The scheme has been approved to continue with existing unit assistance of Rs. 1.20 
lakh in plain areas and Rs. 1.30 lakh in North Eastern Region (NER) States and Hill 
States. 
No proposal is under consideration for revision in unit assistance of the scheme.” 
 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

 
 
49 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
4.15 The Committee note with concern the behaviour of the contractors at the 
bidding stage to acquire the tender of projects under PMGSY by quoting 25-30% 
lower amount than the minimum bidding amount. This approach by contractors has a 
cascading detrimental effect over the quality of construction of roads under PMGSY. 
This is a strategy which does not augur well for the effectiveness of the scheme. The 
Committee are of the view that the DoRD should bring out a mechanism at least by 
which a certain quantum of amount component equivalent to the difference between 
bidding and actual quoting is kept aside as security and may be released only after 
ensuring that the constructed road satisfy the stipulated quality norms. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the DoRD to entail all measures for curbing the 
down-tendering in PMGSY and review its provision to incorporate the security 
component for quality assurance of roads. 
Reply of the Government  
 
4.16 Tendering of PMGSY works are done by the respective State governments 
and they are expected to follow the Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) norms while 
awarding the PMGSY works. In the interest of the quality of roads being built under 
PMGSY and for protection against Abnormally Low Bids (ALBs), provisions of taking 
the additional performance security from the contractor have been made in the SBD. 
All States have been advised to deal with cases of ALBs as per SBD provisions 
which are enumerated as under. 
  
(a) Qualification of the Bidder:  
  
To make sure that contractors who are bidding for the works have sufficient 
backgrounds in execution of good quality works, the following Qualification criteria 
are laid down in clause 4 of the SBD: 
  
(a) Contractor to provide the aggregate monetary value of civil construction projects 
executed in each of the preceding five years. 
(b) Furnish a record of past involvement in projects similar in nature and scale for 
each of the past five years. Additionally, include particulars of ongoing or contracted 
projects, along with endorsements from a relevant authority not lower than the rank 
of an Executive Engineer or its equivalent.  
(c) Present comprehensive information regarding the technical personnel slated for 
engagement in the project.  
(d) Confirm that the contract aligns with the qualifications specified in Clause 4.4 
B(b) (ii) of ITB for the construction.  

 
 
50 
 
(e) Submit a proposed schedule for construction activities and a Quality 
Management Plan outlining the anticipated timeline for project completion in 
adherence to technical specifications and the stipulated completion period. 
  
(b) Additional Bank Guarantee: 
  
As per clause 46, sub-clause 46.1 and 46.2 of the SBD, the Performance 
Security equal to 5% (five percent) of the Contract Price and additional Security for 
unbalanced bids shall be provided to the Employer. 
  
(c) Blacklist/Termination of Contract 
  
As per clause 52, sub-clause 52.1 and 52.2 the Employer can terminate the 
Contract if the Contractor commits a major breach of contract in terms of quality and 
other contractual commitments i.e. failure to correct a specified defect promptly, non-
maintenance of required Security, delaying project completion beyond allowable 
liquidated damages period and not completing a specified portion of work on time. 
  
It may be noted that SBD already has strict provisions to ensure that good 
quality contractors are engaged for the execution of PMGSY works; however, the 
States/UTs have been further advised to ensure strict technical evaluation during the 
technical scrutiny of bids. While reviewing the quality aspects of PMGSY works, it is 
ensured that more focus is given to such works which have been awarded at 
abnormally low rates. Ministry has devised a mechanism whereby special quality 
checks are conducted for such works by deputing a team of NQMs. All such works 
are inspected by NQMs. In case abnormally low bids result in poor quality of works, 
States are advised to take necessary action against such contractor and rectify the 
works at their cost. As such Ministry has always been actively involved in the 
implementation aspects of various provisions of SBD norms and necessary 
instructions are issued as well as hand-holding is undertaken at appropriate levels.  
  
The States are also requested to align their Schedule of Rates (SoRs) with market 
rates so that the instances of down-tendering are minimized. 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
4.17 The roads constructed under PMGSY at certain sites are not up to the 
stipulated norms and standards of construction and quality of materials used are 
compromised, even if they survive five years of the warranty period. Beside this, the 
effort of constructing quality roads providing rural connectivity gets marred in the 
aftermath of poor maintenance aspect. The Committee note the concern raised from 
various quarters that the roads constructed under PMGSY at various places suffer 

 
 
51 
 
from poor maintenance and start getting degraded before 5 years of warranty. It has 
been noted that there are provisions for maintenance of the road constructed in the 
guidelines but same is not strictly adhered. Even the monitoring mechanism of the 
elaborately laid down principle for the maintenance aspect of roads constructed 
under PMGSY remains a cause of concern. The Committee note that the two 
separate issues starting initially with the quality of construction and later the 
maintenance aspect, both require equally strict regulation and compliance by the 
Contractors. In view of this scenario, the Committee recommend DoRD to ensure 
that the quality norms as prescribed under the provisions of PMGSY should not at all 
be compromised so that the roads built have strong durability. The Committee further 
recommend the DoRD to ensure due coordination with the Nodal agencies and 
requisite surveillance for proper maintenance of the PMGSY roads post 
construction.  
Reply of the Government  
 
4.18 Ensuring the quality of PMGSY works is the responsibility of the State 
Governments, who are implementing the programme. A three-tiered Quality Control 
mechanism is in place under PMGSY for ensuring the construction of quality road 
works and durability of road assets under PMGSY including the works undertaken by 
sub-contractors. 
  
Guidelines to regulate the quality control process have been issued to States 
from time to time. In order to ensure that people engaged in quality checks are 
adequately proficient and well trained, NRIDA has been conducting proficiency tests 
of NQMs, SQMs, PIU, etc. It has been made mandatory for all personnel engaged as 
NQM/SQM to pass the proficiency test. Further, their skills are also developed 
through webinars, and seminars or by sending them to various training institutions, 
etc. 
  
To strengthen the quality check mechanism, the establishment of a field Lab 
has been made compulsory. These labs are also to be geo-tagged. Unless these are 
ensured, no payment is allowed to be made against such roads. Also, a new version 
of the Quality Monitoring System App has been developed to include e-forms and 
other initiatives that have strengthened quality monitoring systems. Consequent 
upon the introduction of e-Marg, payment on account of maintenance to the 
contractor, during the defect liability period, is made commensurate with the quality 
of roads maintained by him/her through a performance-based contract management 
system. 
  
PMGSY roads are constructed by State Governments with a minimum design 
life of 10 years. As per PMGSY guidelines, the responsibility for their maintenance 
rests with the State Governments. Initial maintenance during the first five years is 

 
 
52 
 
governed by contracts signed along with the construction contract, as per the 
Standard Bidding Document, with the same contractor managing both phases. 
Maintenance funds required for this period are budgeted by the State Governments 
and placed with the State Rural Roads Development Agencies (SRRDAs) in a 
dedicated maintenance account. Following the five-year post-construction 
maintenance period, PMGSY roads are transitioned to Zonal Maintenance 
Contracts, encompassing maintenance and periodic renewal works in five-year 
cycles. 
  
To enhance focus on road maintenance during the Defect Liability Period 
(DLP) and streamline routine maintenance processes, the Electronic Maintenance 
of Rural Roads (eMARG) system has been introduced. This system is built on 
Performance-Based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC), where contractor payments 
are linked to the road's condition and compliance with predefined performance 
standards, rather than specific tasks. Payments are based on the maintenance of 
road structures, cross-drainage works, and traffic assets, ensuring better 
accountability and quality. 
  
Building on the success of eMARG during the Pre-5-Year DLP, a Post-DLP 
eMARG module has been developed to extend maintenance responsibilities beyond 
the initial defect liability period. This module covers key activities such as: 
  
1. Initial Rehabilitation: Restoring structural integrity and functionality through 
repairs, overlays, and drainage improvements. 
2. Routine Maintenance: Addressing minor issues like pothole patching, 
cleaning, and repainting to prevent deterioration. 
3. Renewal Works: Periodic resurfacing and surface treatment to extend the 
road's lifespan. 
4. Emergency Works: Repairs to address damages caused by natural disasters 
or unforeseen events. 
  
Moreover, eMARG has been revamped and post DLP maintenance have also 
been included in the revamped eMARG. Under PMGSY, best performing States are 
provided with financial incentive money for maintenance of PMGSY roads post DLP. 
It has been made mandatory to spend incentive money for maintenance of roads 
through eMARG only. Under PMGSY-III, roads are to be maintained for 10 years by 
the states and necessary funds are to be provided by them as per MoU entered into 
with each state. The States are being encouraged and incentivized to undertake 
maintenance post-DLP through eMARG. In the recently launched PMGSY-IV, many 
new initiatives are being taken to strengthen the quality of construction. 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.32 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
53 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
4.19 The Committee note that PMGSY roads are getting damaged due to the 
heavy vehicles that ply on them because these are generally low volume roads and 
were never meant to bear the load of heavy vehicles. In most of the cases, heavy 
vehicles plying on NHAI roads would also use the PMGSY roads as last mile 
connectivity to meet the ever-growing needs and expansion of industrial projects to 
the rural areas as well. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department of 
Rural Development should take serious view of this matter and come out with some 
concrete and effective solution at the earliest to protect the PMGSY roads from 
getting damaged by heavy vehicles. 
Reply of the Government 
 4.20 “The recommendations of the Committee were taken up with Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways (MoRTH). MoRTH vide letter dated 19.01.2024 opined that 
the National Highways network provides arterial connectivity whereas last mile 
connectivity is invariably provided by State Roads including village roads. 
Considering this, it is important that while planning road network and its design, area 
development plans, existing/proposed land use, type & volume of traffic is duly 
considered by road development authorities. Based on road network requirement; 
State Highways, Major District Roads, Other District Roads & Village Roads should 
be designed. It would ensure that the roads are adequately designed for service life 
and are not damaged due to movement of commercial traffic. The Ministry states 
that the proposals under PMGSY are appraised for traffic requirements and 
sanctioned as per IRC, etc. norms accordingly. The PMGSY guidelines also stipulate 
that States may use District Mining/Mineral funds for construction/maintenance of the 
roads in convergence model in case of mining areas keeping in view the traffic load 
of these roads. 
This Ministry has further informed that State Authorities are expected to enforce 
regulations on legal loading of commercial vehicles. The MoRTH has also mentioned 
that National Highways are also getting damaged in many stretches due to menace 
of overloading and that Ministry had been making efforts to control this by levying 
penalty and toll fee and requesting State Governments to enforce provisions of 
Motor Vehicle Act & rules. The MoRTH also requested MoRD to take up the matter 
with the State Governments for strict enforcement of Motor Vehicle rules to 
discourage overloading. 
Accordingly, this Ministry has written a letter to all states/UTs asking them to take up 
the matter with their concerned Transport Departments for strict enforcement of the 
Motor Vehicle Act & Rules and to discourage overloaded vehicles from plying on 
PMGSY roads, so that there may not be damage to these roads by such overloaded 
vehicles.” 
 
 (DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.35 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
54 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
4.21 National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) is a 100% Centrally Funded 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme which has been continued for 15th Finance 
Commission Cycle (2021-26) also. NSAP caters to 3.09 Crore BPL beneficiaries with 
a scheme-wise ceiling/cap for each State/UT on the number of beneficiaries (fixed in 
Nov., 2012 and revised in September, 2022). The amount of assistance aimed for 
old aged, widows, disabled persons and bereaved families on death of primary bread 
winner belonging to BPL households, under the sub-schemes of NSAP, i.e. 
IGNDAPS, IGNWPS and IGNDPS ranges from Rs.200/- to Rs.500/- per month has 
been a cause of concern to the Committee for a long period of time. The Committee 
note this amount abysmally low when the cost of living has increased during the last 
couple of years. The Committee feel that there is an urgent requirement for the 
upward revision of the social assistance provided under NSAP. The Committee, 
therefore, again recommend to the DoRD to look into this issue with utmost sincerity 
and concretize the result on ground level as soon as possible. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.22 “NSAP aims to provide a basic financial support to old age, widow and 
severely disabled persons. As social security, invalid and old age pensions figure as 
items 23 and 24 in the Concurrent List (7th Schedule) of the Constitution, both the 
Central Government and States/ UTs have the responsibility for working in tandem in 
rolling out a comprehensive social security framework in the country. Accordingly, 
the State/UTs are encouraged to provide top up amounts at least of an equivalent 
amount to the assistance provided by the Central Govt. so that the beneficiaries 
could get a decent level of assistance. At present, the States/UTs are adding Top up 
amounts ranging from Rs.50 to Rs.3200 per month per beneficiary under NSAP 
schemes. 
   
Based on various recommendations/ evaluation studies, the Department submitted 
the proposal for revamp of NSAP during the 15thFinance Commission cycle.  In 
addition to the proposal for prescribing the criteria for beneficiary identification on the 
basis SECC (Automatic Inclusion and any two Deprivations), it was also proposed to 
enhance the minimum pension rate for elderly and widows from Rs.200/- and 
Rs.300/- respectively to Rs.800/- per month and for the disabled from Rs.300/- to 
Rs.1000/- per month. For the elderly of 80+ years, it was proposed to be enhanced 
from Rs.500 to Rs.1200. Further, one-time lump sum amount of Rs.20,000/- on the 
death of primary breadwinner was proposed to be enhanced to Rs.80,000/-.  
  

 
 
55 
 
The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 19th January 2022, however, approved 
continuation of NSAP in its present form. As such, as per the approval, the existing 
rate of assistance prescribed for NSAP scheme will continue till completion of 
15thFinance Commission cycle i.e. up to FY 2025-26.” 
(DoRD O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.38 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
  

 
 
56 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Department of Rural Development O.M. No. G-20011/03/2021-B&A Dated 03.04.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
 21 July, 2025 
 30 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural  
Development & Panchayati Raj 
 

 
 
57 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF THE 
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 14th JULY, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1255 hrs in Committee Room 'B',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
4. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
5. Shri Jugal Kishore 
6. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
10. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
11. Shri Ganesh Singh 
12. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha 
      
13. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
14. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
15. Shri Iranna Kadadi  
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 

 
 
58 
 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee convened for (i) consideration and adoption of the Draft Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 1st 
Report on Demands for Grants (2024-25) pertaining to the Department of Rural 
Development (Ministry of Rural Development) and XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX. 
 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Reports and after discussion, adopted 
both the above-mentioned draft Reports XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports 
and present the same to the Parliament in the forthcoming Monsoon Session.   
 
 [Thereafter, the representatives from the XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX were 
called in] 
 
5. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX. 
6. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX. 
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A record of verbatim proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 
  

 
 
59 
 
ANNEXURE II 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:              18
        
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 1, 2, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18  
          Total: 7
                Percentage: - 39%
    
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL          
          Total: NIL 
                Percentage: 0%      
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14    
   
Total: 11 
        Percentage: - 61% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
Total: NIL 
           Percentage: 0%      
 
 
 