STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
      
 
        EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ  
 
   
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on 'Gram Urja Swaraj: Promoting Renewable Energy in Rural Areas’ (2024-25) of the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj'] 
 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
29  


TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-26) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on 'Gram Urja Swaraj: Promoting Renewable Energy in Rural Areas’ (2024-25) of the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.03.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.03.2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2026/Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 


CRD No. 220 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____ Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)............................................................... ii 
INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................................... iii 
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................................... 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 6 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies.................................................. 
10 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee...................................... 
11 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited............................................................ 
14 
ANNEXURES 
I Letter by MoPR to State for disseminating details of Training 
Partners across the Country to all Panchayati Raj Institutions 
(PRIs) 
15 
II Advisory by MoPR to State Panchayati Raj Departments for 
organising Special Gram Sabhas on 15th August 2025 in PRIs 
16 
III Extracts of Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Committee held 
on 11.02.2026 
17 
IV Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj………………………………………………………….. 
19 
 
 
 
 
  

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
27. Smt. Rajathi 
28. Shri Nagendra Ray 
29. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
30. Smt. P.T. Usha 
31. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sushil Kumar   - Under Secretary 

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
(2025-26) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present the 29rd Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-First Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development & Panchayati Raj on 'Gram Urja Swaraj: Promoting Renewable Energy in Rural 
Areas’ (2024-25) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
2.  The Twenty-First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 19.08.2025 and was laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19.08.2025. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 27.11.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
11.02.2026. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-First (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25 March, 2026 
04 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati 
Raj (2025-26) deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
'Gram Urja Swaraj: Promoting Renewable Energy in Rural Areas’ (2024-25) of the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
1.2 The Twenty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 19-08-2025 and was 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19-08-2025. The Report contained 06 
Observations/ Recommendations. 
1.3  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government. These have been 
examined and categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 
Serial Nos. 3, 4, 5 & 6 
 Total: 06 
Chapter II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: NIL 
    Total: NIL 
Chapter III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 
Serial Nos. 1 & 2 
Total: 02 
 Chapter IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter V 

2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case 
where it is not possible for any reasons to implement the recommendations in 
letter and spirit, the matter shall be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that Final Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments. 
I.      Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Creation of New Scheme Namely “Gram Urja Swaraj” 
1.6 With regard to Creation of new scheme namely “Gram Urja Swaraj”, the 
Committee had recommended as under: 
“Gram Urja Swaraj is a campaign launched by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to 
help villages use clean energy like solar, wind, and biogas. It encourages 
Panchayats to use renewable energy to meet their needs and rely less on 
traditional energy. During the briefing representatives of MoPR has stated that 
MoPR do not have any scheme and no budget has been allocated for this 
purpose. Representatives of MoPR has also stated that under Rashtriya Gram 
Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), panchayats are given awards for good performance. 
Two special awards, Gram Urja Special Panchayat Award and Carbon Neutral 
Special Panchayat Award were introduced under RGSA. The winner GP get 
reward an amount of Rs 1 crore, Rs 75 lakh and Rs 50 lakh for first, second, 
and third place. The Committee note that panchayats can play an important role 
in making Gram Urja Swaraj success by helping villages to generate their own 
energy, improve livelihoods, and move towards a cleaner and more sustainable 
future. The Committee, therefore recommend that MoPR should start a 
dedicated scheme with adequate fund to help villages become self-reliant in 
clean and affordable energy by using renewable source like solar power, 
windmills, biogas and small energy grids. This scheme should focus on support 
to Gram Panchayats by giving them financial and technical help, train young 
people to manage these energy systems, encourage people to use energy 
wisely, and involve the whole community. The Committee feel this will enable 
increased Renewable Energy Penetration in rural infrastructure and 
households.” 
  
1.7 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 

3 
 
“1.1  Recognizing the importance of clean energy at the grassroots level, the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) initiated the Gram Urja Swaraj campaign—not 
as a scheme, but as a means of awareness to promote renewable energy 
adoption, reduce electricity costs, and build energy self-reliance in Panchayats. 
The campaign complements the ongoing schemes of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy (MNRE), such as PM-KUSUM and PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli 
Yojana, which provides solar rooftop installations, solar pumps, and other 
decentralized renewable energy solutions. 
1.2 In addition, initiatives such as the Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh 
Abhiyan (DA-JGUA, formerly PM JGUA) focus on solar home lighting systems, 
solar mini-grids, and electrification support in Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group 
(PVTG) habitations and remote tribal villages, thereby strengthening renewable 
energy access in underserved rural areas. 
1.3 Thus, the MoPR plays a facilitative and supportive role, focusing on 
convergence, planning, and capacity-building at the Gram Panchayat level. 
1.4 In this capacity, MoPR works closely with MNRE and State Governments 
to enable effective implementation, foster awareness, and mobilize local 
communities, ensuring the adoption of existing government schemes at 
Panchayat level.” 
[O.M. No. H-11013 /10/2025-Parl. Dated:  27.11.2025] 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.8 The Committee note that while the MoPR has initiated the Gram Urja Swaraj 
Campaign as an awareness measure, the absence of structured programme 
framework limits its effectiveness at the grassroots level.  The Committee are, of 
the view that NIRD&PR in collaboration with SIRDs may support the MoPR in 
documenting best practices, developing maintaining indicators, prepare model 
guidelines, training toolkits and handholding support for gram panchayats under 
the Gram Urja Swaraj Campaign initiative enabling panchayats to translate 
awareness into local level energy planning exercise.  Further, the Committee 
seems the expertise of NIRD & PR may also be utilized for developing simplified 
planning templates, checklists and model DPR formats to assist panchayats in 
identifying decentralized renewable energy needs and facilitating convergence 
with line departments. The Committee, therefore, urge the MoPR that the above 
campaign may be converted into a dedicated scheme with clearly defined 
guidelines, institutional roles for PRIs and measurable outcome indicators, so as 

4 
 
to ensure sustained engagement of the Gram Panchayats in renewable energy 
planning and implementations. 
(Recommendation Serial No. 2) 
Creation of Rural Renewable Energy Fund 
1.9 Regarding Creation of Rural Renewable Energy Fund, the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
“The Gram Urja Swaraj Campaign aims to promote renewable energy 
adoption at the Panchayat level to achieve self-reliance in rural energy 
needs. MoPR’s role is limited to collaboration and identification of projects, 
with funding largely routed through the MNRE. This dependency limits 
MoPRs operational autonomy and slows grassroots implementation. The 
Committee recommend that MoPR should establish a dedicated Rural 
Renewable Energy Fund under its own budget to reduce dependence on 
MNRE and enable Panchayats to directly plan, sanction and implement 
renewable energy projects. Funds can be pooled from Finance 
Commission grants, State Finance Commissions, NABARD’s Rural 
Infrastructure Development Fund, CSR Contributions and development 
partners. The Committee is of the view that this will enable financial 
independence for Panchayats in energy planning and faster 
implementation through direct MoPR funding channels. The Committee 
urge the MoPR, for other MNRE projects associated with Rural 
Development and Panchayati Raj better coordination should be 
maintained between both the Ministries” 
1.10 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“2.1  The promotion, financing, and regulation of renewable energy 
generation and distribution fall within the mandate of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), which serves as the nodal Ministry 
for policy direction, funding, and technical oversight of such programmes.  
2.2 The MoPR plays a facilitative and supportive role, focusing on 
convergence, planning, and capacity-building at the Gram Panchayat 
level.  In this capacity, MoPR works closely with MNRE and State 
Governments to enable effective implementation, foster awareness, and 
mobilize local communities, ensuring the adoption of renewable energy 
solutions at the grassroots.  
 [O.M. No. H-11013 /10/2025-Parl. Dated:  27.11.2025] 
  

5 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.11  The Committee note that while technical and financial aspects of renewable 
energy schemes fall under the mandate of the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy (MNRE).  The institutional strengthening, capacity building, convergence 
and effective participation of Panchayati Raj Institutions lie squarely within the 
purview of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  The Committee also observe that 
effective decentralized energy planning at the panchayat level requires 
predictable and flexible financial support.  Without creating overlap with existing 
schemes of other Ministries, the Committee, therefore, recommend that the MoPR 
may explore earmarking a dedicated component within its existing programmes 
or permissible grants to support panchayat led preparatory activities such as 
energy planning, community mobilization, capacity building and convergence 
facilitation to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) within a 
specified time limit. 
 
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Enhancing Quality and Durability of Solar Films 
 
2.1 Improving the quality and durability of solar films under the PM Surya Ghar: Muft 
Bijli Yojana and PM-KUSUM is important for the scheme’s long-term success. The 
Committee note that low-quality films produce less electricity and degrade faster when 
exposed to heat, rain, and dust, leading to frequent repairs 9 and higher costs. This can 
reduce trust in the program and discourage people from using it. The Committee 
recommend that the MoPR must take strong steps for installation of quality standards 
and durable solar films from approved manufacturers and trained installer. Mandatory 
use of solar films with UV resistance, moisture protection, BIS certification, IEC safety 
guidelines along with 10 years warranty would serve the purpose effectively. Further, 
Committee urge the MoPR should conduct third-party audits for quality checks of solar 
films as the Committee are of the view that using better-quality solar films work more 
efficiently, save money over the period, benefiting both the households and the 
Government’s investment. Further, in order to have optimal results there is a need to 
employ trained and certified installers to maintain the performance and durability of the 
solar films. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 The schemes such as PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana and PM KUSUM are 
being implemented by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE).  As the 
nodal Ministry for these schemes, MNRE is best placed to consider the Committee’s 
recommendations. The related subject of improving solar film quality and durability also 
comes under the purview of MNRE. 
[O.M. No. H-11013 /10/2025-Parl. Dated:  27.11.2025] 
 
 
  

7 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Upgrading Battery Technology for Renewable Energy 
 
2.3 As the India moves towards clean and green energy source like solar and wind 
energy. To ensure the long-term efficiency, success and reliability on renewable energy 
systems, the energy storage batteries are playing a vital role. The Committee observe 
that batteries currently in use are outdated, have limited storage capacity, and stop 
functioning properly over the period. Frequently replacing solar batteries and purchasing 
new batteries can make using solar energy more expensive in the long run and make it 
harder for people to afford or rely on solar energy. To make renewable energy systems 
work better and last longer the Committee recommend that the MoPR should explore 
possibility to procure latest upgraded battery with provision of its replacement and 
upgradation. The scheme provides financial aid or subsidies to individuals and 
communities who wish to adopt better battery systems. It could also encourage 
research and development in battery technology for long-term improvements. This will 
help make our energy system more reliable and move towards clean, green energy. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 MNRE is best placed to consider the given recommendation of the Committee on 
the subject of ‘Upgrading Battery Technology for Renewable Energy’ as it falls within 
their mandate. 
[O.M. No. H-11013 /10/2025-Parl. Dated:  27.11.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Training to local youths for Maintenance of Solar Panels 
 
2.5 Solar energy is becoming more popular in the country as it is clean and good for 
the environment. Regular maintenance is essential to keep solar panels working 
smoothly. During the course of evidence, the Committee note that there is an acute 
shortage of trained/skilled mechanics to repair and maintain solar panels. The 
Committee therefore recommend that the MoPR should hire special agencies or 
establish training centres to train the people to maintain and repair solar panels. These 
agencies/centres should focus on developing the skills needed in this field by training 
more mechanics targeting local youths and local mechanics, so that it will be easier for 

8 
 
solar panel owners to find local mechanics who can resolve their problem quickly. This 
way purpose of the scheme will be useful for the villagers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 MoPR has shared details of training partners available across the country, 
offering training on solar, wind, and hydro energy under the Surya Mitra, Vayu Mitra, 
and Jal Urja Mitra Skill Development Programmes of MNRE. The Ministry has advised 
the States to disseminate this information to all Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and 
advised the PRIs to identify eligible individuals and facilitate their enrolment in these 
programmes. This initiative aims to ensure the availability of skilled manpower for 
operation and maintenance of renewable energy systems and to promote employment 
opportunities in rural areas. A copy of the letter has been placed as Annexure I 
[O.M. No. H-11013 /10/2025-Parl. Dated:  27.11.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
Panchayats as Energy Producers 
 
2.7 The Committee recommends Panchayats should be empowered as energy 
producers, with legal backing in State Panchayati Raj Acts to own renewable energy 
assets and sell surplus power to DISCOMS, creating sustainable local revenue streams. 
Further, Committee also suggests MoPR to act as nodal for multi-Ministry 
Convergence-use MGNREGA (MoRD) for labour components, MoHUA for solar street 
lighting, PM-KUSUM for solar lighting-while forging direct partnerships with PSUs and 
CSR agencies for sponsorship of energy infrastructure.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 6.1 As per the 11th Schedule of the Constitution, relevant subjects are already 
included under the purview of PRIs.  
Specifically following items:  
a) Item 14: Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity  
b) Item 15: Non-conventional energy sources 
These provisions provide a constitutional foundation for PRIs to engage in 
renewable energy initiatives, including solar, wind, and biomass projects. 
 

9 
 
6.2  MoPR is already working in close coordination with the MNRE to effectively 
implement their schemes. MoPR had issued an advisory to State Panchayati Raj 
Departments, requesting the States to organize Special Gram Sabhas on 15th August 
2025 in PRIs. PRIs during the Gram Sabhas were enable outreach, mobilization, and 
enrolment for various Renewable Energy (RE) schemes of the MNRE, such as PM 
Surya Ghar, PM-KUSUM. PRIs have also been advised to coordinate with local banks 
to facilitate access to loans; support demand aggregation of rooftop solar systems; 
identification of community infrastructure; support DISCOMs/SNAs in identifying eligible 
households under the Utility led aggregation model in underserved areas and identify 
biogas beneficiaries, especially where LPG access is limited, to promote clean cooking 
alternatives. A copy of the advisory to States have been placed as Annexure II 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013 /10/2025-Parl. Dated:  27.11.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013 /10/2025-Parl. Dated:  27.11.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE  
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
4.1 Gram Urja Swaraj is a campaign launched by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to 
help villages use clean energy like solar, wind, and biogas. It encourages Panchayats to 
use renewable energy to meet their needs and rely less on traditional energy. During 
the briefing representatives of MoPR has stated that MoPR do not have any scheme 
and no budget has been allocated for this purpose. Representatives of MoPR has also 
stated that under Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), panchayats are given 
awards for good performance. Two special awards, Gram Urja Special Panchayat 
Award and Carbon Neutral Special Panchayat Award were introduced under RGSA. 
The winner GP get reward an amount of Rs 1 crore, Rs 75 lakh and Rs 50 lakh for first, 
second, and third place. The Committee note that panchayats can play an important 
role in making Gram Urja Swaraj success by helping villages to generate their own 
energy, improve livelihoods, and move towards a cleaner and more sustainable future. 
The Committee, therefore recommend that MoPR should start a dedicated scheme with 
adequate fund to help villages become self-reliant in clean and affordable energy by 
using renewable source like solar power, windmills, biogas and small energy grids. This 
scheme should focus on support to Gram Panchayats by giving them financial and 
technical help, train young people to manage these energy systems, encourage people 
to use energy wisely, and involve the whole community. The Committee feel this will 
enable increased Renewable Energy Penetration in rural infrastructure and households. 
  
Reply of the Government 
4.2 1.1  Recognizing the importance of clean energy at the grassroots level, the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) initiated the Gram Urja Swaraj campaign—not as a 
scheme, but as a means of awareness to promote renewable energy adoption, reduce 
electricity costs, and build energy self-reliance in Panchayats. The campaign 
complements the ongoing schemes of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(MNRE), such as PM-KUSUM and PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana, which provides 

12 
 
solar rooftop installations, solar pumps, and other decentralized renewable energy 
solutions. 
1.2 In addition, initiatives such as the Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh 
Abhiyan (DA-JGUA, formerly PM JGUA) focus on solar home lighting systems, solar 
mini-grids, and electrification support in Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group (PVTG) 
habitations and remote tribal villages, thereby strengthening renewable energy access 
in underserved rural areas. 
1.3 Thus, the MoPR plays a facilitative and supportive role, focusing on 
convergence, planning, and capacity-building at the Gram Panchayat level. 
1.4 In this capacity, MoPR works closely with MNRE and State Governments to 
enable effective implementation, foster awareness, and mobilize local communities, 
ensuring the adoption of existing government schemes at Panchayat level.” 
[O.M. No. H-11013 /10/2025-Parl. Dated:  27.11.2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
4.3 The Gram Urja Swaraj Campaign aims to promote renewable energy adoption at 
the Panchayat level to achieve self-reliance in rural energy needs. MoPR’s role is 
limited to collaboration and identification of projects, with funding largely routed through 
the MNRE. This dependency limits MoPRs operational autonomy and slows grassroots 
implementation. The Committee recommend that MoPR should establish a dedicated 
Rural Renewable Energy Fund under its own budget to reduce dependence on MNRE 
and enable Panchayats to directly plan, sanction and implement renewable energy 
projects. Funds can be pooled from Finance Commission grants, State Finance 
Commissions, NABARD’s Rural Infrastructure Development Fund, CSR Contributions 
and development partners. The Committee is of the view that this will enable financial 
independence for Panchayats in energy planning and faster implementation through 
direct MoPR funding channels. The Committee urge the MoPR, for other MNRE 
projects associated with Rural Development and Panchayati Raj better coordination 
should be maintained between both the Ministries. 
  

13 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 2.1  The promotion, financing, and regulation of renewable energy 
generation and distribution fall within the mandate of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy (MNRE), which serves as the nodal Ministry for policy direction, 
funding, and technical oversight of such programmes.  
2.2 The MoPR plays a facilitative and supportive role, focusing on 
convergence, planning, and capacity-building at the Gram Panchayat level.  In this 
capacity, MoPR works closely with MNRE and State Governments to enable effective 
implementation, foster awareness, and mobilize local communities, ensuring the 
adoption of renewable energy solutions at the grassroots.  
[O.M. No. H-11013 /10/2025-Parl. Dated:  27.11.2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 

14 
 
CHAPTER V 
 RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT  
ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013 /10/2025-Parl. Dated:  27.11.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25 March, 2026 
04 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
 

15 
 
ANNEXURE I 
 


16 
 
ANNEXURE II 
 
 


17 
 
ANNEXURE III 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 11th FEBRUARY, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1703 hrs in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT   
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
4. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
10. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
11. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
12. Shri Ganesh Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
14. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
15. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
16. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
17. Smt. Rajathi 
18. Shri Nagendra Ray 
19. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the Draft Report on action taken 

18 
 
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 21st Report on “Gram Urja 
Swaraj: Promoting Renewable Energy in Rural Areas” (2024-25) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj and for XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
XXXX XXXX XXXX. 
 
3. Above mentioned draft report was taken up for consideration and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any modifications. The Committee 
then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid draft report and present the 
same to the Parliament. 
 
 [XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX] 
 
4. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
5. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
6. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX  
 
7. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
8. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX  
 
 [XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX] 
 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
 
____________________________ 
XXXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 
 
 
  

19 
 
Annexure IV 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIRST REPORT (18TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
I. Total number of recommendations 06  
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
Serial Nos. 3, 4, 5 & 6 
 
 
 
Total: 04 
Percentage: 67% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:   
Serial Nos. 1 & 2 
 
 
 
Total: 02 
Percentage: 33% 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
 
 
 