 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
   
 
       EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF CONSTITUTION 
73RD AMENDMENT ACT WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO 
COORDINATION IN THREE-TIER SYSTEM OF PANCHAYAT 
 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
35 


 
 
 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF CONSTITUTION 
73RD AMENDMENT ACT WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO 
COORDINATION IN THREE-TIER SYSTEM OF PANCHAYAT 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 05.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 05.08.2026 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2026/Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
CRD No. 226 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs 
 
 
 
© 2026 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2024-2025) ii 
Composition of the Committee (2025-2026) ii 
Introduction  iii  
 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
PART I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
I. Introduction 1 
II. 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 1 
III. Effectiveness of the implementation of 73rd Constitutional 
Amendment Act, 1992 
3 
IV. Initiatives by Ministry of Panchayati Raj 12 
V. Involvement of three-tier system of Panchayats in the schemes of 
Central Government 
16 
VI. Status of implementation of the main purpose behind 73rd 
Amendment Act 1992 
16 
VII. Other information outside 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 19 
 Part - II 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
20 
ANNEXURES  
I. Advisory dated 16.08.2021 on “Making Gram Sabhas Vibrant" to 
revitalize the institution of Gram Sabhas 
28 
II. State/UT-wise status provisions of reservation of seats and offices of 
chairpersons for women in PRIs 
40 
III. Advisory dated 5th March, 2026 issued to all the States/UTs 
requesting to sensitize the Women Elected Representative and 
Panchayat officials that Panchayat meetings are attended by WERs 
themselves and any proxy representation in meetings, training 
programmes or public events etc. should not be entertained. 
44 
IV. Ranking of States/UTs in Devolution Index (DI) and Sub-indices 45 
V. The eligibility conditions for Tied Grants and Untied Grants under the 
Fifteenth Finance Commission 
47 
VI. State wise progress on AuditOnline for the audit period 2023-24 as 
on 05.03.2026 
49 
VII. State wise progress on AuditOnline for the audit period 2024-25 as 
on 05.03.2026 
50 
VIII. State/UT-wise status of provisions of District Planning Committee 51 
IX. Extracts of the Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Committee held 
on 24 March, 2026 
55 
X. Minutes of the Twenty-Third sitting of the Committee held on 04 
June, 2026 
58 
XI. *Extracts of the Minutes of the Twenty-Eighth sitting of the 
Committee held on 29 July, 2026 
62 
 
* Not attached. 
  

ii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-2026) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
26. Smt. Rajathi 
27. Shri Nagendra Ray 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Smt. P.T. Usha 
30. Shri Karamvir Singh Boudh 
31. Shri Baidyanath Ram 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sushil Kumar   - Under Secretary 
 

iii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2025-26) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present the Thirty-Fifth Report on ‘Effectiveness of the 
Implementation of Constitution 73rd Amendment Act with Special Reference to 
Coordination in Three-Tier System of Panchayat’ of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  
2.  The Committee held briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR) on 24 March, 2026. 
3.  The Committee took oral evidence of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of 
Law and Justice (Legislative Department), and Ministry of Women and Child 
Development on 04 June, 2026. 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 29 July, 2026. 
5.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department), and Ministry of 
Women and Child Development for placing before them the requisite material and their 
considered views in connection with the examination of the subject.  
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
03 August, 2026 
12 Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj 
 

1 
 
 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF CONSTITUTION 
73RD AMENDMENT ACT WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO 
COORDINATION IN THREE-TIER SYSTEM OF PANCHAYAT 
PART – I  
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 Panchayat a State subject 
 As per the Constitution of India, ‘Panchayat’ is a State subject. Entry 5 of ‘List 
II: State List of the 7th Schedule of the Constitution (which lists subjects to be dealt by 
the Centre and States) is as follows: 
 
‘Local government, that it to say, the constitution and powers of municipal 
corporations, improvement trusts, districts boards, mining settlement authorities 
and other local authorities for the purpose of local self-government or village 
administration’ 
 
Legislation with respect to Panchayats is subject to provisions contained in Part 
IX of the Constitution of India is therefore undertaken by the States concerned. 
1.2 Main Purpose behind the 73rd Amendment Act 1992: 
 
The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment 
Bill, 1991 (now 73rd Amendment Act 1992), inter-alia, states that- 
 
“Though the Panchayati Raj Institutions have been in existence for a long time, 
it has been observed that these institutions have not been able to acquire the 
status and dignity of viable and responsive people’s bodies due to a number of 
reasons including absence of regular elections, prolonged supersessions, 
insufficient representation of weaker sections like Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes and women, inadequate devolution of powers and lack of 
financial resources.” 
II. 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992: 
Panchayats are local governments mandated under Part IX of the Constitution 
of India. Part IX was inserted in the Constitution as a sequel to the 73rd Constitutional 
Amendment Act,1992 promulgated on 24th April, 1993. Consequently, ‘Panchayats’ 
have assumed Constitutional status. As per the Constitution, three tiers of Panchayats 
are to be constituted, through elections every five years, except in States with 
population less than 20 lakhs, where Panchayats at two tiers may be created. The 
Constitution envisages that Panchayats will function as institutions of local government 
and prepare plans and implement schemes ‘for economic development and social 
justice’, but leaves the precise devolution of powers and authority to Panchayats to the 

2 
 
 
States. 
 
73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 incorporated as “Part IX: The 
Panchayats” in the Constitution, which includes the following as compulsory/ 
mandated provisions: 
(i) Three tiers of Panchayats in all States. But the States having a 
population not exceeding 20 lakhs may not constitute Intermediate 
Panchayats. [Article 243B] 
(ii) Direct election to seats at all three tiers of Panchayats [Article 243C(2)] 
(iii) Indirect elections for Chairpersons of Block and District Panchayats 
[Article 243C(5)(b)] 
(iv) Reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
in proportion to their respective population [Article 243 D(1)]; 
(v) Reservation of not less than one-third seats for women including within 
SC and ST reservations [Article 243D(2)&(3)] 
(vi) Reservation in offices of Chairpersons for the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their respective population. 
Reservation of not less than one third in offices of Chairpersons for 
women including within SC and ST reservations [Article 243D(4)] 
(vii) Election to Panchayats every five years [Article 243 E] 
(viii) Disqualification for membership in Panchayat [Article 243F] 
(ix) To constitute the State Finance Commissions every five years to 
review the financial position of Panchayats and make 
recommendations to Governor regarding distribution between the 
State and Panchayats of taxes, duties, tolls etc. [Article 243I] 
(x) Setting up of State Election Commission (SEC) and vesting the 
superintendence, directions and control of the preparation of electoral 
rolls for and the conduct of all election to the Panchayats in SEC 
[Article 243K] 
(xi) Application of Part-IX to Union Territories. [Article 243L] 
(xii) Part-IX shall not to apply to certain areas. [Article 243M] 
(xiii) Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats. [Article 243N] 
(xiv) Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters. [Article 243O] 
 
The application/operation of the following provisions in Part IX have been left 
to the discretion of the respective States: 
(i) Powers and functions of Gram Sabha. [Article 243A] 
(ii) Direct or Indirect election of Chairperson of Village Panchayat. 
[Article 243C(5)(a)] 
(iii) Reservation of seats and offices of Chairpersons in Panchayats in 
favor of backward class of citizens [Article 243D(6)] 
(iv) Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats [Article 243G] 
(v) Powers to impose taxes by and fund of the Panchayats. [Article 243H] 
(vi) Audit of accounts of Panchayats [Article 243J] 
 
 
  

3 
 
 
III. Effectiveness of the implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment 
Act, 1992 
3.1  Gram Sabha (Article 243A) 
 
Article 243A provides that a Gram Sabha may exercise such powers and 
perform such functions at the village level as the legislature of a State may, by law, 
provide. Powers assigned to the Gram Sabha, therefore, vary from State to State. 
Gram Sabha is key to the self-governance and transparent and accountable 
functioning of the Gram Panchayat. The Gram Sabha is the forum that ensures direct, 
participative democracy. It offers equal opportunity to all citizens including the poor, 
the women and the marginalised to discuss and criticize, approve or reject proposals 
of the Gram Panchayat (the executive) and also assess its performance. 
 
All the States & UTs, covered under Part-IX of the Constitution, have made 
provisions of Gram Sabhas in their State Panchayati Raj Acts and have assigned 
powers and functions to them. 
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has regularly emphasized the importance of the 
Gram Sabha with the States and secondly, ways have been identified in which Gram 
Sabha participation can be increased. The Ministry had also issued an advisory dated 
16.08.2021 (copy attached as Annexure I) on the subject “Making Gram Sabhas 
Vibrant" to revitalize the institution of Gram Sabhas so that they may be strengthened 
to oversee implementation of various development programmes of Government. 
3.2 Constitution and Composition of Panchayats (Article 243B and 
Article 243C): 
 
Since the time of enactment of Constitution, there was a provision of only 
Village Panchayat under Article 40 which provides that the State shall take steps to 
organise village panchayats and endow them with such powers and authority as may 
be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government. 
 
i. Before the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, the structure and tiers of 
Panchayats were not fixed and varied from State to State; the amendment 
standardized and strengthened the system. 
 
After 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, Article 243B of the Constitution 
empowers the Legislature of a State to make provisions with respect to the constitution 
of Panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels provided that Panchayats 
at the intermediate level may not be constituted in a State having a population not 
exceeding twenty lakhs. 
 
The States of Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Sikkim and UTs Lakshadweep, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu and Puducherry have two tiers of Panchayats. All 
other remaining States/UTs have three tiers of Panchayats. 
ii. Article 243C of the Constitution empowers the Legislature of a State to make 
provisions with respect to the composition of Panchayats provided that the 
ratio between the population of the territorial area of a Panchayat at any level 

4 
 
 
and the number of seats in such Panchayat to be filled by election shall, so 
far as practicable, be the same throughout the State. Article 243C of the 
Constitution also provides that the Chairperson of a Panchayat at the 
intermediate level or district level shall be elected by, and from amongst, the 
elected members thereof. 
 
While members at all three levels (village, intermediate and district) are directly 
elected by the public, the chairpersons at the intermediate and district levels are 
elected indirectly, only from amongst the directly elected members. This structure 
ensures coordination, as lower-tier leaders directly participate in shaping the 
intermediate/district-level leadership and planning.  
 
3.3 Reservation of seats and offices of Chairpersons in Panchayats (Article 
243D) 
 
Before the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992, reservation in 
Panchayats was not streamlined and left to the discretion of individual state 
governments, resulting in inconsistent, erratic, and often inadequate representation 
for marginalized sections and women. Whereas now, Article 243D of the Constitution 
of India provides for the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes in every Panchayat (at all levels) in proportion of their population in the 
Panchayat area. Reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
at all levels of Panchayat is a mandatory provision and the State Governments have 
complied with this by making a provision in their respective Panchayati Raj 
Acts. 
 
Article 243D of the Constitution of India also provides not less than one-third 
reservation for women out of ‘total number of seats to be filled by direct election in 
every Panchayat’ and ‘total number of offices of chairpersons in the Panchayats at 
each level’. However, 21 States and 2 UTs have gone even further and have made 
provisions of 50% reservation for women in Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in their 
respective State Panchayati Raj Acts/Rules encouraging increased participation in the 
grassroots governance. In respect of remaining States/UTs, Constitutional provision 
as prescribed in Article 243D applies (i.e. one-third of total seats). 
 
In a written reply to the committee regarding grievance redressal mechanism 
exists (or can be created) for reservation-related anomalies. The MoPR replied as 
under: 
 
“States have also been empowered under clause (6) of Article 243D to make 
provisions for reservation of seats or offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at any 
level in favour of Backward class of citizens.  
As such, States/UTs have made provisions in their State Panchayati Raj for 
reservations in Panchayats. Any complaint or grievance in the matter of reservations 
is forwarded to the relevant State/UT. It falls within the purview of State Government 
to take appropriate action.” 
State/UT-wise status provisions of reservation of seats and offices of 
chairpersons for women in PRIs is annexed as Annexure II. 

5 
 
 
3.4 Duration of Panchayats (Article 243E) 
Before the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992, Panchayati Raj 
Institutions lacked constitutional status, leading to irregular elections and varied, non-
fixed tenures across States, often controlled by State governments. 
 
Article 243E of the Constitution provides that every Panchayats, unless sooner 
dissolved under any law for the time being in force, shall continue for five years from 
the date appointment for its first meeting and no longer. Further, an election to 
constitute a Panchayat shall be completed before the expiry of its duration or before 
the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution. 
 
States have generally compiled with this Constitutional provisions. Sometime, 
elections are delayed due to various reasons such as administrative, pending court 
cases and stay imposed by the Hon’ble Courts etc. The Ministry issues advisories to 
the States/UTs from time to time, where Panchayat elections are delayed, with the 
request to take all possible steps to hold the delayed Panchayat elections in conformity 
with the Constitutional provisions. 
 
In a written reply to the committee regarding mechanism that exists to 
prevent such prolonged delays in Panchayat elections. The MoPR replied as 
under: 
 
“As per Article 243K of the Constitution, superintendence, direction and control 
of all elections to the Panchayats is vested in a State Election Commission consisting 
of a State Election Commissioner to be appointed by the Governor” 
3.5 Disqualifications for membership in Panchayat (Article 243F): 
Article 243F brought about a uniform constitutional framework for defining 
disqualifications for membership, while still allowing State legislatures to tailor 
provisions to their local governance needs. The purpose of Article 243F is to ensure 
the moral and legal eligibility of individuals holding positions in Panchayats, thereby 
safeguarding the ethical standards of public life and strengthening democratic 
functioning at the grassroots level. 
 
Article 243F of the Constitution provides that a person be disqualified for being 
chosen as, and for being, a member of a Panchayat 
 
(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for 
the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned 
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the Legislature of the 
State  
 
In a written reply to the query regarding criteria for disqualification of Members 
of Panchayats. The MoPR replied as under: 
“After examining the relevant provisions contained in the Panchayati Raj 
laws of all the States/UTs, covered under Part-IX of the Constitution, it has been 
found that all the States/UTs have made such provisions relating to 

6 
 
 
disqualification of members of Panchayats as per their specific need, which 
may vary across States.  
  Some of the criteria for disqualification of members of Panchayats, which 
are common among most of the States/UTs, are as under:  
 • not a citizen of India;  
 • not twenty-one years of age;  
 • holds any office of profit under the Government or local body;  
• disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for the purposes 
of elections to the Legislature of the State;  
• dismissed from the services of Central or any State Government or any 
other local authority for misconduct;  
 • the Member absents himself for specific numbers of Panchayat meetings. 
  
 However, some of the States have made specific criteria for 
disqualification, including criteria for disqualification of members of Panchayats 
which are common among the States/UTs.  
 
 Further, it comes under the jurisdiction of a State to take proxy 
representation as a criterion for disqualification from membership of 
Panchayats and role of this Ministry is advisory in nature. Recently, an advisory 
has been issued on 5th March, 2026 to all the States/UTs requesting to 
sensitize the Women Elected Representative and Panchayat officials that 
Panchayat meetings are attended by WERs themselves and any proxy 
representation in meetings, training programmes or public events etc. should 
not be entertained. A copy of the advisory is placed at Annexure III” 
 
3.6  Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats (Article 243G): 
Article 243G of the Constitution empowers the Legislature of a State to make 
provisions, by law, for the devolution of power and responsibilities upon Panchayat at 
appropriate level, subject to such conditions, as may be, specified with respect to the 
preparation of plans for economic development and social justice and implementation 
of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be entrusted to them 
including those in relation to matters included in the Eleventh Schedule to the 
Constitution. The State legislatures are to consider the 29 subjects set out in the 
Eleventh Schedule for devolution of power and responsibilities upon Panchayats. The 
performance of the Panchayats depends on the extent of powers and resources 
devolved to them by the States concerned, which varies across States. 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj has taken continuous steps to provide assistance to 
the States & UTs and reviews performance of PRIs, from time to time, through studies, 
review meetings, field visits, video conferencing, Information Technology applications 
etc. 
In a written reply to the query regarding variations in the powers of 
Mukhiya/Pradhan in different States. The MoPR replied as under: 
‘It is informed that “Panchayat”, being “Local Government”, is a State subject 
and part of State List of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. Panchayats are 

7 
 
 
set up and operate through the respective State Panchayati Raj Acts. States have 
made their own Panchayati Raj Act, subject to the provisions of the Constitution.” 
Further, 
“All States/UTs have made provisions relating to powers & functions of 
Chairperson of Panchayats. The differences in the powers assigned to 
Mukhiya/Pradhan of a Panchayat in different States are caused due to the 
differences in extent of powers and resources devolved to them by the States 
concerned, which varies across States.  
Some of the powers & functions of Chairperson of Panchayats, which 
are common among States/UTs, are as under: 
 Responsible for convening the meeting of Gram Sabha and 
preside over its meeting (Chairperson of Gram Panchayat);  
 Preside over and conduct the meetings of the Panchayat; 
 Responsible for the maintenance of the records of the Panchayat;  
 have the general responsibility for the financial and executive 
administration of the Panchayat.  
However, some of the States have made specific powers & functions of 
Chairperson of Panchayats, including common powers & functions of 
Chairperson of Panchayats.” 
 
Recently, the Ministry has released a report titled “Status of Devolution to 
Panchayats in States - An Indicative Evidence-Based Ranking, 2024” in February 
2025 to assess the effectiveness of devolution and the role of local governments in 
strengthening grassroots democracy. This report presents the Devolution Index, which 
provides the overall scores and ranks for all States/Union Territories covered under 
Part-IX of the Constitution, based on six identified dimensions: Framework, Functions, 
Finances, Functionaries, Capacity Enhancement, and Accountability. 
 
Dimensions and Indicators under Devolution Index of Panchayats 
 
 
Framework 
 Election and affirmative action of Panchayats (Art. 243D) -
Reservation of Seats for SC/ST and Women 
 Panchayats Elections & State Election Commission (Art. 243K) 
 Panchayats duration, Dissolution & Bye Elections (Art. 243E) 
 Constitution and Function of District Planning Committee (Art. 
243ZD) 
 Role of Panchayats in Committees and Parallel Bodies/
Institutions 
 Autonomy to Panchayats (Art. 243F) 
 
Functions 
 Functions Assigned to Panchayats including Activity Mapping, 
Expenditure incurred and Actual Involvement of Panchayats 
(Art. 243G) 
 Involvement of Panchayats in Important Schemes (Art 243G) 

8 
 
 
 
 
 
Finances 
 Fifteenth Finance Commission Grants to the Panchayats (Art.
280 (3)b) 
 State Finance Commission (SFC) (Art. 243I) 
 Money Transfers to Panchayat on accounts of the SFC 
recommendations 
 Empowerment of Panchayats to Impose and Collect Revenue 
(Art. 243H) 
 Funds Available with Panchayats 
 Expenditure of Panchayats 
 Initiatives related to Finance, Accounts and Budget (Art. 243J) 
 
Functionaries 
 Physical Infrastructure of Panchayats 
 e-Connectivity of Panchayats 
 Panchayats Officials: Sanctioned and actual staff position 
Capacity 
Enhancement 
 Training Institutions 
 Training Activities - Training of Elected Representative and
Officials 
 
Accountability 
 Accounting and Audit of Panchayats (Art. 243J) 
 Social Audit of Panchayats 
 Functioning of Gram Sabha (Art. 243A) 
 Transparency & Anti-Corruption 
 Panchayats Assessment & Incentivization 
This report reveals that the extent of devolution has increased from 39.9% to 
43.9% between the period 2013-14 to 2021-22. Ranking of States/UTs in Devolution 
Index and Sub-indices is attached as Annexure IV.  
 
3.7 Powers to impose taxes by and fund of the Panchayats (Article 243H): 
Article 243H of the Constitution provides that the Legislature of a State may, by law, 
 
(a) authorise a Panchayat to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls 
and fees in accordance with such procedure and subject to such limits; 
 
(b) assign to a Panchayat such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and collected by 
the State Government for such purposes and subject to such conditions and 
limits; 
(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated 
Fund of the State; and 
(d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys received, 
respectively, by or on behalf of the Panchayats and also for the withdrawal of 
such moneys therefrom. 
 
3.8 Constitution of Finance Commission (Article 243I) 
Article 243I of the Constitution provides that the Governor of a State shall, as 
soon as may be within one year from the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-

9 
 
 
third Amendment) Act, 1992, and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year, 
constitute a Finance Commission to review the financial position of the Panchayats. 
 
At present, out of 28 States, 25 States (as the States of Meghalaya, Mizoram 
and Nagaland are not covered under Part-IX of the Constitution) have constituted 
State Finance Commission (SFCs) to comply with Article 243I of the Constitution. 
 
Article 280(3) (bb) of the Constitution inserted vide the 73rd Constitutional 
Amendment Act, 1992 provides that the Union Finance Commission shall make 
recommendations on “the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a 
State to supplement the resources of the Panchayats in the State on the basis of the 
recommendations made by the Finance Commission of the State”. 
 
Under Fourteenth Finance Commission grants were released to the Gram 
Panchayats (GPs) constituted under Part IX of the Constitution in 26 States. 
 
As regard Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV FC) is concerned, grants are 
being released to Panchayats in all the three tiers and Traditional Local Bodies and 
Sixth Schedule areas in 28 States as per the operational guidelines of the Fifteenth 
Finance Commission issued by the Ministry of Finance vide letter dated 14.07.2021. 
The inter se distribution among all the tiers shall be done by the concerned State 
Government on the basis of accepted recommendations of the latest State Finance 
Commission (SFC) and in conformity with the following bands; 
 
Range for 
Distribution 
Gram 
Panchayats 
Block 
Panchayats 
District 
Panchayats 
Minimum 70% 10% 5% 
Maximum 85% 25% 15% 
States which have a two-tier system with only village and district panchayats, 
the allocation shall be in the followings bands: 
 
Range for Distribution Gram Panchayats District Panchayats 
Minimum 70% 15% 
Maximum 85% 30% 
Releasing grants to Panchayats in all the three tiers promote coordination by 
requiring States in all three tiers of Panchayats to distribute funds based on 
State Finance Commission recommendations. 
The XV FC Grants have two components; namely, Basic (Untied) Grants and 
Tied Grants. The Basic (Untied) grants can be used for locally felt needs of basic 
facilities under the 29 subjects enshrined in the XI schedule, except for salaries and 
other establishment costs. The Tied Grants are to be utilised for basic facilities, 
specifically, for drinking water supply, sanitation and rainwater harvesting. 
As per recommendations of Central Finance Commission, the Union Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj recommends to the Union Finance Ministry for release of grants to 
Rural Local Bodies of various States. These recommendations are based on eligibility 
conditions fixed by the current Finance Commission. The XV FC Grants are not 

10 
 
 
allocated to the Union Territories. The eligibility conditions for Tied Grants and Untied 
Grants under the Fifteenth Finance Commission are attached as Annexure V. 
 
Key Recommendations of 16th Finance Commission for Rural Local 
Bodies: 
A total allocation of₹ 7,91,493 crores has been allocated as grants for duly 
constituted Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) for the award 
period from 2026-27 to 2030-31. The allocation between RLBs and ULBs has been 
divided in the ration of 60:40. Grants across States have been divided, in the ratio of 
90:10 of projected Rural Population (2026) and Area respectively. 
 
A total of ₹4,35,236 crore has been earmarked as grants to Rural Local Bodies 
which is almost twice the allocation done under XV Finance Commission which was₹ 
2,36,805 crore. 
 
50% of the basic component should be tied and the remaining 50% of the basic 
component and the entire performance components should remain untied. 
 
The Grant is divided into Basic Grant (80%, i.e., ₹ 3,48,188 crores), RLB 
performance grant (10%, i.e., ₹ 43,524 crores) and State Performance Grant (10%, 
i.e., ₹ 43,524 crores). FC-16 has recommended that as the Gram Panchayats 
have the necessary powers of taxation and levying user charges, thus, based on 
the achievement of the minimum level of Own Source of Revenue (OSR), the local 
bodies will be eligible for the RLB Performance component grant. Further, while 
emphasising the primary responsibility of making adequate financial resources 
available to local bodies rests with the States, FC-16 has recommended the grant 
based upon the State transferring funds to RLBs from its own resources. 
 
Inter-tier RLB distribution is shown in the table below: 
 
Inter-tier RLB Grant Sharing Within a State 
Number of Tiers Gram Panchayat Block Panchayat District Panchayat 
Three 80% 10% 10% 
Two 90% - 10% 
One 100% - - 
 
3.9 Audit of accounts of Panchayats (Article 243J): 
Article 243J of the Constitution provides that the Legislature of a State may, by 
law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Panchayats 
and the auditing of such accounts. 
As per Fifteenth Finance Commission recommendations, States will receive the 
total grants due to only those Rural Local Bodies having both provisional accounts for 
the previous year and audited accounts for the year before the previously available 
online in public domain. 
 
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has developed an application of ‘AuditOnline’ 

11 
 
 
for online audits of Panchayat accounts and their financial management. AuditOnline 
for transparent auditing of Central Finance Commission funds utilization for strengthen 
financial management of Panchayats launched in April 2020. For audit year 2023-
24, 2.58 lakh Audit Plans have been created, and 2.56 lakh Audit Report have been 
generated. State wise details may be seen at Annexure VI.  
 
Furthermore, for the audit year 2024-25, 2.12 lakh Audit Plans have been 
created, and 1.54 lakh Audit Reports have been generated. The State wise details 
may be seen at Annexure VII.  
 
3.10 Elections to the Panchayats (Article 243K): 
Before the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992, panchayat elections 
were conducted by respective State Governments, not a dedicated autonomous body. 
The amendment, established the State Election Commission to handle the supervision 
and conduct of elections, providing legal sanctity and autonomy to rural local self-
governments. As per Article 243K of the Constitution, superintendence, direction and 
control of all elections to the Panchayats is vested in a State Election Commission 
consisting of a State Election Commissioner to be appointed by the Governor. 
 
The States of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, West Bengal and UTs 
of Jammu & Kashmir and Puducherry have their own State Election Commission. 
 
The UTs of Andaman & Nicobar Island, Dadra and Nagar Haveli & Daman and 
Diu, Lakshadweep and Ladakh have a common State Election Commission. 
 
3.11 Application to Union territories (Article 243L): 
Article 243L of the Constitution provides that provisions of Part-IX of the 
Constitution shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union 
territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor of a State were references to 
the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under Article 239 of the Constitution. 
 
At present, the Union Territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Lakshadweep and 
Puducherry are covered under Part-IX of the Constitution. Union Territories of Delhi 
and Chandigarh are not covered under Part-IX of the Constitution as they do not have 
a functional Panchayati Raj system. They are predominantly urban and governed by 
municipal corporations. 
 
3.12 Part-IX not to apply to certain areas (Article 243M): 
Article 243M (1) of the Constitution exempts Scheduled Areas and tribal areas 
referred to in Clause (1) and (2) of Article 244 from application of the provisions of Part 
IX of the Constitution. Article 244(1) of the Constitution makes special provisions for 
the administration of certain areas called “Scheduled Areas” in States other than 
Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. However, Article 243M (4) (b) empowers 

12 
 
 
the Parliament to legislate and extend the provisions of Part IX to the Scheduled Areas 
and tribal areas referred to in clause (1), subject to such exceptions and modifications 
as may be specified in such law and no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment 
of the Constitution for the purpose of article 368. 
 
In terms of article 243M(4)(b) of the Constitution of India, Parliament enacted 
“The Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 
1996” (called as PESA Act), for extending the provisions of Part-IX of the 
Constitution, with certain exceptions and modification, to the Scheduled Areas. 
 
At present, Fifth Schedule Areas exist in 10 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Rajasthan and Telangana. 
 
3.13 Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats [Article 243N] 
Article 243N of the Constitution provides that any provision of any law relating 
to Panchayats in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the 
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, which is inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a 
competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration of one year 
from such commencement, whichever is earlier: 
 
Provided that all the Panchayats existing immediately before such 
commencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner 
dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of that State 
or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature 
of that State. 
 
3.14  Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters [Article 243O] 
Article 243O of the Constitution provides that the validity of any law relating to the 
delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made 
or purporting to be made under article 243K, shall not be called in question in any 
court; and no election to any Panchayat shall be called in question except by an 
election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided for by 
or under any law made by the Legislature of a State. 
 
IV. Initiatives by Ministry of Panchayati Raj: 
 
(a) Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP), Block Panchayat 
Development Plan (BPDP) and District Panchayat Development Plan 
(DPDP): 
The 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 has strengthened decentralized 
planning by empowering Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) to prepare development 
plans for economic development and social justice. Accordingly, planning is 
undertaken at different levels of the Panchayati Raj system through the Gram 
Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP) at the village level, Block Panchayat 
Development Plan (BPDP) at the intermediate/block level, and District Panchayat 

13 
 
 
Development Plan (DPDP) at the district level. The GPDP is prepared annually by 
Gram Panchayats through participatory processes involving Gram Sabhas, where 
local needs and priorities are identified. These plans promote bottom-up planning, 
convergence of various Central and State schemes, and effective utilization of local 
resources for sustainable rural development. 
 
Role and Co-ordination of three-tier system of Panchayats: 
 Gram Panchayat (Village Level): The Gram Panchayat plays the 
primary role in identifying local needs through Gram Sabha consultations 
and preparing the GPDP based on community priorities. 
 Block Panchayat (Intermediate Level): BPDP to be prepared through 
a participatory, inclusive and transparent process with a modified bottom-
up approach. BPDP may arrive at development needs by consolidating 
gaps ascertained in GPDPs. The BPDP process envisages need-based 
planning, supplementing GPDPs. 
 District Panchayat (District Level): District Panchayat Development 
Plan should ideally match with people's needs, basic services, and their 
aspirations, prioritized in accordance with the available resources. It 
should be prepared through a participatory, inclusive, and transparent 
process with a modified bottom-up approach. The District Panchayat 
Development Plan process envisages need-based planning, 
supplementing GPDPs and BPDPs. 
(b) Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) 
 
The Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) is a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme implemented by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to strengthen the 
institutional capacity of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) for effective and inclusive 
local governance. The scheme focuses on capacity building and training of elected 
representatives and functionaries of PRIs, enabling them to perform their roles in 
planning, implementation, and monitoring of development programmes at the 
grassroots level. 
 
Under the Revamped RGSA, funds are released to States and Union Territories 
to support activities such as training and capacity building of PRI representatives, 
strengthening Panchayat infrastructure, promoting e-governance initiatives, and 
improving service delivery at the local level. 
 
In a written reply to the question regarding steps being taken to strengthen 
physical infrastructure in the Gram Panchayats. The MoPR replied as under: 
 
”Under the scheme of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), the Ministry 
supplements the efforts of States/UTs on limited scale for creation basic 
infrastructure for effective functioning of Gram Panchayats such as 
Construction of Gram Panchayat Bhawans, Computers and Colocation of 
Common Service Centres (CSCs) with Gram Panchayat Bhawans with focus 
on North East States, as proposed by States/UTs in their Annual Action Plans 
and later approved by Central Empowered Committee. Ministry has also been 
providing support to the States/UTs, under the scheme of revamped RGSA for 

14 
 
 
setting up of Project Management Units (PMUs) at States, District and Block 
level as approved in the Annual Action Plan for effective implementation of the 
scheme and setting up of institutional mechanism as State, District and Block 
level Panchayat Resource Centres to support Capacity Building & Training of 
Panchayats.” 
 
Annual Action Plan: The Annual Action Plan (AAP) is a planning document prepared 
by States and Union Territories under various schemes of the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj, including the RGSA. It outlines the activities, targets, timelines, and financial 
requirements for the implementation of approved components of the scheme during a 
particular financial year. 
 
Under the Revamped RGSA, States/UTs prepare their Annual Action Plans 
based on their requirements for capacity building, training programmes, strengthening 
of Panchayat infrastructure, and other approved activities for Panchayati Raj 
Institutions. The AAP is submitted to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for approval. 
 
The Central Empowered Committee (CEC) examines and approves the Annual 
Action Plans submitted by States/UTs. Funds under the scheme are released based 
on the approved AAPs, subject to the fulfillment of prescribed conditions such as 
submission of utilization certificates, progress reports, and other required documents. 
 
The preparation and approval of the Annual Action Plan help ensure systematic 
planning, effective utilization of resources, and proper monitoring of activities under 
the scheme during the financial year. 
 
The Annual Action Plan of the State is prepared at State level based on the 
consultation/ input at different levels and vary from State to State, as per administrative 
stature of the States/UTs. 
 
(c) Panchayat Advancement Index: 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj has constituted an Expert Committee on Localization 
of Sustainable Development Goals for developing strategies & approaches to localized 
Goals of SDG through a thematic approach at the Panchayat level. The Committee 
has recommended 9 Themes of LSDGs aggregated 17 SDGs so that people can 
relate better with local goals & targets; effective convergence & augmentation of 
resources at the Panchayat Level and attainment of SDGs with PRIs through LSDGs, 
along with 9 Themes. 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj has initiated the process of localization of Sustainable 
Development Goals involving all the stakeholders, embodying the spirit of the whole 
of government and whole of society. 
 
9 Themes of Localization of Sustainable Development Goals (LSDGs) 
 Theme 1: Poverty Free and Enhanced Livelihoods in Panchayat  
 Theme 2: Healthy Panchayat 
 Theme 3: Child-Friendly Panchayat  
 Theme 4: Water Sufficient Panchayat  

15 
 
 
 Theme 5: Clean and Green Panchayat 
 Theme 6: Panchayat with Self-sufficient Infrastructure  
 Theme 7: Socially Just & Socially Secured Panchayat  
 Theme 8: Panchayat with Good Governance 
 Theme 9: Women-Friendly Panchayat 
 
The Panchayat Advancement Index (PAI) serves as a performance 
assessment and planning tool to measure the progress of Gram Panchayats across 
the themes aligned with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The effective 
implementation and utilization of PAI require coordinated efforts among the three tiers 
of the Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
 
Ministry has introduced more relevant and representative local indicators and 
data points, while simplifying workflows to improve usability. In this process, the 
number of indicators has been rationalised from 516 in PAI 1.0 to 150 in PAI 2.0 for 
the year 2023-24. 
PAI 2.0 recorded wide national participation, with 33 out of 36 States and 
Union Territories taking part in the exercise. This included 27 out of 28 States 
(except West Bengal) and 6 out of 8 Union Territories (excluding Delhi and 
Chandigarh, which do not have Gram Panchayats). 
 
A total of 2,59,867 Gram Panchayats/Equivalent GPs, representing 97.30% 
of the total 2,66,999 Panchayats across participating States/UTs, submitted validated 
data on the PAI portal. This marks a significant improvement over PAI Version 1.0, 
which had recorded 80.79% participation. 
 
Role and Co-ordination of three-tier system of Panchayats: 
The Panchayat Advancement Index (PAI) serves as a performance 
assessment and planning tool to measure the progress of Gram Panchayats across 
the themes aligned with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The effective 
implementation and utilization of PAI require coordinated efforts among the three tiers 
of the Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
 Gram Panchayat level: The primary responsibility lies in the collection and 
validation of data related to the PAI indicators. Gram Panchayats integrate the 
findings of PAI into the Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP) to identify 
local development gaps and prioritize activities aimed at improving 
performance across the thematic areas. 
 Panchayat Samiti (Block) level: The focus is on providing technical guidance 
and oversight to Gram Panchayats. The Block administration reviews PAI 
performance, facilitates capacity building, and ensures convergence of various 
government schemes to support Panchayats in addressing gaps identified 
through the index. 
 Zila Parishad (District) level: The role is primarily strategic and supervisory. 
The district authorities consolidate PAI data from blocks, undertake district-level 
analysis, and coordinate with line departments to align resources and 
programmes with the priority areas identified through PAI assessments. 
 

16 
 
 
Thus, the coordinated functioning of the three tiers ensures a bottom-up 
planning approach, strengthens evidence-based decision-making, and facilitates 
targeted interventions to improve Panchayat performance and accelerate progress 
toward local development goals. 
 
V. Involvement of three-tier system of Panchayats in the schemes of Central 
Government 
A substantial portion of resources for the development of Panchayats is provided 
by the Union Government through various schemes. The Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes (CSSs) are conceived under the provision of Article 282 of the Constitution 
with the avowed objective of tackling problems. The role of Panchayats varies across 
different CSSs of national importance. Among the major CSSs, Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), Sarva Siksha Abhiyan 
(SSA), National Rural Health Mission (NRHM), Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-Gramin 
(PMAYG),Total Sanitation Campaign, Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme 
(ARWSP), National Programme of Nutritional Support to Primary Education (Mid-Day 
Meals), National Horticulture Mission, Macro Management of Agriculture, Micro 
Irrigation etc. are the schemes, which provide roles and responsibilities to Panchayats. 
VI. Status of implementation of the main purpose behind 73rd Amendment 
Act 1992 
 
S. 
No. 
Main purpose 
behind 73rd 
Amendment 
Act, 1992 
Effectiveness of the implementation of 73rd Amendment 
Act, 1992 
1. Absence of 
regular elections 
In terms of Article 243K of the Constitution, all the States and 
UTs, covered under Part-IX of the Constitution, have their 
State Election Commissions for the superintendence, direction 
and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the 
conduct of, all elections to the Panchayats. 
Panchayat elections are being conducted regularly every five 
years as mandated in Article 243E of the Constitution, which is 
the responsibility of the States/UT concerned. 
Sometimes, Panchayat elections are delayed due to various 
reasons such as court cases, delimitation, reservation, 
administrative reasons, law & order situation etc. 

17 
 
 
2. Prolonged 
supersessions of 
PRIs 
Before 73rd Amendment, there were no fixed structure of 
Panchayats and there were prolonged supersessions of PRIs 
because there was no fixed tenure of PRIs. 
Now, in terms of Article 243B of the Constitution, all the States 
& UTs, covered under Part-IX of the Constitution, have setup 
the three-tier of Panchayati Raj system in their respective 
State/UT. 
States/UTs, having population not exceeding 20 lakhs, have 
set up two-tiers of PRIs. These States/UT are- Arunachal 
Pradesh, Goa, Sikkim, Lakshadweep, Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
and Daman & Diu and Puducherry. 
Thus, PRIs have their fixed tenure of Panchayats of five years. 
In case, Panchayats may not be constituted due to various 
reasons, there are provisions of administrative setup so that 
the development work of PRIs may not hamper. 
3. Insufficient 
representation of 
weaker sections 
like Scheduled 
Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes 
and women 
State/UTs under Part-IX of the Constitution have made 
provisions for the representation of SCs, STs, women and also 
for the backward class of citizens in compliance of Article 243D 
of the Constitution. 
Special focus is given to Women. Though the Constitution of 
India provides not-less than one-third reservation in PRIs for 
women, but 21 States and 2 UTs have gone even further and 
have made provisions of 50% reservation for women in 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in their respective State 
Panchayati Raj Acts/Rules encouraging increased 
participation in the grassroots governance. In respect of 
remaining States/UTs, Constitutional provision as prescribed 
in Article 243D applies (i.e. one-third of total seats). 
4. Inadequate 
devolution of 
powers 
All States/UTs, covered under Part-IX of the Constitution, have 
made provisions relating to devolution of powers & functions
to Panchayats. The differences in the powers assigned to 
Panchayats in different States are caused due to the
differences in extent of powers and resources devolved to them 
by the States concerned, which varies across States. 
Recently, the Ministry has released a report titled “Status of 
Devolution to Panchayats in States - An Indicative Evidence-
Based Ranking, 2024” in February 2025 to assess the 
effectiveness of devolution and the role of local governments 
in strengthening grassroots democracy. This report presents 
the Devolution Index, which provides the overall scores and 
ranks for all States/Union Territories covered under Part-IX of 
the Constitution, based on six identified dimensions: 
Framework, Functions, Finances, Functionaries, Capacity 
Enhancement, and Accountability. 
 

18 
 
 
This report reveals that the extent of devolution has increased 
from 39.9% to 43.9% between the period 2013-14 to 2021-22. 
5 Lack of financial 
resources 
At present, out of 28 States, 25 States (as the States of 
Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland are not covered under 
Part-IX of the Constitution) have constituted 
State Finance Commission (SFCs) to comply with the 
Constitution. 
As per recommendations of Central Finance Commission, the 
Union Ministry of Panchayati Raj recommends to the Union 
Finance Ministry for release of grants to Rural Local Bodies 
(RLBs) of various States. 
Under the 15th FC (2020–26), ₹2.98 lakh crore has been 
released (as on 31.03.2026) to RLBs, which is the 95% of total 
allocation. 
Under the 16th FC (2026–31), ₹4.35 lakh crore allocated to the 
RLBs. 
 
The FC Grants are not allocated to the Union Territories. 
 
Panchayats may strengthen themselves by way of generation 
of Own Sources of Revenue. Panchayats have powers to levy 
taxes and collect duties/fees etc.  
 
6.1 In a written reply to the question regarding any research on need to further 
amend 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992. The MoPR replied as under: 
“As far as provisions in Part IX that are left to the discretion of the respective 
States are concerned. States themselves are empowered to make provisions 
as per their specific needs. As far as compulsory/ mandatory provisions of the 
Part IX of the Constitution are concerned, the Ministry has not received any 
reference/complaint from State for facing any difficulty in implementation of 
these provisions.  
The 83rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 2000 amended the 73rd Amendment 
to exempt State of Arunachal Pradesh from reserving seats for Scheduled 
Castes in Panchayati Raj institutions. This was enacted because there was no 
SC population in the State, making the provision inapplicable, while keeping ST 
and women reservations. This is the only constitutional amendment made in 
the Part IX after 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992. 
The 33 years since the implementation of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment 
Act have demonstrated a robust and remarkably stable foundational framework 
for rural local self-governance in India. This implies that the provisions of Part 
IX still hold good. This Ministry feels that there is no need to amend the existing 
provisions in 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992.” 
 
 

19 
 
 
VII. Other information outside 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992: 
7.1 Article 243ZD of the Constitution (Part IXA)- 74th Constitutional 
Amendment Act, 1992: 
Article 243ZD of the Constitution provides for setting up a District Planning 
Committee, in every State at the district level, to consolidate the plans prepared by the 
Panchayats and the Municipalities in the district and to prepare a draft development 
plan for the district as a whole. 
 
The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to- 
 
(a) the composition of the District Planning Committees; 
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled: 
 
Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total number of members of such 
Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the 
Panchayat at the district level and of the Municipalities in the district in proportion to 
the ratio between the population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district; 
 
(a) the functions relating to district planning which may be assigned to 
such Committees; 
(b) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be 
chosen. 
Every District Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft development 
plan- 
(a) have regard to- 
i. matters of common interest between the Panchayats and the 
Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and other 
physical and natural resources, the integrated development of 
infrastructure and environmental conservation; 
ii. the extent and type of available resources whether financial or otherwise; 
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor may, by order, 
specify. 
 
The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward the 
development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government of the 
State. 
 
It falls under the jurisdiction of the State Government to compose District 
Planning Committee (DPC), the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall 
be filled, the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be chosen, 
functioning relating to district planning etc. 
 
In this regard, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj issues advisory to all States/UTs 
with the request to take necessary action to constitute District Planning Committee in 
every district and ensure their effective operationalisation in conformity with the Article 
243ZD of the Constitution of India. 
 
The State/UT-wise status of provisions of District Planning Committee is 
annexed as Annexure VIII. 

20 
 
 
PART – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. NEED FOR EFFECTIVE DEVOLUTION AND REALISATION OF THE 
CONSTITUTIONAL VISION 
The Committee note that the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 
1992 was enacted with the objective of establishing Panchayati Raj Institutions as 
institutions of self-government and addressing deficiencies such as absence of 
regular elections, prolonged supersession of Panchayats, inadequate 
representation of weaker sections and lack of financial resources. The Committee 
further note that while substantial progress has been achieved in ensuring regular 
elections and representation of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women, 
the pace and extent of devolution of powers, functions, finances and functionaries 
continue to vary considerably across States. The Committee also expressed 
concern regarding disparities in the powers and authority available to Panchayati 
Raj Institutions in different States. The Committee are of the considered view that 
the constitutional vision underlying the Seventy-third Amendment can be fully 
realized only when Panchayati Raj Institutions are empowered to function as 
genuine institutions of self-government rather than merely implementing agencies 
of State Governments. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR), in consultation with States and Union Territories, 
institutionalize a comprehensive review framework based on the "Status of 
Devolution to Panchayats in States - An Indicative Evidence-Based Ranking" report. 
The MoPR must periodically assess and rank state performance using the 
Devolution Index across its six identified dimensions, namely: Framework, 
Functions, Finances, Functionaries, Capacity Enhancement, and Accountability, to 
track the increase of the extent of devolution systematically and ensure effective 
implementation of the constitutional mandate in letter and spirit.  
2. NEED FOR STRENGTHENING COORDINATION AND BALANCED 
DISTRIBUTION OF POWERS AND DECENTRALISED PLANNING IN THE 
THREE-TIER SYSTEM 
The constitutional framework envisages a three-tier Panchayati Raj system 
and a bottom-up planning process through Gram Panchayat Development Plans 
(GPDP), Block Panchayat Development Plans (BPDP), and District Panchayat 
Development Plans (DPDP). The Committee express serious concern regarding the 
concentration of powers at the Gram Panchayat level and the relatively limited 
powers available to Intermediate and District Panchayats, which adversely affects 
integrated planning and convergence. To address these structural imbalances, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) formulate 
guidelines to enforce a coordinated, tiered approach to planning, where the BPDP 
and DPDP systematically consolidate development gaps ascertained in lower-tier 
plans. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
encourage States to strictly align their local planning frameworks with the statutory 
Inter-tier Rural Local Body (RLB) Grant Sharing bands, ensuring that fund 

21 
 
 
distribution within a state adheres to the prescribed ratios of 80% for Gram 
Panchayats, 10% for Block Panchayats, and 10% for District Panchayats in three-
tier systems, and 90% for Gram Panchayats and 10% for District Panchayats in two-
tier systems. Effective fund distribution is the life blood of the three tier Panchayati 
Raj System. It translates constitutional mandates into grassroots development, 
ensuring financial resources reach the rural population to directly alleviate poverty 
and local infrastructure. 
3. NEED FOR REVITALIZATION OF GRAM SABHAS AND PARTICIPATORY 
DEMOCRACY 
The Committee note that Gram Sabha constitutes the foundation of 
participatory democracy and is intended to ensure transparency, accountability 
and direct participation of citizens in local governance. However, the Committee 
note with concern the views expressed during evidence that in many areas Gram 
Sabha meetings are becoming ceremonial in nature and public participation has 
declined considerably. The Committee are of the view that weakening of Gram 
Sabhas would adversely affect the spirit of democratic decentralisation envisaged 
under the Constitution. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj, in coordination and collaboration with States and Union Territories, 
take concerted measures for revitalization of Gram Sabhas through awareness 
campaigns, use of digital platforms, social mobilisation and greater participation of 
women, youth and vulnerable sections and evolve mechanisms to periodically 
assess the quality and effectiveness of Gram Sabha functioning. Revitalizing Gram 
Sabha is critical for realising Mahatma Gandhi’s vision of Gram Swaraj. 
 
4. NEED FOR EXAMINING VARIATIONS IN THE SIZE, POPULATION AND 
TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION OF PANCHAYATS 
The Committee note the concerns expressed during evidence regarding 
considerable variations in the size, population and territorial jurisdiction of 
Panchayats across States and Union Territories. The Committee further note that 
while some Panchayats cater to relatively small populations and compact 
geographical areas, others cover extensive territories and large populations, 
resulting in disparities in representation, accessibility and service delivery. The 
Committee are of the view that excessive variations in the size and population of 
Panchayats may adversely affect participatory governance and weaken the 
objective of bringing administration closer to the people. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj undertake a comprehensive study 
on variations in the size, population and territorial jurisdiction of Panchayats and 
examine, in consultation with States and other stakeholders, the feasibility of 
evolving broad norms and guiding principles for ensuring balanced representation 
while preserving the flexibility and federal character envisaged under the 
Constitution. 
5. NEED FOR STRENGTHENING INTERMEDIATE AND DISTRICT 
PANCHAYATS 
The Committee note the concerns expressed regarding excessive 

22 
 
 
concentration of powers at the Gram Panchayat level and inadequate 
empowerment of Intermediate and District Panchayats. The Committee further note 
apprehensions regarding excessive dependence on executive authorities and the 
relatively limited powers available to elected representatives at higher tiers. The 
Committee also emphasized the need to restore and strengthen the authority of 
elected Panchayat representatives including Gram Pradhans. The Committee are of 
the view that weakening of higher tiers adversely affects integrated planning and 
coordinated development and undermines the spirit of democratic decentralization. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Panchayati Raj should make 
an effort to encourage States and Union Territories to strengthen Panchayat Samitis 
and Zila Parishads and examine the scope for enhancing the role and authority of 
elected representatives in Panchayati Raj Institutions. The Panchayat System 
serves as the bedrock of rural Governance in the Country, bringing democracy and 
development directly to the village-level. 
6. NEED FOR FINANCIAL EMPOWERMENT AND FISCAL SUSTAINABILITY OF 
PANCHAYATS 
Article 243H of the Constitution empowers State Legislatures to authorize 
Panchayats to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees and also 
provides for grants-in-aid and constitution of Panchayat funds. The Committee note 
that while successive Central Finance Commissions have considerably 
strengthened the finances of Rural Local Bodies through grants, Panchayats 
continue to depend predominantly upon such transfers and their capacity to 
mobilize own source revenues remains limited. The Committee also emphasized 
the need to make Panchayats financially self-reliant on the lines of Urban Local 
Bodies. The Committee further note that substantial grants have been 
recommended for Rural Local Bodies for the award period 2026-27 to 2030-31, 
reflecting the continued importance accorded to fiscal decentralisation and 
grassroots governance. The Committee are of the view that excessive dependence 
upon external grants adversely affects the autonomy, sustainability and 
effectiveness of Panchayati Raj Institutions and constrains their ability to function 
as institutions of self-government envisaged under the Constitution. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in 
consultation with States and Union Territories, formulate a comprehensive strategy 
for strengthening own source revenues of Panchayats, encourage innovative 
mechanisms for local resource mobilisation and pursue with States the timely 
constitution of State Finance Commissions and effective implementation of their 
recommendations so as to promote fiscal decentralisation and financial 
sustainability of Panchayati Raj Institutions. The Committee further recommend 
that performance-based incentives and other measures aimed at encouraging 
enhancement of Own Source Revenues and improving financial management may 
be effectively operationalised so as to strengthen accountability and promote 
greater financial self-reliance among Panchayati Raj Institutions and to ensure that 
rural local bodies have independent, predictable financial resources to function as 
autonomous units of Self Government. 

23 
 
 
7. NEED FOR DEDICATED PANCHAYAT CADRES AND ADEQUATE 
AVAILABILITY OF FUNCTIONARIES 
The Committee is of the opinion that effective devolution envisaged under 
the Constitution requires adequate and trained human resources at the grassroots 
level. The Committee note with concern that one Panchayat Secretary is often 
required to look after four or five Panchayats, adversely affecting governance and 
service delivery. The Committee also note concerns regarding the absence of 
dedicated Panchayat cadres and frequent conflicts among elected representatives 
and officials. The Committee are of the view that effective devolution cannot be 
achieved without adequate and trained human resources at the grassroots level. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj actively 
pursue the matter with States and Union Territories and encourage creation of 
dedicated Panchayat cadres and phased provision of one Panchayat Secretary for 
each Gram Panchayat. 
8. NEED FOR CAPACITY BUILDING, LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT AND 
INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING 
The Committee note that effective discharge of functions by Panchayati Raj 
Institutions depends not only upon devolution of powers and resources but also 
upon the capacities of elected representatives and functionaries. The Committee 
appreciate the efforts being made under the Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj 
Abhiyan for capacity building and institutional strengthening. However, the 
Committee are of the view that training programmes need to be made continuous, 
need-based and responsive to emerging requirements such as digital governance, 
climate resilience and participatory planning. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj strengthen and redesign training 
modules under RGSA and establish a robust framework for continuous capacity 
building and leadership development of elected representatives and functionaries 
with special emphasis on leadership development, participatory planning and 
digital governance. 
9. NEED FOR EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN REPRESENTATIVES AND 
PREVENTION OF PROXY REPRESENTATION 
The Committee appreciates that reservation for women in Panchayati Raj 
Institutions constitutes one of the most significant achievements of the 
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 and has resulted in women 
constituting nearly half of the elected representatives in Panchayati Raj Institutions 
At the same time, the Committee note with concern reports of proxy representation 
by male family members and inadequate institutional support available to newly 
elected women representatives. The Committee also emphasized the need for 
separate training programmes for women representatives, particularly those 
belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and suggested utilizing Self 
Help Groups as mentoring institutions. The Committee are of the view that proxy 
representation defeats the spirit of reservation and undermines the objective of 
women empowerment. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the advisory 
issued by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in this regard be implemented effectively 

24 
 
 
and monitored periodically and that separate training modules and mentoring 
mechanisms involving Self Help Groups and experienced women representatives 
be developed, with special focus on Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe women 
representatives. 
10. NEED FOR STRENGTHENING PANCHAYAT INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM 
The Committee note that strengthening of physical and digital infrastructure 
is essential for enabling Panchayati Raj Institutions to effectively discharge their 
constitutional responsibilities. The Committee appreciate the efforts made under 
the Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) for construction of Gram 
Panchayat Bhawans and promotion of digital governance. However, the Committee 
note with concern the delays in completion of Gram Panchayat buildings, 
inadequate availability of computers and uneven digital infrastructure across 
States. Members also emphasized the need for strengthening Common Service 
Centres, Panchayat Resource Centres and Project Management Units for effective 
functioning of Panchayats. The Committee are of the view that deficiencies in 
infrastructure adversely affect transparency, service delivery and citizen 
engagement. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj closely monitor the progress of infrastructure projects under RGSA and ensure 
timely completion of Gram Panchayat Bhawans and provision of adequate digital 
infrastructure. The Committee further recommend that Common Service Centres, 
Panchayat Resource Centres and other institutional support mechanisms be 
strengthened to facilitate efficient delivery of services at the grassroots level. 
11. NEED FOR STRENGTHENING TRANSPARENCY, ACCOUNTABILITY AND 
DIGITAL AUDIT MECHANISMS 
The Committee appreciate the progress achieved through initiatives such as 
eGramSwaraj and Audit Online which have significantly strengthened transparency 
and accountability in Panchayat administration. The Committee note that robust 
accounting and audit mechanisms under Article 243J are indispensable for 
ensuring financial discipline and enhancing public confidence in Panchayati Raj 
Institutions. While appreciating the progress achieved through digital initiatives, the 
Committee observe with concern that the generation of audit reports continues to 
vary considerably across States. The Committee note that while 2.58 lakh Audit 
Plans were created and 2.56 lakh Audit Reports were generated for the audit year 
2023-24 via the 'Audit Online' application, the numbers declined to 2.12 lakh Audit 
Plans and 1.54 lakh Audit Reports for the audit year 2024-25, indicating uneven 
compliance. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj intensify efforts for the universal adoption of digital planning, accounting, and 
auditing platforms. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj must strictly enforce the 
accountability criteria, ensuring that States receive total grants due only to those 
Rural Local Bodies that have made both their provisional accounts for the previous 
year and audited accounts for the year before the previous year available online in 
the public domain. Transparency and accountability in Panchayati Raj System are 
essential for grassroots democracy. Special technical and administrative 

25 
 
 
assistance must be directed toward States lagging behind in generating these 
digital audit records.  
12. NEED FOR STRENGTHENING PARTICIPATION OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
INSTITUTIONS IN SOCIAL SECTOR PROGRAMMES 
The Committee find that Panchayati Raj Institutions have limited role in the 
functioning of Anganwadi Centres and the absence of a dedicated mechanism for 
sanitation at the village level. Further, there is need for greater awareness regarding 
menstrual hygiene among adolescent girls and women and finds greater 
involvement of elected women representatives in social sector programmes. The 
Committee are of the view that greater participation of Panchayati Raj Institutions 
and elected women representatives in programmes relating to nutrition, sanitation 
and social awareness would contribute significantly towards improved outcomes 
and community participation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in coordination with other concerned Ministries, States 
and Union Territories, evolve appropriate mechanisms for greater participation of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions and elected women representatives in programmes 
relating to nutrition, sanitation and menstrual hygiene and strengthen community-
based awareness initiatives. 
13. NEED FOR GREATER ROLE OF PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVES AND 
STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONAL COORDINATION 
The Committee expressed its concern regarding inadequate consideration 
of suggestions made by Members of Parliament and Members of Legislative 
Assemblies at the Panchayat level. The Committee further note that effective local 
governance requires close coordination among elected representatives, 
Panchayati Raj Institutions and the administrative machinery. The Committee also 
note that District Planning Committees envisaged under Article 243ZD of the 
Constitution are intended to consolidate plans prepared by Panchayats and 
Municipalities and facilitate integrated district planning and coordination on matters 
of common interest. The Committee are conscious that while the autonomy and 
democratic character of Panchayati Raj Institutions should remain intact, 
constructive coordination among various democratic institutions is essential for 
effective grassroots governance and integrated development. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that States and Union Territories evolve suitable institutional 
mechanisms for ensuring better coordination among Panchayati Raj Institutions, 
Members of Parliament, Members of Legislative Assemblies and other 
stakeholders. The Committee further recommend that District Planning Committees 
be effectively operationalized and strengthened as forums for integrated planning 
and coordination and that suggestions made by elected representatives be 
accorded due consideration while preserving the constitutional status and 
autonomy of Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
14. NEED FOR EXAMINING THE IMPACT OF PARTY-BASED PANCHAYAT 
ELECTIONS 
The Committee is concerned to learn that party-based Panchayat elections 
often create divisions and bitterness at the village level and adversely affect social 

26 
 
 
harmony and consensus-building. The Committee further find that excessive 
politicisation of Panchayati Raj Institutions may weaken their character as 
institutions of grassroots democracy and participatory governance. The Committee 
are of the view that the implications of different electoral practices on the 
functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions merit careful examination. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj may 
undertake a study of the prevailing practices relating to Panchayat elections in 
different States and examine their impact on grassroots governance and social 
cohesion.  
15. NEED FOR ENSURING INCLUSION OF MAJOR HAMLETS AND 
HABITATIONS 
The Committee note the concerns expressed regarding several major 
habitations and hamlets which are not recognized as revenue villages are often 
deprived of developmental benefits and effective representation. The Committee 
are of the view that exclusion of such habitations runs contrary to the objective of 
inclusive and equitable rural development and may result in denial of benefits under 
various Government programmes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj take up the matter with States and Union Territories and 
explore suitable mechanisms to ensure that major habitations and hamlets are not 
deprived of developmental benefits and effective representation merely on account 
of their non-recognition as revenue villages. 
16. NEED FOR SPECIAL SUPPORT TO TRIBAL AND FINANCIALLY WEAK 
PANCHAYATS 
The Committee note that Panchayats situated in Scheduled Areas, tribal 
regions and economically weaker areas face unique challenges relating to 
infrastructure, finances and institutional capacities. The need for providing 
additional support to Panchayats in such areas and ensuring effective 
implementation of the provisions relating to Scheduled Areas has also been 
highlighted. The Committee are of the view that a uniform approach may not 
adequately address the special developmental requirements of these regions. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in 
consultation with States and other stakeholders, evolve suitable mechanisms for 
providing additional financial and institutional support to Panchayats located in 
Scheduled Areas and backward regions. The Committee also recommend that 
special attention be given to strengthening Gram Sabhas and promoting 
participatory governance in such areas. The Committee further recommend that the 
Ministry take up with the Sixteenth Finance Commission the need for evolving 
suitable mechanisms for providing additional support to tribal and financially weak 
Panchayats. These initiatives are required to improve living standard, promote 
education and ensure inclusive growth for the rural population. 
17. NEED FOR COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW AND NEXT GENERATION 
PANCHAYAT REFORMS 
The Committee note that more than three decades have elapsed since the 
enactment of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992. During this 

27 
 
 
period, Panchayati Raj Institutions have emerged as important instruments of 
democratic decentralization and have contributed significantly towards promoting 
inclusive governance and participatory development. The Committee further note 
that while substantial progress has been achieved in ensuring regular elections and 
representation of weaker sections and women, challenges relating to uneven 
devolution, inadequate finances, shortage of functionaries, weak institutional 
capacities, declining participation in Gram Sabhas and deficiencies in coordination 
among the three tiers continue to persist. The Committee are of the considered view 
that after more than three decades of experience, the time has come to move 
beyond the mere creation of institutions and focus on strengthening their 
effectiveness, responsiveness and capacity to deliver sustainable and inclusive 
development. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj undertake a comprehensive review of the functioning of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions in consultation with States, experts and other stakeholders and 
formulate a roadmap for the next generation of Panchayat reforms. Such a roadmap 
should focus on deepening democratic decentralization, strengthening institutional 
capacities, enhancing financial sustainability, promoting digital governance and 
ensuring greater citizen participation so as to realize the constitutional vision 
embodied in the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992. The Committee 
further recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj institutionalize robust 
performance assessment and monitoring mechanisms and promote evidence-
based planning and decision-making at the grassroots level through appropriate 
indices and data-driven frameworks. The Committee also recommend that local 
development strategies of Panchayats be aligned with the themes relating to 
Localization of Sustainable Development Goals and that greater emphasis be laid 
on convergence of Central and State schemes, outcome-oriented planning, socio-
economic empowerment and sustainable rural development. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
03 August, 2026 
12 Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj 

28 
 
 
Annexure I


29 
 
 


30 
 
 


31 
 
 


32 
 
 


33 
 
 


34 
 
 


35 
 
 


36 
 
 


37 
 
 


38 
 
 


39 
 
 
 
  


40 
 
Annexure II 
State/UT-wise status provisions of reservation of seats and offices of 
chairpersons for women in PRIs 
(A) State/UT-wise status of 50% reservation of seats and offices of chairpersons for 
women in PRIs  
 
Sr. 
No. 
State/UT 50% reservation of ‘Seats’ 
for women at all levels of 
Panchayats has been 
provided under- 
50% reservation of 
‘Offices of chairperson’ 
for women at all levels of 
Panchayats has been 
provided under- 
Remarks 
1 Andhra Pradesh The Andhra Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Reservation of seats 
and offices of Gram Panchayats, Mandal Parishads and 
Zilla Parishads) Rules, 2006 notified on 06.06.2006, vide 
amendment of Rules on 07.04.2011. 
As amended vide ‘Amendment to 
the Andhra Pradesh Panchayat Raj 
(Reservation of seats and offices of 
Gram Panchayats, Mandal 
Parishads and Zilla Parishads) 
Rules, 2006’ notified on 
07.04.2011. 
2 Assam Sec-9(3), 67(1) of ‘The 
Assam Panchayat Act, 1994’ 
notified on 06.05.1994. 
Sec-10(2)(b), 38(1)(b), 
70A(3)* of ‘The Assam 
Panchayat Act, 1994’ 
notified on 06.05.1994. 
*Section 70A has been 
inserted in the principal 
Act vide ‘The Assam 
Panchayat (Amendment) 
Act, 2001’ notified on 
19.10.2001.  
As amended vide ‘The Assam 
Panchayat (Amendment) Act, 
2011’ notified on 25.04.2011. 
3 Bihar Sec-13(2)&(3), 38(2)&(3), 
65(2)&(3) of ‘The Bihar 
Panchayati Raj Act, 2006’ 
notified vide the Bihar Act 
No. 6 of 2006. 
Sec-15(5)(ii)&(iii), 
40(2)(ii)&(iii), 
67(2)&(ii)&(iii) of ‘The 
Bihar Panchayati Raj Act, 
2006, notified vide the 
Bihar Act No. 6 of 2006. 
‘The Bihar Panchayati Raj Act, 
1993’ has been replaced by ‘The 
Bihar Panchayati Raj Act, 2006.  
4 Chhattisgarh Sec-13(6), 23(5), 30(5) of 
‘The Chhattisgarh Panchayati 
Raj Avam Garam Swaraj 
Abhiniyam, 1993’ notified on 
25.01.1994.  
Sec-17(3), 25(2)(i), 
32(2)(i) of ‘The 
Chhattisgarh Panchayati 
Raj Avam Garam Swaraj 
Abhiniyam, 1993’ 
notified on 25.01.1994. 
As amended vide ‘The Chhattisgarh 
Panchayat Raj (Sanshodhan) 
Adhiniyam, 2008’ notified on 
23.05.2008. 
5 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and 
Daman & Diu  
Sec-12(7), 55(5) of “The 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and 
Daman and Diu Panchayat 
Regulation, 2012” notified on 
09.04.2021. 
Sec-12(9)(b), 61(5) of 
“The Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and Daman and 
Diu Panchayat 
Regulation, 2012” 
notified on 09.04.2021. 
This Regulation has been notified 
after incorporating provisions of 
‘the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and 
Daman Diu (Adaptation of State 
Law and Presidential Regulations) 
Order, 2020’ dated 08.10.2020. 
6 Gujarat Sec-9(5)(c) , 10(5)(c), 
77(2)(b) of ‘The Gujarat 
Panchayat Act, 1993’ notified 
on 26.08.1993.  
Sec-51(2), 63(2)(b), 
77(2)(b) of ‘The Gujarat 
Panchayat Act, 1993’ 
notified on 26.08.1993. 
Amendment made vide ‘The 
Gujarat Local Authorities Laws 
(Amendment) Act. 2009, assented 
to by the Governor on 04.11.2014.  
7 Haryana Sec-9(3), 59(3), 120(3) of 
‘The Haryana Panchayati Raj 
Sec-9(6), 59(6), 120(6) of 
‘The Haryana Panchayati 
As amended vide ‘The Haryana 
Panchayati Raj (Second 

41 
 
Sr. 
No. 
State/UT 50% reservation of ‘Seats’ 
for women at all levels of 
Panchayats has been 
provided under- 
50% reservation of 
‘Offices of chairperson’ 
for women at all levels of 
Panchayats has been 
provided under- 
Remarks 
Act, 1994’ notified on 
22.04.1994.  
Raj Act, 1994’ notified on 
22.04.1994.  
Amendment) Act, 2020’ notified on 
02.02.2021.  
8 Himachal 
Pradesh 
Sec-8(3A), 78(5A), 89(5A) of 
‘The Himachal Pradesh 
Panchayati Raj Act, 1994’ 
notified on 23.04.1994. 
Sec-125(2) of ‘The 
Himachal Pradesh 
Panchayati Raj Act, 1994’ 
notified on 23.04.1994. 
Amendment made vide ‘The 
Himachal Pradesh Panchayati Raj 
(Amendment) Act, 2008’ notified 
on 13.04.2008. have been 
incorporated in the Principal Act.  
9 Jharkhand Sec-17(A)(4), 36(A)(4), 
51(A)(4) of ‘The Jharkhand 
Panchayati Raj Act, 2001’ 
notified on 10.05.2001. 
Sec-21(A)(1)(iv), 
40A91)(iv), 55(A)(1)(iv) 
of ‘The Jharkhand 
Panchayat Raj Act, 2001’ 
notified on 10.05.2001. 
As amended vide ‘The Jharkhand 
Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 
2010’ notified on 04.09.2010. 
10 Karnataka Sec-5(4), 123(3), 162(3) of 
‘The Karnataka Gram Swaraj 
and Panchayat Raj Act, 1993, 
notified on 30.04.1993. 
Sec-44(2)(c), 138(2)(c), 
177(2) (c) of ‘The 
Karnataka Gram Swaraj 
and Panchayat Raj Act, 
1993, notified on 
30.04.1993. 
As amended vide ‘The Karnataka 
Panchayath Raj (Amendment) Act, 
2010, notified on 23.07.2010. 
11 Kerala Sec-7(6), 8(6), 9(6) of ‘The 
Kerala Panchayat Raj Act, 
1994’ notified in 1994. 
Sec-153(3)(b) of ‘The 
Kerala Panchayat Act, 
1994’ notified in 1994. 
As amended vide ‘The Kerala 
Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 
2009’ notified on 07.10.2009. 
12 Madhya Pradesh Sec-13(6), 25(5), 30(5) of 
‘The Madhya Pradesh 
Panchayat Raj Avam Gram 
Swaraj Adhiniyam, 1993’ 
notified on 25.01.1994. 
Sec-17(3), 25(2)(i), 
32(2)(i) of ‘The Madhya 
Pradesh Panchayat Raj 
Avam Gram Swaraj 
Adhiniyam, 1993’ 
notified on 25.01.1994. 
Amendment made vide ‘The 
Madhya Pradesh Panchayat Raj 
Avam Gram Swaraj (Sanshodhan) 
Adhiniyam, 2007’ notified on 
25.05.2007, have been incorporated 
in the Principal Act.  
13 Maharashtra Sec-10(2)(d) of ‘The 
Maharashtra Village 
Panchayats Act, 1959’ 
notified on 30.01.1959. 
 
Sec-58(1B)(d), 12(2)(d) of 
‘The Maharashtra Zilla 
Parishads and Panchayat 
Samitis Act, 1961’ notified on 
13.03.1962. 
Sec-30(4)(c) of ‘The 
Maharashtra Village 
Panchayats Act, 1959’ 
notified on 30.01.1959. 
 
Sec-67(5)(c), 42(4)(c) of 
‘The Maharashtra Zilla 
Parishads and Panchayat 
Samitis Act, 1961’ 
notified on 13.03.1962. 
As amended vide ‘The Bombay 
Village Panchayats and the 
Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and 
Panchayat Samitis Amendment 
Act, 2011’ notified on 21.04.2011. 
14 Odisha Sec-10(3)(c) of ‘The Orissa 
Grama Panchayats Act, 1964’ 
notified on 21.01.1965.  
 
Sec-16(2)(c) of ‘The Orissa 
Panchayat Samiti Act, 1959’ 
notified on 19.02.1960. 
 
Sec-6(3)(c) of ‘The Orissa 
Zilla Parishad Act, 1991’ 
notified on 02.07.1991. 
Sec-10(5)(e) of ‘The 
Orissa Grama Panchayats 
Act, 1964’ notified on 
21.01.1965.  
 
Sec-16(3-a)(ii-c) of ‘The 
Orissa Panchayat Samiti 
Act, 1959’ notified on 
19.02.1960. 
 
Sec-6(3-A)(d)(iii) of ‘The 
Orissa Zilla Parishad Act, 
As amended vide ‘The Odisha 
Panchayat Laws (Amendment) Act, 
2011’ notified on 17.05.2011. 

42 
 
Sr. 
No. 
State/UT 50% reservation of ‘Seats’ 
for women at all levels of 
Panchayats has been 
provided under- 
50% reservation of 
‘Offices of chairperson’ 
for women at all levels of 
Panchayats has been 
provided under- 
Remarks 
1991’ notified on 
02.07.1991. 
15 Punjab Sec-11(3), 102(3), 165(3) of 
‘The Punjab Panchayati Raj 
Act, 1994’ notified on 
21.04.1994. 
Sec-12(2), 106(b), 169(b) 
of ‘The Punjab 
Panchayati Raj Act, 1994’ 
notified on 21.04.1994. 
As amended vide ‘The Punjab 
Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 
2017’ notified on 25.07.2017. 
16 Rajasthan Sec-15(6) of ‘The Rajasthan 
Panchayati Raj Act, 1994’ 
notified on 23.4.1994. 
Sec-16(5) of ‘The 
Rajasthan Panchayati Raj 
Act, 1994’ notified on 
23.4.1994. 
Amendment made vide ‘The 
Rajasthan Panchayati Raj (Second 
Amendment) Act, 2008’ notified on 
11.04.2008, have been incorporated 
in the Principal Act.  
17 Sikkim Sec-13(7), 500(5) of ‘The 
Sikkim Panchayat Act, 1993’ 
notified on 18.10.1993. 
Sec-17(2)(b), 54(2)(b) of 
‘The Sikkim Panchayat 
Act, 1993’ notified on 
18.10.1993. 
As amended vide ‘The Sikkim 
Panchayat (Amendment) Act, 
2011’ notified on 17.12.2011. 
18 Tamil Nadu Sec-11(3), 20(3), 32(3) of 
‘The Tamil Nadu Panchayats 
Act, 1994’ notified on 
22.07.1994. 
Sec-57(1-D) of ‘The 
Tamil Nadu Panchayats 
Act, 1994’ notified on 
22.07.1994. 
As amended vide ‘The Tamil Nadu 
Panchayats (Amendment) Act, 
2016’ notified on 27.02.2016. 
19 Telangana Sec-9(6), 146(5), 175(4) of 
‘The Telangana Panchayat 
Raj Act, 2018’ notified on 
30.03.2018. 
Sec-17(5), 147(6), 176(5) 
of ‘The Telangana 
Panchayat Raj Act, 2018’ 
notified on 30.03.2018. 
- 
20 Tripura Sec-14(3), 72(3), 124(3) of 
‘The Tripura Panchayat Act, 
1993’ notified on 10.11.1993. 
Sec-20(4), 79(2), 131(2) 
of ‘The Tripura Panchayat 
Act, 1993’ notified on 
10.11.1993. 
As amended vide ‘The Tripura 
Panchayat (Fifth Amendment) Act, 
2010’ notified on 20.04.2010. 
21 Uttarakhand Sec-11(2), 56(b), 93(b) of 
‘The Uttarakhand Panchayati 
Raj Act, 2016, notified on 
07.04.2016.  
Sec-10A(3), 55A(3), 
92A(3) of ‘The 
Uttarakhand Panchayati 
Raj Act, 2016, notified on 
07.04.2016. 
As amended vide ‘The Uttarakhand 
Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 
2019’ notified on 25.07.2019. 
22 West Bengal Sec-4(2), 94(20(ii), 140(2)(ii) 
of ‘The West Bengal 
Panchayat Act 1973’ notified 
on 17.01.1974.  
Sec-9(1), 98(1), 143(1) of 
‘The West Bengal 
Panchayat Act 1973’ 
notified on 17.01.1974. 
As amended vide ‘The West Bengal 
Panchayat (Amendment) Act 2012’ 
notified on 17.05.2012. 
23 Lakshadweep Sec-12(8), 58(5) of ‘The 
Lakshadweep Panchayat 
Regulation, 2022’ notified on 
19.09.2022.  
12(10)(ii) of ‘The 
Lakshadweep Panchayat 
Regulation, 2022’ 
notified on 19.09.2022. 
- 
 
(B) States/UTs, where Constitutional provisions of Article 243D regarding ‘not less than one-
third’ reservation of ‘Seats’ and ‘Offices of chairperson’ for women in PRIs are in force  
 
Sr. 
No. 
State/UT Remarks 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar Island 
Presently, provisions of Article 243D of the Constitution, i.e. ‘Not less than one-third’ reservation 
of ‘Seats’ and ‘Offices of chairperson’ for women at all levels of Panchayats under Panchayati 
Regulations/Rules of the UT, are in force.  

43 
 
Sr. 
No. 
State/UT Remarks 
 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Presently, provisions of Article 243D of the Constitution, i.e. ‘Not less than one-third’ reservation 
of ‘Seats’ and ‘Offices of chairperson’ for women at all levels of Panchayats under State 
Panchayati Raj Act/Rules, are in force.  
 
3 Goa Presently, provisions of Article 243D of the Constitution, i.e. ‘Not less than one-third’ reservation 
of ‘Seats’ and ‘Offices of chairperson’ for women at all levels of Panchayats under State 
Panchayati Raj Act/Rules, are in force.  
 
4 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
These are newly created UTs w.e.f. 31.10.2019 after bifurcation of erstwhile State of Jammu & 
Kashmir. These UTs have adopted the provisions of ‘Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act 
1989, including provisions of Article 243D of the Constitution, i.e. ‘Not less than one-third’ 
reservation of ‘Seats’ and ‘Offices of chairperson’ for women at all levels of Panchayats under 
Panchayati Regulations/Rules of the UT, are in force. 
 
5 Ladakh 
6 Puducherry Presently, provisions of Article 243D of the Constitution, i.e. ‘Not less than one-third’ reservation 
of ‘Seats’ and ‘Offices of chairperson’ for women at all levels of Panchayats under Panchayati 
Regulations/Rules of the UT, are in force.  
7 Manipur Presently, provisions of Article 243D of the Constitution, i.e. ‘Not less than one-third’ reservation 
of ‘Seats’ and ‘Offices of chairperson’ for women at all levels of Panchayats under State 
Panchayati Raj Act/Rules, are in force.  
 
8 Uttar Pradesh Presently, provisions of Article 243D of the Constitution, i.e. ‘Not less than one-third’ reservation 
of ‘Seats’ and ‘Offices of chairperson’ for women at all levels of Panchayats under State 
Panchayati Raj Act/Rules, are in force.  
 
** 
 
 
 
 
  

44 
 
Annexure III 
Advisory dated 5th March, 2026 issued to all the States/UTs requesting to sensitize 
the Women Elected Representative and Panchayat officials that Panchayat meetings 
are attended by WERs themselves and any proxy representation in meetings, training 
programmes or public events etc. should not be entertained. 
 
 


45 
 
Annexure IV 
Ranking of States/UTs in Devolution Index (DI) and Sub-indices 
Rank DI Framework Functions Finances Functionaries Capacity Building Accountability 
State Score  State Score  State Score  State Score  State Score  State Score  State Score 
General Category States 
1 Karnataka 72.23  Kerala 83.56  Tamil Nadu 60.24  Karnataka 70.65  Gujarat 90.94  Telangana 86.19  Karnataka 81.33
2 Kerala 70.59  Maharashtra 74.74  Karnataka 57.62  Kerala 62.89  Tamil Nadu 84.25  Tamil Nadu 84.29  Kerala 81.18
3 Tamil Nadu 68.38  Karnataka 74.43  Odisha 57.46  Tamil Nadu 55.78  Kerala 82.99  Gujarat 83.96  Maharashtra 80.36
4 Maharashtra 61.44  Haryana 73.3  Rajasthan 56.13  Rajasthan 54.56  Karnataka 80.11  Goa 77.7  Uttar Pradesh 76.07
5 Uttar Pradesh 60.07  Madhya Pradesh 70  Kerala 53.86  Odisha 53.57  Chhattisgarh 78.33 Andhra Pradesh 76.69 Tamil Nadu 71
6 Gujarat 58.26  Odisha 69.2  Uttar Pradesh 46.89 West Bengal 52.96  Bihar 75.13  Uttar Pradesh 74.44 Andhra Pradesh 60.49
7 Rajasthan 56.67  Rajasthan 68.54  Maharashtra 46.52 Uttar Pradesh 51.76 Maharashtra 73.63 Maharashtra 73.35 Telangana 60.43
8 West Bengal 56.52  Chhattisgarh 68.51  Chhattisgarh 42.39 Chhattisgarh 51.45  Andhra Pradesh 68.78 Karnataka 71.59  Chhattisgarh 58.17
9 Chhattisgarh 56.26  Tamil Nadu 66.83  Gujarat 41.23  Telangana 46.86  West Bengal 67.76 Kerala 71.11  West Bengal 57.87
10 Telangana 55.1  West Bengal 62.3  Madhya Pradesh 39.47 Bihar 43.86  Rajasthan 64.03  West Bengal 70.63 Odisha 51.92
11 Andhra Pradesh 54.43 Gujarat 61.65  Telangana 38.77  Andhra Pradesh 43.19 Uttar Pradesh 63.13 Madhya Pradesh 70 Bihar 51.64
12 Madhya Pradesh 50.94 Andhra Pradesh 60.08 West Bengal 33.07 Maharashtra 42.96  Madhya Pradesh 62.22 Rajasthan 61.43  Gujarat 47.9
13 Odisha 50.03  Uttar Pradesh 54.64  Punjab 31.97  Madhya Pradesh 42.34 Telangana 58.01  Bihar 55.27  Haryana 41.93
14 Bihar 48.24  Goa 52.88  Andhra Pradesh 30.5 Gujarat 41.63  Goa 46.31  Chhattisgarh 47.61 Rajasthan 41.43
15 Haryana 39.33  Bihar 49.76  Jharkhand 27.56  Haryana 40.38  Haryana 38.48  Odisha 43.43  Madhya 
Pradesh 36.55
16 Goa 37.71  Punjab 47.26  Bihar 18.69  Punjab 36.36  Jharkhand 27.83  Haryana 35.35  Goa 31.75
17 Punjab 29.34  Telangana 45.35  Haryana 16.82  Jharkhand 30.05  Odisha 27.42  Punjab 26.34  Punjab 24.87
18 Jharkhand 27.73  Jharkhand 42.3  Goa 6.63  Goa 26.88  Punjab 8.2  Jharkhand 24.72  Jharkhand 16.47

46 
 
Northeastern / Hilly Area States 
1 Tripura 57.58  Uttarakhand 70.95  Sikkim 42.59  Tripura 59.16  Himachal 
Pradesh 70.06 Himachal 
Pradesh 83.68 Tripura 70.69
2 Himachal Pradesh 53.17 Tripura 66.5  Assam 28.66  Himachal 
Pradesh 48.41 Assam 65.12  Tripura 76.82  Assam 57.14
3 Uttarakhand 49.11  Sikkim 65.27  Himachal 
Pradesh 23.01 Uttarakhand 47.11  Uttarakhand 60.49 Assam 71.96  Uttarakhand 52.72
4 Assam 49.06  Himachal Pradesh 62.22 Tripura 21.5  Sikkim 43.5  Tripura 52.22  Uttarakhand 56.02 Himachal 
Pradesh 39.41
5 Sikkim 43.81  Assam 54.04  Uttarakhand 16.68 Assam 34.06  Sikkim 31.42  Sikkim 53.23  Sikkim 34.94
6 Arunachal Pradesh# 17.96 Arunachal 
Pradesh# 41.5 Arunachal 
Pradesh# 12.7 Manipur# 13.17  Manipur# 21.4  Arunachal 
Pradesh# 37.4 Manipur# 28.75
7 Manipur# 17.13  Manipur# 34.05  Manipur# 11.23  Arunachal 
Pradesh# 6.83 Arunachal 
Pradesh# 5.74 Manipur# 3.75  Arunachal 
Pradesh# 22.56
Union Territories 
1 Jammu and 
Kashmir 27.85 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 55.21 Jammu and 
Kashmir 11.88 Puducherry 16.16  Lakshadweep# 39.53 Jammu and 
Kashmir 55.08 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 45.73
2 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 27.15 Lakshadweep# 31.42 Ladakh 11.08  Jammu and 
Kashmir 13.29 Jammu and 
Kashmir 36.97 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 54.82 Jammu and 
Kashmir 39.76
3 Lakshadweep# 18.32  Jammu and 
Kashmir 23.07 Lakshadweep# 10.36 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 9.09 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and 
Daman & Diu# 
31.69 Ladakh 29.32  Puducherry 29.33
4 Ladakh 16.18  Ladakh 22.21  Puducherry 4.63  
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and 
Daman & Diu# 
5.45 Ladakh 25.25  Lakshadweep# 15.18 Lakshadweep# 28.13
5 Puducherry 16.16  
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman 
& Diu# 
22.06 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 4.5 Lakshadweep# 3.99 Puducherry 21.49  Puducherry 13.75  Ladakh 27.43
6 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman 
& Diu# 
13.62 Puducherry 9.31  
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and 
Daman & Diu# 
0 Ladakh 0  Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 20.94 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and 
Daman & Diu# 
8.57 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and 
Daman & Diu# 
24.91
 National Average 43.89  54.29  29.18  37.04  50.96  54.63 47.51
Source: Report titled “Status of Devolution to Panchayats in States - An Indicative Evidence-Based Ranking, 2024”  
Note: #States for which previous data is used.

47 
 
Annexure V 
 
The eligibility conditions for Tied Grants and Untied Grants under the Fifteenth 
Finance Commission 
 
Eligibility criteria for release of 15th Finance Commission Grants to Rural Local Bodies: 
The following conditions have been stipulated in the Operational guidelines of XV 
Finance Commission for the release of 15th Central Finance Commission Grants to Rural 
Local Bodies: 
 
(i) Untied Grants – (Recommendation for release is processed by MoPR) 
 
a) RLBs shall be deemed to be eligible for the grants, if they are duly constituted 
i.e. if duly elected bodies are in place except for States/ Areas where Part IX of 
the Constitution does not apply. In case, all the bodies are not duly constituted 
grants shall be released to the State on actual allocation / pro-rata basis for duly 
constituted only.  
 
b) Uploading of GPDPs/BPDPs/ DPDPs of the RLBs in eGramSwaraj 
 
c) RLBs have to mandatorily onboard on eGramSwaraj – PFMS for XV FC 
Grants’ transactions. 
 
d) RLBs to mandatorily prepare and make available online both provisional 
account of previous year and audited accounts of year before previous year to 
avail the grants 
 
e) Unspent Balance of XIV FC Grants with the State should not be more than 10 
% of the instalment under consideration. 
 
f) At least 50 % of the Untied grants released during the previous year have been 
utilized (valid only for release of 2nd installment of the FY). 
 
g) All states which have not done so, must constitute State Finance Commission 
(SFC), act upon their recommendations and lay the explanatory memorandum 
as to the action taken thereon before the State legislature on or before March 
2024. After March 2024, no grants shall be released to State that has not 
complied with the Constitutional provisions in respect of the SFC and these 
conditions. 
 
(ii) Tied Grants – (Recommendation for release is processed by DDWS) 
 
a) RLBs shall be deemed to be eligible for the grants, if they are duly constituted 
i.e. if duly elected bodies are in place except for States/ Areas where Part IX of 
the Constitution does not apply. In case, all the bodies are not duly constituted 
grants shall be released to the State on actual allocation/pro-rata basis for duly 
constituted only. 
 
b) Uploading of GPDPs/BPDPs/ DPDPs of the RLBs in eGramSwaraj 
 

48 
 
c) RLBs have to mandatorily onboard on eGramSwaraj – PFMS for XV FC 
Grants’ transactions. 
d) RLBs to mandatorily prepare and make available online both provisional 
account of previous year and audited accounts of year before previous year to 
avail the grants 
 
e) Unspent Balance of XIV FC Grants with the State should not be more than 10 
% of the instalment under consideration. 
 
f) At least 50 % of the Untied grants released during the previous year have been 
utilized (valid only for release of 2nd installment of the FY). 
 
g) All states which have not done so, must constitute State Finance Commission 
(SFC), act upon their recommendations and lay the explanatory memorandum 
as to the action taken thereon before the State legislature on or before March 
2024. After March 2024, no grants shall be released to State that has not 
complied with the Constitutional provisions in respect of the SFC and these 
conditions. 
***  
 
  

49 
 
Annexure VI 
State wise progress on AuditOnline for the audit period 2023-24 as on 05.03.2026 
 
S.No. State Name No. of 
PRIs 
Audit 
Plans 
prepared 
% 
progress 
Audit 
Reports 
generated 
% 
progress 
1 Andhra Pradesh 14,001 13,999 99.99% 13,994 99.95% 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 2,133 2,131 99.91% 2,125 99.62% 
3 Assam 2,884 2,418 83.84% 2,418 83.84% 
4 Bihar 8,627 8,626 99.99% 8,621 99.93% 
5 Chhattisgarh 11,829 11,825 99.97% 11,809 99.83% 
6 Goa 193 191 98.96% 191 98.96% 
7 Gujarat 14,946 14,919 99.82% 14,880 99.56% 
8 Haryana 6,393 6,384 99.86% 6,360 99.48% 
9 Himachal Pradesh 3,708 3,708 100.00% 3,708 100.00% 
10 Jharkhand 4,635 4,633 99.96% 3,504 75.60% 
11 Karnataka 6,220 5,950 95.66% 5,950 95.66% 
12 Kerala 1,107 1,107 100.00% 1,107 100.00% 
13 Madhya Pradesh 23,377 23,376 100.00% 23,312 99.72% 
14 Maharashtra 28,341 28,313 99.90% 28,069 99.04% 
15 Manipur 3,823 - 0.00% - 0.00% 
16 Meghalaya 3 - 0.00% - 0.00% 
17 Mizoram 835 835 100.00% 810 97.01% 
18 Nagaland 1,326 - 0.00% - 0.00% 
19 Odisha 7,138 7,138 100.00% 7,133 99.93% 
20 Punjab 13,410 13,373 99.72% 13,307 99.23% 
21 Rajasthan 11,650 11,633 99.85% 11,381 97.69% 
22 Sikkim 205 205 100.00% 204 99.51% 
23 Tamil Nadu 12,949 12,951 100.02% 12,949 100.00% 
24 Telangana 13,344 13,341 99.98% 13,313 99.77% 
25 Tripura 1,278 1,260 98.59% 1,260 98.59% 
26 Uttarakhand 7,892 7,892 100.00% 7,890 99.97% 
27 Uttar Pradesh 58,655 58,649 99.99% 58,598 99.90% 
28 West Bengal 3,706 3,594 96.98% 3,581 96.63% 
 Total 2,64,608 2,58,451 97.67% 2,56,474 96.93% 
 
 
 
 
  

50 
 
Annexure VII 
 
State wise progress on AuditOnline for the audit period 2024-25 as on 05.03.2026 
 
S.No. State Name No. of 
PRIs 
Audit 
Plans 
prepared 
% 
progress 
Audit 
Reports 
generated 
% 
progress 
1 Andhra Pradesh 14,000 13,942 99.59% 12,238 87.41% 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 2,135 1,212 56.77% 504 23.61% 
3 Assam 2,997 - 0.00% - 0.00% 
4 Bihar 8,625 7,599 88.10% 1,447 16.78% 
5 Chhattisgarh 11,892 471 3.96% - 0.00% 
6 Goa 193 116 60.10% - 0.00% 
7 Gujarat 14,968 14,936 99.79% 14,863 99.30% 
8 Haryana 6,395 6,377 99.72% 3,988 62.36% 
9 Himachal Pradesh 3,708 3,247 87.57% 2,908 78.43% 
10 Jharkhand 4,635 11 0.24% - 0.00% 
11 Karnataka 6,221 5,950 95.64% 5,949 95.63% 
12 Kerala 1,107 - 0.00% - 0.00% 
13 Madhya Pradesh 23,376 20,843 89.16% 12,040 51.51% 
14 Maharashtra 28,337 21,748 76.75% 13,460 47.50% 
15 Manipur 3,823 - 0.00% - 0.00% 
16 Meghalaya 6,857 - 0.00% - 0.00% 
17 Mizoram 843 2 0.24% - 0.00% 
18 Nagaland 1,327 - 0.00% - 0.00% 
19 Odisha 7,138 7,137 99.99% 5,232 73.30% 
20 Punjab 13,414 11,159 83.19% 10,158 75.73% 
21 Rajasthan 11,624 11,604 99.83% 7,268 62.53% 
22 Sikkim 205 205 100.00% 205 100.00% 
23 Tamil Nadu 12,949 9,472 73.15% 9,123 70.45% 
24 Telangana 13,598 13,300 97.81% 12,906 94.91% 
25 Tripura 1,278 1,277 99.92% 1,198 93.74% 
26 Uttarakhand 7,895 - 0.00% - 0.00% 
27 Uttar Pradesh 58,592 58,594 100.00% 37,357 63.76% 
28 West Bengal 3,706 3,594 96.98% 3,230 87.16% 
 Total 2,71,838 2,12,796 78.28% 1,54,074 56.68% 
 
 
 
 
  

51 
 
Annexure VIII 
 
State/UT-wise status of provisions of District Planning Committee 
S. 
No. 
State  Section & Act Verbatim / Relevant Provision Whether DPC 
mentioned in the 
State Panchayati 
Raj Act  
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Section 3 – Andhra 
Pradesh District 
Planning 
Committees Act, 
2005 
There shall be constituted for 
every district a District Planning 
Committee to consolidate the 
plans prepared by the Panchayats 
and the Municipalities and to 
prepare a draft development plan 
for the district. 
Not mentioned in 
Andhra Pradesh 
Panchayat Raj 
Act, 1994 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Panchayati Raj 
Act, 1997 
Not mentioned No 
3 Assam Sec.3 – Assam 
Panchayat Act, 
1994 
State Government shall constitute 
District Planning Committee to 
consolidate plans prepared by 
Panchayats and Municipalities. 
 
Yes 
4 Bihar Sec. 167 – Bihar 
Panchayat Raj Act, 
2006 
The Government shall constitute 
in every district a District 
Planning Committee to 
consolidate the plans prepared by 
the Panchayats and Municipalities 
in the district and to prepare a 
draft development plan for the 
district as a whole. 
Yes 
5 Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh 
Panchayat Raj 
Adhiniyam, 1993 
 
Not mentioned  No  
6 Goa Sec. 239 – Goa 
Panchayat Raj Act, 
1994 
Government shall constitute in 
every district, a District Planning 
Committee to consolidate the 
plans prepared by the Zilla 
Panchayat, Panchayats, and 
Municipal Councils in the district 
as a whole. 
Yes 
7 Gujarat Gujarat 
Panchayats Act, 
1993 
Not mentioned No 
8 Haryana Sec. 214 – Haryana 
Panchayati Raj 
Act, 1994 
District Planning Committee 
constituted under the Haryana 
Municipal Act, 1973, shall 
consolidate the plans prepared by 
the Gram Panchayats, Panchayat 
Samitis and Zila Parishads and 
also prepare a draft development 
plan for the district 
Yes 
 

52 
 
9 Himachal 
Pradesh 
Sec. 185 – 
Himachal Pradesh 
Panchayati Raj 
Act, 1994 
The Government shall constitute 
in every district a District 
Planning Committee to 
consolidate the plans prepared by 
the Zila Parishad, Panchayat 
Samitis, Gram Panchayats, 
Municipalities  
Yes 
10 Jharkhand Sec. 123 – 
Jharkhand 
Panchayati Raj 
Act, 2001 
there shall be constituted in every 
district a District Planning 
committee to consolidate the 
plans Prepared by the Panchayats 
and the Municipalities in the 
district 
Yes 
11 Karnataka Section 310 – The 
Karnataka Gram 
Swaraj & 
Panchayat Raj Act, 
1993 
The Government shall constitute 
in every district a District 
Planning Committee to 
consolidate the plans prepared by 
the Zilla Panchayats, Taluk 
Panchayats, Grama Panchayats 
Yes 
12 Kerala Sec. 175 – Kerala 
Panchayat Raj Act, 
1994 
The panchayat at every level shall 
prepare every year a development 
plan for the next year in respect of 
the functions vested in it 
Yes 
13 Madhya 
Pradesh 
MP Panchayat Raj 
and Gram Swaraj 
Adhiniyam, 1993 
Not mentioned  No 
14 Maharashtra Section 3 – 
Maharashtra 
District Planning 
Committees 
(Constitution and 
Functions) Act, 
1998  
There shall be a District Planning 
Committee for every district 
consisting of not less than thirty 
and not more than fifty members 
as provided sub-section (2) to 
consolidate the plans prepared by 
the Panchayats and the 
Municipalities in the district 
Not mentioned in 
Maharashtra Zilla 
Parishads and 
Panchayat Samitis 
Act, 1961 
15 Manipur Sec 96 – Manipur 
Panchayati Raj 
Act, 1994 
The Government shall constitute 
in every district a District 
Planning Committee to 
consolidate the plans prepared by 
the Zilla Parishad, Gram 
Panchayats, Nagar Panchayat, 
Municipal Council and Municipal 
Corporation 
Yes 
16 Meghalaya Not applicable 
(Sixth Schedule) 
Panchayati Raj system not 
applicable. 
No 
17 Mizoram Not applicable 
(Sixth Schedule) 
Panchayati Raj system not 
applicable. 
No 
18 Nagaland Not applicable 
(Art. 371A) 
Panchayati Raj system not 
implemented. Local governance is 
managed by traditional village 
and area councils under 
the Nagaland Village and Area 
Councils Act, 1978. 
No 
19 Odisha Odisha Panchayati 
Raj Act, 1994 
Not mentioned  No 

53 
 
 
  
20 Punjab Sec. 214 – Punjab 
Panchayati Raj 
Act, 1994 
The District Planning Committee 
constituted in terms of the 
provisions of Article 243 ZD of 
the Constitution of India shall 
consolidate the plans prepared by 
the Panchayats 
Yes 
21 Rajasthan Sec. 121 – 
Rajasthan 
Panchayati Raj 
Act, 1994 
Government shall constitute 
District Planning Committee to 
consolidate plans of Panchayats 
and municipalities. 
Yes 
22 Sikkim Sec. 127 – Sikkim 
Panchayat Act, 
1993 
Provision for constitution of 
District Planning Committee for 
district planning. 
Yes 
23 Tamil Nadu Sec. 241 – Tamil 
Nadu Panchayats 
Act, 1994 
Constitution of District Planning 
Committee. 
Yes 
24 Telangana Telangana 
Panchayat Raj Act, 
2018 
Not Mentioned  No 
25 Tripura Sec. 222 – Tripura 
Panchayats Act, 
1993 
The Government shall constitute 
in every District, a Planning 
Committee to consolidate the 
plans prepared by the Zilla 
Parishad, the Panchayat Samitis, 
the Gram Panchayats 
Yes 
26 Uttar Pradesh Sec.3 - U.P. 
District Planning 
Committee Act, 
1999  
Provision relating to constitution 
of District Planning Committee. 
Not mentioned in 
The U.P. 
Panchayat Raj 
Act, 1947 
27 Uttarakhand Sec. 104 – 
Uttarakhand 
Panchayati Raj 
Act, 2016 
Constitution of District Planning 
Committee. 
Yes 
28 West Bengal Sec.8 & 211 – 
West Bengal 
Panchayat Act, 
1973 
Power of State Planning Board 
and the District Planning 
Committee 
Yes 

54 
 
Union Territories 
S. 
No. 
State  Section & Act Verbatim / Relevant 
Provision 
Whether DPC 
mentioned in the 
State 
Panchayati Raj 
Act  
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
Sec 41 (D) - A&N 
Islands Panchayat 
Regulation, 1994 
Provision for District 
Planning Committee. 
Yes 
2 Chandigarh Sec 214 - The 
Punjab Panchayati 
Raj Act, 1994 
DPC shall consolidate the 
plans prepared by the 
Panchayats, in every district, 
and shall also prepare draft 
development plan for the 
district 
Yes 
3 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and 
Daman & Diu 
Sec 119 - The 
Daman and Diu 
Panchayat 
Regulation, 2012 
The Administrator for the 
purpose of undertaking 
district planning shall 
constitute a District Planning 
Committee consisting of such 
members as may be 
prescribed. 
Yes 
4 Delhi THE NEW DELHI 
MUNICIPAL 
COUNCIL ACT, 
1994 
Not mentioned  No 
5 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Sec 47(A) - J&K 
Panchayati Raj Act, 
1989 
Provision for composition of 
District Planning Committee 
Yes 
6 Ladakh Sec 3 - The Ladakh 
Autonomus Hill 
Development 
Councils Act, 1995 
Planning done through 
Autonomous Hill 
Development Council. 
Yes 
7 Lakshadweep Sec 127 - 
Lakshadweep 
Panchayat 
Regulation, 2022 
The Administrator for the 
purpose of undertaking 
District Planning shall 
constitute a District Planning 
Committee 
Yes 
8 Puducherry The Puducherry 
Village and 
commute Panchayat 
Act, 1973 
Not mentioned  No 
 
 
 
  

55 
 
Annexure IX 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE 
COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY, 24th MARCH, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1715 hrs in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT   
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
3. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
4. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
5. Shri Jugal Kishore 
6. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
10. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
11. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
12. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
13. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
15. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
16. Smt. Rajathi 
17. Shri Nagendra Ray 
18. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
19. Smt. P. T. Usha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj  
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1. Shri Vivek Bharadwaj Secretary 
2. Ms. Mukta Shekhar Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Rajesh Kumar Singh Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Vipul Ujjwal Director 
5. Shri Ramit Maurya Director 
6. Shri Vijay Kumar Director 
 

56 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of (i) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX; (ii) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX; and for having a briefing by the representatives of the Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj on the subject “Effectiveness of the implementation of Constitution 
73rd Amendment Act with special reference to coordination in three-tier system of 
Panchayat”. 
 
3. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
[Thereafter the representatives from the Ministry of Panchayati Raj were called in] 
 
4. After welcoming the representatives, the Chairperson in his opening remarks 
stressed upon the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act (1992), which granted 
constitutional status to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and established a three-tier 
system at the village, intermediate, and district levels. The Chairperson, then asked 
the representatives of the Ministry to introduce themselves and place their views on 
the subject.  
 
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj after taking permission from the 
Chairperson, made a Power Point Presentation on the above-mentioned subject 
covering various aspects of above amendment with special focus on its 
implementation alongwith challenges face etc.  
 
6. Highlights of Ministry’s PPT are as under :-  
 
1. Constitutional and Structural Provisions: Three tier structure, Direct 
elections, Five-year tenure, State Election Commission, State Finance 
Commission, disqualification of Members; 
2. Reservation Provision - SCs/STs at all tiers, Minimum 33% reservation 
for women; 
3. Gram Sabha Provision - As foundation of local self-govt, functions of GS 
(Approval, Monitoring, Accountability), Ministry’s Advisory for regular GS 
meetings and quorum; 
4. Devolution of Powers - State empowered for possible 29 subjects in XI 
Schedule; 
5. Devolution Index Study - Six indicators (legal framework, functions, 
finances, Functionaries, Infrastructure, Capacity Building), Improvement 
in Devolution from 39.9% to 43.9%; 
6. Financial Powers to States - Act 243H power to levy taxes, tolls, fees, 
Grants-in-aid, OSR, Finance Commission grants increased; 
7. Accountability & Audit provisions - Mandatory audited accounts for 
release of Finance Commission grants; 

57 
 
8. Elections & legal provisions - Court can interfere only through election 
petition; 
9. Coordination among 3 tiers - District Planning Committees for integrated 
planning; 
10. Ministry’s Initiatives - Annual Decentralised Planning GPDP, Capacity 
Building through RGSA, Panchayat Advancement Index performance 
assessment tool and People’s plan campaign for participator planning. 
7. During the evidence, the following major queries were raised by Members of 
the Committee: - 
1. Inadequate devolution of Powers: States not transferring Functions, 
Funds and Functionaries to Panchayats, limiting their autonomy; 
2. Despite five-year tenure, irregular/delayed Panchayat elections 
conducted in some States; 
3. Lack of coordination among three tiers affects planning and 
implementation; 
4. Sarpanch/PRI heads are assigned responsibilities without financial and 
administrative authority thus limiting the powers of elected 
representatives; 
5. Large size and uneven structure of Panchayats makes management and 
governance difficult. Need for norms for ideal Panchayat size/population; 
6. Frequent rotation of reserved seats affects experience and continuity in 
Panchayat leadership; 
7. Heavy dependence on Centre/State grants, limited OSR leads to weak 
financial autonomy of Panchayat; 
8. Panchayats not becoming self-reliant as OSR is low, suggested linking 
grants with OSR; 
9. Delay in release of funds by Finance Commission and Central Scheme 
funds affecting development works; 
10. Delay in constitution and weak functioning of State Finance 
Commissions. 
8. Subsequently, the queries of the Committee were replied by the Secretary, 
MoPR. Certain issues which remained unanswered along with those which warranted 
elaborate reply, the Ministry were requested to send written replies thereto in writing 
within 07 days.  
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 
  

58 
 
Annexure X 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
THURSDAY, 04 JUNE, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1300 hrs in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT   
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
3. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
8. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
9. Shri Janardan Mishra 
10. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
11. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
12. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
13. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
14. Shri Ganesh Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
 
15. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
16. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
17. Smt. Rajathi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
2. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj  
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1.  Shri Vivek Bharadwaj Secretary 
2.  Ms Palka Sahni Joint Secretary 
3.  Ms Mukta Shekhar Joint Secretary 
4.  Shri Rajesh Kumar Singh Joint Secretary 
5.  Shri Ramit Maurya Director 
6.  Shri Vijay Kumar Director 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) 
 

59 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1.  Dr. Rajiv Mani Secretary 
2.  Smt Arti Chopra Additional Legislative 
Counsel 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1.  Dr. Preetam B. Yashvant Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department), and Ministry of 
Women and Child Development on the subject “Effectiveness of the implementation of 
Constitution 73rd Amendment Act with special reference to coordination in three-tier 
system of Panchayat”. 
 
[Thereafter the representatives from the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Law 
and Justice (Legislative Department), and Ministry of Women and Child Development 
were called in] 
 
3. After welcoming the representatives, the Chairperson in his opening remarks 
stressed upon the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act (1992), which granted 
constitutional status to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and established a three-tier 
system at the village, intermediate, and district levels. The Chairperson, then asked 
the representatives of the Ministry to introduce themselves and place their views on 
the subject.  
 
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj after taking permission from the 
Chairperson, made a Power Point Presentation on the above-mentioned subject 
covering various aspects of above amendment with special focus on its 
implementation along with challenges face etc.  
 
5. Highlights of Ministry’s PPT are as under:-  
 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
(i) Prior to the 73rd Constitutional Amendment, Panchayats lacked 
constitutional status, elections were irregular, powers were limited and 
participation of SCs, STs, women and backward classes was 
inadequate.  
(ii) The 73rd Amendment granted constitutional status to Panchayats, 
established the three-tier system, ensured regular elections, reservation 
and financial empowerment and strengthened the role of Gram Sabha.  
(iii) The 73rd Amendment has deepened democratic decentralization, social 
justice and inclusive development.  
(iv) States have varying laws regarding devolution and powers, resulting in 
lack of uniformity.  

60 
 
(v) Reservation for SCs, STs, OBCs and women has been ensured not only 
for members but also for Chairpersons.  
The Secretary from Ministry of Law and Justice submitted as under:- 
 
(i) The 73rd Amendment strengthened the Directive Principle under Article 
40 and gave constitutional backing to local self-government.  
(ii) Women received an unprecedented democratic platform through 
Panchayati Raj Institutions.  
(iii) Diversity among States in legislation has resulted in differing 
implementation patterns.  
The Representatives of Ministry of Women and Child Development 
submitted as under:- 
 
(i) The 73rd Amendment was described as the most path-breaking initiative 
for women empowerment.  
(ii) About 15 lakh women are serving as elected representatives in 
Panchayati Raj Institutions.  
(iii) Capacity building projects for elected women representatives have been 
supported under Nirbhaya Fund.  
(iv) Programmes have also been designed for sensitization of men and 
breaking gender stereotypes.  
(v) Proposals received from Ministry of Panchayati Raj are under 
consideration for implementation. 
 
6. During the evidence, the following major queries were raised/suggestions were 
made by Members of the Committee: - 
(i) Strengthening Institutional Framework of Panchayati Raj: Need for 
greater uniformity in Panchayat structure and powers across States, 
strengthening of Intermediate and District Panchayats and examination 
of the desirability of non-party based Panchayat elections. 
(ii) Role of MPs and MLAs in Local Planning: Need to accord due 
consideration to suggestions and proposals made by MPs, MLAs and 
their representatives in Panchayat deliberations and development 
planning. 
(iii) Panchayat Functionaries and Administrative Capacity: Inadequate 
staffing, shortage of Panchayat Secretaries and absence of a dedicated 
Panchayat cadre are adversely affecting the functioning of Panchayati 
Raj Institutions. 
(iv) Financial Empowerment of Panchayats: Need to enhance own-source 
revenues, reduce dependence on Finance Commission grants and 
provide special support to financially weak, tribal and backward 
Panchayats. 
(v) Strengthening Gram Sabha and Decentralized Governance: Declining 
participation in Gram Sabha meetings, weak community engagement 
and the need to strengthen local dispute resolution mechanisms were 
highlighted. 
(vi) Women Empowerment and Capacity Building: Need for focused training 
and mentoring of elected women representatives, prevention of proxy 

61 
 
representation and assessment of increasing participation of women 
beyond prescribed reservation levels. 
(vii) Convergence with Social Development Programmes: Need for stronger 
coordination between Panchayats and Anganwadi institutions and 
greater emphasis on adolescent girls' health and menstrual hygiene 
awareness. 
(viii) Inclusion and Special Provisions for Vulnerable Areas: Need for 
recognition of unserved hamlets and habitations, effective 
implementation of PESA and strengthening the role of Gram Sabhas in 
utilisation of District Mineral Foundation funds. 
(ix) Rural Infrastructure and Service Delivery: Concerns were expressed 
regarding delays in infrastructure development under RGSA and the 
absence of dedicated institutional arrangements for sanitation at the 
village level. 
(x) Capacity Building and Participatory Governance: Need to strengthen 
institutional capacity of Panchayati Raj Institutions through training, 
digital support and greater participation of citizens in local governance. 
7. Subsequently, the queries of the Committee were replied by the Secretary, 
MoPR. Certain issues which remained unanswered along with those which warranted 
elaborate reply, the Ministry were requested to send written replies thereto in writing 
within seven days.  
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
  

62 
 
Annexure XI 
 