 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
   
 
     EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development)'.] 
 
 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
37 


 
 
 
 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development)'.] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 .08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2026 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2026/Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 228   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____ 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-2025)  
INTRODUCTION  
   
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
28 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
47 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
48 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
67 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I Extracts of Minutes of the Twenty-Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 7th August, 2026 
 
68 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj. 
70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
26. Smt. Rajathi 
27. Shri Nagendra Ray 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Smt. P.T. Usha 
30. Shri Karamvir Singh Boudh 
31. Shri Baidyanath Ram 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Juby Amar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sudhanshu Shekhar  - Under Secretary 
 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj (2025-2026) having been authorised by the Committee to present 
the Report on their behalf, present the 37th Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (18thLok Sabha) on 
'Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Rural Development). 
2.  The Twenty Fifth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 09.03.2026 and 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09.03.2026. Replies of the Government to 
all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 14.05.2026. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 07.08.2026. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Fifth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
10 August, 2026 
19 Shravana, 1948 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural  
Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2025-
26) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty-Fifth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development) for the year 2026-2027. 
1.2  The Twenty-Fifth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 
09.03.2026 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09.03.2026. The 
Report contained 23 Observations/Recommendations.  
1.3  Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 23 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been received 
from the Government. These have been examined and categorised as 
follows: -  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
     Serial Nos. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 18, 19, 22, 23   
          Total: 13
          Chapter-II 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
      Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL      
        Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
      Serial No. 1, 2, 6, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17, 20, 21     
  
 Total: 10 
   Chapter-IV   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
      Serial No. NIL        
 Total: NIL 
              Chapter-V 
 

 
 
2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case 
where it is not possible for any reasons to implement the recommendations in 
letter and spirit, the matter shall be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration/merit 
comments.  
I. Optimum Utilization of Allocated Funds 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
1.6 With regard to the optimum utilisation of allocated funds, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:- 
           “The Department of Rural Development (DoRD) under the aegis 
of the Ministry of Rural development have a huge responsibility upon 
them to create a conducive environment wherein the vast rural 
populace living in the nooks and corners of the country realise the 
succour of holistic development. The areas of concern range from 
Rural Development, Rural Housing, Rural Connectivity to Rural 
Livelihoods to name a few. For a nation of such rich heritage as ours, 
the rise from ‘developing’ to ‘developed’ status is not at all feasible until 
and unless the majority population of the country residing in villages 
march side by side with their urban counterparts. The Committee 
resonate with this idea and acknowledge the paramount importance of 
rural development in the country. However, in this scenario, the 
Committee is not able to understand the approach of the Department 
that as against the funds of Rs. 1,86,995.61 crore allocated at the RE 
stage of 2025-26, actual expenditure was Rs. 99,090.47 crore only, 
which is 47.01% less than the funds allocated at the RE stage. This 
indicates that either the budgetary planning of the Government was not 
prudent enough or there is a problem at the actual implementation 
stage of the schemes. Non-utilization of allocated funds means that 
deprivation of the targeted people from availing benefits from the 
scheme, and the same could have been meaningfully utilized for the 
other scheme where funds were direly needed. At the fag end of the 
completion of the financial year, the Committee desire to know how the 
DoRD plans to utilize the allocated funds fully within the short span of 
time. Therefore, the Committee, recommend the DoRD to chalk out 
quarterly and monthly expenditure plans well in advance in consultation 
with Stakeholder particularly the State Governments in respect of all of 
its schemes/programme and should undertake all possible measures 
for optimum utilization of funds and at the same time also keep a close 
monitoring on the availability of funds so as to raise supplementary 

 
 
3 
 
demands or re-appropriate at opportune moment in collaboration with 
the Ministry of Finance.” 
1.7 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“MGNREGA:- The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme is a demand-driven programme and funds are 
released to States/UTs based on actual demand for work and 
performance of the States in terms of utilization of available funds, 
generation of employment, and submission of requisite compliance 
including utilization certificates and audited accounts. During FY 2025-
26, against the available funds of Rs. 88,000 crore, funds amounting to 
Rs.87,365.76 crore have been released. The lower expenditure against 
RE allocation during FY 2025-26 was primarily on account of 
procedural transition relating to implementation of SNA-SPARSH. The 
Ministry continuously monitors fund utilization through 
monthly/quarterly reviews, regular follow-up with States/UTs, and 
timely assessment of additional fund requirements. Quarterly and 
monthly expenditure plans are also reviewed in consultation with 
States to ensure optimum utilization of funds and timely re-
appropriation/supplementary demands are sought wherever required, 
in coordination with Ministry of Finance. 
PMAY-G:- The Budget Estimate (BE) allocation for the current 
financial year under PMAY-G is Rs. 54,832.03 crore, which was 
revised to Rs. 32,500.01 crore at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage. The 
expenditure incurred under PMAY-G is Rs.22,997.73 crores as on 
01.04.2026. 
The comparatively lower expenditure is primarily due to the 
ongoing migration from the existing Single Nodal Agency (SNA) model 
to the SNA-SPARSH platform. This transition involves integration with 
multiple stakeholders, including State IFMIS, NIC, PFMS and NPCI, 
which has led to temporary disruption in fund flow mechanisms. 
Despite these transitional challenges, significant progress has 
been achieved with 26 States already onboarded onto the SNA-
SPARSH platform under PMAY-G, with 03 States remaining (Bihar 
being at the last stage of integration and no targets being allocated to 
West Bengal and Telangana in Phase II). Expenditure routed solely 
through SPARSH under PMAY-G has reached Rs. 10,819.53 crore, 
indicating gradual stabilisation of the new system and improved fund 
flow alignment. 
Further, to ensure utilisation of funds, quarterly and monthly 
expenditure plans under PMAY-G have been prepared in consultation 
with States/UTs. Financial allocations are also being revised based on 
requests received from States, keeping in view their component-wise 
requirements, so that funds are available, and expenditure can be 
accelerated. Regular review meetings are being held with States/UTs 
to monitor fund utilisation and States have been advised to expedite 
utilisation in line with approved allocations/mother sanctions issued. 
PMGSY:- The budget allocation of Pradhan Mantri gram Sadak 
Yojana (PMGSY) for financial Year 2025-26 was Rs. 19,000 Crore at 
BE stage which has been revised to Rs. 11,000 Crore at RE stage. The 

 
 
4 
 
actual funds released under PMGSY for Financial Year 2025-26 was 
Rs. 7,855.08 Crore. Additionally, an amount of Rs. 2,252.515 Crore 
has been surrendered under the PMGSY in a timely manner, and these 
funds have been reallocated to other schemes. 
Further, Quarterly and Monthly Action Plans are chalked out in 
advance after proper consultation with States/UTs and in pursuance of 
the guidelines of MoF. The progress is regularly reviewed by the 
Ministry by way of Regional Review Meetings (RRMs), Performance 
Review Committee (PRC) Meetings, Pre-Empowered/ Empowered 
Committee Meetings with the States. However, there was low 
expenditure in the Financial Year 2025-26 due to the following 
reasons:- 
(a) Transition to SNA SPARSH: The most significant technical 
reason for the reduction is onboarding on SNA SPARSH. Many States 
had substantial unspent balances in their Single Nodal Accounts 
(SNA). Under the previous system, Central releases were made even if 
States had not fully exhausted previous tranches. The Ministry has now 
fully transitioned to the SNA SPARSH. This platform provides real-time 
visibility of funds. Many States had first exhausted the existing "float" or 
"SNA balances" before onboarding on the SNA SPARSH. Hence the 
actual requirement for new Central releases decreased under PMGSY. 
 (b)  Sun-setting of Verticals: The decrease also reflects that the 
legacy phases of PMGSY are nearing completion, while new phases 
are in the initial mobilization stage. PMGSY-I & II phases have reached 
over 95% physical completion nationwide. 
 (c)  PMGSY-III Restrictions: While PMGSY-III was extended to 
March 2026, the government imposed a condition that no new works 
should be taken up if they were sanctioned but not yet tendered. This 
effectively capped new expenditure for this vertical. Many sanctioned 
works could not be awarded due to these restrictions and this 
extension with the rider came only in the month of July. By that time 
working season was over due to onset of the Monsoon in many parts of 
the country. Also contractors slowed down the works as the payment 
was not released due to late receipt of the extension of the timeline of 
PMGSY-II, RCPLWEA and PMGSY-III.  
 (d)  Transition to PMGSY-IV: The launch of PMGSY-IV 
(targeted for 2024-2029) is currently in the "indicative allocation" and 
planning phase. Large-scale fund absorption typically happens after 
the tendering and initial mobilization of new projects, which shifted the 
bulk of the financial requirement to the next fiscal year. 
 (e)  Systemic and Operational Constraints: Field-level 
challenges impacted the pace of work, leading to lower-than-
anticipated expenditure. Inclement weather, including extended 
monsoons and extreme heatwaves in 2025, significantly shortened the 
"working season," leading to temporary work stoppages. In the 
Himalayan States and LWE-affected areas projects faced persistent 
delays due to forest clearances and law and order issues. Some States 
faced a "limited contracting capacity" where the volume of sanctioned 
work under PMGSY-III exceeded the number of qualified contractors. 
 

 
 
5 
 
DAY-NRLM:- Quarterly and Monthly Plans have already been 
formulated and have been included in the Detailed Demands for Grants 
also. Expenditure is also being closely monitored. 
DDU-GKY:- Under DDU-GKY, optimum utilization of allocated 
funds is ensured through a structured mechanism of need-based fund 
release, continuous monitoring, and strict financial controls. Funds are 
released to States/UTs based on approved Annual Action Plans 
(AAPs), physical and financial progress, utilisation of previously 
released funds, and compliance with scheme guidelines. 
 The Ministry has strengthened financial management through 
implementation of the SNA-SPARSH framework and PFMS, enabling 
real-time tracking of releases, expenditures, and unspent balances. 
Regular review meetings are conducted with States/UTs to monitor 
utilisation trends and address bottlenecks affecting expenditure. 
 Further, the Division follows a prudent approach by issuing 
Mother Sanctions and releasing funds strictly on the basis of actual 
requirement and absorptive capacity of States/UTs, thereby avoiding 
idle parking of funds. States/UTs having higher unspent balances are 
regularly advised to expedite expenditure or refund idle balances to the 
Consolidated Fund of India (CFI). 
To improve utilisation efficiency, the Ministry has also introduced 
periodic reconciliation of accounts, mandatory submission of Utilization 
Certificates (UCs), physical progress reports, and compliance with 
audit observations before processing further releases. 
As a result of continuous monitoring and corrective measures, 
substantial reduction in unspent balances has been achieved, leading 
to improved fund utilisation and better alignment of financial releases 
with scheme outcomes under DDU-GKY. 
The State/UT wise Status of Unspent Balance under DDU-GKY 
as on 31.03.2026 mentioned as below:- 
 
Sr. No. States/UTs Balance in the Bank 
Account of SNA (in Cr.) 
1 Kerala 188.31 
2 West Bengal 65.65 
3 Telangana 48.31 
4 Gujarat 12.45 
5 Odisha 10.90 
6 Maharashtra 10.50 
7 Uttar Pradesh 6.53 
8 Haryana 1.08 
9 Rajasthan 0.51 
10 Uttarakhand 0.50 
11 Andaman & Nicobar 0.30 
12 Tamil 0.21 
13 Jammu 0.00 
14 Karnataka 0.00 
15 Manipur 0.00 
16 Punjab 0.00 
17 Andhra 0.00 
18 Arunachal 0.00 
19 Assam 0.00 

 
 
6 
 
20 Bihar 0.00 
21 Chhattisgarh 0.00 
22 Goa 0.00 
23 Himachal 0.00 
24 Jharkhand 0.00 
25 Madhya Pradesh 0.00 
26 Meghalaya 0.00 
27 Mizoram 0.00 
28 Nagaland 0.00 
29 Puducherry 0.00 
30 Sikkim 0.00 
31 Tripura 0.00 
   Total  345.24 
RSETI:- It is pertinent to mention that the RSETI scheme operates as a 
fully demand-driven and reimbursement-based programme, with no 
provision for advance State-wise budget allocation. Under the scheme, 
training programmes are conducted by sponsoring banks. 
Reimbursement is processed only upon submission of complete 
claims, including Utilization Certificates (UCs), audited statements, and 
other prescribed documentation, and after due verification at multiple 
levels. Thus, the scheme inherently follows a post-facto settlement 
mechanism, wherein expenditure is first incurred by implementing 
agencies and subsequently reimbursed by the Government of India 
NSAP:- Under NSAP schemes, funds are provided to States/UTs, 
based on digitized number of beneficiaries or States cap of 
beneficiaries whichever is lower. Fund release is subject to receiving 
proposal from States/UTs complete in all respects, in terms of scheme 
guidelines/ in procedures laid down by D/o Expenditure. BE 2025-26 
for NSAP is Rs. 9652.00 crore which was reduced to Rs.9197.09 Crore 
at RE stage. Out of RE of Rs. 9197.09 Crore, funds amounting to 
Rs.8863.93 Crore were expended during the FY 2025-26 which is 
96.38% of allocated RE. The utilization of funds under NSAP has been 
very good. However, the Ministry has taken note of the suggestion and 
will plan expenditure in consultation with the State Governments.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.8 The Committee have carefully examined the reply furnished by the 
Department of Rural Development. While the Department has explained the 
shortfall in expenditure primarily with reference to the transitional challenges 
arising from the migration to the SNA-SPARSH platform, sun-setting of certain 
PMGSY verticals, restrictions on new works under PMGSY-III and field-level 
operational constraints, the Committee remain deeply concerned that the 
overall utilisation against the Revised Estimates of ₹1,86,995.61 crore stood at 
only ₹99,090.47 crore (approximately 53 per cent). Such a large under-
utilisation indicates persistent gaps in advance planning, absorptive capacity 
assessment and real-time corrective action. The Committee find that quarterly 

 
 
7 
 
and monthly expenditure plans are stated to have been prepared and reviewed 
yet the gap between allocation and actual expenditure continues to be 
substantial under major schemes (particularly PMAY-G and PMGSY). The 
Committee is of the considered view that mere formulation of plans is 
insufficient unless these plans are accompanied by enforceable timelines, 
clear accountability of State-level implementing agencies and time-bound 
escalation mechanisms when utilisation falls below predetermined thresholds. 
The Committee further observe that while significant progress has been 
claimed in onboarding States onto SNA-SPARSH and in liquidating unspent 
balances under certain schemes, residual unspent balances and delayed fund 
flows continue to affect scheme outcomes. Therefore, the Committee, 
recommend that the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) immediately 
institutionalise a mandatory monthly utilisation dashboard for every scheme 
with State-wise and component-wise targets placed in the public domain. A 
dedicated inter-ministerial coordination cell involving DoRD, the Department of 
Expenditure, PFMS and State IFMIS teams should be constituted to resolve all 
remaining SNA-SPARSH technical and procedural bottlenecks. Mid-year 
reviews of each State’s absorptive capacity must be undertaken so that funds 
can be re-appropriated or surrendered in time rather than allowed to 
accumulate as unspent balances. Optimum utilisation of allocated funds must 
be treated as a non-negotiable priority so that rural development benefits 
reach intended beneficiaries without delay. 
II. Need for Increased Budgetary Allocation 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
1.9 With regard to need for increased budgetary allocation, the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
"The Committee note that the Department of Rural Development 
(DoRD) have been entrusted with a huge task of implementing and 
overseeing plethora of schemes of the Government of India which are 
aimed at the upliftment of rural masses of our country. It is pretty 
evident that vast population of our country 67 still reside in the villages 
among which a substantial quantum belongs to marginalised and 
economically downtrodden section of our society. Thus, it becomes 
imperative on the part of the Department of Rural Development to 
ensure that the visionary flagship schemes of the Government of India 
are not left in the lurch for want of better maneuvering and are provided 
with ample support in terms of finances for keeping the schemes 

 
 
8 
 
healthy and running. The Committee find that Rs. 2,28,768.81 crore 
have been allocated to the Department of Rural Development at the BE 
stage for 2026-27, which is 21.20% more than the funds at BE stage in 
Financial Year 2025-26. The Committee acknowledge this and hope 
that it would be fully utilized for the rural development schemes as 
conceived by the Government in order to extend benefits to the 
targeted beneficiaries. However, the Committee note with concern that 
out of the total allocation of Rs. 2,28,768.81 crore at BE stage for 2026-
27, a major amount of Rs. 95,692.31 crore has been allocated to VB-
GRAMG. Therefore, barring VBGRAMG, funds for other major 
schemes like PMGSY, PMAY-G, DAY-NRLM and NSAP, by and large, 
have been kept static and moreover, funds for MGNREGA has been 
drastically reduced to Rs. 30,000 crore. The Committee are of the firm 
opinion that such allocation is inadequate and totally unacceptable. 
Therefore, in order to accelerate the sustainable momentum of rural 
progress, adequate budgetary allocation is necessary particularly when 
the popular schemes like MGNREGA, NSAP, DAY- NRLM, PMGSY 
and PMAY-G are also not immune to the inflation and rising cost of raw 
materials involved. Further, the Committee hope that allocated funds 
would be utilised fully on various rural development schemes in order 
to yield desired results for the overall welfare of the rural population. 
The Committee are of the firm opinion that such allocation is 
inadequate and may be suitably enhanced, particularly when the 
scheme continues to face substantial pending liabilities from previous 
years. The Committee note that pending liabilities under MGNREGA 
are expected to approach nearly Rs. 25,000 crore by the end of the 
financial year, which would leave very limited fiscal space for meeting 
fresh demand for work during the current financial year. In a demand-
driven programme such as MGNREGA, such a situation may severely 
constrain the ability of the scheme to respond to genuine demand for 
employment. Therefore, in order to accelerate the sustainable 
momentum of rural progress, adequate budgetary allocation is 
necessary, particularly when popular schemes like MGNREGA, NSAP, 
DAYNRLM, PMGSY and PMAY-G are also affected by inflation and the 
rising cost of raw materials and services. The Committee further hope 
that the allocated funds would be fully utilised under various rural 
development schemes in order to yield the desired outcomes for the 
overall welfare of the rural population."  
1.10 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
  "MGNREGA:- It is submitted that budget allocation under 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme is 
made based on projected demand, absorptive capacity of States/UTs, 
pace of expenditure, and overall fiscal considerations. Being a 
demand-driven programme, additional funds under MGNREGS are 
considered at RE stage based on actual demand for employment. The 
Ministry remains committed to ensuring that no eligible demand for 
work is denied due to shortage of funds. The requirement of enhanced 
allocation for MGNREGS is reviewed periodically and additional funds 

 
 
9 
 
are sought from Ministry of Finance, wherever necessary, based on 
emerging demand and pending liabilities. 
PMAY-G:- As on 01.04.2026, under PMAY-G, a total target of 4.15 
crore houses has been allocated to States/UTs, out of which 3.90 crore 
houses have been sanctioned and more than 2.99 crore houses have 
been completed. The remaining allocation will be made from the total 
approved target of 4.95 crore houses, after receipt of the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee and upon identification and 
verification of eligible households under the Awaas+ 2024 survey. 
The total liability for release of Central share to the States/UTs under 
Phase II (2024-25 to 2025-26) is Rs. 41,925 crores. Against this, the 
Budget Estimate allocation for the next financial year is Rs. 54,916.70 
crore. The pending liabilities will be released first, and the remaining 
funds from the BE allocation will be utilized for further releases to 
States/UTs. The allocation to the states will also be revised, as per 
requirement, to ensure availability of funds. 
PMGSY:- The allocation/release of funds to the States for 
implementation of PMGSY is made based on the fund release 
proposals received from the States/UTs and depends, inter-alia on 
works in hand, execution capacity of the States/UTs, and unspent 
funds available with the States/UTs. Quarterly and Monthly Action 
Plans are chalked out in advance after proper consultation with 
States/UTs and in pursuance of the guidelines of MoF. In addition, the 
States are regularly followed up for requirement of funds. Under 
PMGSY there is an unbroken chain of funds release and no work has 
been affected due to the shortage of funds. 
 The budget estimate of PMGSY for FY 2026-27 is Rs. 19,000 crore. 
This amount along with the corresponding State share would be 
enough to meet the expenditure on PMGSY works to be carried out by 
States/UTs during the FY 2026-27. 
DAY-NRLM:-  The Annual Action Plan for the year 2026-27 of all the 
States/UTs have already been approved by the Empowered 
Committee of this Ministry which includes financial and physical target. 
Review of these targets will be done regularly. Therefore, it is expected 
that allocated funds during the current year will be fully utilised. 
NSAP:- Under NSAP, 100 % of BE of FY 2024-25 of Rs. 9652.00 
Crore was utilised in the FY 2024-25 and in the FY 2025-26, out of 
allocated RE of Rs.9197.09 Crore, funds amounting to Rs.8863.93 
Crore has been utilized which is 96.38% of allocated RE. An amount of 
Rs 9671.00 crore has been allocated to NSAP for B.E 2026-27.   
Funds under NSAP are released to States/UTs on the basis of number 
of eligible beneficiaries whose database has been digitized on NSAP-
PPS (National Social Assistance Programme - Pension Payment 
System) portal or State cap of number of beneficiaries, whichever is 
less. In case of any additional requirement of funds under the scheme, 
the same will be sought at the RE stage or through supplementary 
provisions." 
  

 
 
10 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.11  The Committee have examined the Department’s reply on the Budget 
Estimate of ₹2,28,768.81 crore for 2026-27 and remain concerned that, while 
the overall allocation shows a 21.20 per cent increase, a major share is 
attributable to VB-GRAMG. Allocations for other key schemes such as PMGSY, 
PMAY-G, DAY-NRLM and NSAP have remained largely static and MGNREGA 
has been sharply reduced to ₹30,000 crore. The Department’s assurances that 
additional funds will be considered at the Revised Estimates stage and that 
existing provisions are adequate do not sufficiently address the impact of 
inflation, rising costs and large pending liabilities, particularly under 
MGNREGA. Sufficient funds are the ultimate lifeline for rural development 
schemes directly determining whether a programme successfully uplifts 
communities or fails during execution. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department immediately reassess the fund requirements of all major 
schemes for 2026-27 taking full account of inflation, input costs, pending 
liabilities and projected demand. It should urgently approach the Ministry of 
Finance for substantial enhancement of allocations rather than relying solely 
on the RE stage. Any enhanced funds must prioritise clearance of pending 
liabilities while creating adequate space for fresh works. A mid-year review 
mechanism should monitor utilisation and enable timely re-appropriation or 
supplementary provisions. Adequate and realistic provisioning is essential to 
sustain rural development schemes and ensure benefits reach the intended 
beneficiaries without fiscal constraints. 
III. Low Wage Rate under MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
1.12  In the context of low wage rate under MGNREGA, the Committee had 
recommended as below:- 
“An oft-repeated concern of the Committee pertaining to 
MGNREGA has been the inadequacy of wage rates under the 
programme. Despite several recommendations in this regard, there has 
been no noticeable shift in the stance of the Department of Rural 
Development (DoRD). While the Department has consistently indicated 
that wage rates are revised annually, the Committee is of the view that 
the magnitude of such revisions remains insufficient in the context of 
rising inflation and the increasing cost of living in both rural and semi-
urban areas. The Committee note with concern that the notified wage 

 
 
11 
 
rates in several States continue to hover around Rs.200 per day, which 
is significantly lower than the prevailing market wage rates for similar 
categories of labour in those very States. Such a disparity undermines 
the fundamental objective of MGNREGA as a programme intended to 
provide livelihood security and fair compensation for rural labour. The 
Committee are of the view that the existing methodology for wage 
determination warrants a comprehensive review. In particular, the 
continued reliance on an outdated base year and the absence of a 
robust inflation-linked mechanism have resulted in wage levels that do 
not adequately reflect present economic realities. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Department of Rural Development 
undertake a thorough reassessment of the wage structure under 
MGNREGA and consider instituting a minimum wage floor of Rs. 400 
per day under the programme. The Committee further recommend that 
the wage rates under MGNREGA be systematically indexed to an 
appropriate inflation indicator to ensure periodic and meaningful 
adjustments. The Committee note that the base year of 2011 continues 
to be used as the reference for determining wage calculations under 
MGNREGA, which has remained static for a considerable period. The 
Committee are of the view that in the present context, when the country 
is well beyond 2025, reliance on such an outdated base year fails to 
adequately capture the prevailing economic conditions, inflationary 
trends and changes in rural wage structures. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the base year be revised at the earliest so 
that wage determination under MGNREGA more accurately reflects 
current economic realities and ensures that the notified wages remain 
meaningful and relevant to rural workers.” 
1.13 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD:- 
“The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, under Section 6(1), empowers 
the Central Government to notify wage rates for its beneficiaries. 
Further, as per Section 6(2) of the Act, until such time as wage rates 
are notified by the Central Government for any area in a State, the 
minimum wages fixed by the State Government for agricultural 
labourers under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 are applicable. 
Accordingly, from the inception of the Scheme till FY 2010–11, wage 
rates under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA were determined on the basis of 
the minimum wage set by the respective State Governments. However, 
from FY 2011–12 onwards, the Government of India adopted a uniform 
methodology for wage determination based on the Consumer Price 
Index for Agricultural Labourers (CPI-AL), as compiled and released by 
the Labour Bureau, Shimla. 
To account for inflationary pressures and safeguard the real 
wages of workers, the Ministry of Rural Development revises wage 
rates annually, effective from 1st April of each financial year, based on 
the change in CPI-AL. The index is State/UT-specific, thereby allowing 
for differential wage revisions across States/UTs. Additionally, a 
safeguard mechanism is in place whereby, in case the computed wage 
rate for any State/UT is lower than that of the previous year, the wage 

 
 
12 
 
rate is protected at the previous year’s level. It is further submitted that 
the States/UTs are at liberty to provide wages over and above the 
centrally notified rates from their own resources. 
 
With regard to the observations of the Hon’ble Committee, it is 
respectfully submitted that the existing methodology for wage 
determination, including indexation to CPI-AL, is well established and 
has been consistently followed. At the same time, the concerns raised 
by the Hon’ble Committee regarding the adequacy of wage rates, 
revision of base year, and alignment with prevailing economic 
conditions have been duly noted. 
It is also apprised that Section 10 of the Viksit Bharat – 
Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): VB–G RAM G 
(ͪवकͧसत भारत–जी राम जी) Act, 2025 (36 of 2025) provides that until a 
wage rate is notified by the Central Government, the wage rates 
notified under Section 6 of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA shall continue to 
be applicable in the areas covered under the new Act. 
Accordingly, while the existing wage determination framework 
continues to remain in force, the Department has taken due 
cognizance of the concerns expressed by the Hon’ble Committee. 
These concerns, including the need for ensuring adequacy of wages 
and appropriate indexation, will be duly considered while deliberating 
upon wage rate determination under the new legislative framework.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.14 The Committee have examined the Department’s reply on MGNREGA 
wage rates and remain deeply concerned that, despite annual CPI-AL-linked 
revisions since 2011-12 and the safeguard against downward adjustment, the 
magnitude of increases has failed to keep pace with rising living costs and 
market wages. Notified rates in several States continue to hover around or 
only modestly above ₹200 per day, while the base year of 2011 is now more 
than a decade and a half old. The assurance that these concerns will be 
considered under the new VB–G RAM G Act does not address the immediate 
hardship of rural workers or the Committee’s long-standing 
recommendations. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department 
of Rural Development (DoRD) should immediately undertake a comprehensive 
review of the wage-determination methodology including the appropriateness 
of the 2011 base year and the adequacy of CPI-AL without awaiting full 
operationalisation of the new Act. It should consider instituting a minimum 
wage floor of ₹400 per day with regional differentiation and ensure systematic 
and meaningful indexation to a robust inflation indicator that reflects actual 
rural living costs. Pending structural revision and necessary fiscal space 

 
 
13 
 
should be sought for a significant upward adjustment in the current cycle. A 
detailed Action Taken Report on the review, the proposal for base-year 
revision and minimum floor and steps to ensure adequate wages under both 
the existing and new frameworks should be submitted within three months. 
The adequacy of MGNREGA wages must be treated as an urgent priority so 
that the programme remains a meaningful safety net for the rural poor.  
IV. Increase in Per Unit Assistance under PMAY-G 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
1.15 Concerning the increase in per unit assistance under PMAY-G, the 
Committee had made the following recommendation:- 
“The per unit assistance under PMAY-G for plain areas is 
Rs.1.20 lakh and for hilly areas is Rs.1.30 lakh which has remained 
static for a considerable period of time. With rising inflation having a 
detrimental effect on the cost associated with raw materials, 
transportation and labour, constructing a new house of the requisite 
size under PMAY-G for poor and needy beneficiaries with the present 
level of assistance appears to be an arduous task. The vision of 
“Housing for All” may not achieve its envisaged target unless 
beneficiaries are provided adequate financial handholding in terms of 
assistance of appropriate value and at the right juncture. Moreover, 
there are several instances where houses remain incomplete for want 
of adequate financial resources, thereby causing delays in achieving 
the targets under the scheme. The Committee, during their interactions 
with stakeholders and based on feedback received from various 
States, have observed that the actual expenditure incurred by 
beneficiaries for construction of a basic pucca house significantly 
exceeds the present assistance, with beneficiaries often compelled to 
mobilise additional resources through borrowings or personal savings 
to complete construction. In many cases, the total cost of construction 
has been reported to be substantially higher due to the rising cost of 
construction materials, transportation in remote areas, and increased 
labour charges. In view of the foregoing, the Committee find it 
necessary that a comprehensive review of the per-unit assistance 
under PMAY-G be undertaken on priority, particularly when the 
scheme has been extended up to March, 2029. The Committee are of 
the considered view that the per-unit assistance under PMAY-G needs 
a substantial revision and recommend that the assistance be enhanced 
up to minimum Rs. 4 lakh per unit, with appropriate differentiation for 
difficult and hilly areas, so as to ensure that beneficiaries are able to 
construct a durable and dignified dwelling without being subjected to 
financial distress. Such a revision would not only reflect the prevailing 
construction costs but also strengthen the objective of the scheme in 
delivering safe and permanent housing to rural households. The 
Committee also recommend there should be parity in unit assistance 

 
 
14 
 
provided under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Urban and Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana – Gramin.” 
1.16 In regard to the above recommendation, the DoRD in their action taken reply 
have stated as below:- 
            “Under Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana–Gramin (PMAY-G), the 
unit assistance provided is Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain areas and Rs. 1.30 
lakh in North-Eastern States and Hilly States (including UTs of J&K and 
Ladakh). In addition, beneficiaries are facilitated with 90/95 person-
days of unskilled labour wages through mandatory convergence with 
the Viksit Bharat Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission–Gramin 
(VB-G RAM G). Support of Rs. 12,000 for construction of toilet is also 
provided through Swachh Bharat Mission–Gramin (SBM-G), 
MGNREGS or any other dedicated source of funding. 
Further, PMAY-G converges with various Government programmes to 
provide benefits such as piped drinking water, electricity connection, 
LPG gas connection, solar lanterns, cleaner cooking energy and solar 
rooftop, to the beneficiaries. 
 There is no proposal under consideration in the Ministry for increasing 
the unit financial assistance” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.17  The Committee have examined the Department’s reply on the unit 
assistance under PMAY-G and remain deeply concerned that the assistance 
continues at ₹1.20 lakh for plain areas and ₹1.30 lakh for North-Eastern and 
Hilly States, with no proposal under consideration for any increase. While the 
Department has highlighted additional support through convergence of labour 
wages under VB-G RAM G, toilet assistance, and other amenities but, the 
Committee, is of the view that these benefits cannot substitute for adequate 
core financial assistance. The unit amount has remained static despite 
sustained inflation in construction costs, leading to incomplete houses and 
financial distress for beneficiaries who are often forced to borrow or use 
personal savings. With the scheme extended up to March 2029, the Committee 
recommend that the Department immediately undertake a comprehensive, 
evidence-based review of current construction costs and the extent of 
incomplete houses attributable to inadequate funds. It should place a concrete 
proposal for substantial upward revision of the unit assistance to a minimum 
of ₹4 lakh per unit, with higher differentiation for difficult and hilly areas and 
also examine parity with PMAY-Urban. An interim measure should also be 
taken to prioritise completion of incomplete houses. Static assistance in the 

 
 
15 
 
face of rising costs is no longer tenable, if the objective of providing durable 
rural housing is to be achieved.        
V. Consultation and Institutional Role of Members of Parliament under 
PMGSY 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
1.18 With regard to the consultation and institutional role of Members of Parliament 
under PMGSY, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee are fully aware of the inbuilt mechanism under 
PMGSY which mandates consultation with the concerned Members of 
Parliament during the finalisation of road plans. However, despite these 
provisions, the Committee continue to receive frequent complaints from 
Members of Parliament regarding non-compliance with the consultative 
procedures in both letter and spirit. Instances have been brought to the 
notice of the Committee where consultation is either not undertaken at 
all or reduced to a mere formality, such as obtaining consent without 
sharing adequate details or without facilitating proper ground-level 
verification of proposed road alignments. The Committee are of the 
view that Members of Parliament, being elected representatives and 
the primary point of contact for grievances of the local population, 
possess valuable insights regarding the developmental needs of their 
constituencies and are therefore well placed to provide meaningful 
inputs during the planning stage of rural connectivity projects. The 
Committee also reiterate that the role of Members of Parliament should 
not be confined merely to post-facto information, but should extend to 
meaningful consultation and appropriate institutional association in the 
planning, oversight and approval processes relating to major rural 
development projects. In this regard, the Committee are of the view 
that suitable arrangements may be evolved to ensure due participation 
of Members of Parliament, or their authorised representatives where 
necessary, in relevant State-level or district-level oversight and 
approval mechanisms. The Committee are further concerned to note 
that the prescribed guidelines relating to foundation laying and 
inauguration ceremonies of PMGSY roads are also not being 
consistently followed. As per extant provisions, the foundation stone 
and inauguration of PMGSY roads are to be carried out by the 
concerned Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) along with other elected 
representatives of the area. However, several instances of deviation 
from this protocol have been reported, wherein Members of Parliament 
were either not invited or were informed only after the event. The 
Committee are of the firm view that the presence of Members of 
Parliament at such events strengthens transparency and accountability 
in the execution of projects funded from the public exchequer. In view 
of the above, the Committee recommend that the Department of Rural 
Development should ensure strict compliance with all consultative and 
protocol provisions relating to Members of Parliament under PMGSY 
and impress upon the State Governments and implementing agencies 
the necessity of adhering to these provisions in both letter and spirit.” 

 
 
16 
 
1.19  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
            “The PMGSY Guidelines provide a key role to the public 
representatives and Hon’ble Members of Parliament in the 
implementation of the programme, including selection and construction 
of roads.  Consultation with Members of Parliament is provided at both 
the District Rural Roads Plan (DRRP) finalisation and Annual 
Proposals stages.  In addition, at the stage of preparing Detailed 
Project Reports (DPRs), the District Programme Implementation Unit 
(DPIU) conducts a transect walk along the road alignment, involving 
the local panchayat. State Governments are required to arrange joint 
inspection of ongoing as well as completed works under PMGSY by 
Hon’ble MPs, Hon’ble MLAs and representatives of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions.  
Some important provisions of PMGSY-III guidelines, which provide 
detailed procedures for consultation with the Members of Parliament 
during the process of planning and selection of roads, are detailed 
below: 
Para 3.6.  The suggestions given by the Members of Parliament are to 
be given full consideration while finalizing the District Rural Roads Plan 
(DRRP). 
Para 5.5. The Annual proposals will be based on the Comprehensive 
Upgradation cum Consolidation Priority List (CUCPL) following the 
Order of Priority (subject to PCI). However, it is possible that there are 
inadvertent errors or omissions, particularly in the selection of Through 
Routes. Accordingly, it is desirable to also associate public 
representatives while finalizing the selection of road works in the 
annual proposals. The proposals of the Members of Parliament are 
required to be given full consideration, for this purpose:  
 (i)     The CUCPL should be sent to concerned MPs with the request 
that their proposals on the selection of works out of the CUCPL should 
be sent to the District Panchayat. It is suggested that at least 15 clear 
days may be given for the purpose. 
 (ii)    In order to ensure that the prioritization has some reference to the 
funding available, the size of proposals expected may also be indicated 
to the Members of Parliament while forwarding the CUCPL list to them. 
District wise allocation may be indicated to enable choice with the 
requisite geographical spread.  It is expected that such proposals of 
Members of Parliament which adhere to the Order of Priority would be 
invariably accepted subject to consideration of equitable allocation of 
funds and need for upgradation. 
  (iii)     The proposals received from the Members of Parliament by the 
stipulated date would be given full consideration in the District 
Panchayat which would record the reason in each case of non-
inclusion. Such proposals that cannot be included would be 
communicated in writing to the Members of Parliament with reasons for 
non-inclusion of such proposals in each case.  It would be preferable if 
the communication is issued from the Nodal Department at a senior 
level. 

 
 
17 
 
Para 7.1:  After approval by the District Panchayat, the proposals 
would be forwarded by the PIU to the SRRDA. The PIU will at that time 
prepare the details of proposals forwarded by the Members of 
Parliament, and action taken thereon, in Proforma MP-I and MP–II and 
send it along with the proposals. In all cases where the proposal of an 
MP has not been included, cogent reasons shall be given based on the 
reasons given by the District Panchayat.  
Para 7.3   The State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) would 
scrutinize the proposals to see that they are in accordance with the 
Guidelines and that the proposals of the Members of Parliament have 
been given full consideration.  
In order to ensure that the State Government gives due attention 
towards this aspect of the guidelines while submitting the proposals to 
the Ministry of Rural Development for sanction, the Ministry has issued 
a fresh advisory to the States on 23rd June, 2023. The State 
Governments have been advised, inter-alia, to communicate the final 
list of proposals in the order of priority to the Member of Parliament 
with the reasons for non-inclusion of certain roads in the proposals and 
incorporate their recommendations with the proposals sent to 
NRIDA/Ministry for approval. 
As per the PMGSY-IV norms, the District Rural Roads Block and 
District level has to be prepared, based on the conducted surveys to 
identify habitations through the Gram Sadak Survey App, and placed 
before the District Panchayats. In all these stages the suggestions and 
proposals from Hon’ble Members of Parliament are to be given due 
importance.  
Ministry of Rural Development vide letter dated 29.01.2025 (English) 
and 10.02.2025 (Hindi) (Annexure - 3(a) and 3(b)) has directed States/ 
UTs that  during the survey process itself, the Project Implementation 
Unit (PIUs) should apprise the Hon’ble Members of Parliament (both 
Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha as per PMGSY norms) regarding the 
ongoing survey and give due consideration to their suggestions for 
inclusion of habitations in DRRP and CNCPL as per the eligibility 
norms of the programme, para 5.5 of the programme guidelines 
mention the following:- 
5.5 After the CNCPL is prepared and verified it shall be placed before 
the District Panchayat. The Member of Parliament/ MLA shall be given 
a copy of the CNPL and their suggestions and the suggestions of lower 
level Panchayati Raj Institutions shall be given fullest consideration by 
the district panchayat while according its approval. 
The suggestion of the Hon’ble Members of Parliament regarding the 
eligible habitations should be duly recorded in MP-I format before 
submission of proposals to District Panchayat for the approval. This will 
ensure that the eventual selection of the habitations is comprehensive 
and it strengthens the planning and implementation under the 
programme.  
Further, this Ministry vide letter dated 15.03.2025 (Annexure - 3(c)) has 
directed the States/ UTs to circulate the letter dated 29.01.2025 and 
10.02.2025 along with a copy of PMGSY guidelines (English and Hindi) 
to all Hon’ble Members of Parliament for kind information.   

 
 
18 
 
Further, a fresh letter to States/ UTs for strict adherence to advisory 
regarding invitation to Public Representatives for foundation laying and 
inauguration ceremonies of PMGSY work has been issued on 
01.12.2025 (Annexure - 3(d)).” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.20 The Committee have examined the Department’s reply detailing the 
existing PMGSY guidelines that mandate consultation with Members of 
Parliament at the stages of District Rural Roads Plan finalisation, Annual 
Proposals and Detailed Project Reports, along with recent advisories issued in 
2023 and 2025 requiring States to apprise MPs, record their suggestions and 
invite them for foundation-laying and inauguration ceremonies. While noting 
these provisions, the Committee remain concerned that frequent complaints of 
non-compliance viz., consultation reduced to a formality, inadequate details, 
lack of ground verification and protocol deviations are continue to be received, 
indicating that advisories alone have not ensured adherence in letter and 
spirit. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Rural 
Development (DoRD) should strengthen monitoring by requiring verified 
compliance certificates with every set of proposals confirming adequate 
consultation, institute a time-bound grievance-redressal mechanism for MP 
complaints with accountability for repeated deviations, evolve institutional 
arrangements for meaningful MP participation in State and district-level 
oversight and approval processes, enforce mandatory prior written invitation 
of MPs for foundation and inauguration events and submit a detailed Action 
Taken Report within three months on the monitoring framework, action on 
complaints and steps taken to institutionalise a more effective role for 
Members of Parliament. The consultative and protocol provisions must be 
implemented effectively so that the insights of elected representatives are 
meaningfully utilised and transparency in publicly funded rural connectivity 
projects is strengthened. 
 
VI. Reassessment of “Saturated” Districts under PMGSY 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
1.21 With regard to the reassessment of “Saturated” districts under PMGSY, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 

 
 
19 
 
 “The Committee note that although several districts have been 
shown as having achieved saturation under the Pradhan Mantri Gram 
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY IV), concerns continue to be received that a 
number of habitations, particularly those situated in forest-fringe, hilly 
and otherwise difficult areas, still remain without all-weather road 
connectivity. The Committee are of the considered view that mere 
classification of a district as saturated cannot be a ground for 
overlooking habitations that remain genuinely unconnected due to 
terrain, forest-related clearances or administrative exclusion. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Rural 
Development undertake a fresh and detailed reassessment of such 
districts, with special focus on habitations left out on account of forest 
and difficult-area constraints, and ensure that districts where genuine 
connectivity gaps continue are not treated as fully saturated till 
universal road access is actually achieved.”  
1.22  The DoRD in their action taken reply furnished to the Committee have stated 
as follows:- 
As per 5.3 of PMGSY-IV Guidelines, a mobile application, 
named "PMGSY Gram Sadak Survey App”, has been developed to 
identify possible alignments of roads to unconnected eligible 
habitations. PM Gati Shakti portal with a wider database is available for 
detailed analysis of data received from the transect walk and will 
facilitate developing the preliminary DPR. The data captured will be 
verified at the State level before uploading on Geo Sadak. The SRRDA 
will ensure that the vetted proposals meet the objectives of PMGSY-
IV”. 
  
The survey date has been extended multiple time and States 
were asked to survey all such habitations which remain unconnected 
as per PMGSY norms. Whatever gap has been identified by the 
States/UTs and if such identified unconnected habitations meeting the 
conditions of the programme guidelines, the Ministry is working in close 
coordination with States/UTs to sanction the roads/bridges to provide 
connectivity to such habitations on priority. As on date, 3638 roads of 
12,099.98 km length has been sanctioned under PMGSY for providing 
connectivity to 4,569 habitations.”   
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.23 The Committee have examined the Department’s reply on the 
reassessment of “saturated” districts under PMGSY-IV. While noting the use 
of the Gram Sadak Survey App, the PM Gati Shakti portal, multiple extensions 
of the survey timeline and the sanctioning of 3,638 roads covering 12,099.98 
km to connect 4,569 habitations, the Committee remain concerned that 
districts continue to be classified as saturated even when habitations in forest-
fringe, hilly and other difficult areas lack all-weather connectivity. Without 

 
 
20 
 
routine reassessments, the works under the scheme risk stagnation 
continuing to fund areas that no longer need basic infrastructure while 
neglecting newly vulnerable populations or falling behind on emerging 
regional demands. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department 
of Rural development (DoRD) should immediately undertake a fresh district-
wise reassessment of all currently saturated districts, with special focus on 
difficult areas to identify every remaining unconnected eligible habitation. A 
transparent list of such residual habitations with reasons for non-connectivity 
and proposed timelines should be placed in the public domain and shared with 
the Committee. No district should be treated as fully saturated until universal 
all-weather access to all eligible habitations has actually been achieved. 
Priority must be given to roads and bridges for habitations left out due to 
forest and terrain constraints, with close monitoring of clearances. Saturation 
under PMGSY must reflect actual ground-level connectivity, particularly for the 
most vulnerable habitations, rather than remaining a purely administrative 
label. 
VII. Revision of Population and Eligibility Norms for Rural Connectivity 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
1.24 In the context of revision of population and eligibility norms for rural 
connectivity, the Committee had recommended as below:- 
 “The Committee note that the determination of eligibility and 
prioritisation under PMGSY has continued to rely upon older population 
benchmarks and legacy data, which in many areas no longer reflect the 
present demographic realities on the ground. The Committee are of the 
view that dependence on outdated population parameters may result in 
exclusion of deserving habitations that have grown over time or whose 
connectivity needs have changed significantly. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department undertake a review of the 
existing norms and criteria used for identification and prioritisation of 
habitations under PMGSY so that present-day population realities and 
actual connectivity deprivation are more accurately captured.” 
1.25  In their action taken reply to the above recommendation, DoRD have stated 
as follows:- 
           “The CCEA has approved PMGSY-IV on latest census data 
(Census 2011) with the following stipulations/ norms:- 
 "Construction of 62,500 Km of all-weather roads (single lane) to 
provide connectivity to about 25,000 unconnected habitations of 
population size 500+ in plains, 250+ in NE & Hill States/ UTs, special 
category areas (Tribal Schedule V, Aspirational Districts/ Blocks, 

 
 
21 
 
Desert areas), and 100+ in LWE affected districts, as per Census 
2011".” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.26 The Committee have examined the Department’s reply stating that 
PMGSY-IV has been approved by the CCEA on the basis of Census 2011 data 
with eligibility norms of 500+ population in plains, 250+ in North-Eastern and 
Hill States/UTs and special category areas, and 100+ in LWE-affected districts 
targeting about 25,000 unconnected habitations. While noting that Census 
2011 remains the most recent complete census, the Committee remain 
concerned that exclusive reliance on figures more than a decade old fails to 
reflect present-day demographic realities and risks excluding habitations that 
have grown or whose connectivity needs have changed. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
immediately undertake a comprehensive review of the existing population and 
eligibility norms, exploring the use of more recent indicators such as projected 
population estimates and local surveys or other authenticated data. The 
Department should also examine a flexible provision allowing States to 
propose inclusion of habitations that now meet the spirit of the criteria on the 
basis of verified current data and direct States to identify and report such left-
out habitations for consideration. Inputs from Members of Parliament, State 
Governments and local bodies should be actively sought. The programme 
must adopt a more dynamic approach so that no deserving habitation is 
denied all-weather connectivity merely because of outdated or obsolete 
benchmarks.   
VIII.   Allocation of Funds and Revision of Assistance under NSAP 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
1.27 With regard to allocation of funds and revision of assistance under NSAP, the 
Committee in this regard had recommended as under:- 
“The National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) is a 100% 
Centrally Funded Centrally Sponsored Scheme providing social 
security assistance to senior citizens, widows, persons with disabilities, 
and bereaved families upon the death of the primary breadwinner. The 
Committee note that the Budget Estimates for NSAP have remained 
almost static at around Rs. 9,652 crore for the last three financial years 
and Rs. 9,671 crore for the current financial year. The Committee are 
unable to comprehend the rationale behind the continued stagnation in 

 
 
22 
 
allocation since 2022–23, particularly when the programme caters to 
approximately 3.09 crore BPL beneficiaries (including about 2.97 crore 
pensioners) across the country. Given the importance of ensuring 
financial protection to vulnerable sections of society, the Committee are 
of the view that the existing level of allocation requires urgent review. 
The Committee also observe that the assistance amounts provided 
under the major components of NSAP, namely the Indira Gandhi 
National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS), Indira Gandhi National 
Widow Pension Scheme (IGNWPS) and Indira Gandhi National 
Disability Pension Scheme (IGNDPS), which range from Rs. 200 to Rs. 
500 per month, remain extremely low and inadequate in the present 
economic context. The Committee find such meagre assistance wholly 
insufficient to provide meaningful support to beneficiaries belonging to 
highly marginalised and economically distressed households, 
especially when the cost of living has increased substantially over the 
years. In view of the above, the Committee recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development submit a comprehensive proposal 
for Cabinet consideration seeking both an enhanced budgetary 
allocation for NSAP and a substantial upward revision of the assistance 
amounts under all its components. The Committee further emphasise 
that the adequacy of pension support under NSAP must be reassessed 
in light of prevailing cost-of-living conditions and a structured 
mechanism for periodic revision of pension amounts linked to 
appropriate inflation indices should be introduced so as to preserve the 
real value of assistance over time. Such measures would ensure that 
the programme continues to provide meaningful, predictable and 
dignified income support to vulnerable rural households.” 
1.28 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as below:- 
“Under NSAP funds are released to the States/UTs based on 
number of beneficiaries belonging to Below Poverty Line whose data 
has been digitized on NSAP-PPS portal or State/UT cap, whichever is 
lower. At present, States are giving top up amount to the beneficiaries 
ranging from ₹50/- to ₹5700/- per month, depending on their fiscal 
capacity and policy priorities.  NSAP caters to 3.09 crore BPL 
beneficiaries and as per the information collected from States/UTs, 
about 5.86 crore additional pensioners are supported by state-funded 
social pension schemes. Around 9 crore beneficiaries (central NSAP 
plus additional state beneficiaries) are covered under the pension 
schemes.  
 While considering the continuation of the NSAP for the 15th 
Finance Commission cycle (2021-26), the revision in the eligibility 
criteria and rate of assistance under the scheme was considered by the 
Government. However, the Government has approved the continuation 
of NSAP schemes in their present form.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.29 The Committee have examined the Department’s reply on NSAP and 
remain deeply concerned that central assistance rates of ₹200–₹500 per month 

 
 
23 
 
and the budgetary allocation of around ₹9,650–9,671 crore have remained 
virtually static for years, despite covering approximately 3.09 crore BPL 
beneficiaries. While State top-ups are welcome, they are highly uneven across 
States and cannot be a substitute for a meaningful central contribution that 
ensures a basic, dignified level of income support for the most vulnerable 
sections of society. The fact that a revision was considered but not effected 
only underscores the need for renewed and urgent attention to this issue. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Rural Development 
(DoRD) should immediately prepare and submit a comprehensive proposal to 
the Cabinet seeking substantial enhancement of both the budgetary allocation 
and the central assistance amounts under all NSAP components along with a 
structured mechanism for periodic inflation-linked revision to preserve the real 
value of pensions. The proposal should take into account prevailing cost-of-
living conditions and the uneven nature of State top-ups so that central 
assistance itself provides a minimum dignified floor of support. Coverage and 
timely disbursement of central assistance must also be closely monitored. 
Revision of NSAP assistance must be treated as a priority to fulfil the objective 
of providing meaningful social security to elderly, widows, persons with 
disabilities and other vulnerable households. 
IX. Enhancing Financial Literacy among SHG Members 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
1.30 With regard to the enhancing financial literacy among SHG Members, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that under Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana–
National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY–NRLM), substantial progress 
has been achieved in mobilising rural women into community 
institutions. More than 10 crore rural women have been organised into 
over 90 lakh Self-Help Groups (SHGs), and the SHG–Bank linkage 
programme has facilitated access to institutional credit of 
approximately Rs.11.95 lakh crore. While the Committee 
acknowledged the remarkable scale of financial inclusion achieved 
under the programme, the Committee also expressed concern during 
the course of deliberations that many SHG members, particularly in 
remote and economically vulnerable regions, lack adequate 
understanding of loan management, interest obligations, market 
dynamics, bookkeeping practices and business planning, which may 
affect the sustainability of SHG-based enterprises and could lead to 
sub-optimal utilisation of credit resources The Committee feel that 

 
 
24 
 
strengthening financial capability at the grassroots level has become 
essential to ensure that SHGs evolve into viable income-generating 
institutions rather than remaining primarily credit-linked collectives. The 
Committee therefore recommend that the DoRD strengthen financial 
literacy and entrepreneurship development initiatives for SHG 
members through structured training programmes covering areas such 
as basic financial management, enterprise planning, bookkeeping, 
digital financial transactions, market linkage strategies and risk 
management. The Committee further recommend that such initiatives 
be implemented in close coordination with banks, State Rural 
Livelihood Missions, training institutions and community resource 
persons, and be integrated with ongoing capacity-building efforts so as 
to ensure responsible utilisation of credit, sustainability of SHG 
enterprises and long-term economic empowerment of rural women.” 
1.31  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
            “To provide financial literacy in the remote areas is the priority 
of the DAY-NRLM.   To bridge the gap, a structured set of interventions 
has been planned which include undertaking large-scale digital literacy 
efforts through the Financial Literacy Community Resource Persons 
(Sakhi). 
Further, the Mission is to strengthening access of the services to 
women SHG members. through SAKSHAM Centers at the sub-block 
level, which will function as local hubs for awareness generation. 
These measures are expected to systematically address barriers 
related to awareness at grass root levels, management of credit and its 
usage, thereby promoting inclusive growth of rural households, 
particularly women. 
Proper utilization of loans and empowerment of women are also linked 
through strong repayment performance and improved livelihood 
orientation. The repayment rate of women SHGs remains above 98%, 
which reflects responsible credit behaviour and proper utilization of 
loans. Further, the share of loans used for productive purposes has 
increased from 57% in FY 2019–20 to 72% in FY 2024–25, 
demonstrating a clear shift towards income-generating activities and 
enterprise promotion.  Overall, the Mission has substantially addressed 
key concerns related to credit access, adequacy, utilization, and 
economic empowerment of women & will continue targeted efforts.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.32 The Committee have examined the Department’s reply on enhancing 
financial literacy among SHG members under DAY-NRLM. While noting the 
priority given to remote areas, the planned use of Financial Literacy 
Community Resource Persons (Sakhi) and SAKSHAM Centres and the 
encouraging indicators of over 98 per cent repayment and a rise in productive 
use of loans from 57 per cent to 72 per cent, the Committee are of the 

 
 
25 
 
considered view that these measures and outcomes do not fully address 
deeper gaps in financial capability particularly in loan management, 
bookkeeping, enterprise planning, market linkages, digital transactions and 
risk management especially in remote and connectivity-challenged regions. 
Enhancing financial literacy among SHG members in rural schemes is critical 
because it transitions women from passive savers to active economic 
managers, maximising the impact of Government livelihood initiatives. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should design and roll 
out a comprehensive, structured financial literacy and entrepreneurship 
curriculum covering these critical areas with special focus on remote and 
vulnerable regions. The programme should be implemented in close 
coordination with banks, State Rural Livelihood Missions, training institutions 
and Community Resource Persons and integrated with ongoing capacity-
building efforts. Clear and measurable annual targets for training coverage 
and outcomes should be set and supported by a robust monitoring and 
impact-assessment mechanism. Intensive and outcome-oriented training is 
essential so that the large credit flow under the SHG Bank linkage programme 
translates into sustainable livelihoods and long-term economic empowerment 
of rural women. 
 
X. DISHA Meetings and Overall Monitoring of Schemes 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
1.33 With regard to the DISHA meetings and overall monitoring of Schemes, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “Time and again, the Committee have taken note of the casual 
conduct of District Development Coordination and Monitoring 
Committee (DISHA) Meetings. The sole aim of such meetings is 
overseeing the effective utilisation of Government money for the 
welfare of the common’s masses and as such these meetings assume 
paramount importance and a tool of great value in the implementation 
of various rural schemes. However, the purpose for holding such 
Meetings is defeated with the non-appearance of responsible Officials 
at the helm of affairs, in lieu thereof, junior officers with no knowledge 
of the projects attending such DISHA meetings has become the order 
of the day. As on 20 February, 2026, 992 meetings at District Level are 
conducted in 2025-26 in comparison to 645 in 2024-25 while only 
seven States (Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Mizoram, 

 
 
26 
 
Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand) have conducted their State level DISHA 
Committee meetings in the year 2025-26. The Committee therefore, 
implore upon DoRD to take serious note of this approach of District 
Development and Monitoring officials in the matter and ensure that the 
Meetings of DISHA Committees are held regularly (at least two 
meetings per year should be mandatorily conducted) as per the 
guidelines and also sufficient number of senior level representatives 
from the concerned Department is present there in these committees.”  
1.34  The DoRD in their action taken reply furnished to the Committee have stated 
as follows:- 
“Timely convening of DISHA meetings is crucial for ensuring 
effective governance and promoting the holistic development of 
districts. Recognizing the critical importance of DISHA, Ministry of 
Rural Development (MoRD) is persistently working to ensure that these 
meetings are convened on a regular basis. All States/ UTs have been 
urged from time to time to take necessary actions and instruct the 
relevant Member Secretaries (District Collectors/Magistrates/Deputy 
Commissioners) to ensure that District Level DISHA meetings are held 
as per DISHA guidelines and to ensure the participation of senior level 
officers from the State Government in the DISHA Committee meeting 
(Annexure-2). 
Member Secretaries (District Collectors/Magistrates/Deputy 
Commissioners) of District Level DISHA Committees of all States/UTs 
have also been requested separately to ensure that District Level 
DISHA meetings are held as per DISHA guidelines and to ensure the 
participation of senior officers in the meetings (Annexure-1).”   
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.35 The Committee have carefully examined the Department’s reply. The 
Department has stated that timely convening of DISHA meetings is crucial and 
that the Ministry of Rural Development is persistently working to ensure 
regularity and that all States/UTs as well as Member Secretaries (District 
Collectors/Magistrates/Deputy Commissioners) have been repeatedly urged 
and requested to hold District Level DISHA meetings as per guidelines and to 
ensure the participation of senior-level officers.While the Committee note 
these communications, it remain deeply concerned that the fundamental 
problems identified viz., casual conduct of meetings, frequent non-appearance 
of senior officials and attendance by junior officers lacking adequate 
knowledge of the schemes continue to persist. The mere issuance of 
advisories has not translated into consistent adherence. The Committee, 
further note that only seven States conducted State-level DISHA Committee 
meetings in 2025-26, indicating that the monitoring architecture at the higher 

 
 
27 
 
level remains weak. DISHA meetings are a critical instrument for overseeing 
the effective utilisation of public funds and ensuring coordinated 
implementation of rural development schemes and their dilution through 
irregular holding or inadequate representation defeats the very purpose for 
which they were instituted. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development (DoRD) must issue binding directions 
making at least two District Level DISHA meetings mandatory every year and 
mandate personal attendance of senior-level officers from concerned 
Departments, with the level of representation recorded in the minutes. The 
Committee, further recommend DoRD to constitute a robust Ministry-level 
monitoring mechanism to track frequency, quality and participation on a 
quarterly basis and place the status in the public domain. The Committee 
expect from the Department to move beyond repeated advisories and to 
enforce the DISHA framework with the seriousness that the utilisation of 
public funds and the welfare of rural communities demand.  
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
28 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
2.1 The Committee note with concern the omnipresence of unspent balances 
across all the schemes of rural development which is not acceptable and justifiable. 
The Committee painfully note that during the financial year 2025-26, Rs. 4999.54 
lakhs in MGNREGA (as on 22.02.2026), Rs.1,24,192.48 lakhs in PMAY-G (as on 
22.02.2026), Rs. 401.15 crores (as on 19.02.2026) in PMGSY, Rs. 819.41 crores in 
NSAP (as on 23.02.2026), Rs. 382.82 crores in NRLM (up to 20.02.2026), Rs. 
506.99 crores in DDU-GKY (as on 23.02.2026) and Rs. 57.37 lakhs in RSETI (till 
23.02.2026) lie unspent. The Committee, although note the various constraints being 
faced and measures adopted by the DoRD in tackling and mitigating the issue of 
unspent balances are still in a quandary on the meagre increase in fund allocation 
for the Department on one hand, existing pendencies in schemes like MGNREGA as 
reflected through wage and material component liabilities or delay in instalment 
releases in PMAY-G on the other hand along-with non-utilization of full funds. In 
situations, wherein beneficiaries are kept awaiting for their wages or instalments, the 
accrual of unspent balances is completely unacceptable. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommend the DoRD to take appropriate and judicious approach so that 
unspent balances do not keep piling up in the various schemes and that each penny 
allocated against the schemes is fully utilized for the welfare of poor and 
marginalized section of the rural populace across the country.   
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 MGNREGA:- It is stated that unspent balances under Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme are continuously monitored and 
States/UTs are advised to utilize available balances before seeking further releases. 
Fund releases are linked with expenditure thresholds and compliance under the 
Scheme. In cases where beneficiaries are awaiting wage payments or material 
payments, priority is accorded for liquidation of pending liabilities. States are 
regularly instructed to improve financial planning, expedite utilization of funds, and 
ensure timely generation of FTOs and settlement of material dues so that 
accumulation of unspent balances is minimized and funds are utilized efficiently for 
intended beneficiaries. 
  

 
 
29 
 
In addition to above, as per instructions issued by Ministry of Finance, under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, funds are being released for Material, Admin and Social 
Audit Units through SNA-SPARSH mode. Under SNA-SPARSH mode, funds are 
sanctioned for these components by issuing mother sanctions and funds are 
released on daily-basis against FTOs generated by States and UTs (with 
legislature).   
 
PMAY-G:- The concept of unspent balance is not applicable in respect of States 
onboarded on the SNA-SPARSH platform, as the revised fund flow mechanism 
operates on a just-in-time release of funds. States onboarded on SNA-SPARSH 
have been advised to refund the balance available in the SNA accounts to the 
Consolidated Fund of India (CFI). As of date, 02 States have successfully processed 
the return of funds amounting to Rs. 152.72 crore. 
For the remaining 03 States, regular reviews are being undertaken to ensure their 
early onboarding onto the SNA-SPARSH platform. Till such time the revised fund 
flow mechanism becomes fully operational across all States/UTs, the Ministry is 
taking several measures to liquidate unspent SNA balances, including:- 
i. Monitoring of house sanctions and completion using the latest IT tools and 
technologies. 
ii. Continuous review at various levels 
iii. Focus on the completion of those houses where 3rd or 2nd instalment of 
funds has been released 
iv. Separate review of States with high target, poor-performing and delayed 
houses. Regular follow-ups are being done to improve performance. 
v. Timely release of funds as per the requirements of States/UTs. 
vi. The Aadhar-Based Payment System (ABPS) has been integrated with 
PFMS by linking the beneficiaries' Aadhar numbers with their bank accounts 
and other financial details in the PFMS database. This allows for a seamless 
flow of funds from the government to the beneficiaries through ABPS. 
As a result of onboarding onto the SNA-SPARSH platform and the above measures, 
the unspent SNA balance has reduced from Rs. 11,092.01 crore at the beginning of 
the current financial year to Rs. 751 crores by the end of the financial year. 
PMGSY:- The SNA-SPARSH module has  been introduced recently to ensure just in 
time release to the States/ UTs, which has resulted in reducing  the unspent balance 
to a large extent. The SNA balance is Rs. 93.82 Crore as on 13.04.2026 under 
PMGSY, out of which Rs. 78.30 Crore is available with the State of Bihar. Since the 
State of Bihar has also onboarded on SNA SPARSH, this amount will be returned to 
the Consolidated Fund of India and the Consolidated Fund of the State within one 
month. Therefore, there will be minimal unspent balances with the Union Territories 
without Legislatures, which have been excluded from the SPARSH module. 
 

 
 
30 
 
DAY-NRLM:- This Ministry has made all the best efforts to  reduce the unspent 
balance during the year 2025-2026.  
It may be noted that unspent balance with the States/UTs as on 01.04.2025 was 
Rs.5262.75 Crore, this was reduced to Rs.804.14 Crore as on 31.03.2026 (including 
DDU- GKY and RSETI). 
DDU-GKY:- Under DDU-GKY, the Ministry has undertaken focused efforts for 
liquidation of unspent balances through continuous monitoring, periodic review 
meetings with States/UTs, strict adherence to SNA-SPARSH guidelines, and 
improved financial discipline under PFMS. States/UTs were regularly advised to 
expedite expenditure against available balances, reconcile accounts, remit interest, 
and refund idle funds lying in SNA accounts wherever required. 
  
As a result of these sustained efforts, significant reduction in unspent balances has 
been achieved under the scheme. The SNA balance, which stood at ₹1,259.00 
Crores as on 31.03.2025, has substantially reduced to ₹345.24 Crores as on 
31.03.2026. Thus, a total reduction of ₹913.76 Crores has been achieved during the 
period, indicating considerable improvement in fund utilization, financial 
reconciliation, and overall expenditure management under DDU-GKY. 
  
The Ministry continues to closely monitor the remaining balances and has directed 
all States/UTs to ensure timely utilization/refund of funds and closure of inactive SNA 
accounts to maintain optimum financial efficiency under the scheme. 
  
RSETI:- Under RSETI, now the SNA Sparsh mechanism has been implemented 
wherein releases are made based on actual payment requirements/demands 
generated by the State through the SNA-SPARSH workflow.  
  
Regarding unspent balance in OLD SNA, the Ministry has undertaken focused 
efforts for liquidation of unspent balances through continuous monitoring, periodic 
review meetings with States/UTs. States/UTs were regularly advised to expedite 
expenditure against available balances, reconcile accounts, remit interest, and 
refund idle funds lying in SNA accounts wherever required. As on 31.03.2026, the 
unspent balance is Rs.0.30 cr. as detailed below. Efforts are being continuously 
made for reducing it to zero. 
 
The State-wise details of the unspent balance under RSETI are given below:- 
State Name Unspent Balance (Rs. in Crore) 
ANDHRA PRADESH 0.00  
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 0.00  
ASSAM 0.00  
BIHAR 0.00  
CHHATTISGARH 0.00  
GUJARAT 0.17  
HARYANA 0.05  
HIMACHAL PRADESH 0.00  
JAMMU AND KASHMIR 0.00  

 
 
31 
 
JHARKHAND 0.00  
KARNATAKA 0.01  
KERALA 0.00  
MADHYA PRADESH 0.00  
MAHARASHTRA 0.00  
MANIPUR 0.00  
MEGHALAYA 0.01  
MIZORAM 0.00  
NAGALAND 0.00  
ODISHA 0.00  
PUDUCHERRY 0.00  
PUNJAB 0.00  
RAJASTHAN 0.00  
SIKKIM 0.00  
TAMIL NADU 0.03  
TELANGANA 0.00  
TRIPURA 0.00  
UTTAR PRADESH 0.01  
UTTARAKHAND 0.01  
WEST BENGAL 0.00  
Total  0.2991 
 
NSAP:- BE 2025-26 for NSAP is Rs. 9652.00 crore which was reduced to 
Rs.9197.09 Crore at RE stage. Out of RE of Rs. 9197.09 Crore, funds amounting to 
Rs.8863.93 Crore were expended during the FY 2025-26 which is 96.38% of 
allocated RE. 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
2.3 The Committee note that the Ministry has cited difficulties arising from the 
implementation of SNA-SPARSH as one of the factors affecting fund flow and 
utilisation under various schemes. The Committee are of the considered view that 
any digital public finance system ought to have been introduced only after adequate 
preparedness, training and handholding support to the implementing agencies. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry urgently address operational 
bottlenecks in SNA-SPARSH, ensure complete onboarding and handholding of all 
States and implementing agencies, and issue clear operational guidance so that 
delays in fund release and utilisation do not continue on account of procedural or 
technical deficiencies. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
32 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.4 MGNREGA:- It is stated that the implementation of SNA-SPARSH is aimed at 
improving transparency, accountability, and real-time monitoring of fund flow under 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes including the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme. Initial operational challenges were observed during 
the transition phase; however, continuous handholding support, training sessions, 
video conferences, and issuance of detailed operational guidelines have been 
undertaken for States/UTs and implementing agencies.  
  
So far, 29 States/UTs have onboarded successfully on SNA SPARSH platform and 
releases have been made to these states under various State Linked Schemes in FY 
2025-26.  The Division is closely coordinating with States and PFMS authorities for 
the resolution of technical and procedural bottlenecks to ensure smooth functioning 
of the system and timely release/utilization of funds. 
 
PMAY-G:- The implementation of SNA-SPARSH involves coordination among 
multiple stakeholders (State IFMIS, NIC, PFMS and NPCI), and operational issues 
affecting fund flow have been observed, including -  
i. Delay in the release of the corresponding matching state share against the 
mother sanction issued  
ii. Delay in requesting proposals from the state for the issuance of Mother 
Sanction 
iii. Delayed Credit response and credit acknowledgement 
iv. Pending FTOs at various levels   
 
In case of non-release of State Share by the States, the matter is constantly 
reviewed at all levels to ensure the release of the same and as per the Framework 
for implementation of PMAY-G 
States/UTs have also been requested through letters issued in May, July, 
September, November and December regarding mandatory onboarding on the SNA-
SPARSH platform, as directed by the Department of Expenditure. Regular review 
meetings have been conducted, and follow-up communications have been issued to 
State officials to facilitate onboarding and address operational issues. As a result, 26 
States have been onboarded onto the SNA-SPARSH platform, with 03 States 
remaining (Bihar being at the last stage of integration and no targets being allocated 
to West Bengal and Telangana in Phase II). 
  
In the current financial year 2025-26, an expenditure of Rs. 18,564.24 crore has 
been booked under PMAY-G, out of which Rs. 10,819.53 crore has been routed 
through the SNA-SPARSH model, indicating progressive stabilisation of the platform 
and improved fund flow. 
 
PMGSY:- With the persistent efforts of this ministry, all the States/ UTs with 
Legislature have been on-boarded on SNA SPARSH platform under PMGSY. 
 
DAY-NRLM:- Out of the 30 States, 29 have already been onboarded under NRLM 
during 2025–26. The onboarding of Bihar could not be completed due to the non-
readiness of the State IFMIS, following changes in its technical team. It is expected 
that Bihar will also be onboarded during the current financial year. This Division has 

 
 
33 
 
been providing regular handholding support to all States, including the resolution of 
technical issues as and when they arise. A dedicated ‘Zoom Room’ has also been 
set up to provide online support to States on all working days. 
 
 
NSAP:- Assam and Chhattisgarh states have been boarded on SNA-SPARSH for 
NSAP. States/UTs have been requested vide this Department's D.O letter dated 
23.12.2025, dated 12.01.2026 and 16.03.2026 for onboarding SNA-SPARSH 
platform forwarding therewith Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) along with a 
detailed list of activities as per revised user guidelines. Additionally, meetings are 
being conducted with States/UTs for expediting the on-boarding process. 
                 ( DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
2.5 The Committee are concerned to note that the Budget Estimates under 
MGNREGA for the Financial Year 2026-27 have been drastically reduced to 
Rs.30,000 crore which is 65.12% less than the Budget Estimates for the previous 
financial year, i.e. 2025-26. In this scenario, the Committee is not able to reason the 
approach of the Department in seeking/obtaining funds which prima-facie do not 
seem to be adequate enough to fuel the sustainable momentum of the rural progress 
because most of them will be utilized to clear pendencies. The Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) provides a legal right to 
work for the most economically disadvantaged sections of the rural population who 
are willing to work. It is a last resort of succour for the jobless section of the society 
who have no other means of livelihood to feed their family members. The scheme 
serves as a critical safety net, particularly for those facing extreme poverty and 
unemployment. Therefore, the Committee are unable to comprehend the rationale 
for such a huge reduction in the allocation of fund under MGNREGA for 2026-27. 
Since the scheme ensured employment to masses of rural poor and deprived section 
of the society, it is very much essential that adequate Budgetary Allocation ought to 
be made for the effective implementation and running of the Scheme. The 
Committee note that significant pending liabilities continue to persist under 
MGNREGA. As per the information furnished by the Department of Rural 
Development, as on 22.02.2026, liabilities amount to Rs.5,940.54 crore under the 
wage component and Rs.10,921.59 crore under the material component, 
aggregating to Rs.16,862.13 crore. The Committee further observe that with the 

 
 
34 
 
overall allocation of only Rs.30,000 crore for the year, the existing and anticipated 
liabilities together are likely to rise to nearly Rs.25,000 crore by the end of the 
financial year, leaving very little fiscal space for fresh works under the scheme. The 
Committee are of the view that such a situation undermines the demand-driven 
character of MGNREGA and constrains its ability to respond to genuine employment 
demand. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department of Rural Development to 
reassess the requirement of funds more realistically and press upon the Ministry of 
Finance for enhanced allocation, particularly considering that additional funds can be 
provided at the Revised Estimates stage for a demand-driven programme like 
MGNREGA. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.6 It is stated that Budget Estimate of Rs.30,000 crore for FY 2026-27 under 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme represents the 
initial allocation and additional funds are provided at RE stage based on actual 
demand for employment. Since MGNREGS is a demand-driven scheme governed 
by statutory provisions, the Ministry assesses requirement of funds periodically and 
seeks additional allocation from Ministry of Finance as necessary. Pending liabilities 
under wage and material components are also taken into account while projecting 
fund requirements. The Ministry remains committed to ensuring the uninterrupted 
implementation of the Scheme and that no genuine demand for work is curtailed due 
to budgetary constraints. 
 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
2.7 The Committee are concerned about the continuous delays/pendencies in the 
disbursement of the Centre’s share of funds under the wage and material 
components of MGNREGA across multiple States and Union Territories. As per the 
information provided by the Department of Rural Development, as of 22.02.2026, the 
pending liabilities stand at Rs.5,940.54 crore in wages, Rs.10,921.59 crore in 
material components and total pending liabilities are Rs.16,862.13 crore. This 
accounts for 56.20% of the current budget, meaning that more than half of the 
allocated funds will be used to clear previous years' dues. Consequently, the actual 
working budget for the current financial year is reduced to Rs.13,137.87 crore, 
significantly limiting the scheme’s capacity to function effectively and meet its 
primary objective of preventing rural distress and ensuring livelihood security. The 
Committee further note that with an overall allocation of around Rs.30,000 crore for 

 
 
35 
 
the year, the existing and anticipated liabilities together may rise to nearly Rs.25,000 
crore, leaving very little fiscal space for fresh works under the scheme. Given the 
demand-driven nature of MGNREGA, it is therefore imperative that adequate and 
realistic budgetary allocations are provided to ensure uninterrupted implementation 
of the programme. The Committee feel that both the aspect of MGNREGA, i.e. a 
demand driven nature of the scheme and creation of assets under the scheme are 
severely hampered. Any administrative or procedural lapse causing delays in wage 
payments and material fund release in the context of a scheme of such enormous 
proportion like MGNREGA which caters to the nook and corners of the country and 
has millions of beneficiaries enrolled as job card holders would only deter the needy 
person from availing the benefits of the scheme. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend DoRD to spruce up its financial management of the scheme and tighten 
its oversight on the systemic gaps that may have crept into the implementation of 
MGNREGA at the ground level, so as to ensure the earliest eradication of 
pendencies in wage payments and material components. The Committee further 
emphasise that, given the demand-driven nature of the scheme, adequate additional 
budgetary provisions should be made as and when required to meet emerging 
demand, and no legitimate demand for work under MGNREGA should be curtailed 
or suppressed on account of shortage of funds. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.8 Under Mahatma Gandhi Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, wage payments are 
directly credited by the Central Government to the account of beneficiaries through 
the Direct Benefit Transfer protocol.  
  
With the regard of material, States/UTs furnish funds release proposals to 
Government of India. The Ministry releases funds periodically in two tranches with 
each tranche consisting of one or more instalments, keeping in view the “agreed to” 
Labour Budget, demand for works, opening balance, pace of utilization of funds, 
pending liabilities, overall performance and subject to submission of relevant 
documents by the States/UTs. 
  
Fund release to the States/UTs is a continuous process and Central Government is 
committed in making funds available to States/UTs for the implementation of the 
Scheme as per the demand for work on the ground. This Ministry regularly interacts 
and follows up with States/UTs Government regarding timely submission of 
prescribed documents in order to avoid delay in the release of funds for the 
implementation of the scheme. 
  

 
 
36 
 
Periodic communications based on expenditure projections have been made to the 
Ministry of Finance for making sufficient provisions under revised estimates 2025-26 
and budget estimates 2026-27. 
        
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
2.9 The Committee are of the view that the level of development already achieved 
in a Gram Panchayat should not become a ground for denial or restriction of wage 
employment support to eligible rural households residing therein. The Committee 
note that pockets of deprivation, vulnerable labour households and distress migration 
may continue to exist even within relatively better-performing Panchayats. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that programme implementation should remain 
sensitive to household-level vulnerability and actual demand for employment, and 
that no eligible household should be denied access to wage employment merely on 
the ground that the concerned Panchayat is considered relatively developed.  
Reply of the Government  
 
2.10 It is stated that Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme is a rights-based, demand-driven programme and every rural household 
whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work is entitled to demand 
employment irrespective of the relative development status of the Gram Panchayat. 
No eligible household is denied wage employment on the ground that the concerned 
Panchayat is comparatively better developed. Programme implementation is based 
on actual demand for work and household-level vulnerability. States/UTs are 
regularly advised to ensure equitable access to employment opportunities and strict 
adherence to the provisions of the Act so that livelihood security is provided to all 
eligible rural households without discrimination.  
  
         (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
2.11 The Committee note that a persistent challenge in the implementation of 
PMAY-G has been the identification of genuine beneficiaries, particularly homeless 
individuals and those residing in kutcha houses. The eligibility criteria for PMAY-G 
were determined based on housing deprivation parameters from the Socio-Economic 
Caste Census (SECC), 2011. However, considerable time has passed since the 
base year, and it has been widely observed that many eligible beneficiaries have 

 
 
37 
 
become ineligible while a whole lot of eligible beneficiaries have surfaced and 
waiting to avail the benefits. This gap in beneficiary identification is a serious 
deficiency in the scheme’s implementation and requires urgent rectification. The 
Committee recommend that the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) 
undertake a comprehensive review of the existing list of eligible beneficiaries at the 
earliest. Additionally, the policy framework must be revised to ensure that newly 
emerging needy households—who were not covered under the SECC 2011 
Census—are duly included in the PMAY-G scheme. This will ensure that no eligible 
and deserving beneficiary is left out. Furthermore, the Committee also recommend 
that the eligibility criteria be expanded to include households with semi-permanent 
structures, such as those with pucca walls or tin roofs, to better reflect the current 
housing realities and ensure comprehensive coverage under PMAY-G. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under PMAY-G, beneficiaries were initially identified using housing deprivation 
parameters based on the Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC), 2011, 
followed by verification through Gram Sabhas and an appellate process. The eligible 
universe included houseless households and those living in zero, one or two rooms 
with kutcha walls and kutcha roofs, as per SECC 2011. 
To address the issue of left-out households not captured in SECC 2011, the 
Government conducted the Awaas+ survey from January 2018 to March 2019, which 
prepared an additional list of potential beneficiaries. The SECC 2011-based 
Permanent Wait List, along with the Awaas+ 2018 survey list, has since been 
saturated for most States/UTs, except Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and West Bengal. 
Further, while approving the implementation of PMAY-G for the period 2024-29, the 
Government approved modifications to the exclusion criteria and the conduct of an 
exercise to update the Awaas+ list of beneficiary households. Accordingly, the 
Awaas+ 2024 household survey is being conducted from 27.12.2024 through the 
Awaas+ 2024 Mobile App, with provision for both self-survey and assisted survey 
through pre-registered surveyors, to identify additional eligible rural households 
under the scheme. The initial timeline for completion of the Survey was 31.03.2025, 
which was extended till 30.04.2025 and 15.05.2025 for all States/UTs, and 
thereafter, extension in timeline has been granted to those States/UTs that have 
demanded a timeline extension. 
The modified exclusion criteria of the PMAY-G for this phase (2024-2029) are as 
follows: 
1. Motorised three/four-wheeler 
2. Mechanised three/ four-wheeler agricultural equipment 
3. Kisan Credit Card with a credit limit of Rs 50,000/- or above 
4. Household with any member as a Government employee 

 
 
38 
 
5. Households with non-agricultural enterprises registered with the Government 
6. Any member of the family earning more than Rs 15,000/- per month 
7. Paying income tax 
8. Paying professional tax 
9 Own 2.5 acres or more of irrigated land 
10. Own 5 acres or more of unirrigated land. 
 
As per the SECC definition of Kutcha house, a kutcha house is a house with 
predominant material of wall of dwelling room being Grass, thatch, bamboo, plastic, 
polythene, mud, unburnt brick, wood, stone not packed with mortar and predominant 
material of roof of dwelling room being Grass, thatch, bamboo, wood, mud, plastic, 
polythene, handmade tiles. 
 
However, an Expert Committee was constituted to provide its recommendations on 
the proposals from the States of Assam, Tripura, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh for 
revisiting the definition of Kutcha house under PMAY-G. As per the 
recommendations given by the Expert Committee, for the State of Assam and 
Tripura, decision was taken that for the state of Assam and Tripura, “the house with 
the CGI sheet roof and Kutcha wall may be considered as Kutcha house, whereas 
wall with moisture degradable materials like 'Icra' panels, unburnt bricks, etc. with 
external surface protected with cement sand plaster may be considered as pucca 
wall.” 
At present, there is no proposal under consideration of the Ministry for further 
modifications in the exclusion criteria or the definition of kutcha house beyond those 
already specified. 
             (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
2.13 The Committee note that apart from the inadequacy of the present unit 
assistance under PMAY-G, a serious challenge also persists in relation to families 
who are houseless but do not possess land for construction of a dwelling unit. The 
Committee are of the considered view that the objective of rural housing cannot be 
fully realised unless the concerns of the landless poor are addressed in an integrated 
manner. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department evolve a 
suitable policy framework for providing housing support to landless eligible 
households, including through land allotment, community land models or other viable 
arrangements in coordination with the State Governments. The Committee further 
recommend that the per unit assistance under PMAY-G be reviewed 
comprehensively in light of the prevailing cost of construction so that the assistance 
provided is realistic and adequate for completion of a dignified dwelling unit. 
  

 
 
39 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 “Land” is a state subject. Under PMAY-G, landless beneficiaries are accorded 
top priority as they are among the most deserving households in the Permanent Wait 
List (PWL). States/UTs have been advised to ensure that such beneficiaries are 
provided land from Government land or any other available land, including public 
land such as Panchayat common land, community land or land belonging to other 
local authorities. Landless beneficiaries are also given priority in the ranking of 
households. 
As per information reported by the States/UTs, out of 6.66 lakh identified landless 
beneficiaries from the existing beneficiary database, 4.30 lakh beneficiaries have 
been provided land/assistance for purchase of land, while 2.36 lakh beneficiaries 
remain to be provided land/assistance for purchase of land for construction of 
houses. The Ministry is regularly reviewing the matter and requesting States/UTs to 
take necessary steps to address the issue. 
Further, several States have implemented specific initiatives to address the needs of 
landless beneficiaries. These includes:-  
(a) Bihar: “Mukhyamantri Awas Sthal Kray Sahayata Yojana” Financial 
assistance of ₹60,000 to eligible beneficiaries for the purchase of land to build their 
house.  
(b) Odisha: “Vasundhara Yojana” – Aims to provide land rights and housing 
benefits to landless poor, slum dwellers, and vulnerable groups.  
(c) Maharashtra: “Pandit Deendayal Upadhyay Gharkul Jaga Kharedi 
Arthasahay Yojana” – Financial assistance of ₹1,00,000 to landless beneficiaries for 
purchasing 500 sq. ft. of land for house construction.  
(d) Tamil Nadu: Provision of free land to landless beneficiaries for house 
construction under PMAY-G 
There is no proposal under consideration in the Ministry for increasing the unit 
financial assistance. 
  
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
2.15 The Committee note that in many rural areas houses of poor families are 
rendered uninhabitable due to fire accidents, floods and other natural calamities, 
leaving affected households in immediate distress. The Committee are of the view 
that such households require urgent housing support and should not be left to await 
prolonged procedural processes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department consider evolving an appropriate provision or priority window under 
PMAY-G for reconstruction of houses belonging to eligible rural households that 

 
 
40 
 
have been destroyed or severely damaged due to fire, floods or similar calamities, in 
coordination with the concerned State Governments. 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 Under PMAY-G, up to 5% of the targets are reserved for Special Projects. 
The Ministry allocates targets for Special Projects based on proposals received from 
States/Union Territories, as per the Framework for Implementation of PMAY-G. 
As per the provisions of the scheme, rehabilitation or relocation of families whose 
houses have been completely or substantially damaged due to natural hazards, as 
categorised in the extant National Disaster Management Plan of the National 
Disaster Management Authority (such as floods, earthquakes, fire, etc.), is an eligible 
category for submission of proposals under Special Projects. 
Beneficiaries under Special Projects are required to be eligible households as per 
the provisions of PMAY-G. The Ministry also allows for the opening of special 
windows for the survey/registration of eligible rural households covered under such 
Special Projects. 
 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
2.17 The Committee observe that delays in appraisal, approval and sanction of 
road proposals under PMGSY adversely affect execution timelines, escalate costs 
and delay the intended benefits of rural connectivity to the local population. The 
Committee are of the view that avoidable procedural delays defeat the core objective 
of the scheme, especially in remote and underserved regions where road 
connectivity remains a basic developmental necessity. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department streamline the approval process under PMGSY 
through clearly defined timelines, closer coordination with the State Governments 
and regular monitoring of pending proposals so that eligible roads are sanctioned 
and executed without undue delay. 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 At present, sanctions under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana – Phase IV 
(PMGSY-IV) are being accorded. Under this scheme 25,000 unconnected 
habitations of population  size 500+ in plains, 250+ in NE & Hill Sates/UTs, special 
category areas (Tribal Schedule V, Aspirational Districts/Blocks, Desert areas) and 
100+ in LWE affected districts, as per Census 2011 will be covered. Under this 
scheme 62,500 Km of all-weather roads will be provided to unconnected habitations. 
Construction of required bridges along the alignment of the all-weather road will also 
be provided. 

 
 
41 
 
 
MoRD/ NRIDA has developed a mobile application called the Pradhan Mantri Gram 
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) Gram Sadak Survey Mobile App, specifically designed for 
digital mapping of PMGSY-IV unconnected habitations. Habitation Geo Tagging 
mobile app enables the mapping of unconnected habitations. It allows users to input 
latitude and longitude coordinates for both start and end points, ensuring precise 
tracking. The app enables users to capture geo-tagged photos of essential facilities, 
such as schools, primary health centers, gram mandis, and banks, along their route. 
The app offers offline functionality, allowing users to map remote areas with limited 
or no internet connectivity. This feature ensures uninterrupted mapping operations, 
even in areas with poor network coverage.  
 
Guidelines for PMGSY IV are prepared and circulated to all the States. Habitation 
surveys have been carried out by the states with the use of Gram Sadak Survey 
App. PMGSY IV mainly relies on Gatishakti for planning of rural roads.  
 
Till now, no such instances in inordinate delay in preparation of DPRs of roads have 
been observed. As on date, 3638 roads of 12,099.98 km length has been sanctioned 
under PMGSY for providing connectivity to 4,569 habitations.  
 
The implementation of all sanctioned works is being monitored through an online 
programme Monitoring Information System named Online Management, Monitoring 
and Accounting System (OMMAS) on a real time basis. In addition, the progress is 
regularly reviewed by the Ministry by way of Regional Review Meetings (RRMs), 
Performance Review Committee (PRC) Meetings, Pre-Empowered/ Empowered 
Committee Meetings with the States. At District level, the District Development 
Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA) headed by Hon’ble Member of 
Parliament (LS) monitors the implementation of various schemes of Government of 
India including PMGSY. Besides above, special review meetings/monthly review 
meetings are also held by Secretary/Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary, Ministry of 
Rural Development with Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of the States to take 
stock of the progress of the scheme and remove the bottlenecks, if any. 
 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
2.19 The Committee note with concern that under the National Social Assistance 
Programme, eligible beneficiaries, particularly the elderly, widows, disabled persons 
and residents of remote tribal areas, often face avoidable difficulties in accessing 
benefits on account of banking formalities, biometric authentication failures, KYC-
related issues and weak mobile connectivity. The Committee are of the view that a 
social assistance programme meant for the most vulnerable should be guided by 
ease of access and not by cumbersome procedural barriers. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department evolve alternative and simplified 
mechanisms for delivery of assistance to eligible beneficiaries, especially in remote 

 
 
42 
 
and connectivity-challenged regions, and ensure that no eligible person is denied or 
delayed benefits on account of procedural or technological hurdles. The Committee 
further recommend that the existing cap or quota-based constraints under NSAP be 
revisited so that every eligible beneficiary may receive assistance without undue 
waiting. The Committee also note that in several States new beneficiaries are often 
enrolled only when an existing beneficiary exits the scheme, typically upon death, 
due to fixed ceilings on beneficiary numbers. The Committee are of the view that 
such a practice defeats the purpose of a social security programme. Any person who 
fulfils the eligibility criteria should be able to receive assistance without having to wait 
for vacancy under the capped list, and the Department should move towards 
maintaining a universal and dynamic list of eligible beneficiaries under NSAP. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 Regarding beneficiaries residing in tribal areas, remote areas, as per NSAP 
guidelines, in extreme cases where a beneficiary is found to be incapable of 
receiving his / her pension due at the specified place of disbursement, door step 
delivery of the pension dues shall be ensured within seven days. As per information 
received from States/UTs, majority of States/UTs have a mechanism to disburse 
pension to doorsteps with the help of Banking Correspondents, SHG members, 
Anganwadi workers, Banking Sakhis, etc. to most vulnerable beneficiaries such as 
old Age, infirm and divyangjan beneficiaries.  
 
Under NSAP funds are released to the States/UTs based on number of beneficiaries 
belonging to Below Poverty Line whose data has been digitized on NSAP-PPS portal 
or State/UT cap, whichever is lower. At present, States are giving top up amount to 
the beneficiaries ranging from ₹50/- to ₹5700/- per month, depending on their fiscal 
capacity and policy priorities.  NSAP caters to 3.09 crore BPL beneficiaries and as 
per the information collected from States/UTs, about 5.86 crore additional 
pensioners are supported by state-funded social pension schemes. Around 9 crore 
beneficiaries (central NSAP plus additional state beneficiaries) are covered under 
the pension schemes. The beneficiaries are receiving pension benefits either under 
Central pension schemes or under State-specific social security pension schemes, 
many of which have expanded coverage and higher assistance levels tailored to 
local needs.  
 
In parallel, broader socio-economic indicators reflect improved well-being: according 
to the National Multidimensional Poverty Index report of NITI Aayog, the proportion 
of India’s multi-dimensionally poor declined significantly from 24.85 per cent in 2015-
16 to about 14.96 per cent in 2019-21, with around 13.5 crore people exiting 
multidimensional poverty in this five-year period. 
 
Further, as per Economic Survey 2025-26, poverty estimates by researchers based 
on the Tendulkar committee poverty line indicates that the poverty rate estimated to 

 
 
43 
 
have reduced from 21.9 per cent in 2011-12 to 4.7 per cent in 2022-23 and further to 
2.3 per cent in 2023-24.  
                    (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
2.19 Self-Help Groups (SHGs) under the scheme of DAY-NRLM are a boon to the 
rural women who work together for means of livelihoods. However, the Committee 
note that the women of SHGs may be better served in terms of generating revenue 
for their livelihoods if products prepared by them like dairy products, agriculture, 
handicrafts etc. have a proper platform for their marketing and income generation. 
Although SHGs have access to village mandis, the limited operational days of these 
mandis restrict their ability to sell their products effectively. Therefore, continuous 
promotion and marketing of SHG products is essential to provide them with the 
much-needed opportunity to thrive. This includes free connectivity for SHG products 
to online marketplaces like Amazon, Flipkart, etc. Additionally, SHG members should 
be provided with specialized computer training to help them launch their local 
products online through websites and social media platforms, enabling them to 
generate revenue through their hard work and skills. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the status of such efforts along with the revenue generated by the SGHs. 
The Committee therefore recommend that the DoRD develop a robust marketing 
structure that allows SHG products to gain better visibility, leading to wider local and 
international customer reach, ultimately enhancing revenue generation and ensuring 
sustainable incomes. The Committee also recommend that the DoRD should 
strengthen market linkage initiatives through expansion of digital marketplaces, 
partnerships with e-commerce platforms and promotion of producer collectives that 
can aggregate products and negotiate better prices. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 The Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) has taken a number of steps for 
ensuring market access for SHG products. The MoRD has registered brands of 
“Saras”, Saras Aajeevika” and “Aajeevika” for promotion of SHG products. Further, 
twenty-five States have created State level brands and are facilitating the sales of 
the SHG products under these brands, e.g. Palash and Adiva of Jharkhand, Himira 
of Himachal Pradesh and Mathi of Tamil Nadu etc. 
  

 
 
44 
 
Saras Melas are being organized at National, State and District levels to popularize 
the Saras brand and also to promote the sale of SHG products in urban markets. 
The annual sales through these Melas is more than Rs.200 crores. 
 
A retail store- Saras Aajeevika Gallery include with a total sale to Rs. 8.46 crore till 
March 2026 is being operated in Central Delhi for sale of curated products of SHG 
members. Similarly States also operate retail outlets under the State’s brands. 
 
A dedicated eCommerce platform eSaras for selling of curated SHG products has 
been set up and is being operated by MoRD. As on March 2026, 3331 products 
SKUs (Stock keeping units or products) have been uploaded on the eSARAS 
platform. Further, tie-ups gave been made with GeM, ONDC, Amazon, Flipkart, 
Jiomart mart and Meesho to promote SHG products on ecommerce platforms. 
 
In response to the Committee’s observations regarding strengthening marketing 
avenues and enhancing income generation for SHGs, it is submitted that the Ministry 
has taken active steps in this direction. 
 
The concepts of SHE-Marts Aggregator-cum-Sales Outlets, Digital Facilitation 
Centres (DFCs) for strengthening e-commerce, and Centre of Excellence as 
dedicated retail and branding spaces for SHG products have been duly 
conceptualized and incorporated in the EFC proposal for the period 2026–31.  
 
These interventions aim to provide SHG products with sustained market access, 
improved visibility, aggregation support, and enhanced digital integration with e-
commerce platforms. Collectively, they are expected to address the gaps highlighted 
by the Committee by enabling better price realization, wider market reach (both 
domestic and international), and capacity building of SHG members in online 
marketing and enterprise management.  
                     
          (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22) 
2.19 The Committee were informed during the course of deliberations that in 
certain districts DISHA meetings are not being convened regularly due to lack of 
awareness among District Collectors and district-level officials regarding the 
availability of reimbursement for meeting-related expenditure. The Committee 
pointed out that this administrative gap has, in some instances, resulted in 
reluctance on the part of district authorities to convene meetings. The Committee are 
of the considered view that such issues should not impede the functioning of an 
important monitoring platform intended to strengthen accountability in the 
implementation of rural development programmes. The Committee therefore 
recommend that the DoRD issue comprehensive instructions to all State 

 
 
45 
 
Governments and district administrations clearly outlining the reimbursement 
provisions and procedural requirements for DISHA meetings. The Committee further 
recommend that the Ministry undertake awareness and orientation initiatives for 
District Collectors and other implementing authorities, and consider developing a 
simplified and timely reimbursement mechanism, so that financial and administrative 
constraints do not discourage district authorities from convening DISHA meetings on 
a regular basis. 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 Para 8 and Para 9 of the guidelines for District-Level DISHA Committees 
provide for the reimbursement of amounts claimed by the State Government and 
DRDA or Zila Panchayat, respectively, based on actual expenditures incurred, 
subject to an overall ceiling of Rs. 3.0 lakh and Rs. 2.0 lakh per meeting, 
respectively. The State/UT Governments have been informed about the detailed 
provisions for reimbursement of meeting-related expenditure time to time.  
 
Recently, District Collector/ Magistrate/ Deputy Commissioner of all States/UTs have 
been informed again regarding the provisions of reimbursement of DISHA meeting-
related expenditure vide this ministry's letter dated 08.04.2026 (Annexure-1). The 
Ministry is making concerted efforts to ensure the timely release of reimbursement 
claims upon receipt of the requisite proposals from the States/UTs/Districts 
authorities.  
                    (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23) 
2.19 The Committee note that effective monitoring of development expenditure at 
the district level requires convergence across major funding streams, including those 
which have substantial bearing on local infrastructure and welfare outcomes. The 
Committee are of the view that the District Development Coordination and Monitoring 
Committee (DISHA) would be more effective if important district-level funds and 
programmes, including District Mineral Foundation (DMF) review, are also brought 
within its review ambit. The Committee further note that the lack of awareness 
regarding reimbursement and expenditure support for DISHA meetings continues to 
impede their regular conduct in some places. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry issue explicit and widely communicated instructions to all States and 
district authorities regarding the admissible meeting expenditure, including the 
sanctioned ceiling for conduct of DISHA meetings, and also consider including DMF-
related review in DISHA proceedings wherever relevant so as to strengthen district-
level coordination and accountability. 

 
 
46 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 Para-5 of District Level DISHA guidelines provides that DISHA will cover all 
non-statutory schemes of Government of India that are administered in general. 
However, the functions of schemes that have been specifically assigned under a 
statute cannot be assigned to any other committee for monitoring. In such cases, the 
extant statutory provisions will prevail. 
 
District Mineral Foundation (DMF) being a statutory body cannot be brought under 
the purview of DISHA Committees. However, the Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra 
Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) is being implemented by DMF from the funds accruing to 
them in terms of Mines & Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957. Since the 
PMKKKY scheme is already under the purview of DISHA Committees, the 
development programmes being carried out by DMF under PMKKKY in mining 
affected districts may be monitored in DISHA Committee meetings through 
PMKKKY. 
 
Regarding reimbursement and expenditure support for DISHA meetings, Para 8 and 
Para 9 of the guidelines for District-Level DISHA Committees provide for the 
reimbursement of amounts claimed by the State Government and DRDA or Zila 
Panchayat, respectively, based on actual expenditures incurred, subject to an overall 
ceiling of Rs. 3.0 lakh and Rs. 2.0 lakh per meeting, respectively. The State/UT 
Governments have been informed about the detailed provisions for reimbursement 
of meeting-related expenditure time to time.  
 
Recently, District Collector/ Magistrate/ Deputy Commissioner of all States/UTs have 
been informed again regarding the provisions of reimbursement of DISHA meeting-
related expenditure vide this ministry's letter dated 08.04.2026 (Annexure-1). The 
Ministry is making concerted efforts to ensure the timely release of reimbursement 
claims upon receipt of the requisite proposals from the States/UTs/Districts 
authorities.  
                    (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
  

 
 
47 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Department of Rural Development O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
  

 
 
48 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
4.1 The Department of Rural Development (DoRD) under the aegis of the Ministry 
of Rural development have a huge responsibility upon them to create a conducive 
environment wherein the vast rural populace living in the nooks and corners of the 
country realise the succour of holistic development. The areas of concern range from 
Rural Development, Rural Housing, Rural Connectivity to Rural Livelihoods to name 
a few. For a nation of such rich heritage as ours, the rise from ‘developing’ to 
‘developed’ status is not at all feasible until and unless the majority population of the 
country residing in villages march side by side with their urban counterparts. The 
Committee resonate with this idea and acknowledge the paramount importance of 
rural development in the country. However, in this scenario, the Committee is not 
able to understand the approach of the Department that as against the funds of Rs. 
1,86,995.61 crore allocated at the RE stage of 2025-26, actual expenditure was Rs. 
99,090.47 crore only, which is 47.01% less than the funds allocated at the RE stage. 
This indicates that either the budgetary planning of the Government was not prudent 
enough or there is a problem at the actual implementation stage of the schemes. 
Non-utilization of allocated funds means that deprivation of the targeted people from 
availing benefits from the scheme, and the same could have been meaningfully 
utilized for the other scheme where funds were direly needed. At the fag end of the 
completion of the financial year, the Committee desire to know how the DoRD plans 
to utilize the allocated funds fully within the short span of time. Therefore, the 
Committee, recommend the DoRD to chalk out quarterly and monthly expenditure 
plans well in advance in consultation with Stakeholder particularly the State 
Governments in respect of all of its schemes/programme and should undertake all 
possible measures for optimum utilization of funds and at the same time also keep a 
close monitoring on the availability of funds so as to raise supplementary demands 
or re-appropriate at opportune moment in collaboration with the Ministry of Finance. 
 
  

 
 
49 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 “ MGNREGA:- The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme is a demand-driven programme and funds are released to States/UTs 
based on actual demand for work and performance of the States in terms of 
utilization of available funds, generation of employment, and submission of requisite 
compliance including utilization certificates and audited accounts. During FY 2025-
26, against the available funds of Rs. 88,000 crore, funds amounting to Rs.87,365.76 
crore have been released. The lower expenditure against RE allocation during FY 
2025-26 was primarily on account of procedural transition relating to implementation 
of SNA-SPARSH. The Ministry continuously monitors fund utilization through 
monthly/quarterly reviews, regular follow-up with States/UTs, and timely assessment 
of additional fund requirements. Quarterly and monthly expenditure plans are also 
reviewed in consultation with States to ensure optimum utilization of funds and timely 
re-appropriation/supplementary demands are sought wherever required, in 
coordination with Ministry of Finance. 
 
PMAY-G:- The Budget Estimate (BE) allocation for the current financial year under 
PMAY-G is Rs. 54,832.03 crore, which was revised to Rs. 32,500.01 crore at the 
Revised Estimate (RE) stage. The expenditure incurred under PMAY-G is 
Rs.22,997.73 crores as on 01.04.2026. 
The comparatively lower expenditure is primarily due to the ongoing migration from 
the existing Single Nodal Agency (SNA) model to the SNA-SPARSH platform. This 
transition involves integration with multiple stakeholders, including State IFMIS, NIC, 
PFMS and NPCI, which has led to temporary disruption in fund flow mechanisms. 
Despite these transitional challenges, significant progress has been achieved with 26 
States already onboarded onto the SNA-SPARSH platform under PMAY-G, with 03 
States remaining (Bihar being at the last stage of integration and no targets being 
allocated to West Bengal and Telangana in Phase II). Expenditure routed solely 
through SPARSH under PMAY-G has reached Rs. 10,819.53 crore, indicating 
gradual stabilisation of the new system and improved fund flow alignment. 
Further, to ensure utilisation of funds, quarterly and monthly expenditure plans under 
PMAY-G have been prepared in consultation with States/UTs. Financial allocations 
are also being revised based on requests received from States, keeping in view their 
component-wise requirements, so that funds are available, and expenditure can be 
accelerated. Regular review meetings are being held with States/UTs to monitor fund 
utilisation and States have been advised to expedite utilisation in line with approved 
allocations/mother sanctions issued. 
PMGSY:- The budget allocation of Pradhan Mantri gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) for 
financial Year 2025-26 was Rs. 19,000 Crore at BE stage which has been revised to 
Rs. 11,000 Crore at RE stage. The actual funds released under PMGSY for 
Financial Year 2025-26 was Rs. 7,855.08 Crore. Additionally, an amount of Rs. 
2,252.515 Crore has been surrendered under the PMGSY in a timely manner, and 
these funds have been reallocated to other schemes. 
Further, Quarterly and Monthly Action Plans are chalked out in advance after proper 
consultation with States/UTs and in pursuance of the guidelines of MoF. The 
progress is regularly reviewed by the Ministry by way of Regional Review Meetings 

 
 
50 
 
(RRMs), Performance Review Committee (PRC) Meetings, Pre-Empowered/ 
Empowered Committee Meetings with the States. However, there was low 
expenditure in the Financial Year 2025-26 due to the following reasons:- 
(a) Transition to SNA SPARSH: The most significant technical reason for the 
reduction is onboarding on SNA SPARSH. Many States had substantial unspent 
balances in their Single Nodal Accounts (SNA). Under the previous system, Central 
releases were made even if States had not fully exhausted previous tranches. The 
Ministry has now fully transitioned to the SNA SPARSH. This platform provides real-
time visibility of funds. Many States had first exhausted the existing "float" or "SNA 
balances" before onboarding on the SNA SPARSH. Hence the actual requirement 
for new Central releases decreased under PMGSY. 
 (b)  Sun-setting of Verticals: The decrease also reflects that the legacy phases of 
PMGSY are nearing completion, while new phases are in the initial mobilization 
stage. PMGSY-I & II phases have reached over 95% physical completion 
nationwide. 
 (c)  PMGSY-III Restrictions: While PMGSY-III was extended to March 2026, the 
government imposed a condition that no new works should be taken up if they were 
sanctioned but not yet tendered. This effectively capped new expenditure for this 
vertical. Many sanctioned works could not be awarded due to this restrictions and 
this extension with the rider came only in the month of July. By that time working 
season was over due to onset of the Monsoon in many parts of the country. Also 
contractors slowed down the works as the payment was not released due to late 
receipt of the extension of the timeline of PMGSY-II, RCPLWEA and PMGSY-III.  
 (d)  Transition to PMGSY-IV: The launch of PMGSY-IV (targeted for 2024-2029) is 
currently in the "indicative allocation" and planning phase. Large-scale fund 
absorption typically happens after the tendering and initial mobilization of new 
projects, which shifted the bulk of the financial requirement to the next fiscal year. 
(e)  Systemic and Operational Constraints: Field-level challenges impacted the pace 
of work, leading to lower-than-anticipated expenditure. Inclement weather, including 
extended monsoons and extreme heatwaves in 2025, significantly shortened the 
"working season," leading to temporary work stoppages. In the Himalayan States 
and LWE-affected areas projects faced persistent delays due to forest clearances 
and law and order issues. Some States faced a "limited contracting capacity" where 
the volume of sanctioned work under PMGSY-III exceeded the number of qualified 
contractors. 
DAY-NRLM:- Quarterly and Monthly Plans have already been formulated and have 
been included in the Detailed Demands for Grants also. Expenditure is also being 
closely monitored. 
DDU-GKY:- Under DDU-GKY, optimum utilization of allocated funds is ensured 
through a structured mechanism of need-based fund release, continuous monitoring, 
and strict financial controls. Funds are released to States/UTs based on approved 
Annual Action Plans (AAPs), physical and financial progress, utilisation of previously 
released funds, and compliance with scheme guidelines. 
  

 
 
51 
 
The Ministry has strengthened financial management through implementation of the 
SNA-SPARSH framework and PFMS, enabling real-time tracking of releases, 
expenditures, and unspent balances. Regular review meetings are conducted with 
States/UTs to monitor utilisation trends and address bottlenecks affecting 
expenditure. 
  
Further, the Division follows a prudent approach by issuing Mother Sanctions and 
releasing funds strictly on the basis of actual requirement and absorptive capacity of 
States/UTs, thereby avoiding idle parking of funds. States/UTs having higher 
unspent balances are regularly advised to expedite expenditure or refund idle 
balances to the Consolidated Fund of India (CFI). 
 
To improve utilisation efficiency, the Ministry has also introduced periodic 
reconciliation of accounts, mandatory submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs), 
physical progress reports, and compliance with audit observations before processing 
further releases. 
 
As a result of continuous monitoring and corrective measures, substantial reduction 
in unspent balances has been achieved, leading to improved fund utilisation and 
better alignment of financial releases with scheme outcomes under DDU-GKY. 
The State-wise details of the unspent balance are given below:- 
 
The State/UT wise Status of Unspent Balance under DDU-GKY as on 31.03.2026 
mentioned as below:- 
Sr. No. States/UTs Balance in the Bank Account 
of SNA (in Cr.) 
1 Kerala 188.31 
2 West Bengal 65.65  
3 Telangana 48.31  
4 Gujarat 12.45  
5 Odisha 10.90 
6 Maharashtra 10.50  
7 Uttar Pradesh 6.53  
8 Haryana 1.08  
9 Rajasthan 0.51  
10 Uttarakhand 0.50  
11 Andaman & Nicobar 0.30  
12 Tamil 0.21  
13 Jammu 0.00 
14 Karnataka 0.00  
15 Manipur 0.00  
16 Punjab 0.00  
17 Andhra 0.00  
18 Arunachal 0.00  
19 Assam 0.00  
20 Bihar 0.00  
21 Chhattisgarh 0.00  
22 Goa 0.00  
23 Himachal 0.00  
24 Jharkhand 0.00  
25 Madhya Pradesh 0.00 
26 Meghalaya 0.00  

 
 
52 
 
27 Mizoram 0.00  
28 Nagaland 0.00  
29 Puducherry 0.00  
30 Sikkim 0.00  
31 Tripura 0.00  
   Total  345.24 
 
RSETI:- It is pertinent to mention that the RSETI scheme operates as a fully 
demand-driven and reimbursement-based programme, with no provision for advance 
State-wise budget allocation. Under the scheme, training programmes are conducted 
by sponsoring banks. Reimbursement is processed only upon submission of 
complete claims, including Utilization Certificates (UCs), audited statements, and 
other prescribed documentation, and after due verification at multiple levels. Thus, 
the scheme inherently follows a post-facto settlement mechanism, wherein 
expenditure is first incurred by implementing agencies and subsequently reimbursed 
by the Government of India 
 
NSAP:- Under NSAP schemes, funds are provided to States/UTs, based on digitized 
number of beneficiaries or States cap of beneficiaries whichever is lower. Fund 
release is subject to receiving proposal from States/UTs complete in all respects, in 
terms of scheme guidelines/ in procedures laid down by D/o Expenditure. BE 2025-
26 for NSAP is Rs. 9652.00 crore which was reduced to Rs.9197.09 Crore at RE 
stage. Out of RE of Rs. 9197.09 Crore, funds amounting to Rs.8863.93 Crore were 
expended during the FY 2025-26 which is 96.38% of allocated RE. The utilization of 
funds under NSAP has been very good. However, the Ministry has taken note of the 
suggestion and will plan expenditure in consultation with the State Governments.” 
 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
4.3 The Committee note that the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) have 
been entrusted with a huge task of implementing and overseeing plethora of 
schemes of the Government of India which are aimed at the upliftment of rural 
masses of our country. It is pretty evident that vast population of our country 67 still 
reside in the villages among which a substantial quantum belongs to marginalised 
and economically downtrodden section of our society. Thus, it becomes imperative 
on the part of the Department of Rural Development to ensure that the visionary 
flagship schemes of the Government of India are not left in the lurch for want of 
better maneuvering and are provided with ample support in terms of finances for 
keeping the schemes healthy and running. The Committee find that Rs. 2,28,768.81 
crore have been allocated to the Department of Rural Development at the BE stage 

 
 
53 
 
for 2026-27, which is 21.20% more than the funds at BE stage in Financial Year 
2025-26. The Committee acknowledge this and hope that it would be fully utilized for 
the rural development schemes as conceived by the Government in order to extend 
benefits to the targeted beneficiaries. However, the Committee note with concern 
that out of the total allocation of Rs. 2,28,768.81 crore at BE stage for 2026-27, a 
major amount of Rs. 95,692.31 crore has been allocated to VB-GRAMG. Therefore, 
barring VBGRAMG, funds for other major schemes like PMGSY, PMAY-G, DAY-
NRLM and NSAP, by and large, have been kept static and moreover, funds for 
MGNREGA has been drastically reduced to Rs. 30,000 crore. The Committee are of 
the firm opinion that such allocation is inadequate and totally unacceptable. 
Therefore, in order to accelerate the sustainable momentum of rural progress, 
adequate budgetary allocation is necessary particularly when the popular schemes 
like MGNREGA, NSAP, DAY- NRLM, PMGSY and PMAY-G are also not immune to 
the inflation and rising cost of raw materials involved. Further, the Committee hope 
that allocated funds would be utilised fully on various rural development schemes in 
order to yield desired results for the overall welfare of the rural population. The 
Committee are of the firm opinion that such allocation is inadequate and may be 
suitably enhanced, particularly when the scheme continues to face substantial 
pending liabilities from previous years. The Committee note that pending liabilities 
under MGNREGA are expected to approach nearly Rs. 25,000 crore by the end of 
the financial year, which would leave very limited fiscal space for meeting fresh 
demand for work during the current financial year. In a demand-driven programme 
such as MGNREGA, such a situation may severely constrain the ability of the 
scheme to respond to genuine demand for employment. Therefore, in order to 
accelerate the sustainable momentum of rural progress, adequate budgetary 
allocation is necessary, particularly when popular schemes like MGNREGA, NSAP, 
DAYNRLM, PMGSY and PMAY-G are also affected by inflation and the rising cost of 
raw materials and services. The Committee further hope that the allocated funds 
would be fully utilised under various rural development schemes in order to yield the 
desired outcomes for the overall welfare of the rural population. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4  “ MGNREGA:- It is submitted that budget allocation under Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme is made based on projected 
demand, absorptive capacity of States/UTs, pace of expenditure, and overall fiscal 

 
 
54 
 
considerations. Being a demand-driven programme, additional funds under 
MGNREGS are considered at RE stage based on actual demand for employment. 
The Ministry remains committed to ensuring that no eligible demand for work is 
denied due to shortage of funds. The requirement of enhanced allocation for 
MGNREGS is reviewed periodically and additional funds are sought from Ministry of 
Finance, wherever necessary, based on emerging demand and pending liabilities. 
PMAY-G:- As on 01.04.2026, under PMAY-G, a total target of 4.15 crore houses has 
been allocated to States/UTs, out of which 3.90 crore houses have been sanctioned 
and more than 2.99 crore houses have been completed. The remaining allocation 
will be made from the total approved target of 4.95 crore houses, after receipt of the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee and upon identification and verification of 
eligible households under the Awaas+ 2024 survey. 
The total liability for release of Central share to the States/UTs under Phase II (2024-
25 to 2025-26) is Rs. 41,925 crores. Against this, the Budget Estimate allocation for 
the next financial year is Rs. 54,916.70 crore. The pending liabilities will be released 
first, and the remaining funds from the BE allocation will be utilized for further 
releases to States/UTs. The allocation to the states will also be revised, as per 
requirement, to ensure availability of funds. 
PMGSY:- The allocation/release of funds to the States for implementation of PMGSY 
is made based on the fund release proposals received from the States/UTs and 
depends, inter-alia on works in hand, execution capacity of the States/UTs, and 
unspent funds available with the States/UTs. Quarterly and Monthly Action Plans are 
chalked out in advance after proper consultation with States/UTs and in pursuance 
of the guidelines of MoF. In addition, the States are regularly followed up for 
requirement of funds. Under PMGSY there is an unbroken chain of funds release 
and no work has been affected due to the shortage of funds. 
The budget estimate of PMGSY for FY 2026-27 is Rs. 19,000 crore. This amount 
along with the corresponding State share would be enough to meet the expenditure 
on PMGSY works to be carried out by States/UTs during the FY 2026-27. 
DAY-NRLM:-  The Annual Action Plan for the year 2026-27 of all the States/UTs 
have already been approved by the Empowered Committee of this Ministry which 
includes financial and physical target. Review of these targets will be done regularly. 
Therefore, it is expected that allocated funds during the current year will be fully 
utilised. 
NSAP:- Under NSAP, 100 % of BE of FY 2024-25 of Rs. 9652.00 Crore was utilised 
in the FY 2024-25 and in the FY 2025-26, out of allocated RE of Rs.9197.09 Crore, 
funds amounting to Rs.8863.93 Crore has been utilized which is 96.38% of allocated 
RE. An amount of Rs 9671.00 crore has been allocated to NSAP for B.E 2026-27.   
Funds under NSAP are released to States/UTs on the basis of number of eligible 
beneficiaries whose database has been digitized on NSAP-PPS (National Social 
Assistance Programme - Pension Payment System) portal or State cap of number of 
beneficiaries, whichever is less. In case of any additional requirement of funds under 
the scheme, the same will be sought at the RE stage or through supplementary 
provisions.” 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 

 
 
55 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
4.5 An oft-repeated concern of the Committee pertaining to MGNREGA has been 
the inadequacy of wage rates under the programme. Despite several 
recommendations in this regard, there has been no noticeable shift in the stance of 
the Department of Rural Development (DoRD). While the Department has 
consistently indicated that wage rates are revised annually, the Committee is of the 
view that the magnitude of such revisions remains insufficient in the context of rising 
inflation and the increasing cost of living in both rural and semi-urban areas. The 
Committee note with concern that the notified wage rates in several States continue 
to hover around Rs.200 per day, which is significantly lower than the prevailing 
market wage rates for similar categories of labour in those very States. Such a 
disparity undermines the fundamental objective of MGNREGA as a programme 
intended to provide livelihood security and fair compensation for rural labour. The 
Committee are of the view that the existing methodology for wage determination 
warrants a comprehensive review. In particular, the continued reliance on an 
outdated base year and the absence of a robust inflation-linked mechanism have 
resulted in wage levels that do not adequately reflect present economic realities. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Rural Development 
undertake a thorough reassessment of the wage structure under MGNREGA and 
consider instituting a minimum wage floor of Rs. 400 per day under the programme. 
The Committee further recommend that the wage rates under MGNREGA be 
systematically indexed to an appropriate inflation indicator to ensure periodic and 
meaningful adjustments. The Committee note that the base year of 2011 continues 
to be used as the reference for determining wage calculations under MGNREGA, 
which has remained static for a considerable period. The Committee are of the view 
that in the present context, when the country is well beyond 2025, reliance on such 
an outdated base year fails to adequately capture the prevailing economic 
conditions, inflationary trends and changes in rural wage structures. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the base year be revised at the earliest so that wage 

 
 
56 
 
determination under MGNREGA more accurately reflects current economic realities 
and ensures that the notified wages remain meaningful and relevant to rural workers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 “The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA), 2005, under Section 6(1), empowers the Central Government to 
notify wage rates for its beneficiaries. Further, as per Section 6(2) of the Act, until 
such time as wage rates are notified by the Central Government for any area in a 
State, the minimum wages fixed by the State Government for agricultural labourers 
under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 are applicable. Accordingly, from the inception 
of the Scheme till FY 2010–11, wage rates under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA were 
determined on the basis of the minimum wage set by the respective State 
Governments. However, from FY 2011–12 onwards, the Government of India 
adopted a uniform methodology for wage determination based on the Consumer 
Price Index for Agricultural Labourers (CPI-AL), as compiled and released by the 
Labour Bureau, Shimla. 
 
To account for inflationary pressures and safeguard the real wages of workers, the 
Ministry of Rural Development revises wage rates annually, effective from 1st April of 
each financial year, based on the change in CPI-AL. The index is State/UT-specific, 
thereby allowing for differential wage revisions across States/UTs. Additionally, a 
safeguard mechanism is in place whereby, in case the computed wage rate for any 
State/UT is lower than that of the previous year, the wage rate is protected at the 
previous year’s level. It is further submitted that the States/UTs are at liberty to 
provide wages over and above the centrally notified rates from their own resources. 
 
With regard to the observations of the Hon’ble Committee, it is respectfully submitted 
that the existing methodology for wage determination, including indexation to CPI-
AL, is well established and has been consistently followed. At the same time, the 
concerns raised by the Hon’ble Committee regarding the adequacy of wage rates, 
revision of base year, and alignment with prevailing economic conditions have been 
duly noted. 
 
It is also apprised that Section 10 of the Viksit Bharat – Guarantee for Rozgar and 
Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): VB–G RAM G (ͪवकͧसत भारत–जी राम जी) Act, 2025 (36 of 
2025) provides that until a wage rate is notified by the Central Government, the wage 
rates notified under Section 6 of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA shall continue to be 
applicable in the areas covered under the new Act. 
 
Accordingly, while the existing wage determination framework continues to remain in 
force, the Department has taken due cognizance of the concerns expressed by the 
Hon’ble Committee. These concerns, including the need for ensuring adequacy of 
wages and appropriate indexation, will be duly considered while deliberating upon 
wage rate determination under the new legislative framework.” 
 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 

 
 
57 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
4.7 The per unit assistance under PMAY-G for plain areas is Rs.1.20 lakh and for 
hilly areas is Rs.1.30 lakh which has remained static for a considerable period of 
time. With rising inflation having a detrimental effect on the cost associated with raw 
materials, transportation and labour, constructing a new house of the requisite size 
under PMAY-G for poor and needy beneficiaries with the present level of assistance 
appears to be an arduous task. The vision of “Housing for All” may not achieve its 
envisaged target unless beneficiaries are provided adequate financial handholding in 
terms of assistance of appropriate value and at the right juncture. Moreover, there 
are several instances where houses remain incomplete for want of adequate 
financial resources, thereby causing delays in achieving the targets under the 
scheme. The Committee, during their interactions with stakeholders and based on 
feedback received from various States, have observed that the actual expenditure 
incurred by beneficiaries for construction of a basic pucca house significantly 
exceeds the present assistance, with beneficiaries often compelled to mobilise 
additional resources through borrowings or personal savings to complete 
construction. In many cases, the total cost of construction has been reported to be 
substantially higher due to the rising cost of construction materials, transportation in 
remote areas, and increased labour charges. In view of the foregoing, the Committee 
find it necessary that a comprehensive review of the per-unit assistance under 
PMAY-G be undertaken on priority, particularly when the scheme has been extended 
up to March, 2029. The Committee are of the considered view that the per-unit 
assistance under PMAY-G needs a substantial revision and recommend that the 
assistance be enhanced up to minimum Rs. 4 lakh per unit, with appropriate 
differentiation for difficult and hilly areas, so as to ensure that beneficiaries are able 
to construct a durable and dignified dwelling without being subjected to financial 
distress. Such a revision would not only reflect the prevailing construction costs but 
also strengthen the objective of the scheme in delivering safe and permanent 
housing to rural households. The Committee also recommend there should be parity 
in unit assistance provided under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Urban and 
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Gramin. 

 
 
58 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 “Under Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana–Gramin (PMAY-G), the unit assistance 
provided is Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain areas and Rs. 1.30 lakh in North-Eastern States 
and Hilly States (including UTs of J&K and Ladakh). In addition, beneficiaries are 
facilitated with 90/95 person-days of unskilled labour wages through mandatory 
convergence with the Viksit Bharat Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission–
Gramin (VB-G RAM G). Support of Rs. 12,000 for construction of toilet is also 
provided through Swachh Bharat Mission–Gramin (SBM-G), MGNREGS or any 
other dedicated source of funding. 
Further, PMAY-G converges with various Government programmes to provide 
benefits such as piped drinking water, electricity connection, LPG gas connection, 
solar lanterns, cleaner cooking energy and solar rooftop, to the beneficiaries. 
There is no proposal under consideration in the Ministry for increasing the unit 
financial assistance” 
 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
4.9 The Committee are fully aware of the inbuilt mechanism under PMGSY which 
mandates consultation with the concerned Members of Parliament during the 
finalisation of road plans. However, despite these provisions, the Committee 
continue to receive frequent complaints from Members of Parliament regarding non-
compliance with the consultative procedures in both letter and spirit. Instances have 
been brought to the notice of the Committee where consultation is either not 
undertaken at all or reduced to a mere formality, such as obtaining consent without 
sharing adequate details or without facilitating proper ground-level verification of 
proposed road alignments. The Committee are of the view that Members of 
Parliament, being elected representatives and the primary point of contact for 
grievances of the local population, possess valuable insights regarding the 
developmental needs of their constituencies and are therefore well placed to provide 
meaningful inputs during the planning stage of rural connectivity projects. The 
Committee also reiterate that the role of Members of Parliament should not be 
confined merely to post-facto information, but should extend to meaningful 
consultation and appropriate institutional association in the planning, oversight and 

 
 
59 
 
approval processes relating to major rural development projects. In this regard, the 
Committee are of the view that suitable arrangements may be evolved to ensure due 
participation of Members of Parliament, or their authorised representatives where 
necessary, in relevant State-level or district-level oversight and approval 
mechanisms. The Committee are further concerned to note that the prescribed 
guidelines relating to foundation laying and inauguration ceremonies of PMGSY 
roads are also not being consistently followed. As per extant provisions, the 
foundation stone and inauguration of PMGSY roads are to be carried out by the 
concerned Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) along with other elected 
representatives of the area. However, several instances of deviation from this 
protocol have been reported, wherein Members of Parliament were either not invited 
or were informed only after the event. The Committee are of the firm view that the 
presence of Members of Parliament at such events strengthens transparency and 
accountability in the execution of projects funded from the public exchequer. In view 
of the above, the Committee recommend that the Department of Rural  Development 
should ensure strict compliance with all consultative and protocol provisions relating 
to Members of Parliament under PMGSY and impress upon the State Governments 
and implementing agencies the necessity of adhering to these provisions in both 
letter and spirit. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.10 “The PMGSY Guidelines provide a key role to the public representatives and 
Hon’ble Members of Parliament in the implementation of the programme, including 
selection and construction of roads.  Consultation with Members of Parliament is 
provided at both the District Rural Roads Plan (DRRP) finalisation and Annual 
Proposals stages.  In addition, at the stage of preparing Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs), the District Programme Implementation Unit (DPIU) conducts a transect 
walk along the road alignment, involving the local panchayat. State Governments are 
required to arrange joint inspection of ongoing as well as completed works under 
PMGSY by Hon’ble MPs, Hon’ble MLAs and representatives of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions.  
Some important provisions of PMGSY-III guidelines, which provide detailed 
procedures for consultation with the Members of Parliament during the process of 
planning and selection of roads, are detailed below: 
Para 3.6.  The suggestions given by the Members of Parliament are to be given full 
consideration while finalizing the District Rural Roads Plan (DRRP). 

 
 
60 
 
Para 5.5. The Annual proposals will be based on the Comprehensive Upgradation 
cum Consolidation Priority List (CUCPL) following the Order of Priority (subject to 
PCI). However, it is possible that there are inadvertent errors or omissions, 
particularly in the selection of Through Routes. Accordingly, it is desirable to also 
associate public representatives while finalizing the selection of road works in the 
annual proposals. The proposals of the Members of Parliament are required to be 
given full consideration, for this purpose:  
 (i)     The CUCPL should be sent to concerned MPs with the request that their 
proposals on the selection of works out of the CUCPL should be sent to the District 
Panchayat. It is suggested that at least 15 clear days may be given for the purpose. 
 (ii)    In order to ensure that the prioritization has some reference to the funding 
available, the size of proposals expected may also be indicated to the Members of 
Parliament while forwarding the CUCPL list to them. District wise allocation may be 
indicated to enable choice with the requisite geographical spread.  It is expected that 
such proposals of Members of Parliament which adhere to the Order of Priority 
would be invariably accepted subject to consideration of equitable allocation of funds 
and need for upgradation. 
  (iii)     The proposals received from the Members of Parliament by the stipulated 
date would be given full consideration in the District Panchayat which would record 
the reason in each case of non-inclusion. Such proposals that cannot be included 
would be communicated in writing to the Members of Parliament with reasons for 
non-inclusion of such proposals in each case.  It would be preferable if the 
communication is issued from the Nodal Department at a senior level. 
Para 7.1:  After approval by the District Panchayat, the proposals would be 
forwarded by the PIU to the SRRDA. The PIU will at that time prepare the details of 
proposals forwarded by the Members of Parliament, and action taken thereon, in 
Proforma MP-I and MP–II and send it along with the proposals. In all cases where 
the proposal of an MP has not been included, cogent reasons shall be given based 
on the reasons given by the District Panchayat.  
Para 7.3   The State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) would scrutinize the 
proposals to see that they are in accordance with the Guidelines and that the 
proposals of the Members of Parliament have been given full consideration.  
In order to ensure that the State Government gives due attention towards this aspect 
of the guidelines while submitting the proposals to the Ministry of Rural Development 
for sanction, the Ministry has issued a fresh advisory to the States on 23rd June, 
2023. The State Governments have been advised, inter-alia, to communicate the 
final list of proposals in the order of priority to the Member of Parliament with the 
reasons for non-inclusion of certain roads in the proposals and incorporate their 
recommendations with the proposals sent to NRIDA/Ministry for approval. 
As per the PMGSY-IV norms, the District Rural Roads Block and District level has to 
be prepared, based on the conducted surveys to identify habitations through the 
Gram Sadak Survey App, and placed before the District Panchayats. In all these 

 
 
61 
 
stages the suggestions and proposals from Hon’ble Members of Parliament are to be 
given due importance.  
Ministry of Rural Development vide letter dated 29.01.2025 (English) and 10.02.2025 
(Hindi) (Annexure - 3(a) and 3(b)) has directed States/ UTs that  during the survey 
process itself, the Project Implementation Unit (PIUs) should apprise the Hon’ble 
Members of Parliament (both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha as per PMGSY norms) 
regarding the ongoing survey and give due consideration to their suggestions for 
inclusion of habitations in DRRP and CNCPL as per the eligibility norms of the 
programme, para 5.5 of the programme guidelines mention the following:- 
5.5 After the CNCPL is prepared and verified it shall be placed before the District 
Panchayat. The Member of Parliament/ MLA shall be given a copy of the CNPL and 
their suggestions and the suggestions of lower level Panchayati Raj Institutions shall 
be given fullest consideration by the district panchayat while according its approval. 
The suggestion of the Hon’ble Members of Parliament regarding the eligible 
habitations should be duly recorded in MP-I format before submission of proposals to 
District Panchayat for the approval. This will ensure that the eventual selection of the 
habitations is comprehensive and it strengthens the planning and implementation 
under the programme.  
Further, this Ministry vide letter dated 15.03.2025 (Annexure - 3(c)) has directed the 
States/ UTs to circulate the letter dated 29.01.2025 and 10.02.2025 along with a 
copy of PMGSY guidelines (English and Hindi) to all Hon’ble Members of Parliament 
for kind information.   
Further, a fresh letter to States/ UTs for strict adherence to advisory regarding 
invitation to Public Representatives for foundation laying and inauguration 
ceremonies of PMGSY work has been issued on 01.12.2025 (Annexure - 3(d)).” 
 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
4.11 The Committee note that although several districts have been shown as 
having achieved saturation under the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY 
IV), concerns continue to be received that a number of habitations, particularly those 
situated in forest-fringe, hilly and otherwise difficult areas, still remain without all-
weather road connectivity. The Committee are of the considered view that mere 
classification of a district as saturated cannot be a ground for overlooking habitations 
that remain genuinely unconnected due to terrain, forest-related clearances or 
administrative exclusion. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department 
of Rural Development undertake a fresh and detailed reassessment of such districts, 
with special focus on habitations left out on account of forest and difficult-area 

 
 
62 
 
constraints, and ensure that districts where genuine connectivity gaps continue are 
not treated as fully saturated till universal road access is actually achieved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.12 “As per 5.3 of PMGSY-IV Guidelines, a mobile application, named "PMGSY 
Gram Sadak Survey App”, has been developed to identify possible alignments of 
roads to unconnected eligible habitations. PM Gati Shakti portal with a wider 
database is available for detailed analysis of data received from the transect walk 
and will facilitate developing the preliminary DPR. The data captured will be verified 
at the State level before uploading on Geo Sadak. The SRRDA will ensure that the 
vetted proposals meet the objectives of PMGSY-IV”. 
The survey date has been extended multiple time and States were asked to survey 
all such habitations which remain unconnected as per PMGSY norms. Whatever gap 
has been identified by the States/UTs and if such identified unconnected habitations 
meeting the conditions of the programme guidelines, the Ministry is working in close 
coordination with States/UTs to sanction the roads/bridges to provide connectivity to 
such habitations on priority. As on date, 3638 roads of 12,099.98 km length has 
been sanctioned under PMGSY for providing connectivity to 4,569 habitations.” 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
4.13 The Committee note that the determination of eligibility and prioritisation 
under PMGSY has continued to rely upon older population benchmarks and legacy 
data, which in many areas no longer reflect the present demographic realities on the 
ground. The Committee are of the view that dependence on outdated population 
parameters may result in exclusion of deserving habitations that have grown over 
time or whose connectivity needs have changed significantly. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department undertake a review of the existing norms 
and criteria used for identification and prioritisation of habitations under PMGSY so 
that present-day population realities and actual connectivity deprivation are more 
accurately captured. 
Reply of the Government 
4.14 “The CCEA has approved PMGSY-IV on latest census data (Census 2011) 
with the following stipulations/ norms:- 
"Construction of 62,500 Km of all-weather roads (single lane) to provide connectivity 
to about 25,000 unconnected habitations of population size 500+ in plains, 250+ in 

 
 
63 
 
NE & Hill States/ UTs, special category areas (Tribal Schedule V, Aspirational 
Districts/ Blocks, Desert areas), and 100+ in LWE affected districts, as per Census 
2011".” 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
4.15 The National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) is a 100% Centrally 
Funded Centrally Sponsored Scheme providing social security assistance to senior 
citizens, widows, persons with disabilities, and bereaved families upon the death of 
the primary breadwinner. The Committee note that the Budget Estimates for NSAP 
have remained almost static at around Rs. 9,652 crore for the last three financial 
years and Rs. 9,671 crore for the current financial year. The Committee are unable 
to comprehend the rationale behind the continued stagnation in allocation since 
2022–23, particularly when the programme caters to approximately 3.09 crore BPL 
beneficiaries (including about 2.97 crore pensioners) across the country. Given the 
importance of ensuring financial protection to vulnerable sections of society, the 
Committee are of the view that the existing level of allocation requires urgent review. 
The Committee also observe that the assistance amounts provided under the major 
components of NSAP, namely the Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme 
(IGNOAPS), Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme (IGNWPS) and Indira 
Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme (IGNDPS), which range from Rs. 200 to 
Rs. 500 per month, remain extremely low and inadequate in the present economic 
context. The Committee find such meagre assistance wholly insufficient to provide 
meaningful support to beneficiaries belonging to highly marginalised and 
economically distressed households, especially when the cost of living has increased 
substantially over the years. In view of the above, the Committee recommend that 
the Department of Rural Development submit a comprehensive proposal for Cabinet 
consideration seeking both an enhanced budgetary allocation for NSAP and a 
substantial upward revision of the assistance amounts under all its components. The 
Committee further emphasise that the adequacy of pension support under NSAP 
must be reassessed in light of prevailing cost-of-living conditions and a structured 
mechanism for periodic revision of pension amounts linked to appropriate inflation 

 
 
64 
 
indices should be introduced so as to preserve the real value of assistance over 
time. Such measures would ensure that the programme continues to provide 
meaningful, predictable and dignified income support to vulnerable rural households. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.16 “Under NSAP funds are released to the States/UTs based on number of 
beneficiaries belonging to Below Poverty Line whose data has been digitized on 
NSAP-PPS  portal or State/UT cap, whichever is lower. At present, States are giving 
top up amount to the beneficiaries ranging from ₹50/- to ₹5700/- per month, 
depending on their fiscal capacity and policy priorities.  NSAP caters to 3.09 crore 
BPL beneficiaries and as per the information collected from States/UTs, about 5.86 
crore additional pensioners are supported by state-funded social pension schemes. 
Around 9 crore beneficiaries (central NSAP plus additional state beneficiaries) are 
covered under the pension schemes.  
While considering the continuation of the NSAP for the 15th Finance Commission 
cycle (2021-26), the revision in the eligibility criteria and rate of assistance under the 
scheme was considered by the Government. However, the Government has 
approved the continuation of NSAP schemes in their present form.” 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
4.17 The Committee note that under Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana–National Rural 
Livelihoods Mission (DAY–NRLM), substantial progress has been achieved in 
mobilising rural women into community institutions. More than 10 crore rural women 
have been organised into over 90 lakh Self-Help Groups (SHGs), and the SHG–
Bank linkage programme has facilitated access to institutional credit of 
approximately Rs.11.95 lakh crore. While the Committee acknowledged the 
remarkable scale of financial inclusion achieved under the programme, the 
Committee also expressed concern during the course of deliberations that many 
SHG members, particularly in remote and economically vulnerable regions, lack 
adequate understanding of loan management, interest obligations, market dynamics, 
bookkeeping practices and business planning, which may affect the sustainability of 
SHG-based enterprises and could lead to sub-optimal utilisation of credit resources 
The Committee feel that strengthening financial capability at the grassroots level has 

 
 
65 
 
become essential to ensure that SHGs evolve into viable income-generating 
institutions rather than remaining primarily credit-linked collectives. The Committee 
therefore recommend that the DoRD strengthen financial literacy and 
entrepreneurship development initiatives for SHG members through structured 
training programmes covering areas such as basic financial management, enterprise 
planning, bookkeeping, digital financial transactions, market linkage strategies and 
risk management. The Committee further recommend that such initiatives be 
implemented in close coordination with banks, State Rural Livelihood Missions, 
training institutions and community resource persons, and be integrated with ongoing 
capacity-building efforts so as to ensure responsible utilisation of credit, sustainability 
of SHG enterprises and long-term economic empowerment of rural women. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.18 “To provide financial literacy in the remote areas is the priority of the DAY-
NRLM.   To bridge the gap, a structured set of interventions has been planned which 
include undertaking large-scale digital literacy efforts through the Financial Literacy 
Community Resource Persons (Sakhi). 
  
Further, the Mission is to strengthening access of the services to women SHG 
members. through SAKSHAM Centers at the sub-block level, which will function as 
local hubs for awareness generation. These measures are expected to 
systematically address barriers related to awareness at grass root levels, 
management of credit and its usage, thereby promoting inclusive growth of rural 
households, particularly women. 
  
Proper utilization of loans and empowerment of women are also linked through 
strong repayment performance and improved livelihood orientation. The repayment 
rate of women SHGs remains above 98%, which reflects responsible credit 
behaviour and proper utilization of loans. Further, the share of loans used for 
productive purposes has increased from 57% in FY 2019–20 to 72% in FY 2024–25, 
demonstrating a clear shift towards income-generating activities and enterprise 
promotion.  Overall, the Mission has substantially addressed key concerns related to 
credit access, adequacy, utilization, and economic empowerment of women & will 
continue targeted efforts.” 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
4.19 Time and again, the Committee have taken note of the casual conduct of 
District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA) Meetings. 

 
 
66 
 
The sole aim of such meetings is overseeing the effective utilisation of Government 
money for the welfare of the common’s masses and as such these meetings assume 
paramount importance and a tool of great value in the implementation of various 
rural schemes. However, the purpose for holding such Meetings is defeated with the 
non-appearance of responsible Officials at the helm of affairs, in lieu thereof, junior 
officers with no knowledge of the projects attending such DISHA meetings has 
become the order of the day. As on 20 February, 2026, 992 meetings at District 
Level are conducted in 2025-26 in comparison to 645 in 2024-25 while only seven 
States (Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Mizoram, Tamil Nadu and 
Uttarakhand) have conducted their State level DISHA Committee meetings in the 
year 2025-26. The Committee therefore, implore upon DoRD to take serious note of 
this approach of District Development and Monitoring officials in the matter and 
ensure that the Meetings of DISHA Committees are held regularly (at least two 
meetings per year should be mandatorily conducted) as per the guidelines and also 
sufficient number of senior level representatives from the concerned Department is 
present there in these committees. 
Reply of the Government 
4.20 “Timely convening of DISHA meetings is crucial for ensuring effective 
governance and promoting the holistic development of districts. Recognizing the 
critical importance of DISHA, Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) is persistently 
working to ensure that these meetings are convened on a regular basis. All States/ 
UTs have been urged from time to time to take necessary actions and instruct the 
relevant Member Secretaries (District Collectors/Magistrates/Deputy 
Commissioners) to ensure that District Level DISHA meetings are held as per DISHA 
guidelines and to ensure the participation of senior level officers from the State 
Government in the DISHA Committee meeting (Annexure-2). 
Member Secretaries (District Collectors/Magistrates/Deputy Commissioners) of 
District Level DISHA Committees of all States/UTs have also been requested 
separately to ensure that District Level DISHA meetings are held as per DISHA 
guidelines and to ensure the participation of senior officers in the 
meetings (Annexure-1).” 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.35 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
 
67 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Department of Rural Development O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 14.05.2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
10 August, 2026 
19 Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj 
 
  

 
 
68 
 
ANNEXURE I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2025-26) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE 
COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 7TH AUGUST, 2026 
 
 The Committee sat from 1000 hrs to 1008 hrs in Committee Room ‘B’,  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram 
3. Shri Raju Bista 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Dr Sanjay Jaiswal 
6. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
7. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
8. Shri Jugal Kishore 
9. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
10. Shri Janardan Mishra 
11. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
12. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
13. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
14. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
15. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
17. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
18. Smt. Rajathi 
19. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
20. Shri Karamvir Singh Boudh 
21. Shri Baidyanath Ram 
 
  

 
 
69 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Juby Amar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director  
3. Smt Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of five Draft Reports on:- 
(i) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 25th Report on Demands for Grants (2026-27) pertaining to 
the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development); 
 
(ii) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(iii) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(iv) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(v) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
3. Draft Reports were taken up for consideration one-by-one and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same with minor modification. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Draft Reports 
and present the same to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
____________________________ 
xxxx Not related to the Draft Report. 
 
  

 
 
70 
 
ANNEXURE II 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT (18TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:              23
        
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 18, 19, 22, 23 
          Total:13
                Percentage: - 57%
    
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL          
          Total: NIL 
                Percentage:- 0%      
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 1, 2, 6, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17, 20, 21    
   
Total: 10 
        Percentage: - 43% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
Total: NIL 
           Percentage:- 0%      
 
 
 