 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
   
 
       EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
 
 
REVIEW OF PANCHAYATS EXTENSION TO THE SCHEDULED AREAS ACT, 1996 
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
33 


 
 
 
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
REVIEW OF PANCHAYATS EXTENSION TO THE SCHEDULED AREAS ACT, 1996 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 31.07.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31.07.2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2026/Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 224 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
 
  

 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2024-2025) ii 
Composition of the Committee (2025-2026) ii 
Introduction  iii  
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
PART I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
A. Introduction – Evolution of Panchayati Raj 1 
B. Enactment of PESA 2 
C. Objectives of PESA Act 1996 4 
D. Salient features of PESA Act 1996 4 
E. Reservation under PESA 5 
F. Difference between Normal Panchayati Raj System and PESA 
Framework 
5 
G. Implementation status of PESA in the States 5 
H. PESA Ranking of States 7 
I. Initiatives taken by MoPR for implementation of PESA Act 7 
J. Centre of Excellence (CoE) on PESA 13 
 Part - II 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
17 
 
ANNEXURES  
I The Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled 
Areas) Act, 1996 
24 
II Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held on 31 October, 
2025. 
27 
III Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Committee held on 20 January, 
2026 
29 
IV Extracts of the Minutes of the Twenty-Sixth sitting of the Committee 
held on 08 July, 2026 
32 
  

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-2026) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
26. Smt. Rajathi 
27. Shri Nagendra Ray 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Smt. P.T. Usha 
30. Shri Karamvir Singh Boudh 
31. Shri Baidyanath Ram 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sushil Kumar   - Under Secretary 
 

 
 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2025-26) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present the Thirty-Third Report on ‘Review of Panchayats 
Extension to the Scheduled Areas Act, 1996’ of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  
2.  The Committee held briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR) on 31 October, 2025. 
3.  The Committee held further briefing by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and 
Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak (Madhya Pradesh) on 20 
January, 2026. 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 08 July, 2026. 
5.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR) and the Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, 
Amarkantak (Madhya Pradesh) for placing before them the requisite material and 
their considered views in connection with the examination of the subject.  
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
29 July, 2026 
07 Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj 

 
 
1 
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
“REVIEW OF PANCHAYATS EXTENSION TO THE SCHEDULED AREAS ACT, 1996” 
PART – I  
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
A. Introduction – Evolution of Panchayati Raj 
1.1 As far as the aspect of ‘Panchayats’ is concerned, the history of Constitutional 
status to the Panchayats begins when “The Constitution (Seventy-Second) 
Amendment Bill, 1992” was introduced in Lok Sabha in 1991 to insert “Part –IX: The 
Panchayats” in the Constitution. In 1993, after receiving assent of the President on 
20.04.1993, that Bill was passed as “The Constitution (Seventy-Third) Amendment 
Act, 1992” which came into effect on 24th April, 1993. Thus, by way of “The 
Constitution (Seventy Third) Amendment Act, 1992”, following amendments were 
made in the Constitution of India-  
(i) “Part –IX: The Panchayats” was inserted in the Constitution.  
(ii) Eleventh Schedule was added in the Constitution.  
(iii) Sub-clause (bb) was added to clause (1) of Article 280 whereby the 
Central Finance Commission has been mandated to make recommendations 
to the President as to the measures needed to augment the Consolidated 
Fund of a State to supplement the resources of Panchayats on the basis of 
recommendations of State Finance Commission.  
1.2 ‘Panchayat’, being local government, is a State subject under Entry No.5 of 
the ‘List II: State List’ under Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. All States 
and Union Territories, covered under Part-IX, have made their respective Panchayati 
Raj laws, in consonance with the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992. Thus, 
Panchayats are set up and operate in accordance with the Panchayati Raj laws of 
the concerned State/UT, which may vary from State to State.  
1.3 At the time of enactment of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992, the 
provisions of Part-IX were not applicable automatically to all States and Union 
Territories. In terms of Article 243M of the Constitution, certain areas were initially 
excluded from the scope of Part-IX. The ‘Scheduled Areas’, referred to in Article 
244(1) of the Constitution, were one of those areas. But a provision was also made 
under Article 243M of the Constitution to include the ‘Scheduled Areas’ in Part-IX, if 
required in future, so that those areas may also be brought into the main stream of 
Panchayati Raj system.  
1.4 That provision is Article 243M(4)(ii) of the Constitution, which inter-alia, 
provides that Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions of Part-IX to the 
Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1) of Article 244, subject to such exceptions 
and modifications as may be specified in such law.  
1.5 In 1994, the Ministry of Rural Development constituted a committee (popularly 
known as Bhuria Committee), under Chairmanship of Sh. Dileep Singh Bhuria, the 
then Member of Parliament, to make recommendations on the salient features of the 

 
 
2 
 
law for extending provisions of Part IX of the Constitution to Scheduled Areas. The 
Committee submitted its report to the Government of India in January, 1995.  
1.6 In 1996, Parliament enacted “The Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to 
the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996” on 24th December, 1996 to extend the provisions 
of Panchayats to the Scheduled Areas, subject to certain exceptions and 
modifications as provided in section-4 of this Act. The provisions of the PESA Act, 
1996 are applicable only to the areas notified as ‘Scheduled Areas’ under the Fifth 
Schedule to the Constitution of India (Annexure I).  
1.7 It may be noted that at the time of drafting of “The Constitution (Seventy-
Second) Amendment Bill, 1992” matters relating to Panchayats were dealt in the 
Department of Rural Development, which was created in 1974 under Ministry of 
Agriculture & Irrigation.  
1.8 Till May, 2004, all matters relating to Panchayats, including PESA, were dealt 
in the Ministry/Deptt. of Rural Development. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been 
created in May, 2004, vide notification dt. 27.05.2004. Since then, MoPR is dealing 
the matters relating to Panchayats, including PESA. On the basis of above-
mentioned C.O.s, and information furnished by MoTA from time to time, the MoPR 
has concluded that at present, Scheduled Areas exist in 10 States viz. Andhra 
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan and Telangana. As these areas are notified in 
terms of Fifth Schedule to the Constitution, therefore, this Ministry calls them as ‘Fifth 
Schedule Areas’ and oversees the implementation of PESA in Fifth Schedule Areas 
of those 10 States.  
1.9 “Scheduled Areas” are the responsibility of the MoTA, whereas ‘PESA’ is the 
responsibility of MoPR. The role of MoPR starts only when an area is declared as a 
Scheduled Area. Unless any area of a State/UT is notified as “Scheduled Areas” in 
accordance with the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution, the provisions of PESA Act 
do not apply to those areas. 
B. Enactment of PESA 
1.10 In terms of Article 243M(4)(b) of the Constitution of India, Parliament 
enacted “The Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled 
Areas) Act, 1996” (called as PESA Act), for extending the provisions of Part-IX 
of the Constitution, with certain exceptions and modification, to the Scheduled 
Areas. 
1.11 Scheduled Areas are those areas which are declared by the President of 
India. Article 244(1) and the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution deals with provisions 
relating to the Scheduled Areas. Since those Scheduled Areas are mentioned under 
Fifth Schedule of the Constitution, therefore, they are called as Fifth Schedule Areas. 
1.12 This Act provides provisions for extension of the provisions of Part-IX of the 
Constitution of India, relating to Panchayats, to the Scheduled Areas referred to in 
Article 244(1), read with Fifth Schedule, of the Constitution. There are certain 
exceptions and modification, mentioned in section-4 of the Act, which must be 
complied with by the PESA States while extending the provisions of Panchayats to 

 
 
3 
 
the Scheduled Areas of the State concerned. Thus, the history of PESA revolves 
around two basic aspects namely “Scheduled Areas” and “Panchayats”.  
1.13 With regard to “Scheduled Areas”, they are defined in paragraph-6 of the Fifth 
Schedule to the Constitution, which says that the expression ‘Scheduled Areas’ 
means such areas as the President may by order declare to be Scheduled Areas. 
These areas are the part of the India Constitution since its enactment i.e. 26th 
January, 1950. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) would like to clarify that as 
per ‘the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules 1961’, notified for the 
first time post-Independence, the matters relating to “Scheduled Areas” were 
mapped at that time with the Ministry of Home Affairs.  
1.14 In 1999, when the Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) was created, vide 
notification dt. 15.10.1999, the matters relating to “Scheduled Areas” were mapped 
to MoTA. Since then, MoTA is dealing with the Scheduled Areas. Since 1950 to 
2025, total 11 Constitutional Orders (C.O.) have been notified whereby the President 
has declared an area of a State as a ‘Scheduled Area’.  
1.15 Therefore, all matters relating to ‘Scheduled Areas’, which may include setting 
up of parameters such as preponderance of tribal community or backwardness of 
area etc. required for declaring an area as a Scheduled Areas, sending the proposal 
to the President of India to notify an area as a Scheduled Area, to take action on the 
report of the Governor of the State on Administration of Scheduled Areas and 
forwarding the same to the President of India; comes under the domain of MoTA. 
Further, MoTA does not seek advice/opinion of MoPR during the process of notifying 
the ‘Scheduled Areas’. In nutshell, MoPR has no role in the whole process involved 
in declaring any particular area of a State as a Scheduled Areas or any other action 
required to be taken under the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of India. 
1.16 At present, Fifth Schedule Areas have been declared in 10 States State-wise 
details of Notified Fifth Schedule Areas are as under- 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the State Villages Panchayats Blocks Districts 
Fully  
covered 
Partially  
covered 
1 Andhra Pradesh 1,586 588 36 0 5 
2 Chhattisgarh 9,977 5,050 85 13 6 
3 Gujarat 4,503 2,388 40 4 7 
4 Himachal Pradesh 806 151 7 2 1 
5 Jharkhand 16,022 2,074 131 13 3 
6 Madhya Pradesh 11,784 5,211 89 5 15 
7 Maharashtra 5,905 2,835 59 0 12 
8 Odisha 19,311 1,918 119 6 7 
9 Rajasthan 5,054 1,194 26 2 3 
10 Telangana 2,616 631 72 0 4 
 Total 77,564 22,040 664 45 63 
 
  

 
 
4 
 
C. Objectives of PESA Act 1996 
1.17 To extend the Panchayati Raj system to the Scheduled Areas without 
disturbing the existing set-up of people residing in those areas and also to provide 
more powers to Gram Sabha/Panchayats which are not provided to normal Gram 
Sabhas/Panchayats.  
D. Salient features of PESA Act 1996 
1.18 The PESA Act, 1996 establishes Gram Sabhas in Scheduled Areas as an 
agency of local self-governance. As per Sections 4(b) and 4(c), Gram Sabhas must 
be established at the habitation or hamlet level. Gram Sabha has the authority to 
approve all development plans and projects before their implementation is taken up 
by the Panchayats (Section 4(e)(i)). The Act grants Gram Sabha powers to 
safeguard and preserve traditions and customs, their cultural identity, community 
resources and uphold customary mode of dispute resolution (Section 4(d)). 
Additionally, Gram Sabhas are responsible for identification or selection of persons 
as beneficiaries under the poverty alleviation and other programs (Section 4(e)(ii)), 
ensuring that development is community-led and culturally appropriate. 
Land Rights: The Act provides for the protection of land rights of tribal communities 
in the Scheduled Areas, requiring consultation from Gram Sabha before any land is 
acquired for development projects. (refer section 4(i) of PESA Act). 
Water Rights: Planning and management of minor water bodies in the Scheduled 
Areas has been entrusted to Panchayats at the appropriate level (refer section 
4(j) of PESA Act). 
Minor minerals: Recommendations of the Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the 
appropriate level has been made mandatory prior to grant of prospecting license or 
mining lease or for grant of concession for the exploitation of minor minerals by 
auction (refer section 4(k) and 4(l) of PESA Act). 
Regulation of intoxicants: Panchayats at the appropriate level and the Gram 
Sabha have been given the power to enforce prohibition or to regulate or restrict the 
sale and consumption of any intoxicant. (refer section 4(m)(i) of PESA Act). 
Ownership of Minor Forest Produce (MFP): Panchayats at the appropriate level 
and the Gram Sabha have been given ownership of minor forest produce. (refer 
section 4(m)(ii) of PESA Act). 
Power to stop land alienation: Panchayats at the appropriate level and the Gram 
Sabha have been given the powers to prevent alienation of land in the Scheduled 
Areas and to take appropriate action to restore any unlawfully alienated land of a 
Scheduled Tribe (refer section 4(m)(iii) of PESA Act). 
Power to manage village markets: Panchayats at the appropriate level and the 
Gram Sabha have been given the power to manage village markets (refer section 
4(m)(iv) of PESA Act). 
Control over money lending: Panchayats at the appropriate level and the Gram 
Sabha have been given the powers to exercise control over money lending to the 
Scheduled Tribes (refer section 4(m)(v) of PESA Act). 

 
 
5 
 
Control over local plans and resources: Panchayats at the appropriate level and 
the Gram Sabha have been given the powers to control local plans and resources for 
such plans including tribal sub-plans (refer section 4(m)(vii) of PESA Act). 
1.19 State Legislature shall not make any law under the provisions of Part-IX of the 
Constitution, which is inconsistent with the features mentioned in secion-4 of the 
PESA Act. A State legislation on the Panchayats that may be made shall be in 
consonance with the customary law, social and religious practices and traditional 
management practices of community resources. 
1.20 Gram Sabha is vested with "absolute" and mandatory powers, not to be 
overridden by higher tiers, especially relating to safeguard and preserve the 
traditions and customs of the people, their cultural identity, community resources and 
the customary mode of dispute resolution. 
1.21 In addition to the powers endowed to a normal Panchayat, State Legislature 
shall also ensure that specific key powers (e.g. control over minor forest produce, 
land alienation, money lending, local plans, management of village markets etc.) are 
endowed to the Gram Sabha & Panchayat. 
1.22 Gram Sabhas/Panchayats have specific control and ownership over minor 
forest produce, management of village markets, community resources and control 
over minor water bodies. 
1.23 However, section 4(n) of the PESA Act mandates that, “the State legislations 
that may endow Panchayats with powers and authority as may be necessary to 
enable them to function as institutions of self-government shall contain safeguards to 
ensure that Panchayats at the higher level do not assume the powers and authority 
of any Panchayat at the lower level or of the Gram Sabha.” Thus, basic primacy of 
Gram Sabha over the Panchayats has been established under this section. 
Therefore, as per the subject before their consideration and the provisions in State 
Acts and Rules, the Gram Sabha and the Panchayats exercise their powers. 
E. Reservation under PESA  
1.24 Reservation of seats in the Scheduled Areas at every Panchayat shall be in 
proportion to the population of the communities (SCs & STs) in that Panchayat for 
whom reservation is sought to be given under Part IX of the Constitution, but 
reservation for STs shall not be less than one-half of the total number of seats. All 
seats of Chairpersons of Panchayats at all levels shall be reserved for the STs.  
1.25 State Government may nominate ST persons as have no representation in 
the Panchayat at the intermediate level or the Panchayat at the district level but such 
nomination shall not exceed one-tenth of the total members to be elected in that 
Panchayat. 
 
F. Difference between Normal Panchayati Raj System and PESA 
Framework 
1.26 Panchayati Raj system applies to rural areas of all States and UTs except 
those areas which are excluded under Article 243M of the Constitution. It includes all 
the 10 PESA States. However, under PESA applies only to the Fifth Schedule Areas 
of the 10 States. 
 

 
 
6 
 
1.27 Under Panchayati Raj “Village” means a village specified by the Governor by 
public notification to be a village for the purposes of this Part and includes a group of 
villages so specified. However, under PESA a village shall ordinarily consist of a 
habitation or a group of habitations or a hamlet or a group of hamlets comprising a 
community and managing its affairs in accordance with traditions and customs. 
 
1.28 Under Panchayati Raj system decision making involves elected 
representatives at all levels of Panchayats in planning and development. However, 
PESA emphasizes participatory democracy, making the Gram Sabha the centre of 
all operations and decision-making in conformity with tribal traditions and customary 
law.  
 
G. Implementation status of PESA in the States 
 
1.29 PESA States have adapted provisions of PESA Act, 1996:  
Nine PESA states, except Rajasthan, have incorporated the provisions of PESA 
1996 in their respective State Panchayati Raj Acts. Rajasthan, the tenth State, has 
notified “The Rajasthan Panchayat Raj (Modification of Provisions in their Application 
to the Scheduled Areas) Act 1999.”  
1.30 PESA States have made PESA Rules under their Panchayati Raj laws:  
At present, nine PESA states namely Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and 
Telangana have framed their PESA Rules and Odisha has framed their draft PESA 
Rules. Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been regularly following up with Odisha to 
finalize their PESA Rules. 
1.31 State-wise details of adaption of provisions of PESA Act and framing of PESA 
Rules are as under- 
States Provisions of PESA Act adapted 
on* 
PESA Rules notified 
on* 
Andhra Pradesh 16.01.1998 24.03.2011 
Chhattisgarh 05.12.1997 08.08.2022 
Gujarat 11.07.1998 17.01.2017 
Himachal Pradesh 24.05.2004 26.03.2011 
Jharkhand 10.05.2001 02.01.2026 
Madhya Pradesh 05.12.1997 15.11.2022 
Maharashtra 
08.08.2003 for Village Panchayat 
04.03.2014 03.01.1997 for Zila Parishad & 
Panchayat Samiti 
Odisha 
21.12.1997 for Gram Panchayat Draft Rules notified on 
10.11.2023 By Act 16 of 1997 for Panchayat 
Samiti 

 
 
7 
 
By Act 17 of 1997 for Zila Parishad 
Rajasthan 30.09.1999 01.11.2011 
Telangana 30.03.2018 
Became a separate 
State on 2nd June, 2014. 
Adopted the PESA 
Rules of Andhra 
Pradesh, 2011 in 2014 
  
1.32 All the Panchayats/Gram Sabha, functioning in the Scheduled Areas of those 
PESA States who have framed their PESA Rules and also for Odisha which has not 
yet framed its PESA Rules, are empowered to exercise their powers in accordance 
with PESA Act because PESA States have already adapted the PESA Act 1996 
through their State Panchayati Raj Acts. 
H. PESA Ranking of States 
 
1.33 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj thus reviews the implementation of PESA from 
time to time and recently it has introduced the PESA Ranking of States on the basis 
of PESA Indicators/Indices so that the Centre and the States stay updated on the 
progress of implementation of PESA through an agreed framework. Maharashtra 
and Madhya Pradesh have emerged as front runners as per the rankings, while 
Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh and Telangana have emerged as 
performer States. Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat have been kept in the category of 
aspirant while the States of Odisha and Jharkhand have been put in the beginner 
category. 
I. Initiatives taken by MoPR for implementation of PESA Act: 
1.34 National Conference on PESA 2021: The Ministry of Panchayati Raj had 
organized a National Conference on PESA jointly with Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 
18th Nov, 2021 at New Delhi. Panchayati Raj and Tribal/ST Welfare Departments of 
all the PESA States were invited to participate in the Conference. Central 
Ministries/Department and other organizations such as NITI Aayog, NCST, MoF, 
MoWCD, NIRD&PR as well as several NGOs were also invited. 
1.35  Regional Conferences on PESA: This Ministry has organised two Regional 
Conferences on PESA on 11th and 12th January, 2024 at Pune, Maharashtra and on 
4th and 5th March 2024 at Ranchi, Jharkhand to assess the progress made by the 
States in implementing the PESA Act and to develop a common vision for its 
implementation at the grassroots level. It has emerged from these two recent 
Regional Conferences that a training manual on each key PESA subject was pre-
requisite to implement the PESA Act in letter and spirit.  
1.36  Preparation of Training Modules: In response to the identified need for 
action-oriented capacity building during the regional conference, the Ministry 
constituted seven Committees of Officers to develop training materials on key PESA 
subjects: (i) Gram Sabhas, (ii) Minor Forest Produce, (iii) Minor Minerals, (iv) Land 
Alienation, (v) Money Lending, (vi) Intoxicants, and (vii) Customary Dispute 

 
 
8 
 
Resolution. These materials were finalized during a National Write-shop at NIRDPR, 
Hyderabad on 20-21 June 2024. 
1.37 National Conference on PESA 2024: The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has 
organized a National Conference on PESA Act on 26th September, 2024 at New 
Delhi which saw the active participation of Minister of State from Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs, Ministers from Departments of Panchayat and Rural Development for 
Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, and Himachal Pradesh along with several Non-
Government Organizations. 35 Elected Representatives from each of ten PESA 
States across the three tiers, officers from the concerned line departments 
implementing PESA at the ground level, in addition to the senior and ground-level 
officials of the State Panchayati Raj Departments from ten PESA States were also 
invited. In this conference, the Ministry launched seven training manuals on key 
PESA subjects –  
 (i) Strengthening of Gram Sabha 
 (ii) Minor Forest Produce 
 (iii) Minor Minerals 
 (iv) Customary Mode of Dispute Resolution 
 (v) Control over Money Lending 
(vi) Prohibition & Regulating/Restricting the Sales & Consumption of 
Intoxicants  
 (vii) Prevention of Alienation of Land. 
 
1.38  PESA GPDP Integration: PESA–GPDP Portal was also launched during the 
National Conference on PESA 2024 in order to develop PESA village specific 
development plans within the Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP) 
framework to facilitate planning and monitoring of development activities aligned with 
the rights and priorities of tribal communities under the PESA Act. PESA–GPDP 
portal enables hamlet/village wise resource allocation of Central Finance 
Commission grants, State Finance Commission grants, Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes, State Schemes and other funds in PESA GPs, which they can use to plan 
village wise activities.  
Subject wise additional activities specific to PESA, such as Strengthening of PESA 
Gram Sabha, Customary Dispute Resolution, Prevention of Land Alienation, 
Enforcement of Prohibition and Intoxicant, Sale Management of Minor Forest 
Produce, Minor Minerals and Control over Money Lending, have also been added to 
GPDP portal for PESA area Gram Panchayats. GPs have begun planning their 
GPDP at village level for financial year 2025-26 in accordance with this after the 
national workshop. 
1.39 PESA Day celebration on 24th December 2024: The Ministry had 
requested all ten PESA States to celebrate 24th December 2024 as PESA Day with 
the objective to enhance awareness about the PESA Act and build capacity of the 
stakeholders for better governance, with special focus on empowering Gram Sabhas 
and improving the functioning of Gram Panchayats in Scheduled Areas. 
1.40 The National Level event was Chaired by Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj, Government of India at Ranchi, where the local elected representatives from 
Schedule V areas, experts from Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and 

 
 
9 
 
Madhya Pradesh spent a day deliberating over the various facets of the Act and the 
actions needed to fill the gaps between the ideal and the real situations. Jharkhand 
pledged to promulgate its PESA rules within 1-2 months as the draft was already in 
circulation. 
1.41 PESA Day celebration (PESA Mahotsav) 2025: The Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj organized the PESA Mahotsav at Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, on 23rd and 
24th December, 2025, on the occasion of PESA Day, with the objective of 
celebrating and strengthening the spirit of self-governance in Scheduled Areas. The 
Mahotsav featured a range of activities including sports competitions such as the 10 
km PESA Run, Archery Recurve (Men & Women), and Kabaddi (Men & Women), 
along with traditional tribal games showcasing indigenous sporting practices. The 
event also included state-wise tribal cultural performances highlighting indigenous 
music and dance, a Craft Bazaar and Food Festival displaying tribal handicrafts, 
handloom, art, and indigenous cuisines, and the launch of the PESA Portal for 
information dissemination and monitoring. In addition, PESA Indicators for state-wise 
assessment, training modules in tribal languages, and Special Gram Sabhas on 
identified PESA themes were organized as part of the celebrations. 
1.42 The Ministry also requested all ten PESA States to celebrate 24th December 
2025 as PESA Day by organizing Gram Sabhas in PESA villages of Fifth Schedule 
Areas, with orientation and discussions on various PESA themes. The States were 
also advised to create awareness about the PESA Act and the respective State 
PESA Rules, and to disseminate information on the provisions of PESA through 
videos, flyers, pamphlets, posters, banners, wall writing, and other IEC materials. In 
addition, the Ministry had requested the States to organize sensitization programmes 
for district- and block-level officials of various line departments related to PESA, such 
as Revenue and other concerned departments, to strengthen understanding and 
effective implementation of PESA provisions at the field level. 
1.43 Creation of PESA State Level Master Trainers and training conducted in 
PESA States: The Ministry requested the seven Anchor States to conduct the 2nd 
round of State-Level Master Trainers Training Programme during the Financial Year 
2025–26. In response, trainings were conducted in 7 different anchor States and 
have been completed. 
Sl. No Anchor State Dates for training PESA training/ Manual 
1. Maharashtra 30-31 October, 2025 Strengthening of Gram Sabha 
2. Andhra Pradesh 10-11 September, 2025 Minor Forest Produce 
3. Chhattisgarh 09-10 October, 2025 Minor Minerals 
4. Telangana 11-12 November, 2025 Prevention of Alienation of land 
5. Madhya Pradesh 15-16 October, 2025 Control over Money Lending 
6. Himachal Pradesh 26 September 2025 Enforcement of Prohibition and 
Sales and Consumption of 
Intoxicant 
7. Odisha 28-29 October, 2025 Customary Mode of Dispute 
Resolution 

 
 
10 
 
 
1.44 In financial year 2024-25, this Ministry, in collaboration with the Anchor 
States, has conducted seven trainings of State Level Master Trainers on each 
training manual on key PESA Subjects. The details of trainings are as under: 
Sl. No Anchor 
State 
Date PESA training/ Manual 
1.   Maharashtra 22-23 August 2024 Strengthening of Gram Sabha 
2.   Andhra 
Pradesh 
29-30 August 2024 Minor Forest Produce 
3.   Chhattisgarh 2-3 September, 2024 Minor Minerals 
4.   Telangana 18-19 September, 
2024 
Prevention of Alienation of land 
5.   Madhya 
Pradesh 
8-9 October, 2024 Control over Money Lending 
6.   Himachal 
Pradesh 
15 October 2024 Enforcement of Prohibition and Sales 
and Consumption of Intoxicant 
7.   Odisha 22-23 October, 2024 Customary Mode of Dispute 
Resolution 
 
1.45 Trainings conducted by State Government at State/District/Block Level 
on PESA 
As per the data available on Training Management Portal of Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj, the details of trainings conducted on PESA in Financial Year 2025-26 till 31st 
December, 2025 are as under: 
Training Details of PESA in FY 2025-2026(till December 2025) 
Sl.  
No. 
State Number 
of 
Trainings 
on PESA 
Participants 
trained at 
State Level 
Participants 
trained at 
District 
Level 
Participants 
trained at 
Block Level 
Grand 
Total 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
121 34 4,325 3,456 7,815 
2 Chhattisgarh 6  72 - 80 152 
3 Gujarat 0.00  - - - - 
4 Himachal 
Pradesh 
20 157 679 - 836 
5 Jharkhand 644  - 1,972 32,179 34,151 
6 Madhya 
Pradesh 
203 2,018 13,404 - 15,422 
7 Maharashtra 83  211 2,823 - 3,034 
8 Odisha 1  - 97 - 97 
9 Rajasthan 13  63 - 277 340 
10 Telangana 1  33 - - 33 
  Total 1092  2,588 23,300 35,992 61,880 

 
 
11 
 
 
1.46 For implementation of PESA at the ground level, the State Government 
imparts trainings to Elected Representatives of the three tiers of Panchayats, officers 
from the concerned line departments and the senior and ground-level officials of the 
State Panchayati Raj Department. 
As per the data available on Training Management Portal of Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj, the details of trainings conducted on PESA in Financial Year 2024-
25 are, as under:  
Training Details of PESA in FY 2024-25 
Sl. 
No. 
State Number of 
Trainings 
on PESA 
Participants 
trained at 
State Level 
Participants 
trained at 
District Level 
Participants 
trained at Block 
Level 
Grand 
Total 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 759  50 54059  0 54109 
2. Chhattisgarh 138 45 415  4554 5014 
3. Gujarat 8  0 0  226 226 
4. Himachal 
Pradesh 1  0 5  0 5 
5. Madhya 
Pradesh 292 162 14523 0 14685 
6. Maharashtra 38 0 1119 0 1119 
7. Odisha 1 0 45 0 45 
8. Rajasthan 27  131 307  1229 1667 
9. Telangana 0  0 0  0 0 
10. Jharkhand 0  0 0  0 0  
Grand Total 1264 388 70473 6009 76870 
 
  The Ministry has requested the States having less participants, such as 
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Telangana to increase the number 
of planned trainings at State/ District / Block level to ensure that more participants 
are included for PESA trainings. 
1.47 Translation of training manuals on PESA in local / tribal languages: The 
Ministry is keen to ensure that the translations of the seven PESA training manuals 
are carried out in tribal and regional languages to enhance accessibility, 
understanding, and the effective implementation of the provisions of the PESA Act at 
the grassroots level.  
1.48 Andhra Pradesh and Telangana have completed the translation of all seven 
manuals into Telugu, while Maharashtra has completed translation of four manuals 
in Marathi. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has also approached Bhashini, which has 
shared translated versions of the PESA training manuals in Gujarati, Marathi, Odia, 
and Santhali.  
1.49 Additionally, the PESA Cell of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has collaborated 
with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to facilitate the translation of 7 training modules— 

 
 
12 
 
Strengthening of Gram Sabha, Minor Forest Produce, Minor Minerals, Customary 
Mode of Dispute Resolution, Control over Money Lending, Prohibition & 
Regulating/Restricting the Sales & Consumption of Intoxicants, Prevention of 
Alienation of Land.—in tribal languages including Mundari, Gondi and Bhili, utilizing 
the Aadi Vaani Portal of MoTA. The translations of the manuals into Gondi, Bhili, and 
Mundari have been completed and were vetted by respective states. Training 
manuals in Mundari (Madhya Pradesh), Bhili (Jharkhand) and Gondi (Chhattisgarh) 
were launched in the occasion of PESA Mahotsav, 2025. 
1.50 PESA Indicators: In order to assess the progress of the States in 
implementing PESA, a set of indicators have been developed by the Ministry based 
on various parameters such as amendments made by the State Governments in 
their Panchayati Raj laws and other subject matter laws in accordance with PESA, 
conformity of State PESA Rules with PESA Act, deployment of PESA staff, training 
and orientation of Gram Sabha members and government officials on PESA, etc. 
These indicators have been shared with the State Governments for their feedback. 
Feedback has been received and incorporated into the framework. PESA indicators 
has been formally launched in occasion of PESA Mahotsav, 2025. 
1.51  Advisory on taking prior consent of Gram Sabha before land 
acquisition: The Ministry of Panchayati Raj, after receiving recommendations from 
National Commission for Scheduled Tribes (NCST, has written to the Chief 
Secretaries of all the PESA States on 8 September 2025 to take prior consent of 
Gram Sabha before land acquisition for development projects and actual planning 
and implementation of the projects in the Scheduled Areas be coordinated at the 
State level. The State Governments have also been requested to carry out 
awareness programs among Gram Sabha members by using funds from the 
Orientation of Gram Sabha component of the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan of the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  
1.52  Research study on PESA: A research study is being commissioned on the 
topic, “Impact of PESA in Strengthening Self-Governance of Panchayats in Fifth 
Schedule Areas” for which Terms of Reference (ToR) have been finalized and the 
research is expected in next FY. 
1.53  PESA Portal: A dedicated portal for PESA is being developed by the Ministry 
so that all the PESA related information, such as Constitutional provisions, State 
specific provisions related to PESA Act, State PESA Rules, list of PESA Panchayats 
and Gram Sabha, advisories and guidelines related to PESA, training manuals, 
conference and workshop minutes, research reports, case studies, best practices, 
photos and videos related to PESA, can be accessed by everyone at one place. The 
portal was formally launched on 24th December of 2025 in occasion of PESA 
Mahotsav, 2025.  
1.54  Meri Parampara, Meri Virasat: In order to systematically document, digitize, 
and preserve the culture of tribals of the State of Chhattisgarh, a unique project 
called Meri Parampara, Meri Virasat has been awarded by the Ministry to the 
Government of Chhattisgarh. The project seeks to create detailed documentation of 
all the 42 tribal communities of the State by adopting a community and Gram Sabha 
led participatory approach. The project will not only safeguard endangered traditions 
but also empower indigenous voices, strengthen intergenerational knowledge 

 
 
13 
 
transmission, and create a bilingual (Hindi-English) digital repository accessible to 
communities, researchers, policymakers and the public. 
1.55 Compendium of best-practices on PESA: In order to enable sharing of 
exemplary practices with regard to use of PESA powers by Gram Sabhas and 
Panchayats, MoPR organized a two days write-shop on 13th & 14th May, 2025 at 
Yashwantrao Chavan Academy of Development Administration (YASHADA) Pune, 
Maharashtra in which experts, PESA officials and the representatives in the domain 
of Panchayati Raj Institutions across Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Telangana and Rajasthan 
participated.  
1.56 A total of 40 best-practices from all 10 PESA states were received by the 
Ministry. This has been published in form of a compendium in both English and Hindi 
entitled “PESA in Action: Stories of Strength and Self-Governance” which was 
released in a program held in Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh on 24th July, 2025. This 
compendium carries 40 success stories from all 10 PESA States. These success 
stories are clear evidence that the PESA Act is getting implemented on ground level 
and Gram Sabhas in PESA Areas are exercising the powers conferred to them by 
State PESA rules.  
1.57 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has also prepared six videos on the basis of 
these success stories, which have been uploaded on official YouTube page of the 
Ministry for wider circulation.  
1.58 Appointment of PESA staff: Under the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan 
MoPR is supporting all 10 PESA states to appoint dedicated staff to work on 
implementation of PESA at State, District, Block and Gram Panchayat level. More 
than 15,500 dedicated staff is working across the states to implement PESA at the 
ground level.  
1.59 Creation of PESA Cell in MoPR: A PESA Cell has, [having regular 
(Ministerial) staff of one US, one SO and two ASOs,] been created in the Ministry 
w.e.f. September 2024 to enhance the implementation and oversight of the PESA 
Act in Scheduled Areas. Four consultants, from background of Social Sciences, 
Legal & Finance, have also been engaged by the Ministry for PESA Cell.  
J. Centre of Excellence (CoE) on PESA 
1.60 The PESA Act empowers tribal areas and communities in local self-
governance and undertaking various developmental activities in PESA Panchayats 
keeping in view traditional and customary laws and practices. The PESA 
States/Areas known as Fifth Schedule Areas, exist in the 10 consists of tribal areas 
inhabited by tribal communities having their own customary law, religious & social 
practices and traditional way of managing the affairs of their villages/Panchayats, 
community resources, dispute resolutions etc.  
1.61 A need has been felt to institutionalize the efforts of the Ministry in PESA 
areas. While the Act was made in 1996, sustained focus has been lacking. There is 
an urgent need to institutionalize our efforts to implement a multi- pronged strategy 
to realize the objectives of PESA for our tribal communities. This is expected to be 
achieved by establishing a Centre of Excellence in an Academic Institution. By 

 
 
14 
 
engaging the tribal universities/institutions with MoPR, the centre can play a pivotal 
role in providing tailored educational/research programs, capacity building and other 
inputs that may address the specific needs and aspirations of tribal populations. This 
collaboration aims to enhance the effectiveness of local governance and 
development initiatives by integrating academic expertise with practical governance 
strategies. 
1.62 The main objectives for establishing a Centre of Excellence in a Central 
University are as follows:  
(i) Aim to bridge the gap between academic knowledge and ground level 
administration in PESA areas in the PESA States; 
(ii) Strengthening Institutional Support and Research: Developing curricula 
and research focused on issues relating to tribal communities, 
provisions of PESA, forest rights, sustainable development, traditional 
knowledge preservation, local resource management etc for the benefit 
of PESA States/Areas, development of critical thinking. 
(iii) Documentations and best practices etc in respect of PESA 
implementing States/Areas etc. 
(iv) Capacity building of community leaders, elected representatives. 
panchayat functionaries, state officials in PESA States. Improving the 
skills and knowledge of the community leaders. 
(v) Preservation and Promotion of Customary Law and Practices, cultural 
heritage. 
(vi) Ensuring participatory planning at grassroots level and effective 
preparation of GPDP in PESA area. 
(vii) Awareness campaigns at grassroots level in PESA Areas and among 
other stakeholders. 
(viii) Any other issue related to the PESA areas. 
1.63 Towards this initiative, this Ministry communicated with the Department of 
Higher Education, M/o Education seeking information about national level 
Universities having Tribal Studies Departments & Universities engaged in Tribal 
Studies. In response, they provided a list of 16 Universities. The Request for 
proposal (RFP) for the ‘Formation of Centre of Excellence in a Central University 
was circulated to 16 Central Universities. The Ministry received proposals from 08 
Central Universities: 
 (i) Central University of Andhra Pradesh 
(ii) Rajiv Gandhi Central University, Arunachal Pradesh 
(iii) Central University of Himachal Pradesh 
(iv) Central University of Karnataka 
(v) Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, MP 
(vi) North Eastern Hill University, Meghalaya 
(vii) Central University of Punjab 
(viii) Jamia Milia Islamia, Delhi 

 
 
15 
 
  
1.64 The Scrutiny Committee of MoPR, after detailed discussion, shortlisted the 
following 04 Universities out of the 08 proposals received on circulation of Request 
for proposal (RFP):  
(i) Central University of Andhra Pradesh 
(ii) Central University of Himachal Pradesh  
(iii) Central University of Karnataka  
(iv) Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, MP  
 
1.65 The final recommendation was based on the financial commitment made by 
the concerned State Governments to ensure ownership by the State. Thus, after 
discussions held with the State Governments of these 04 Universities, the Ministry 
received financial commitment from the State of Madhya Pradesh for establishment 
of National Level Centre of Excellence in their State. Therefore, after thorough 
evaluation, the scrutiny committee recommended setting up the Centre of 
Excellence (CoE) at Indira Gandhi National Tribal University (IGNTU), Madhya 
Pradesh. 
I. Commitments from IGNTU for CoE: 
(a) Infrastructure such as Committee Room, Computer Lab/Systems, 
Lodging facility. 
(b) Manpower such as Professor/Associate Professor – Chair, CoE, 
Assistant Professor (2-3), Research Assistants/Researchers (2-3) 
II. Deliverables for CoE: 
(i) Interventions for effective implementation of PESA. 
(ii) Improvement in the key parameters in various PESA/LSDG 
themes. 
(iii) Number of Awareness campaigns at Districts/Blocks/Villages 
(iv) IEC activities 
(v) Number of Residential Trainings at University for State level 
Master trainers/ Officials 
(vi) Number of ERs/officials trained at University for State level 
Master trainers/ Officials. 
(vii) Resource persons deployed for trainings/awareness at States/ 
Districts etc. 
(viii) Research studies. 
(ix) Documentation of activities as per Scope of Works. 
(x) Post Training Assessment and Feedback 
(xi) Other deliverables for meeting the objectives that may be 
decided as per mutual consent later on. 
 
1.66 The funding for the CoE by the Ministry has been proposed through the State 
component of RGSA Scheme, wherein 60% of the funding will be borne by MoPR 
and 40% by the State government where the University in which CoE will be set up 
or located. The State Government of Madhya Pradesh has submitted its 
commitment to the proposal. The funding for the CoE is proposed to be through the 
State Component of the revamped RGSA scheme where in 60% will be borne by 

 
 
16 
 
MoPR and 40 % by the State Government of MP of the total budget of CoE of 
13,35,32,200/- (5 year's amount). The State share is Rs. 5,34,12,800 (5 years 
amount) and the Centre’s share is Rs. 8,01,19,320/- for the five years proposal. 
However, IGNTU has submitted a revised proposal amounting to Rs. 
Rs.9,63,23,000/- where the share of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) shall be 
60%, amounting to ₹5,77,93,800/- and State Government's share, representing 
40%, is ₹3, 85, 29,200/-, which has the consent of Government of Madhya Pradesh.  
1.67 On 24th July 2025, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in collaboration with the 
Government of Madhya Pradesh and Indira Gandhi National Tribal University 
(IGNTU), Amarkantak, signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to 
establish a Centre of Excellence on PESA at IGNTU. The initiative marks a major 
step toward strengthening local self-governance in tribal areas and the effective 
implementation of the Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled 
Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA). 
1.68 Further, the Programme Advisory Board (PAB) has been constituted to guide 
Centre of Excellence in the Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak, 
Madhya Pradesh. The objectives of the PAB are Capacity Building of tribal 
communities, preservation & promotion of customary law and practices and 
strengthening institutional support & research. The Terms of Reference for the 
Programme Advisory Board are as under: 
(i) Approve the action plan for the functioning of the CoE. 
(ii) Advising the interventions needed for the CoE in respect of envisaged 
objectives  
(iii) Devising Key Performance indicators (KPIs) for the CoE as per the 
deliverables and interventions. 
 
1.69 In the second meeting held on 18th August, 2025, the PAB members have 
approved work plan for 2025-26 having focus on documentation of traditional/ 
customary mode of dispute resolution, codification of traditions and customs, 
documentation of best practices in tribal areas, Training Manuals, 5 model PESA 
Gram Sabhas in PESA States, IEC materials on PESA in local/ tribal languages. 
Presently, IGNTU is undergoing the work of CoE as per the approved work plan with 
regular coordination of MoPR and DoPR, Madhya Pradesh. Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj reviews the approved work plan from IGNTU every month.   
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
17 
 
PART – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. Need for Effective Implementation of PESA in Letter and Spirit 
The Committee note that the PESA Act was enacted in 1996 to extend 
the provisions of Part-IX of the Constitution to the Scheduled Areas while 
preserving tribal customs, traditions and community resources. The 
Committee were informed that despite nearly three decades since enactment 
of the Act, shortcomings still persist in its implementation and progress 
remained slow in the initial years. The Committee further note that the core 
objective of PESA is to strengthen self-governance through Gram Sabhas in 
Fifth Schedule Areas and protect tribal communities and their traditional rights 
and resources. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj, in coordination with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and State 
Governments, should undertake a comprehensive review of implementation of 
PESA across all PESA States and prepare a time-bound roadmap with 
measurable outcomes for effective and sincere implementation of the Act in 
letter and spirit. 
2. Early Notification of PESA Rules by all States 
The Committee note that Odisha is the only remaining PESA State which 
has not yet notified its PESA Rules, though draft Rules were framed in 2023. 
The Committee were informed that Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been 
regularly corresponding with the State Government for early notification of the 
Rules. The Committee further note that although the Ministry clarified that non-
framing of Rules does not prohibit exercise of powers under substantive 
provisions of the Act, absence of notified Rules adversely affects 
implementation at the field level. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj should pursue the matter with 
the Government of Odisha on priority basis and ensure notification of PESA 
Rules at the earliest. The Committee also recommend periodic review and 
updating of PESA Rules by all PESA States to ensure conformity with the spirit 
and objectives of the Act. The said review/assessments are necessary to 
identify gaps and enforce legal compliance. 

 
 
18 
 
3. Strengthening Gram Sabhas as the foundation of self-governance 
The Committee note that Gram Sabha is the foundational institution 
under the PESA framework and is vested with extensive powers relating to 
community resources, customary dispute resolution, minor forest produce, 
land acquisition and village development planning. The Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj informed the Committee that under PESA, Gram Sabha should function in 
accordance with traditions and customs of tribal communities and that 
participatory democracy is the essence of the Act. The Committee further note 
that several powers under the Act remain inadequately operationalized at the 
grassroots level due to lack of awareness and weak institutional support. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj should 
evolve a structured framework for strengthening Gram Sabhas in Scheduled 
Areas through mandatory orientation programmes, institutional handholding 
and dedicated awareness campaigns in local tribal languages. The Committee 
also recommend that Gram Sabha resolutions relating to land acquisition, 
community resources and local planning should be digitally recorded and 
monitored through a dedicated national PESA platform. 
4. Prior informed consent of Gram Sabha before land acquisition 
The Committee note that one of the most important protections under 
the PESA Act relates to mandatory consultation with Gram Sabha prior to land 
acquisition and rehabilitation in Scheduled Areas. RFCTLARR Act 2013 also 
strengthen this by explicitly requiring the prior consent of the concerned Gram 
Sabha before the preliminary notification for acquisition is published. The 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj informed the Committee that advisories had been 
issued to States regarding obtaining Gram Sabha consent before acquisition 
of land for development projects. The Committee also note that examples were 
shared before the Committee where tribal communities had regained land 
rights through intervention of Gram Sabha under PESA framework. The 
Committee are of the considered view that improper implementation of land 
safeguards under PESA may lead to alienation of tribal land and erosion of 
traditional livelihood systems. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry of Panchayati raj should issue comprehensive operational guidelines 
for mandatory Gram Sabha consultation/consent in all cases of land 
acquisition, mining leases and rehabilitation in Scheduled Areas. The 

 
 
19 
 
Committee further recommend that violation of such provisions should attract 
accountability mechanisms and periodic social audit. 
5. Preservation of tribal customs, culture and traditional institutions 
The Committee note that preservation of tribal traditions, customary 
laws and cultural identity is one of the principal objectives of PESA. The 
representatives of Indira Gandhi National Tribal University informed the 
Committee regarding efforts for documentation of tribal customary laws, Gond 
art, local traditions and traditional governance systems. The Committee further 
note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has also collaborated with other 
institutions for preservation and documentation of tribal heritage and best 
practices. The Committee are of the view that increasing socio-economic 
pressures and external influences may gradually weaken traditional tribal 
institutions and customary governance mechanisms. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj should prepare a 
national action plan for preservation and promotion of tribal customs, 
languages, traditional governance systems and customary dispute resolution 
mechanisms in Scheduled Areas. The Committee also recommend that 
documentation work should be undertaken in tribal dialects and local 
languages to ensure authenticity and community participation. 
6. Capacity building and training in local tribal languages 
The Committee note that lack of awareness and inadequate capacity 
building remain major challenges in implementation of PESA. The Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj informed the Committee that training manuals have been 
prepared in Hindi, English and several regional and tribal languages including 
Mundari, Bhili and Gondi. The Committee also note the observations made 
during evidence that excessive dependence on English-based administrative 
systems may dilute outreach among tribal communities. The Committee are of 
the considered view that effective implementation of PESA requires 
communication in local tribal languages and culturally contextualized training 
mechanisms. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all training modules, 
IEC material and awareness programmes relating to PESA should be 
translated into major tribal languages and dialects spoken in Scheduled Areas. 
The Committee further recommend that community-based trainers and local 
tribal resource persons should be developed in all PESA States. 

 
 
20 
 
7. Dedicated institutional mechanism for PESA implementation 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has established 
a dedicated PESA Cell and has also provided support for State-level, district-
level and block-level coordinators under RGSA framework. The Committee 
further note that implementation of PESA involves multiple departments 
including Panchayati Raj, Tribal Affairs, Forest, Revenue and Rural 
Development Departments, thereby requiring strong institutional coordination. 
The Committee are of the opinion that absence of dedicated institutional 
structures at State and district levels adversely affects implementation and 
monitoring. The Committee, therefore, recommend that dedicated PESA Cells 
should be established in all PESA States at State, district and block levels with 
clearly defined roles, adequate staffing and budgetary support. The Committee 
also recommend constitution of inter-departmental coordination committees 
for convergence of all schemes and laws affecting Scheduled Areas, so that 
tribal self-governance and customary rights are protected. 
8. Strengthening GPDP planning in Scheduled Areas 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has introduced 
village-level GPDP planning in PESA areas and incorporated PESA-specific 
themes into planning framework. The Committee were informed that around 96 
percent Gram Panchayats in PESA States had prepared village-wise PESA 
plans for FY 2025-26. The Committee are of the view that decentralized and 
village-centric planning is essential for ensuring tribal participation in 
governance and local development. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that preparation of GPDPs in Scheduled Areas should mandatorily originate 
from Gram Sabha level and all plans should incorporate tribal livelihood 
protection, natural resource management, customary practices and cultural 
priorities. The Committee also recommend integration of PESA priorities with 
SDGs and tribal development schemes. 
9. Documentation and replication of best practices 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj organized 
documentation of 40 successful PESA initiatives and prepared a compendium 
of best practices for wider dissemination. The Committee further note that 
successful examples relating to community forest management, tendu leaf 
collection, customary dispute resolution and Gram Sabha-led governance 

 
 
21 
 
have demonstrated positive outcomes in tribal areas. The Committee are of the 
considered view that dissemination of successful models can motivate local 
institutions and improve implementation standards across States. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj should 
institutionalize annual documentation and dissemination of best practices 
under PESA and establish a national repository of successful Gram Sabha-led 
initiatives. Exposure visits of elected representatives and officials from 
comparatively weaker PESA States should also be organized. 
10. PESA Ranking Framework and independent evaluation 
The Committee note that the Ministry has developed ten indicators for 
ranking PESA States on implementation parameters. The Committee 
appreciate the initiative taken by the Ministry to create a comparative 
framework for assessing implementation status. However, the Committee are 
of the view that such rankings should be transparent, independently validated 
and outcome-oriented rather than merely procedural. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should institutionalize an annual PESA 
Performance Index with clearly defined measurable indicators including Gram 
Sabha functioning, land rights protection, management of minor forest 
produce, participation of women and tribal communities, dispute resolution 
and effectiveness of local planning. Independent third-party evaluation may 
also be undertaken periodically to encourage the sincere healthy inter-state 
competition and transparency. 
11. Centre of Excellence on PESA 
The Committee note that a Centre of Excellence on PESA has been 
established at Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak with 
objectives relating to research, documentation, training, awareness generation 
and preservation of tribal heritage. The Committee further note that the Centre 
is expected to examine implementation challenges, undertake research 
studies and support capacity building in PESA States. The Committee are of 
the view that the Centre of Excellence can play an important role in bridging 
the gap between policy formulation and grassroots implementation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Centre of Excellence should 
function as a national knowledge and resource institution on PESA with 
adequate financial and human resources. The Committee also recommend that 

 
 
22 
 
similar regional centres may be established in other PESA States in phased 
manner. 
12. Protection against exploitation and illegal land transfers 
The Committee note concerns raised during evidence regarding 
exploitation of tribal communities through indirect or fraudulent land transfers 
and misuse of tribal identity for acquisition of tribal land. The Committee are 
deeply concerned that such practices defeat the very objective of 
constitutional and statutory safeguards provided to tribal communities. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry, in consultation with State 
Governments, should undertake a detailed study regarding illegal transfer of 
tribal land and loopholes in implementation of protective laws in Scheduled 
Areas. The Committee further recommend strengthening of monitoring 
systems, digitization of land records and mandatory Gram Sabha verification 
in all land transactions involving tribal land. 
13. Awareness generation among tribal communities 
The Committee note that lack of awareness regarding provisions and 
powers under PESA continues to remain a major challenge. The Committee 
were informed that awareness campaigns, workshops, residential trainings 
and IEC activities are being undertaken by the Ministry and the Centre of 
Excellence. The Committee are of the view that unless tribal communities 
themselves are fully aware of their legal rights and institutional powers under 
PESA, effective self-governance cannot be realized. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that nationwide awareness campaigns in all PESA States should 
be launched through community radio, tribal language media, local cultural 
platforms and educational institutions. Special focus should be given to 
awareness among women, youth and traditional tribal leaders. The said 
awareness is essentially required to achieve the primary goal to educate tribes 
about their constitutional rights, specifically the authority of Gram Sabha over 
the local resources, land and cultural identity. 
14. Need for convergence between PESA and other laws 
The Committee note that implementation of PESA intersects with 
several other laws relating to forests, land, mining, tribal rights and local 
governance. The Committee are of the considered view that absence of 
harmonization often leads to administrative confusion and weak enforcement 

 
 
23 
 
at ground level. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj should undertake a comprehensive review of convergence 
between PESA Act, Forest Rights Act, Land Acquisition laws and State 
Panchayati Raj legislations. The Committee further recommend that necessary 
guidelines may be issued by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to ensure that no 
law or executive action dilutes the spirit and safeguards of PESA in Scheduled 
Areas. The said convergence is essential to resolve legal ambiguities, prevent 
the dilution of tribal rights and elimination of bureaucratic hurdles that restrict 
Gram Sabha autonomy. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
29 July, 2026 
07 Shraavana, 1948 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj 
 
  

 
 
24 
 
Annexure I 
The Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 
 


 
 
25 
 


 
 
26 
 
  
 
  


 
 
27 
 
Annexure II 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY,  
31st OCTOBER, 2025 
 
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs to 1540 hrs in Committee Room No. ‘2’, 
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension (EPHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT   
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram 
3. Shri Raju Bista 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
6. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
7. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
8. Shri Imran Masood 
9. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
10. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
11. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
12. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
13. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
15. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
16. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
17. Shri Nagendra Ray 
18. Smt. P. T. Usha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj  
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1. Shri Vivek Bharadwaj Secretary 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Singh Joint Secretary 
3. Ms Mukta Shekhar Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Vipul Ujwal Director 
5. Shri Ramit Maurya Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for having a briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of 

 
 
28 
 
Panchayati Raj on the subject “Review of Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas 
(PESA) Act, 1996”. 
 
[Thereafter the representatives from the Ministry of Panchayati Raj were called in] 
 
3. After welcoming the representatives, the Chairperson in his opening remarks 
stressed upon the various important aspect of the Panchayat Extension to 
Scheduled Areas (PESA) Act, 1996. The Chairperson, then asked the 
representatives of the Ministry to introduce themselves and place their views on the 
subject. The Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj after taking permission from the 
Chairperson directed the Joint Secretary, to make a Power Point Presentation on the 
above-mentioned subject. 
 
4. Subsequently, Members raised their individual queries. The queries of the 
Members were replied by the Join Secretary. Certain issues which remained 
unanswered along with those which warranted elaborate reply, the Ministry were 
requested to send written replies thereto in writing within 15 days.  
 
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
 
 

 
 
29 
 
Annexure III 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY,  
20th JANUARY, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1635 hrs in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT   
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
10. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
11. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
12. Shri Vivek Thakur 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
14. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
15. Smt. Rajathi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj  
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1. Shri Vivek Bharadwaj Secretary 
2. Shri Sushil Kumar Lohani Additional Secretary 
3. Ms. Mukta Shekhar Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Rajesh Kumar Singh Director 
5. Shri Ramit Maurya Director 
Repre Pradesh) 
Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak (Madhya Pradesh) 
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1.  Shri Byomakesh Tripathy Vice Chancellor 
2.  Shri Soubhagya Ranjan Padhi Professor 
3.  Shri Prasanna Kumar Samal Professor 

 
 
30 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for having a briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj and Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak (Madhya 
Pradesh) on the subject “Review of Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas 
(PESA) Act, 1996”. 
 
[Thereafter the representatives from the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Indira 
Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak (Madhya Pradesh) were called in] 
 
3. After welcoming the representatives, the Chairperson in his opening remarks 
stressed upon the various important aspect of the Panchayat Extension to 
Scheduled Areas (PESA) Act, 1996. The Chairperson, then asked the 
representatives of the Ministry and University to introduce themselves and place 
their views on the subject. The Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj after taking 
permission from the Chairperson directed the Joint Secretary, to make a Power Point 
Presentation on the above-mentioned subject. After that Vice-Chancellor, IGNTU 
with permission from the Chairperson directed Professor, IGNTU to make the 
presentation. 
 
4. The presentation given by Ministry of Panchayati Raj focused on extent of 
PESA in 10 States, PEA Rules notified in 9 out of 10 States except Odisha (where it 
is still in draft stage), preparation of training modules/manuals on 7 key PESA 
themes in English and Hindi and also their translation in regional and tribal 
languages like Mundari, Bhili, Gonds and Santhali. Steps like capacity building 
through training undertaken, 88 PESA Specific themes included in GPDP portal for 
encouraging village level planning in Scheduled Areas, launching a Single Window 
PESA portal and initiating State ranking 10 indicators to monitor implementation 
progress, Advisory on mandatory Gram Sabha consent before land acquisition for 
development projects, Commissioned a research study on “ Impact of PESA in 
strengthening self-governance of the Panchayats in Fifth Schedule areas”. Setting 
up a PESA Cell in MoPR, extending dedicated manpower support under RGSA for 
State/District/Block level coordinators and mobilisers, MoU to establish Centre of 
Excellence (CoE) with IGNTU, funding ratio 60:40 (Centre : State) through RGSA for 
strengthening PESA implementation. 
5. The presentation by IGNTU, identified as CoE for PESA implementation 
support in July 2025, highlighted its work on tribal culture preservation and 
community engagement, livelihood support through Incubation Centres, promotion of 
tribal heritage, art support to tribal artists, recognition of tribal knowledge and 
traditions, community empowerment initiatives like millet preservation and traditional 
knowledge promotion. IGNTU also mentioned the steps like promoting community 
justice mechanisms for local dispute resolution through PESA-linked Committees 
with 30+ cases resolved at village level. IGNTU proposed capacity building 
workshops for PESA functionaries and preparation of simplified training/awareness 
material for local users. The initial operational focus is on Madhya Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh with expansion plans in other PESA States. 
6. During the evidence, the following major queries were raised by Members of 
the Committee: - 

 
 
31 
 
i. Why has PESA not been extended beyond the present 10 States? Can 
new States be included? 
ii. Clarification sought on the criteria and process for declaring Scheduled 
Areas and role of Centre/State in it. 
iii. Why PESA Rules notification still pending in Odisha? Is there any 
timeline? 
iv. Despite banks, why do tribals still depend on money landers, and are 
Jan Dhan/Banking Services truly accessible in PESA areas? 
v. What steps are being taken to stop illegal land alienation/transfer of 
tribal land by contractors/businessman? Also, who benefits from 
industrial/mining use of tribal land? Whether tribals truly receive 
economic gains? 
vi. Is there any quorum requirement for Gram Sabha meetings, so that 
decisions are not taken by a small group? 
vii. When Gram Sabha forwards recommendations, who is the final 
approving authority and how much change occurs later? 
viii. What is Measurable Impart of PESA (before vs after)? Whether is can 
be shown by a comparative Chart/examples showing improvements in 
lifestyle/governance after PESA? 
ix. State-wise data of last 10 years sought mining/forest 
diversion/displacement in Fifth Scheduled Areas and rehabilitation 
measures undertaken. 
7. Subsequently, the queries of the Committee were replied by the Secretary, 
MoPR. Certain issues which remained unanswered along with those which 
warranted elaborate reply, the Ministry and University were requested to send written 
replies thereto in writing within 07 days.  
 [The wwitnesses then withdrew] 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
  

 
 
32 
 
Annexure IV 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE 
COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 8th JULY, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1347 hrs in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT   
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
3. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
4. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
5. Shri Jugal Kishore 
6. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
7. Shri Janardan Mishra 
8. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
9. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
10. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
11. Shri Ganesh Singh 
12. Shri Vivek Thakur 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
14. Shri Samirul Islam 
15. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
16. Shri Nagendra Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
2. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of (i) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx; (ii) Draft Report on the subject “Review of 
Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas (PESA) Act, 1996” pertaining to the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj; and xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
  

 
 
33 
 
3. Above mentioned draft reports were taken up for consideration and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid draft reports and 
present the same to the Parliament. 
 
[xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx] 
 
4. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
 
5. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
 
6.  xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
 
7. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
 
8. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
 
9. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
.  
 [xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx] 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
____________________________ 
xxxx Not related to the Draft Report. 
 
 