13
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT
AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION
SWARNA JAYANTI SHAHARI ROZGAR YOJANA
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
THIRTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


THIRTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT AND
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
SWARNA JAYANTI SHAHARI ROZGAR YOJANA
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 2.3.2006
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 2.3.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2006/Phalguna, 1927 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 13
Price : Rs. 42.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 11
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 26
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 27
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 29
APPENDICES
I. Unspent Balance available with States/UTs
under SJSRY .............................................................. 30
II. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee
held on 23rd February, 2006 ................................ 33
III. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Ninth Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) .. 35
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
*2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Pushp Jain
6. Shri P . Mohan
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Amitava Nandy
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
11. Shri L. Rajgopal
12. Shri D. Vittal Rao
13. Shri Sajjan Kumar
14. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Sugrib Singh
17. Shri K. Subbarayan
18. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
19. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
20. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
21. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
(iii)
*Ceased to be the member of the Committee consequent upon his becoming Minister
w.e.f. 29.1.2006.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
25. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
26. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
27. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
28. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
29. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
30. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
31. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
4. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
5. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Committee Officer
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I,  the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2005-2006) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Thirteenth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Ninth Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban
Development on Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 August,
2005. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 31st October 2005.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
23rd February, 2006.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee (2005-2006) is given in Appendix-III.
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
28 February, 2006 Chairman,
9 Phalguna, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Urban Development (2005-2006)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Ninth Report on Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar
Yojana (SJSRY) of Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation which was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 August, 2005.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 26 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, 3.15,
3.25, 3.26, 3.36, 3.37, 3.42, 3.50, 3.51, 3.52, 3.60, 3.73, 3.74,
3.75, 3.76 and 3.77
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para No. Nil.
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 3.35 and 3.41
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para No. Nil
3. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Utilization of unspent amount under Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)
4. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee note that upto 31.3.2005, States/UTs have total
unspent funds to the tune of Rs. 300.53 crore, which includes both

2
Central and State shares under SJSRY. The Committee fail to
understand why such a huge amount remained unspent when there
is also a move to augment the budgetary allocation due to financial
crunch felt in the implementation of the programme. An in-depth
study is necessary to find out as to why the funds could not be
utilized within the time limit. Non-utilization of funds means that
actual benefits do not reach the poor. This is cause for concern.
The Committee are of the view that such a huge amount of unspent
balance is a serious matter and has an adverse effect on the overall
performance of the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, urge the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation to make
strenuous efforts to motivate and direct the States/UTs for utilizing
these unspent funds and furnish their utilization certificates to the
Ministry.
5. The Government have replied as under:
The scheme of SJSRY got a huge amount of Rs. 560.00 crore (both
Central and State share included) as a opening balance as on
1.12.1997, from the old UPA Schemes of NRY, UBSP and PMIUPEP .
Though subsequently the unspent funds got reduced gradually
due to strenuous efforts taken by the Ministry in the
implementation of the Scheme, still a significant amount is available
with the States/UTs. As reported upto 30.9.2005 by the States/
UTs, an amount of Rs. 275.14 crore is available with States/UTs as
unspent funds. States/UT wise list of the unspent funds is given
Annexure-I. One of the reasons for under utilization is component-
wise allocation of funds. Due to this, whereas funds in one sub-
component remain unutilised due to lack of demand, in other
components there was shortage of funds. To overcome this problem,
the Ministry has empowered the States/UTs from the year
2005-2006 to reallocate the funds in any of the components as per
their requirements and also keeping in view the achievement of
physical targets fixed for the State. It is hoped that this will
substantially reduce the unspent fund amount very shortly. This
Ministry is also impressing upon the States/UTs through letters,
meetings etc. to expedite the implementation of the Scheme and
utilize the funds at the earliest.
6. The Committee note that in 1997, a huge amount was available
with SJSRY as opening balance from the old Urban Poverty
Alleviation schemes. Thereafter, almost eight years have passed,
which is a fairly long period to utilise the unspent funds. But still,
a sum of Rs. 300.53 crore remains unspent upto 31.3.2005. The reason

3
advanced by the Ministry in support of huge unspent balance is not
satisfactory. Therefore, the Committee expect that the Ministry should
go into the root cause of it and furnish the actual factors which
have led to the accumulation of such a huge unspent amount. The
reply appears to be very cursory and do not appeal to reason,
especially when there is resource crunch and there is requirement
for more funds. The Committee note that the Ministry have
empowered the States/UTs from the year 2005-2006 to reallocate the
funds in any of the components of SJSRY scheme as per their
requirement so as to substantially reduce the unspent funds under
SJSRY scheme. The Committee desire that the Ministry should make
sincere efforts to impress upon the States/UTs by seeking quarterly
progress reports and by undertaking, field visits by senior officers
of the Ministry, by holding meetings, etc. to expedite the utilisation
of the unspent funds effectively under the SJSRY scheme at the
earliest so as to achieve the physical targets fixed under the scheme
particularly, in the States/UTs which lag behind in the implementation
of the SJSRY Scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the latest position in this matter.
B. Restructuring of Central and State Share
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
7. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee desire that the Ministry should ascertain the
reasons as to why a few States find difficulty in providing their
matching share on time under SJSRY and if their difficulties are
genuine, the Ministry should resolve them by revising the
guidelines of the Scheme.”
8. The Government have replied as under:
Some of the States are unable to provide their matching State
share (in the ratio of 75:25 between Central:States) under the SJSRY,
due to their poor financial conditions. Keeping in view the
persistent demand from such States in this regard, the Ministry
has proposed in the modifications of the guidelines of the Scheme,
a ratio of 90:10 between Centre and the States for the 11 special
category States (8 NER States including Sikkim and 3 other hilly
States of Uttaranchal, Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh).
9. While the Committee appreciate that there is a move to revise
the guidelines of the Scheme in terms of the share of the States and

4
the Centre for 11 special category States, the Committee would like
to know whether the Government had made an in-depth analysis of
the financial position of all the States before recommending the
aforesaid measures so that there may not be a feeling of
discrimination. In fact, the new restructured ratio of 90:10 between
the Union and the State will be a welcome move for the majority
of the States irrespective of their financial position. The Committee
would, therefore, like the Government to extend this facility to all
the States when the modifications fructify. The Committee should
be kept informed about further strides made in this regard.
C. Skill-oriented training to beneficiaries
Recommendation (Para No. 3.9)
10. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee also desire that the Government should work out
the strategy to utilize the services of employment exchanges in the
urban areas, which can act as the focal point for placement of
unemployed youth who would be trained under SJSRY. The person so
trained under SJSRY should be issued training cards/certificates, which
could help them in availing loans from the banks/financial institutions.
11. The Government have replied as under:
The employment exchanges mainly cater to educated
unemployment and they are already overburdened with the number
of educated unemployed. Therefore, utilizing employment exchanges
for the urban poor population may not be of much help. On the other
hand, Community Sewa Kendras set up under SJSRY are an effective
tool in marketing the skill of trained youth. Therefore, instead of
opening up one more channel of employment exchanges and thus
mixing the educated/not so poor population with the urban poor,
there is need to strengthen the Community Sewa Kendras at the CDS
level. Banks/financial institutions need to be more sensitized to cater
to the credit need of the urban poor.
12. The Committee is not averse to the strengthening of
Community Sewa Kendra at CDS level, which could act as the focal
point for placement of unemployed youth trained under SJSRY. The
Committee has already recommended ( vide para 3.8) that skill-
oriented training to beneficiaries under the scheme should be
imparted based on the suggestions of CDS, which are well conversant
with the local conditions and the marketable activities of the region.
As such, the suggestion advanced by the Ministry is welcome and
details in the regard should be worked out in close collaboration

5
and in consultation with CDS. The Committee would also like to
know about the steps proposed further to sensitize the Banks/
financial institutions to cater to the credit need of the urban poor.
The Committee would also like to reiterate that the persons so trained
under SJSRY should be issued training cards/certificates which could
help them in availing loans from Banks etc.
D. House-to-house survey for identification of beneficiaries
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15)
13. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee note that under the Scheme, house-to-house surveys
for identification of the genuine beneficiaries below the poverty line is
done by the State Governments. Non-economic parameters are also
applied to identify urban poor in addition to the economic criteria of
the urban poverty line. The Committee also note that upto 31.3.2005,
out of the total 3799 towns in the country, house-to-house survey  has
been carried out only in 3536 towns thus leaving 263 towns
unsurveyed. The Committee are of the opinion that without proper
identification of genuine beneficiaries, it would be difficult to effectively
implement and assess the actual performance of the SJSRY Scheme.
Non-availability of BPL list and lack of transparency in compilation
and dissemination of the list would definitely hamper the successful
implementation of the urban poverty alleviation programme like SJSRY.
Once the BPL list has been finalized, the same should be widely
publicized as in case of voters list for the general information of public
with specific economic and other parameters used to identify the
genuine persons for inclusion in the list. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry of UEPA should impress upon the State
Governments to conduct house-to-house survey in the remaining
263 towns at the earliest and for this purpose, services of NGOs, VOs
and Community Based Organization should also be availed. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken in this
regard.
14. The Government have replied as under:
The data provided regarding house-to-house survey is based on
the Quarterly Progress Reports received from the States/UTs. Though
most of the States/UTs have carried out house-to-house survey for
identifying the beneficiaries, a few of them are lagging behind. The
Ministry has time to time requested the States to carry out the BPL
survey at the earliest so as to have the proper list of BPL population
in the area which is essential for the effective implementation of the
Scheme.

6
15. The Committee note from the reply given that a few States
are lagging behind in carrying out house-to-house survey for
identifying the genuine beneficiaries. The Committee would like to
know the names of the States that are lagging behind in the matter
and how the SJSRY Scheme is being implemented in these States
without identification of genuine beneficiaries under BPL category.
This appears to be a serious matter as the benefits do not reach
those who deserve, in the absence of the list. The Committee would
further like to know the steps taken to motivate such States
expeditiously in identifying the persons under BPL categories, so
that the genuine and needy persons do not suffer.
E. Micro-finance for the urban poor
Recommendation (Para No. 3.35)
16. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee note that credit facilities are available to the
eligible BPL beneficiaries who are desirous of setting up self-
employment ventures under USEP component of SJSRY and 95%
of the project cost is sanctioned as composite loan by the banks to
the beneficiaries. The Committee also note that banks are many a
times reluctant to lend to urban poor due to a number of reasons
and presently available micro-credits is inadequate and needs to
be upscaled. The Committee desire that the Government should
set-up a parallel funding mechanism/agency just like NABARD to
specifically address the needs and the issues of funding and loaning
of the urban poor under SJSRY and for this purpose either SIDBI
should be strengthened or some parallel mechanism should be
set-up so that the urban poor can have easy access to micro
finance.”
17. The Government have replied as under:
A Task Force under the Secretary (Urban Employment & Poverty
Alleviation) has been set up in the Ministry to look into the issue of
micro-credit to the urban poor. The Report of the Task Force is expected
shortly. The Ministry will take further action on the basis of the Report.
However, the suggestions of the Hon’ble Committee will also be taken
into account while finalizing strategy for the micro-finance for the
urban poor.
18. The Committee desire that the Task Force should expedite
the finalization of their report and they reiterate their

7
recommendation that while finalizing the strategy for the micro-
finance for the Urban poor, the Government should consider setting
up of a parallel funding mechanism/agency like NABARD to
specifically address the needs and issues of funding and loan for
the urban poor under SJSRY or similar such Schemes.
F. Non-Cooperation of Banks
Recommendation (Para No. 3.36)
19. The Committee had noted as below:
20. The Committee also desire that all issues related to non-
cooperation by banks regarding sanctioning and disbursement of loan
to the beneficiaries under SJSRY should be sorted out in close
coordination with the State level Banker’s Committee, Ministry of
Finance, RBI and the Commercial Banks by holding periodical and
timely meetings.
21. The Government have replied as under:
The Ministry takes up the matter immediately at appropriate level
with the RBI, wherever a specific complaint of non-cooperation of
Banks is reported upon. Moreover, the SLBC Meetings are held at
regular interval to review the progress made by the Banks and any
contentious issue is sorted out by the SLBC, which comprises very
senior officers from the Banks, State Governments and RBI as Members.
22. Non-cooperation of Banks is an oft-quoted complaint, which
the Ministry know very well. Instead of responding to a specific
complaint, the Committee would like that the Ministry should go in
depth into the nature of such complaints received so far, particularly
during the last five years, and work out a solution in close
collaboration with the agencies concerned. Responding to specifics
is certainly welcome, but when it becomes a routine, more is required
to be done. The Committee would like to know the steps
contemplated to root out such hindrances in the smooth execution
of the scheme.
G. Sustainability of employment under Urban Wage Employment
Programme (UWEP)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.41)
23. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee note that UWEP Component seeks to provide
wage employment to prospective beneficiaries living below the

8
poverty line within the jurisdiction of urban local bodies by
utilizing their labour for construction of socially and economically
useful public assets. The Committee also note that the wage
employment provided under UWEP is not sustainable in nature
and it provides only temporary employment. The Committee desire
that UWEP Component of SJSRY need to be used only for building
Community assets and infrastructure relating to the urban poor
and not general municipal works as this would ensure
improvement in the civic amenities meant for urban poor. The
Committee further desire that for providing sustainability of
employment under UWEP to the beneficiaries, the beneficiaries
should be equipped with the sustainable level of skill for self
employment. The Committee recommend that UWEP must be
strengthened in such a way that the schemes under UWEP provide
maximum employment opportunities to the unorganised sector of
labour in the country.”
24. The Government have replied as under:
The wage component under SJSRY i.e. UWEP , is meant for
immediate employment to the poorest of the poor by utilizing their
labour for the construction of socially and economically useful public
assets in the area. It is clearly mentioned that the assets should be
selected by the community itself and to be beneficial to the urban
poor community. Though the wage employment is not sustainable in
nature, it caters to the immediate need of the poor and the destitute
who can not wait till a micro-enterprise venture is established.
25. The Committee desire that the Ministry should explore the
feasibility of providing sustainability of employment under UWEP
to the poor beneficiaries. The Committee reiterate their
recommendation that the UWEP should be strengthened in such a
way that the programme provides maximum sustainable employment
opportunities to the urban poor.
H. Priority to SJSRY by States/UTs
Recommendations (Para No. 3.60 and 3.73)
26. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee note that under SJSRY scheme no physical targets
were fixed during the 9th Plan. However, in the 10th Plan, target
of setting upto 4 lakh micro-enterprises for self-employment and
providing skill training/upgradation to 5,00,000 urban poor has

9
been fixed. For the year 2005-06 the target of assisting 80,000 urban
poor for setting up of micro enterprises for self employment and
providing skill training/upgradation to 1,00,000 urban poor has
been fixed. During the first three years of the 10th Plan upto
31.3.2005, a total of 2,97,419 micro-enterprises have been set-up
and 3,27,399 beneficiaries have been provided skill training under
USEP . The Committee also note that low priority is given by the
States to SJSRY Scheme in comparison to the rural Schemes. The
Committee desire that for the assessment of the Scheme, annual
physical targets under the Scheme should be fixed by the Municipal
level functionaries in the States/UTs and such targets be adhered
to. The Committee further desire that keeping in view the high
magnitude of urban unemployment, the Government should
encourage the States/UTs to give priority to this urban sector
schemes as given by them to the rural Schemes by making the
urban schemes innovative and more acceptable to them. The
Committee recommend that the States/UTs, which are lagging
behind in implementation of SJSR schemes must be encouraged to
improve their performance and the Government should ensure that
proper physical progress is made by States/UTs and the funds
made available to them are fully utilized.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.60)
“The Committee note that the Scheme is being monitored through
quarterly progress reports and periodical review meetings under
the Chairmanship of Minister/Secretary/Joint Secretary/Director of
the Ministry. Most of the States/UTs are sending their quarterly
progress reports on regular basis. The Committee are perturbed to
learn that some States like Goa, Jharkhand and Delhi have not
sent their quarterly progress reports since long on the
implementation of this important self employment scheme for urban
poor. The Committee desire that States like Goa, Jharkhand, Delhi
and other bad performing States which are not sending their
quarterly progress reports since long should be impressed upon to
send their quarterly progress reports timely so that actual impact
of SJSRY Scheme could be properly assessed in these States.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.73)
27. The Government have replied as under:
“The considered views of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
The Ministry has already assigned States/UT-wise annual physical

10
targets by distributing the all India targets of 80,000 and 1,00,000
in proportion to the incidence of urban poverty in the States/UTs.
States/UTs further fix targets for the Districts/ULBs and distribute
the funds accordingly. The States/UTs which are lagging behind
in the implementation of the Scheme are continuously pursued for
expediting the progress of the Scheme.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.60)
“The Ministry has been vigorously pursuing with these States/
UTs to expedite the progress reports and pay proper attention to
the effective implementation of SJSRY.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.73)
28. Keeping in view the high magnitude of urban unemployment,
the Committee are of the view that it is a matter of great concern
that the States/UTs are still to accord the required priority to SJSRY.
The Ministry have not indicated the precise reasons for this approach,
which the Committee expected to be apprised of. While rural schemes
need due consideration, it is not proper that SJSRY should not receive
the required attention. The Committee would like to know the details
in this regard particularly in those States, where SJSRY is not getting
proper attention, compared to rural schemes. The Committee would
also expect the Ministry to spell out the proposals by which this
discriminatory approach could be removed. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate that being the nodal Ministry, the Ministry of UEPA should
encourage the States/UTs to accord the required priority to SJSRY.
The Committee would also like to stress that there should be periodic
and effective inter-action with the States/UT s, which are lagging
behind in the implementation of SJSRY, particularly with the States
like Goa, Jharkhand and Delhi.

11
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10)
The Committee note that Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
(SJSRY) is the only urban poverty alleviation programme of the Ministry
of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation directly providing
employment opportunities to the urban unemployed or under employed
living below the poverty line, which is estimated at 6.71 crore. The
Committee further note that Rs. 541 crore were allocated to SJSRY
during the 10th Five Year Plan as against the demand of
Rs. 2000 crore made by the Ministry which, in the opinion of the
Committee, is not adequate to meet the demands of the growing
unemployment in the urban areas. The Committee recommend that
priority should be given to SJSRY Scheme by the Government and
adequate financial allocations should be made for this scheme so as to
tackle the massive problems of growing unemployment in an effective
manner.
Reply of the Government
The considered views of Hon’ble Committee will be reiterated by
the Ministry while putting its case before the Planning Commission
for the enhanced allocation for the Scheme of SJSRY in the next Annual
Plan.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)
The Committee note that upto 31.3.2005, States/UTs have total
unspent funds to the tune of Rs. 300.53 crore, which includes both
Central and State shares under SJSRY. The Committee fail to understand
why such a huge amount remained unspent when there is also a
move to augment the budgetary allocation due to financial crunch felt
in the implementation of the programme. An in-depth study is
necessary to find out as to why the funds could not be utilized within
the time limit. Non-utilization of funds means that actual benefits do
not reach the poor. This is cause for concern. The Committee are of

12
the view that such a huge amount of unspent balance is a serious
matter and has an adverse effect on the overall performance of the
Scheme. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation to make strenuous efforts to
motivate and direct the States/UTs for utilizing these unspent funds
and furnish their utilization certificates to the Ministry.
Reply of the Government
The scheme of SJSRY got a huge amount of Rs. 560.00 crore (both
Central and State share included) as a opening balance as on 1.12.1997,
from the old UPA Schemes of NRY, UBSP and PMIUPEP . Though
subsequently the unspent funds got reduced gradually due to strenuous
efforts taken by the Ministry in the implementation of the Scheme,
still a significant amount is available with the States/UTs. As reported
upto 30.9.2005 by the States/UTs, an amount of Rs. 275.14 crore is
available with States/UTs as unspent funds. States/UT-wise list of the
unspent funds is given Annexure-I. One of the reasons for under
utilization is component-wise allocation of funds. Due to this, whereas
funds in one subcomponent remain unutilized due to lack of demand,
in other components there was shortage of funds. To overcome this
problem, the Ministry has empowered the States/UTs from the year
2005-2006 to reallocate the funds in any of the components as per
their requirements and also keeping in view the achievement of physical
targets fixed for the State. It is hoped that this will substantially reduce
the unspent fund amount very shortly. This Ministry is also impressing
upon the States/UTs through letters, meetings etc. to expedite the
implementation of the Scheme and utilize the funds at the earliest.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
The Committee desire that the Ministry should ascertain the reasons
as to why a few States find difficulty in providing their matching
share on time under SJSRY and if their difficulties are genuine, the
Ministry should resolve them by revising the guidelines of the Scheme.
Reply of the Government
Some of the States are unable to provide their matching State
share (in the ratio of 75:25 between Central: States) under the SJSRY,

13
due to their poor financial conditions. Keeping in view the persistent
demand from such States in this regard, the Ministry has proposed in
the modifications of the guidelines of the Scheme, a ratio of 90:10
between Centre and the States for the 11 special category States
(8 NER States including Sikkim and 3 other hilly States of Uttaranchal,
Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh).
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)
The Committee is not satisfied to learn that the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation have not fruitfully and effectively
addressed the issue of targeting the urban families below poverty line
for providing employment. The fact has also been highlighted by C&AG
in its Report (Civil) of 2001, Chapter III that the Ministry has not been
able to address satisfactorily the issue of targeting the urban families
below poverty line for providing employment. The Committee need
hardly emphasize that although SJSRY is a well-designed scheme based
on community participation, the actual potential of the programme is
yet to be realized. Unfortunately, implementation efforts by the local
bodies is various States/UTs have encountered several roadblocks
including lack of community leadership, poor finance from banks and
delay in launching of ‘Employment Generating’ units under the scheme.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that concerned efforts must be
made by the Union Ministry to urge the States/UTs to effectively
implement the SJSRY by passing on its benefit to the targeted BPL
persons. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should take
proper follow-up action with the States/UTs to ensure compliance of
Ministry’s guidelines issued to the States/UTs on SJSRY from time to
time.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is vigorously pursuing with the States/UTs through
letters, meetings, visits of the senior officers, seminars, conferences for
effectively tackling the problem of urban poverty and employment.
However, keeping in view the enormousity of the problem of urban

14
poverty, the efforts under SJSRY may not have been able to substantially
tackle the problem. The Ministry accepts the advice of the Hon’ble
Committee and will vigorously follow up with the States/UTs in future
for effective implementation of SJSRY.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14)
In regard to low priority given to SJSRY as compared to the rural
Employment Schemes, the Ministry have stated that the main factor
for this may be the low budget of the Scheme, which is able to cater
to only a taken segment of the urban poor. The Committee are,
however, not convinced by this reply of the Ministry. The Committee
recommend that concerted efforts should be made by the Union
Ministry or grab the attention of the States/UTs for effective
implementation of the employment generating schemes under SJSRY
in their States/UTs to deal with the ever increasing problem of urban
poverty.
Reply of the Government
The considered views of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted
and the Ministry will pursue the Scheme more effectively with States.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.8)
The Committee note that skill development through appropriate
training is one of the elements of USEP which intend to provide
training to the urban poor in a variety of service and manufacturing
trades as well as in local skills and local crafts so that they can set-
up self employment ventures and secure salaried employment with
enhanced remuneration. In this regard, the Committee recommend that
skill oriented training to beneficiaries under the Scheme should be
provided based on the suggestions of the CDSs, which are suitable
with the local conditions and marketable activities of the region. The
Committee are of the firm view that a positive correlation needs to be
developed between the number of persons trained and the number of
persons employed/setting-up micro enterprises, so as to keep them
motivated as well as making the ‘Training Courses’ more result
oriented. The Committee recommend that if necessary, suitable

15
amendments be carried out in the governing rules so that a target
number of trained persons set-up units or engage in activities under
the SJSRY schemes.
Reply of the Government
The objective of skill training under the USEP is to enhance the
capacity of the urban poor so that either he/she can set up its own
micro-enterprise or can be better placed in the wage employment. As
per the guidelines of the Scheme, the beneficiary who wishes to avail
the loan/subsidy for setting up of self-employment ventures must be
provided skill training in that trade if he/she lacks in it. However,
some times and in some trades it is more helpful for the beneficiary
in getting with the newly acquired skill than putting its own venture.
This is more evident in technical trades like computers etc. Keeping in
view these factors, the Ministry has fixed separate annual physical
targets for training and self-employment ventures of 1,00,000 and 80,000
respectively. In this way both the components, capacity building as
well as setting up of micro-enterprises, get proper attention.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.9)
The Committee also desire that the Government should work out
the strategy to utilize the services of employment exchanges in the
urban areas, which can act as the focal point for placement of
unemployed youth who would be trained under SJSRY. The person so
trained under SJSRY should be issued training cards/certificates, which
could help them in availing loans from the banks/financial institutions.
Reply of the Government
The employment exchanges mainly cater to educated
unemployment and they are already overburdened with the number
of educated unemployed. Therefore, utilizing employment exchanges
for the urban poor population may not be of much help. On the other
hand, Community Sewa Kendras set up under SJSRY are an effective
tool in marketing the skill of trained youth. Therefore, instead of
opening up one more channel of employment exchanges and thus
mixing the educated/not so poor population with the urban poor,
there is need to strengthen the Community Sewa Kendras at the CDS
level. Banks/financial institutions need to be more sensitized to cater
to the credit need of the urban poor.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]

16
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.10)
The Committee note that special assistance is provided for setting
up of Community Kendras that are used for multifarious activities
such as work places/marketing centres etc. The Committee desire that
such Community Kendras must be effectively utilized for display and
marketing of products manufactures by Self-Help Group and micro-
units under the SJSRY schemes.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Hon’ble Committee are noted. The
Community Kendras will be more strengthened so as to act as a focal
point at the CDS level to meet all the requirements of the beneficiaries/
urban poor.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.11)
The Committee also desires that training budget of Rs. 2000/-per
participant under the USEP should be increased and successful micro
entrepreneurs should be associated for imparting ‘Enhancement
Courses’ of Skill training. The Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation must regularly analyze the training needs of the
beneficiaries in consultation with the State level authorities specially
the Town Urban Poverty Alleviation Cells in the States/UTs so as to
extend the scope of coverage of this centrally sponsored self-
employment scheme.
Reply of the Government
Keeping in view the feedbacks received from the States/UTs and
persistent demands from the implementing agencies, the Ministry has
proposed for the modification in the guidelines so as to enhance the
training budget from Rs. 2000/-to Rs. 5000/-.In addition to this the
cost of the tool kit is also proposed to be increased to Rs. 2000/-from
the existing Rs. 600/-.The States/UTs are advised to constantly review
the training needs of the beneficiaries in a particular area keeping in
focus the job potential and market analysis.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]

17
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15)
The Committee note that under the Scheme, house-to-house surveys
for identification of the genuine beneficiaries below the poverty line is
done by the State Governments. Non-economic parameters are also
applied to identify urban poor in addition to the economic criteria of
the urban poverty line. The Committee also note that upto 31.3.2005,
out of the total 3799 towns in the country, house-to-house survey  has
been carried out only in 3536 towns thus leaving 263 towns
unsurveyed. The Committee are of the opinion that without proper
identification of genuine beneficiaries, it would be difficult to effectively
implement and assess the actual performance of the SJSRY Scheme.
Non-availability of BPL list and lack of transparency in compilation
and dissemination of the list would definitely hamper the successful
implementation of the urban poverty alleviation programme like SJSRY.
Once the BPL list has been finalized, the same should be widely
publicized as in case of voters list for the general information of public
with specific economic and other parameters used to identify the
genuine persons for inclusion in the list. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry of UEPA should impress upon the State
Governments to conduct house-to-house survey in the remaining 263
towns at the earliest and for this purpose, services of NGOs, VOs and
Community Based Organization should also be availed. The Committee
would like to be apprised about the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The data provided regarding house to house survey is based on
the Quarterly Progress Reports received from the States/UTs. Though
most of the States/UTs have carried out house-to-house survey for
identifying the beneficiaries, a few of them are lagging behind. The
Ministry has time to time requested the States to carry out the BPL
survey at the earliest so as to have the proper list of BPL population
in the area which is essential for the effective implementation of the
Scheme.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report)

18
Recommendation (Para No. 3.25)
The Committee note that DWCUA Scheme is distinguished by the
Special incentive extended to urban poor women, who decide to set-
up self employment ventures in a group comprising of atleast ten
women. The Committee feel that there is need to review the said
condition as sometimes this precondition of having at least ten women
to constitute a group hampers the formation of DWCUA group for
lack of prerequisite number. The Committee recommend that the
viability of keeping the condition of minimum number of members in
DWCUA should be explored by the Ministry expeditiously. The
Committee are of the firm view that more number of DWCUA groups
would be formed if this norm of stipulated groups number is relaxed.
The Committee also note that State Governments work out forward
and backward linkages in accordance with the guidelines of the Scheme
concerning the DWCUA groups. The Committee desire that integration
to the extent possible should be forged between urban self help groups
under DWCUA and rural self help groups so that urban SHGs under
DWCUA could be engaged in the marketing of products produced by
rural SHGs or vice-versa.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has proposed to reduce the minimum number
requirement for the DWCUA group under SJSRY to 5 from the existing
10. Regarding the convergence of the rural SHGs with DWCUA groups,
this will be a novel approach and States/UTs will be made aware of
the views of the Hon’ble Committee to take action accordingly as this
will require coordination between two departments at the States/UTs
level.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.26)
The Committee, further desire that innovative areas of employment
as has been developed in the State of Kerala under Kudumbashree
programme need to be emulated in other States and best practices/
success stories of DWCUA groups should be given wide publicity.
Reply of the Government
This Ministry has already requested the States/UTs to document
their best practices and disseminate this in other parts of the country
so that these can be replicated.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]

19
Recommendation (Para No. 3.36)
The Committee also desire that all issues related to non-cooperation
by banks regarding sanctioning and disbursement of loan to the
beneficiaries under SJSRY should be sorted out in close coordination
with the State level Banker’s Committee, Ministry of Finance, RBI and
the Commercial Banks by holding periodical and timely meetings.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry takes up the matter immediately at appropriate level
with the RBI, wherever a specific complaint of non-cooperation of
Banks is reported upon. Moreover, the SLBC Meetings are held at
regular interval to review the progress made by the Banks and any
contentious issue is sorted out by the SLBC, which comprises very
senior officers from the Banks, State Governments and RBI as Members.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.37)
The Committee note that to address the issue of providing micro-
finance to the urban poor in a holistic manner, a Task Force under the
chairmanship of Secretary (UEPA) has been set-up in the Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation. The Task Fore is expected
to present its report shortly. The Committee hope that the report of
the Task Force would provide formulation for a viable micro-credit
mechanism for the urban poor and would strengthen the existing micro-
credit financing institutions to provide finance to encourage self
employment among the urban poor.
Reply of the Government
The considered views of the honourable Committee are noted.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.42)
The Committee note that under UWEP the material labour ratio
for works is to be maintained at 60:40. The Committee desire that
material labour ratio flexibility should be provided to States so as to
suit their local conditions and requirements so as to make the UWEP
schemes more practical and progressive.

20
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted and
the Ministry has proposed for a flexibility in the material wage ratio
under the UWEP , in the modifications of the SJSRY Guidelines.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.50)
The Committee note that under Information, Education and
Communication (IEC) component of SJSRY, upto 2% of the allocation
at the States/UTs level is retained for the capacity building of project
functionaries and other IEC activities. At the central level also, 2-3%
of the total allocation is retained and kept separately for training,
workshops, seminars and other IEC activities. The Committee also note
that four national level training institutes have been identified by the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation for carrying
out training/capacity building of the project functionaries under SJSRY.
The Committee desire that funds allocation under IEC component
should be increased and regular capacity building exercises, training
of project functionaries and officials involved in the implementation of
the Scheme by associating the national level training institutes, which
have been identified by the Ministry, should be undertaken.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Hon’ble Committee are welcome. The
Ministry has proposed to enhance this IEC allocation at the States/UT
level.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.51)
The Committee further desire that community structures created
under the SJSRY should be fully involved in the activities under the
Scheme, including selection and implementation of works, thrift and
credit groups and group economic activities etc. Sensitization
programme for the implementing agencies should be conducted
regularly. Specific provisions for involvement of NGOs for training
programmes should be incorporated in the Scheme. If necessary , the

21
Government should also explore the feasibility of participation of
private companies in providing training to the beneficiaries under
SJSRY.
Reply of the Government
The community structures set up under the SJSRY are the backbone
of entire Scheme. They are involved in the Scheme from the selection
of the beneficiaries to final stage of setting up of the micro-enterprises.
The Community organizer is actively involved in assisting the
beneficiary at every stage. Involvement of NGOs is strongly proposed
by the Ministry in the modification of the Guidelines. States/UTs can
involve reported NGOs in the skill training/capacity building of the
urban poor.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation  (Para No. 3.52)
The Committee note that documentation of best practices in the
field of poverty alleviation is one of the most important activities
under the ICE component. In respect of documentation and
dissemination of information, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty alleviation has admitted that this area has
been weak. The Secretary also admitted that the dissemination of the
viable projects needed to be stepped up. Lack of documentation of the
viable projects by the States is also one of the weak areas. The
Committee also note that the Ministry of UEPA is planning this year
a comprehensive Media Plan for advertising SJSRY through DAVP and
other agencies. The documentation of best practices under SJSRY is
also being done at ULB/State/National level publicized widely through
circulation in the States/UTs for generating awareness about the
Scheme. The Committee would like to be kept informed about further
steps taken in this direction. The Committee also desire that the
Government should make earnest efforts in association with the
Nation/State/ULB level functionaries and NGOs in propagation and
dissemination of success stories and best practices under SJSRY Scheme.
Wide publicity about the scheme should be given in the vernaculars
also so as to generate awareness of the Scheme amongst the urban
poor.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has already assigned the task of preparing a
comprehensive publicity campaign for the SJSRY Scheme to the

22
Directorate of Advertising & Visual Publicity (DAVP). The media Plan
is under preparation and likely to be launched shortly.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.60)
The Committee note that under SJSRY scheme no physical targets
were fixed during the 9th Plan. However, in the 10th Plan, target of
setting upto 4 lakh micro-enterprises for self-employment and providing
skill training/upgradation to 5,00,000 urban poor has been fixed. For
the year 2005-06 the target of assisting 80,000 urban poor for setting
up of micro enterprises for self employment and providing skill
training/upgradation to 1,00,000 urban poor has been fixed. During
the first three years of the 10th Plan upto 31.3.2005, a total of
2,97,419 micro-enterprises have been set-up and 3,27,399 beneficiaries
have been provided skill training under USEP . The Committee also
note that low priority is given by the States to SJSRY Scheme in
comparison to the rural Schemes. The Committee desire that for the
assessment of the Scheme, annual physical targets under the Scheme
should be fixed by the Municipal level functionaries in the States/UTs
and such targets be adhered to. The Committee further desire that
keeping in view the high magnitude of urban unemployment, the
Government should encourage the States/UTs to give priority to this
urban sector schemes as given by them to the rural Schemes by making
the urban schemes innovative and more acceptable to them. The
Committee recommend that the States/UTs, which are lagging behind
in implementation of SJSRY schemes must be encouraged to improve
their performance and the Government should ensure that proper
physical progress is made by States/UTs and the funds made available
to them are fully utilized.
Reply of the Government
The considered views of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
The Ministry has already assigned States/UT wise annual physical
targets by distributing the all India targets of 80,000 and 1,00,000 in
proportion to the incidence of urban poverty in the States/UTs. States/
UTs further fix targets for the Districts/ULBs and distribute the funds
accordingly. The States/UTs which are lagging behind in the
implementation of the Scheme are continuously pursued for expediting
the progress of the Scheme.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]

23
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.73)
The Committee note that the Scheme is being monitored through
quarterly progress reports and periodical review meetings under the
Chairmanship of Minister/Secretary/Joint Secretary/Director of the
Ministry. Most of the States/UTs are sending their quarterly progress
reports on regular basis. The Committee are perturbed to learn that
some States like Goa, Jharkhand and Delhi have not sent their quarterly
progress reports since long on the implementation of this important
self employment scheme for urban poor. The Committee desire that
States like Goa, Jharkhand, Delhi and other bad performing States
which are not sending their quarterly progress reports since long should
be impressed upon to send their quarterly progress reports timely so
that actual impact of SJSRY Scheme could be properly assessed in
these States.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has been vigorously pursuing with these States/UTs
to expedite the progress reports and pay proper attention to the
effective implementation of SJSRY.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.74)
The Committee are also distressed to learn that Delhi is one of the
States, which has not undertaken projects under the SJSRY, although
the GNCT of Delhi is facing an ever-increasing urban unemployment
and problems in employment opportunities for the unorganized Sector
of labour. The Committee strongly recommend that corrective action
be taken by the Government in coordination with GNCT of Delhi so
as to undertake SJSRY projects in a wholesome manner.
Reply of the Government
The considered views of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted.
The Ministry is vigorously pursuing with the Delhi Government for
effective implementation of the SJSRY scheme.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]

24
Recommendation (Para No. 3.75)
The Committee note that concurrent evaluation of SJSRY in seven
States has been conducted during 2001-2002 through Indian Institute
of Public Administration (IIPA) and other renowned agencies. Further,
an avaluation study on SJSRY on all India basis has been assigned to
Human Settlement Management Institute (HSMI), New Delhi during
the last year. The Study is likely to be completed during the year
2005-2006. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should
strengthen the monitoring of the Scheme at both the Central and State
levels by conducting regular field visits by senior officers of the
Ministry. As regards the concurrent evaluation of the scheme, the
Committee desire that the Ministry should take necessary action to
have the Concurrent evaluation study completed at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The concurrent evaluation of the Scheme of SJSRY being conducted
by the Human Settlement Management Institute, New Delhi is at final
stages and it is likely to be completed shortly.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.76)
The Committee note that the modification of guidelines of the
SJSRY Scheme is at an advanced stage on the basis of the problems
being faced by the States/UTs. The draft Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) memorandum has been prepared and it has been
sent to the Financial Adviser for their concurrence before using
circulated to all concerned for their comments. The Committee desire
that the revised guidelines of the Scheme be finalized at the earliest
after taking into consideration the views of all concerned with the
implementation of the Scheme. The Committee hope that the revised
guidelines of the Scheme would be flexible innovative and would be
able to cater to the requirements of the urban poor to a large extent.
These new revised guidelines of the Scheme should be effective enough
in removing the hurdles experienced in the implementation of this
scheme.
Reply of the Government
The proposal of the Ministry for the modifications in the Guidelines
of SJSRY has been approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee
(EFC) headed by the Secretary (Expenditure) in the Ministry of Finance.

25
Now the Note for the approval of the Union Cabinet is under
preparation and will be placed before the Cabinet shortly . It is hoped
that the revised guidelines will be more effective in tackling the urban
poverty problem in the country.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM No. H-
11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.77)
The Committee trust that the Ministry would make sincere efforts
to remove/plug all the shortcomings/lacunae noticed in the Scheme
and make the modifications in the guidelines of the Scheme as
proposed by them at the earliest for the effective implementation of
the Scheme.
Reply of the Government
The views of the Hon’ble Committee are welcome. The Ministry
of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation will continue to make
all out efforts for removing the bottlenecks in the Scheme of SJSRY
and make to more effective.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]

26
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

27
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 3.35)
The Committee note that credit facilities are available to the eligible
BPL beneficiaries who are desirous of setting up self-employment
ventures under USEP component of SJSRY and 95% of the project cost
is sanctioned as composite loan by the banks to the beneficiaries. The
Committee also note that banks are many a times reluctant to lend to
urban poor due to a number of reasons and presently available micro-
credits is inadequate and needs to be upscaled. The Committee desire
that the Government should set-up a parallel funding mechanism/
agency just like NABARD to specifically address the needs and the
issues of funding and loaning of the urban poor under SJSRY and for
this purpose either SIDBI should be strengthened or some parallel
mechanism should be set-up so that the urban poor can have easy
access to micro finance.
Reply of the Government
A Task Force under the Secretary (Urban Employment & Poverty
Alleviation) has been set up in the Ministry to look into the issue of
micro-credit to the urban poor. The Report of the Task Force is expected
shortly. The Ministry will take further action on the basis of the Report.
However, the suggestions of the Hon’ble Committee will also be taken
into account while finalizing strategy for the micro-finance for the
urban poor.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM No. H-
11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.41)
The Committee note that UWEP Component seeks to provide wage
employment to prospective beneficiaries living below the poverty line

28
within the jurisdiction of urban local bodies by utilizing their labour
for construction of socially and economically useful public assets. The
Committee also note that the wage employment provided under UWEP
is not sustainable in nature and it provides only temporary
employment. The Committee desire that UWEP Component of SJSRY
need to be used only for building Community assets and infrastructure
relating to the urban poor and not general municipal works as this
would ensure improvement in the civic amenities meant for urban
poor. The Committee further desire that the providing sustainability of
employment under UWEP to the beneficiaries, the beneficiaries should
be equipped with the sustainable level of skill for self employment.
The Committee recommend that UWEP must be strengthened in such
a way that the schemes under UWEP provide maximum employment
opportunities to the unorganised sector of labour in the country.
Reply of the Government
The wage component under SJSRY i.e. UWEP , is meant for
immediate employment to the poorest of the poor by utilizing their
labour for the construction of socially and economically useful public
assets in the area. It is clearly mentioned that the assets should be
selected by the community itself and to be beneficial to the urban
poor community. Though the wage employment is not sustainable in
nature, it caters to the immediate need of the poor and the destitute
who can not wait till a micro-enterprise venture is established.
[Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation OM
No. H-11013/2/2004-UPA-I Dated 28th October, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)

29
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Nil
  N EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
28 February, 2006 Chairman,
9 Phalguna, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

30
APPENDIX I
UNSPENT BALANCE AVAILABLE WITH STATES/UTs UNDER SJSRY
(Rs. in Lakh)
Sl.No. States/UTs Opening Balance Total Fund Released Total Fund Available Total Expenditure Unspented Fund % of
(as on 1-12-97) (1997-2006) (Reported Expenditure
Central State Total Central State Total Central State Total Central State Total Central State Total
12 3 4
56 78 91 01 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8
1. Andhra Pradesh 1178.50 3507.56 4686.06 8761.32 6729.52 15490.84 9939.82 10237.08 20176.90 8776.09 7846.35 16622.44 1163.73 2390.73 3554.46 822. Arunachal Pradesh 277.63 194.23 471.86 220.18 70.18 290.36 497.81 264.41 762.22 355.35 221.99 577.34 142.46 42.42 184.88 753. Assam 829.65 0.00 829.65 1862.90 980.72 2843.62 2692.55 980.72 3673.27 2109.27 110.00 2219.27 583.28 870.72 1454.00 604. Bihar 648.83 2436.90 3085.73 2067.78 689.26 2757.04 2716.61 3126.16 5842.77 2291.23 2510.01 4801.24 425.38 616.15 1041.53 825. Chhattisgarh 0.00 0.00 0.00 1136.50 387.01 1523.51 1136.50 387.01 1523.51 881.82 293.91 1175.73 254.68 93.10 347.78 776. Goa 138.84 83.06 221.90 84.06 35.53 119.59 222.90 118.59 341.49 150.69 75.79 226.48 72.21 42.80 115.01 667. Gujarat 1685.26 594.67 2279.93 4656.52 1474.08 6130.60 6341.78 2068.75 8410.53 4304.60 1835.23 6139.83 2037.18 233.52 2270.70 738. Haryana 293.79 170.97 464.76 2106.09 685.40 2791.49 2399.88 856.37 3256.25 1830.56 683.22 2513.78 569.32 173.15 742.47 779. Himachal Pradesh 257.09 440.94 698.03 375.48 174.85 550.33 632.57 615.79 1248.36 589.68 601.59 1191.27 42.89 14.20 57.09 95

31
vw x y
z{ |} ~v Æv v v w v x v y v z v { v | v }
10. Jammu & Kashmir 490.61 186.58 677.19 493.32 1163.83 1657.15 983.93 1350.41 2334.34 928.01 1093.88 2021.89 55.92 256.53 312.45 8611.
Jharkhand 287.11 1137.36 1424.47 788.37 98.34 886.71 1075.48 1235.70 2311.18 0.00 0.00 0.00 1075.48 1235.70 2311.18 0
12. Karnataka 2071.86 2816.89 4888.75 6576.59 2055.03 8631.62 8648.45 4871.92 13520.37 7794.54 4592.40 12386.94 853.91 279.52 1133.43 9113. Kerala 353.75 509.95 863.70 3018.57 1269.47 4288.04 3372.32 1779.42 5151.74 2589.93 1332.10 3922.03 782.39 447.32 1229.71 7614. Madhya Pradesh 1390.47 1663.48 3053.95 7901.51 2533.83 10435.34 9291.98 4197.31 13489.29 8841.03 4026.12 12867.15 450.95 171.19 622.14 9515. Maharashtra 3884.94 2715.67 6600.61 7562.30 1788.75 9351.05 11447.24 4504.42 15951.66 9170.07 3097.28 12267.35 2277.17 1407.14 3684.31 7616. Manipur 2996 56.38 356.04 358.31 86.75 445.06 657.97 143.13 801.10 425.28 136.71 561.98 232.69 6.42 239.12 7017. Meghalaya 196.76 128.10 324.86 237.99 114.18 352.17 434.75 242.28 677.03 328.10 150.09 478.19 106.65 92.19 198.84 7018. Mizoram 53.67 24.53 78.20 1657.84 418.03 2075.87 1711.51 442.56 2154.07 1079.30 442.56 1521.86 632.21 0.00 632.21 7019. Nagaland 150.62 80.00 230.62 437.78 500.00 937.78 588.40 580.00 1168.40 575.08 472.51 1047.58 13.32 107.50 120.82 8920. Orissa 422.55 693.79 1116.34 1844.01 641.30 2485.31 2266.56 1335.09 3601.65 2363.02 1381.83 3744.85 -96.46 -46.74 -143.20 10321. Punjab 847.37 522.78 1370.15 473.21 121.50 594.71 1320.58 644.28 1964.86 1573.34 700.92 2274.26 -252.76 -56.64 -309.40 11522. Rajasthan 1328.56 1831.61 3160.17 2471.16 766.83 3237.99 3799.72 2598.44 6398.16 3201.98 1956.65 5158.63 697.74 64.79 1239.53 8023. Sikkim 37.80 68.36 106.16 337.27 58.14 395.41 375.07 126.50 501.57 315.78 168.69 484.47 59.29 -42.19 17.10 9624. Tamil Nadu 3268.38 4246.27 7514.65 5874.78 1959.68 7834.46 9143.16 6205.95 15349.11 8751.91 6066.93 14818.84 391.25 139.03 530.27 96

32
vw x y
z{ |} ~v Æv v v w v x v y v z v { v | v }
25. Tripura 58.25 39.95 98.20 1401.98 400.11 1802.09 1460.23 440.06 1900.29 1246.08 320.10 1566.18 214.15 119.96 334.11 8226. Uttaranchal 132.87 0.00 132.87 449.74 132.15 581.89 582.61 132.15 714.76 275.54 49.30 324.84 307.07 82.85 389.92 4527. Uttar Pradesh 3112.79 4650.64 7763.43 14489.14 4401.15 18890.29 17601.93 9051.79 26653.72 15631.22 8488.58 24119.80 1970.71 563.21 2533.92 9
0
28. West Bengal 1035.93 1643.21 2679.14 4555.50 1518.61 6074.11 5591.43 3161.82 8753.25 5317.20 27432.27 806047 274.23 418.55 692.78 9229. Andaman & Nicobar
Islands 100.43 0.00 100.43 261.06 0.00 261.06 361.49 0.00 361.49 306.37 0.00 306.37 55.12 0.00 55.12 84
30. Chandigarh 77.70 0.00 77.70 705.50 0.00 705.50 783.20 0.00 783.20 219.41 0.00 219.41 563.79 0.00 563.79 2831. Dadar & Nagar Haveli 81.34 0.00 81.34 287.77 0.00 287.77 369.11 0.00 369.11 305.56 0.00 305.56 63.55 0.00 63.55 8232. Daman & Diu 81.65 0.00 81.65 161.63 0.00 161.63 243.28 0.00 243.28 42.10 0.00 42.10 201.18 0.00 201.18 1733. Delhi 154.83 107.70 262.53 275.31 284.92 560.23 430.14 392.62 822.76 147.29 273.96 421.25 282.85 118.66 401.51 5134. Pondicherry 85.83 173.30 259.13 960.65 159.06 1109.71 1036.48 332.36 1368.84 436.06 240.72 676.78 600.42 91.64 692.06 49
Total
25315.32 30724.88 55040.20 848842.12 31898.21 116540.33 110157.44 62423.09 172580.53 93153.48 51912.67 145066.16 17003.96 10510.42 27514.37 84

33
APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON THURSDA Y THE 23RD FEBRUARY, 2006
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
3. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
4. Shri Amitava Nandy
5. Shri L. Rajgopal
6. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
Rajya Sabha
7. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
8. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
9. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Assistant Director

34
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and
adoption the Memorandum Number 4 regarding Draft Action Taken
Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on ‘Swarna Jayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana’ (SJSRY). The Committee then adopted the above
draft Action Taken Report with slight modifications.
3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalize the
report and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
4. ** ** **
5. ** ** **
6. ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.
**Matter not related with the report.

35
APPENDIX III
[vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN
DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 26
II. Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government: 24
Para Nos. 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10,
3.11, 3.15, 3.25, 3.26, 3.36, 3.37, 3.42, 3.50, 3.51,
3.52, 3.60, 3.73, 3.74, 3.75, 3.76 and 3.77.
Percentage to total recommendations (92.31%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies: Nil
Percentage to total recommendations (0%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of 2
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee.
Para Nos. 3.35 and 3.41
Percentage to total recommendations (7.69%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited. Nil
Percentage to total recommendations (0%).