CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2006-07) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report on “Central
Public Works Department” (CPWD) of the Ministry of Urban
Development, which was presented to the Lok Sabha on 28th
November, 2006.
2. Out of 36 recommendations of the said Report, action taken
notes in respect of all the recommendations have been received from
the Government, which have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.15, 2.33, 2.34, 2.35, 2.37, 2.39, 2.40, 3.16, 3.18,
4.27, 5.7, 5.12, 5.15, 5.18, 5.21 and 5.23
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 2.36, 2.38, 3.15, 4.24, 4.25 and 5.10
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 3.17, 4.20, 4.21, 4.22,
4.23 and 5.9
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.16, 4.26 and 5.5
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes
in respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of the
Report may be furnished to the Committee within three months of
the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Lack of proper maintenance of Vasant Vihar Residential Complex
by CPWD
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10)
5. In their earlier recommendation, the Committee had noted as
under:—
“The Committee note that the CPWD’s Charter clearly demarcates
that for both the residential as well as non-residential buildings
periodic and day-to-day repair and maintenance works may be
undertaken for ensuring habitability and aesthetic of buildings
constructed by CPWD. However, in response to their Press
Communiques the Committee received several complaints from the
users of the residential buildings/accommodations about lack of
proper and timely maintenance and repair works by CPWD
authorities in various residential areas. The Committee, therefore,
felt it expedient to undertake an on-the-spot-study visit to the
Vasant Vihar Residential Complex, New Delhi in order to gather
first hand information in this matter. Accordingly, the Committee
visited the above stated Complex on 21st September, 2005 and
physically inspected these quarters and held discussions with the
users of these quarters and the Residential Welfare Association
(RWA) of the area. The Committee were surprised to find the
exposed iron-rods coming out of the roofs of these residential
buildings and chunks of cement falling from the roofs and the
shabby look of these buildings.”
6. In their Action Reply, the Government have replied as under:—
“Regarding complaints of lack of proper and timely maintenance
and repair works by CPWD received by Hon’ble Committee, it is
submitted that Day to Day and periodic repair and maintenance
works are undertaken by CPWD for ensuring habitability and to
maintain and improve the aesthetic of buildings. For this, time
frame for attending different type of complaints has been specified:
(i) Complaints pertaining to electrical discipline, plumbing
services and drainage system, is to be attended within
24 hours.
(ii) Minor complaints relating to the trades of Mason and
Carpenter are attended within 48 hours.
(iii) Complaints requiring replacement of fixtures and fittings,
for which exercise is normally done through contracts, are
monitored separately through Major Complaint Registers.

3
Action is periodically taken by consolidating major complaints.
Annual Action Plan of maintenance is also prepared in which all
such items are included.
The Construction of Vasant Vihar Complex which was inspected
by Hon’ble Committee was completed by CPWD between 1986 to
1991. The old structures were giving dilapidated look. The
dilapidated look of the houses was due to exposure of
reinforcement due to disintegration and falling of plaster due to
corrosion of reinforcement because of weathering effect. Action has
been taken to rehabilitate these distressed structures in phases as
per details given in reply to Para 2.11* below so as to improve the
condition of flats in this Complex.”
7. The Committee, while expressing their dissatisfaction over the
lack of proper and timely maintenance of CPWD residential
buildings, had particularly pointed out the extremely shabby upkeep
of the Vasat Vihar Housing Complex. Further, they had desired that
Government should ensure habitability and aesthetics of the
buildings constructed by the CPWD. As per the Action Taken Reply
submitted by the Government, the Committee have been given to
understand that the Government have specified a time frame for
attending to different types of complaints from the users of the
residential buildings/accommodations. However, the Committee feel
that even though timeframes have been set, there is a general apathy
among the CPWD staff towards such timeframes. Thus, in order to
improve current scenario, it is of utmost importance that the officers
of CPWD belonging to supervisory ranks undertake periodic visits
to boh residential as well as non-residential Complexes maintained
by them to oversee the performance of their staff in attending to the
complaints regarding maintenance of these buildings. Besides, they
should be in regular touch with the residents to remain aware of
their grievances, if any. In so far as, the Vasant Vihar Complex is
concerned, the Committee note the phase-wise action currently being
taken by the Government to rehabilitate the distressed structures
there. At the same time, they are surprised to find that although the
complex is just 20 years old, yet it is hardly able to withstand the
weathering effect and gives a dilapidated look, which speaks volumes
of the quality of materials used for construction. The Committee,
however, would like to refrain from commenting further on the
matter.
*Placed at para No. 9 of this Report.

4
B. Repair and Maintenance Works in Vasant Vihar Complex
Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)
8. The Committee had noted as under:
“Regarding the repair works in the Vasant Vihar Complex, the
Director General, CPWD has assured during the course of oral
evidence before the Committee that all repair works in this complex
will be completed in the present financial year i.e. 2006-2007. The
Committee therefore, strongly recommend that all repair and
maintenance works at the Vasant Vihar Residential Complex must
be completed by CPWD within this financial year, as assured by
them to the Committee. The Committee also recommend that senior
CPWD officials must properly coordinate with the concerned RWA
so as to ensure appropriate repair and maintenance works in the
complex i.e. up to the satisfaction of the users of these residential
quarters. The Committee also recommend that suitable external
finishing or face-lift must be given to these residential buildings
which should be of permanent nature. The Committee would like
to be apprised about the action taken in the matter within two
months of presentation of this Report to the House.”
9. The Government have replied as under:
“As explained in para 2.10 above efforts are being made to improve
the condition of flats in Vasant Vihar Complex. For this, the work
of repair and rehabilitation and repair of damaged external surface
of quarters was taken up in two Phases. Most of (about 90%)
rehabilitation work of RCC structures by short-creating has been
completed under Phase-I. Part of work under Phase-II only could
be completed upto March’07. The remaining works under
Phase-II could not be completed by end of March, 2007 due to
ground difficulties such as delay in availability of occupied quarters
as per the convenience of the occupants and shortage of cement
etc. The work is now likely to be completed by September, 2007.
Regarding co-ordination meeting with RWA, Regular monthly
meetings are being held between Executive Engineer, AE & JE and
the local RWA officer bearers. Efforts are made to attend to the
problems/issues pointed out and discussed during the meeting.
Regarding permanent finish of external surface, estimates for the
same are being prepared and the work will be taken up during
the current financial year 2007-08.”

5
10. The Committee had recommended a time bound repair and
rehabilitation works by the Government in the Vasant Vihar Complex
to which assurance was given that all repair works of the Complex
would be completed in the Financial Year 2006-2007. While the
Committee note the Government’s efforts to establish coordination
with the Residential Welfare Association of the Complex to invite
their suggestions on the repair and maintenance works in this
Complex, they are not satisfied with the progress of the time bound
repair and rehabilitation works as phase-II of these works has not
been completed so far. The reasons tendered by the Government for
the non-completion of works under Phase-II viz., delay in availability
of occupied quarters as per the convenience of the occupants, shortage
of cement, etc., are unconvincing. Besides, the Government does not
still seem to be sure of completion of phase-II, in view of their
reply, that the work is ‘likely’ to be completed by September, 2007.
Moreover, the estimates for giving a permanent finish to the external
surfaces of the quarters are under preparation stage only. Therefore,
the Committee cannot but express their utter dismay over the slow
pace of work in CPWD and thus, reiterate that a permanent solution
to the problems regarding repair and maintenance of the Complex
must be worked out and implemented without delay.
C. Encroachment of Shopping Complex and Shortage of Water in
Vasant Vihar Area
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.12, 2.13, 2.14)
11. In para 2.12 of their original Report, the Committee had noted
as under:
“The residents of the Vasant Vihar Complex have further brought
to the notice of the Committee the following points:-
(i) Shopping Complex had been built by CPWD in the area. It
is dysfunctional but it is occupied by unauthorized persons.
(ii) There is acute shortage of water supply in the Residential
Complex.
As regards encroachment of the Shopping Complex, the Committee
recommend that suitable coordinative measures must be taken by
the Ministry of Urban Development and CPWD with the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi/other Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) so as to
remove unauthorized occupation in the said Shopping Complex.
The Committee also recommend that appropriate steps must be

6
taken for allotment of shops and opening-up of proper consumer
goods shops in the Shopping Complex for the use of the residents
of the Vasant Vihar government residential complex.”
12. In Para 2.13 of the Report, the Committee had further noted
as under:-
“Regarding the shortage of water supply in the aforesaid area, the
Ministry have stated that since the campus of Vasant Vihar is
located at the tail end of the Delhi Jal Board‘s (DJB) supply, the
availability of water is very less. The Ministry have also stated
that the DJB is primarily responsible for ensuring adequate water
supply but it has been supplying only 10 to 15% of the total
requirement of water of this Complex. In order to deal with the
shortage of water supply, CPWD had tried re-boring of old tube
wells and increasing the depth of existing tube wells in the area,
but all this had improved the yield of water only marginally. In
August 2005, CPWD also got new tube wells bored after approval
of the Central Ground Water Authority (CGWB) and these tube
wells gave the yield of about 2 KL per hour. Two additional tube
wells have also been sanctioned by CGWB and financial sanction
for the same is being obtained by CPWD. However, the Ministry
have informed that as the water table of the area has receded and
the yield from existing tube wells has been unviable, this project
has been abandoned. They have, finally, stated that at present,
about 70 to 80 KL of water supply per day is being pumped into
the Sump through tube wells and supplemented by the DJB Water
Tankers supply to mitigate the water shortage of the Residential
Complex.”
13. In para 2.14 of the Report, the Committee had further noted
as follows:-
“While the Committee express their serious concern over the acute
shortage of water supply in the Vasant Vihar Residential Complex
of CPWD, they are not at all convinced that the availability of
water is less because this campus is located at the tail end of the
Delhi Jal Board (DJB) supply. The Committee are of the firm view
that CPWD and DJB are duty bound to find a permanent solution
to the water crisis in the area and provide the much-needed water
supply at the Vasant Vihar Residential Complex. The Committee
strongly recommend that concerted efforts must be made by the
Ministry of Urban Development/CPWD to persuade the DJB to

7
lay down adequate pipe lines and build water tanks by taking the
required financial sanction for the same so as to provide adequate
and regular DJB water supply to the aforesaid residential complex.
The recent availability of water from Sonia Vihar Water Works
should be suitably made use of to augment the water supply to
the colony. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken
in this regard within two months of presentation of this Report to
the House.”
14. In their Action Taken Reply to para 2.12 of the original Report,
the Government have replied as under:
“At present there is no encroachment in the main shopping complex
at the Vasant Vihar.
Regarding shortage of water supply in the area, several
communications have been addressed to Delhi Jal Board for getting
sufficient quantity of water. The RWAs of the area are also pursuing
the matter with DJB. During a meeting held at the residence of
Smt. Barkha Singh, Hon’ble MLA of the area, on 17th Oct’06 also
which was attended by Delhi Jal Board and CPWD officers, it was
requested to them to take necessary action for supply of additional
water to the complex in view of additional water being available
with DJB from Sarita Vihar treatment plant. Subsequently also
matter was taken up with DJB but no additional water has been
given to the complex so far.
Regarding allotment of shops and opening of consumer goods
stores etc. in Vasant Vihar Shopping Complex, the shops in this
complex have been transferred to MCD as per Cabinet decision of
Oct’2005 and Gazette notification issued by Land and Development
Office. The matter therefore pertains to MCD.”
15. In their reply to Para 2.13 of the Report, the Government have
replied as under:–
“The Hon’ble Committee have noted the steps taken by CPWD to
deal with the shortage of water supplied by Delhi Jal Board in
Vasant Vihar area by supplementing the shortage partly through
tube wells and balance through water tankers.
CPWD Officers are continuing their efforts to pursue with DJB in
getting more water supply. However to augment shortage of water
supply CPWD is making efforts by arranging water through tankers

8
from DJB and from private sources. The water arranged through
tankers is added to the water received in the under ground tank
through DJB supply line and then it is pumped to overhead tank
to be supplied to houses by gravity through existing pipe line
system. However there is still overall shortage of water supply
even after augmenting supply through tankers.”
16. In their Action Taken Reply to para 2.14 of the Report, the
Government have replied as under:
“The Committee has expressed serious concern about shortage of
water supply and have expressed the view that CPWD and Delhi
Jal Board should find a permanent solution to water crisis in the
area.
In this regard, several communications have been addressed to
Delhi Jal Board for getting sufficient quantity of water. The RWAs
of the area are also pursuing the matter with DJB. During a meeting
held at the residence of Smt. Barkha Singh Hon’ble MLA of the
area on 17th Oct’-06 also which was attended by Delhi Jal Board
and CPWD officers, it was requested to them to take necessary
action for supply of additional water to the complex in view of
additional water being available with DJB from Sarita Vihar
treatment plant. Subsequently also matter was taken up with DJB
but no additional water has been given to the complex so far.
CPWD Officers are continuing their efforts to pursue with DJB in
getting more water supply. However to augment shortage of water
supply CPWD is making efforts by arranging water through tankers
from DJB and from private sources. The water arranged through
tankers is added to the water received in the underground tank
through DJB supply line and then it is pumped to overhead tank
to be supplied to houses by gravity through existing pipe line
system. However there is still overall shortage of water supply
even after augmenting supply through tankers.”
17. Based on the points brought to the notice of the Committee
by the residents of the Vasant Vihar Complex, the Committee had
noted two major difficulties faced by them. One was, the
unauthorized occupation in their shopping complex and its
nonfunctioning, and, second, the acute shortage of water. In their
Action Taken Reply, the Government have contended that at present
there is no such unauthorized occupation there. However, in view of
the complaints of the residents of Vasant Vihar Complex, the
Committee desire that CPWD should inspect the complex periodically
to ascertain that there is no unauthorized occupation in the shopping
complex in future too.

9
With regard to the non-functioning of the shopping complex,
the Committee note that allotment of shops and opening of consumer
goods stores, etc. in Vasant Vihar Shopping Complex have been
transferred to MCD as per Cabinet decision of October, 2005 and
Gazette notification issued by Land and Development Office.
However, the Committee desire the CPWD to convey their concern
to MCD so that appropriate steps are taken by them for allotment
of shops and opening up of proper consumer goods shops in the
Shopping Complex.
On the issue of water shortage, the Committee are not convinced
with the action taken by the Government so far towards meeting
the problem. They are concerned as to why, despite Government’s
several communications with Delhi Jal Board as well as the residents’
efforts to draw attention to the acute water shortage, no additional
water is being provided to the Complex. Further, the Committee
find from the Government’s reply that the Delhi Jal Board has been
supplying only 10% to 15% of the total requirement of water of this
area, is highly uncalled for. They fail to understand as to why a
permanent solution of the problem of acute water shortage could
not be worked out even after 20 years of completion of the Complex.
Though the Committee are aware of the overall water shortage in
the Capital, as such, they understand that water from Sonia Vihar
Water Works is available now to meet the problem to some extent.
Thus the Committee cannot but reiterate their earlier recommendation
that the Government should sincerely try to work out a permanent
solution to the acute water crisis in Vasant Vihar Complex.
D. Problems of Maintenance in other CPWD Residential Colonies
or GPRAs
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
18. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee would also like to emphasize that the study about
the maintenance activities at the Vasant Vihar Residential Complex
in Delhi may be considered as a sample case as similar problems
exist in other CPWD residential colonies or GPRAs in the country.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that all the
shortcomings in the maintenance activities and infrastructure
facilities in all the CPWD built/maintained residential colonies in
Delhi as well as other cities should be rectified by promptly
attending to the problems of the users of these residential units.
The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in the
matter within two months of submission of this Report.”

10
19. The Government have replied as under:
“To rectify the shortcomings in the maintenance activities and
infrastructure facilities in CPWD built/maintained houses, a number
of steps were initiated by CPWD in the past which included putting
in place a computerized complaint receiving and monitoring system
for lodging the complaints through telephone and Internet,
preparation of Annual maintenance plans, increased interaction by
senior officers with Residents Welfare Associations and general
public and outsourcing of maintenance in certain colonies in Delhi
on experimental basis.
Further steps have been taken in this regard in the recent past
also, which are given as under:
1. The poor skills of workmen deployed by contractors and
leakage/seepage problems in Government houses have also been
identified as requiring attention. All concerned have been directed
to sensitize the field units towards these problems and maintain
close supervision for all works carried out by the department and
to ensure that quality and end product is of expected standard.
The field officers at all levels have been directed to exercise a
close watch on quality of works as well as their timely completion.
2. Special drive to stop leakage/seepage in residential colonies
was launched and leakage free week was observed from 18th to
24th Feb’07 and instructions have been issued for attending to
special points identified during the drive by 15th April’ 07. A
large number of complaints of leakage/seepage work was attended
to during this period. This exercise will be undertaken on regular
basis to ensure the reduction of leakage/seepage to be minimum.”
20. The Committee had desired that taking Vasant Vihar
Residential Complex as a sample case, the Government should study
similar problems of other CPWD residential colonies or GPRAs in
the country and rectify the same. The Committee have been informed
about the Government’s direction to the field officers at all levels to
exercise a close watch on quality of works as well as their timely
completion and the skills of the workmen deployed by contractors.
The Committee also acknowledge Government’s efforts towards
rectifying the shortcomings in the maintenance activities and
infrastructure facilities in CPWD built/maintained houses by
initiating a computerized complaint receiving and monitoring system,
interacting with RWAs and general public, etc. However, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the actual number of

11
complaints so received and attended to. The Committee would also
like to be apprised of the steps taken by CPWD to promptly correct
these specific problems in future too. The Committee would also
like to know the outcome of the Government’s proposal to outsource
the maintenance works in certain colonies in Delhi and its further
progress.
E. Allocation of funds for maintenance works of Residential units
under CPWD
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
21. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee note that CPWD have constructed and are
maintaining a large number of residential complexes in Delhi and
outside Delhi. From the break-up of financial allocations for Delhi
and outside Delhi, it is noted that under Minor Head-2216, a
budgetary allocation of Rs. 144 crore has been made for 2006-2007
for the maintenance works for 68,483 number of General Pool
Residential Accommodations (GPRAs) in Delhi and an amount of
Rs. 66.69 crore has been earmarked for similar works for 35,257
number of GPRAs outside Delhi in 2006-2007. While the Committee
trust that adequate funds are allocated for the maintenance works
for the GPRAs in Delhi as well as outside Delhi, they desire that
these funds are used prudently by the executing agencies i.e. the
CPWD Work charged workers or the contract workers, so as to
complete the repair/maintenance jobs in time and in efficient
manner. The Committee also insist that the end-use of these funds,
allocated for the maintenance works, must be thoroughly verified
by senior officials of the Ministry of Urban Development and
CPWD so as to obviate any kind of diversion of funds.”
22. The Government have replied as under:
“There has been an increase in the allocation under maintenance
heads both under the head 2216 for residential buildings and under
the head 2059 for non- residential buildings. Annual Action Plans
have been prepared and priorities have been fixed and items
finalized based on consultations held with the RWAs and the works
are being taken up as per these Annual Action Plans for
maintenance. Since the priorities of items of works are being fixed
in consultation with RWAs and efforts are being made to award
annual contracts, this will ensure that the funds are utilized
prudently and maintenance works are completed timely in efficient
manner. These works are also being monitored by officers at Senior
level also.”

12
23. Based on the Budgetary allocations for maintenance of
residential complexes in and outside Delhi for the year 2006-07, the
Committee had noted that the funds were adequate and had
recommended a prudent use of these funds as well as a thorough
verification of its end use. In the Action Taken Reply of the
Government, the Committee have been informed about the efforts
of Government to ensure this by preparing Annual Action Plans,
consultations with RWAs, prioritization of works etc. The
Government have replied that these works are also being monitored
by officers at Senior level. While these efforts are in the right
direction, still the Committee feel that these are somewhat routine
steps and thus, more thrust is required to bring an efficient financial
discipline in the system. Therefore, the Committee would like to
suggest that the internal audit mechanism of CPWD needs to be
activated for verification of end use of these funds, and aberrations,
if found, should be dealt with seriously with appropriate penal action
against those found guilty. It is noteworthy that CPWD is into the
157th year of its existence. Thus, it is high time the CPWD went
through an image makeover and competed with other very
professionally handled construction agencies.
F. Appearance of cracks at the Central Institute of Buddhist Studies
buildings
Recommendation (Para No. 3.17)
24. The Committee had noted as below:
“Further, the Committee found that superficial cracks had appeared
in the structures already completed at the Central Institute of
Buddhist Studies, Choglamsar, Leh. The Committee take a serious
note of this fact and recommend that proper safeguards and
protective measures are taken to remove such cracks on the
buildings and make them earthquake resistant, as Leh falls under
the high seismic zone. The Committee may be kept informed about
the steps taken in this direction.”
25. The Government have replied as under:
“The superficial cracks observed by the Hon’ble Committee in the
buildings completed at Central Institute of Buddhist Studies were
due to abnormal change in temperature in Leh. During winter the
variation in temperature takes place from below 0° C i.e. upto -30°
C to substantial degree above 0° C i.e. upto +25° C. These cracks
have since been repaired.”

13
26. The Committee had recommended that proper safeguard and
protective measures should be taken to remove superficial cracks
which had appeared in the structures already completed at the Central
Institute of Buddhist Studies, Choglamsar, Leh. They have been given
to understand that these cracks have since been removed by the
CPWD. However, as per the reply of the Government, the cracks
had appeared due to cold climate and harsh weather conditions at
Leh. In this regard, it is noteworthy that the harsh weather in Leh
is a perennial phenomenon which may again cause cracks in the
aforesaid structure in future. Repairing these cracks time and again
is just a curative measure which may ultimately mar the aesthetics
of the exteriors. The Committee feel that the CPWD should have
studied these factors before undertaking construction work of the
building. Nonetheless, they now desire that a permanent preventive
measure should be worked out by the CPWD in curbing the
recurrence of cracks.
G. Ban on Recruitments of staff in CPWD
Recommendation (Para No. 4.20, 4.21, 4.22 and 4.23)
27. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee note that due to ban in the recruitment of workers
since 1985 there has been a continuous decline in the strength of
work charged staff of all categories due to retirement etc. in CPWD.
To cope up with shortage of staff, the maintenance by available
works charged staff, is being supplemented by carrying out work
at locations through contracts. Therefore, the CPWD officers have
been forced to recruit workers on casual basis after the ban on
recruitment in the department.
The Committee express their deep concern over the fact that a
complete ban on recruitments had been imposed by Government
including the deployment of daily-rated muster roll/hand-receipt
workers w.e.f. 19.11.1985 in CPWD. Besides this, the Government
and the Central Advisory Contract Labour Board further imposed
a ban on employment of Contract labourers in respect of
15 categories w.e.f. 31.07.2002, which contained the categories of
Air Conditioner Mechanic, Air Conditioner Operator, Air
Conditioner Khalasi/Helper, Electrician, Wiremen, Khalasi
(Electrical), Carpenter, Mason, Fitter, Plumber, Helper/Beldar,
Mechanic, Sewer-man, Sweeper and Foreman.

14
The Committee need hardly emphasize that the aforesaid bans in
employing labour force in CPWD including work charged workers
and contract labourers has had an adverse impact on the efficiency
and working of CPWD. The Committee note that the Employees
Union of this Department have approached the courts of law and
a number of court cases filed by the grieving employees are still
pending before the Courts, thereby , involving the CPWD
management in unfruitful works. The Committee are concerned
about the damaging effects of these recruitment bans on the efficient
functioning of CPWD. The Committee recommend that this matter
should be reviewed in-depth in order to restore and maintain the
expertise of the CPWD trained personnel in various construction
technologies by employing/promoting the original workers of
CPWD rather than resorting to the hired or contract workers in
various fields. The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that conscious
and concerted efforts have to be made by Government to explore
the feasibility of employing and recruitment of adequate number
of workforce in CPWD in future. Steps in this regard should be
taken urgently.
The Committee also note that the Ministry of Finance vide its O.M.
dated 5th August, 1999 had imposed a ban on filling up of the
posts in the Direct Recruitment Quota. Until recently, the screening
Committee vide its communication dated 22nd February, 2006 had
also not given permission to fill up the vacant posts borne on the
work-charged establishment of CPWD and it abolished all the 178
vacant posts of work-charged staff of CPWD for the year 2004-
2005. The Committee are informed that the work-charged staff of
CPWD are regular employees of CPWD in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ and
their salaries are charged to the ‘Account Head’ of maintenance
and not the ‘Account Head’ for salaries of the Government of
India. Hence, from the above it may be seen that 178 vacant and
regular posts had been abolished in CPWD by Government. The
Committee take a serious view of the above facts and stand-by
the cause of aspiring candidates for employment in CPWD. The
Committee feel that engineering graduates must get an opportunity
to serve in CPWD and help in the growth of this organization and
recommend that the process of recruitment should be reviewed to
filling various vacant posts.”
28. The Government have replied as under:
“The Hon’ble Committee has noted the continuous decline in the
strength of CPWD work charged staff due to ban on recruitment

15
of workers since 1985. The Hon’ble Committee has also noted that
to cope up with shortage of staff the maintenance works are being
supplemented by carrying out through contracts and recruitment
of workers through contracts.
The Hon’ble Committee has expressed concern over the ban on
recruitments and deployment of daily-rated muster roll/hand-
receipt workers w.e.f. 19.11.1985 in CPWD, besides ban imposed by
contract labour board in respect of 15 categories of contract
labourers.
The Hon’ble Committee has noted that the ban in employing
labourers in CPWD including work charged workers and contract
labourers has had an adverse impact on the efficiency of working
of CPWD. The Hon’ble Committee has also noted that the various
unions representing the workers have approached the Courts of
Law and filed numerous court cases, thus, involving the CPWD
management in unfruitful work. The Committee has expressed
concern about damaging effect of these bans on the efficient
functioning of CPWD. The Committee has recommended that the
matter should be reviewed in order to maintain the expertise of
the CPWD trained personnel in various construction technologies
by employing/promoting the original workers in various fields.
The Committee has recommended that the Government should
explore the feasibility of employing and recruitment of adequate
number of workforce in CPWD in future. In this regard, it may be
mentioned that the recruitment, to fill in various vacancies, is
carried out as per the guidelines issued by the Government from
time to time. The nature of the job, which CPWD carried out,
necessitates a correct mix of contract and departmental workers. A
balance in this regard has to be maintained. It has been felt that
contract workers, who are skilled in more trades than one, can
perform some maintenance operations more efficiently and
economically. However, in sensitive areas it is necessary to have
regular departmental workers. To this extent, the CPWD is utilizing
the resources presently available and supplement these through
maintenance contracts. The skill sets available with the departmental
workers are being upgraded through regular training programmes
in collaboration with IGNOU and CIDC.
Recruitment in CPWD to fill the vacant posts through Direct
Recruitment is carried out as per existing guidelines issued by the
Government of India as applicable from time to time. It has always
been the endeavour of the Department to recruit the correct mix

16
of engineers and other staff against the number of vacancies
approved to be filled in by the Government. It is also a fact that
the reduction in the overall strength of the department, as per
guidelines of the Government, has a direct impact on the
functioning of the organisation. We are of the view that functional
organisations should be allowed to maintain the desired strength
so that they can perform their roles effectively. Recommendations
of the Committee to review the process of recruitment for filling
in the various vacant posts in CPWD has been noted and the
matter will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance and DoPT.
In so far as recruitment of Engineering Graduates, it is mentioned
they are recruited at the level of AEE through the Combined
Engineering Services Examination conducted by UPSC. The
minimum qualification for JE, recruited in the CPWD, is a diploma
in the concerned branch of engineering. However, many engineering
graduates also enter the department as JE.”
29. The Committee had conveyed their concern over the ban on
recruitments and deployment on daily-rated muster roll/hand receipt
workers w.e.f. 19.11.1985 in CPWD, besides ban imposed by contract
labour board in respect of 15 categories of contract labourers. The
Committee had recommended to urgently explore the feasibility of
employing and recruitment of adequate number of workforce in
CPWD in future. However, as is evident from the reply of the
Government, the Ministry have repeatedly taken the stand that the
recruitment is done as per the Government of India guidelines.
Nothing concrete has so far been done towards recruitment of
adequate number of workforce in CPWD. In fact, the Ministry has
only assured the Committee that the matter will be taken up with
the Ministry of Finance and the DoPT. The Committee take serious
note of the fact that ban on recruitment has been in existence for
the last 22 years. Two decades ago CPWD might have been
overstaffed. But today, the situation has undergone immense change.
There have been tremendous changes in construction concepts.
Further, there has been a cut-throat competition also from the private
players in the field. Therefore, they desire that the Ministry may
take up the matter without further delay at appropriate levels after
reviewing their staff requirement in light of the changed scenario,
more so, since they themselves have admitted that the ban on
employing labour force in CPWD including work charged workers
and contract labourers has had an adverse impact on the efficiency
and working of CPWD. The Committee are also of the view that
certain sensitive areas require the deployment of regular departmental
workers as carrying out work by the casual contract workers won’t

17
solve the purpose. The Ministry should, therefore, convince the
Government for lifting ban on the recruitment of workers. The
Committee also note that the All India Employees Union,
Lodhi Colony Enquiry Office, New Delhi had contended that the
policies of CPWD are against the workers as the strength of
Engineers are increasing and those of workers are reducing. The
Committee are deeply concerned about such feelings in the
workforce. They feel that though professionally qualified personnel
are a must in an organization engaged in technical work, yet the
execution of these works at ground level is largely done through the
workforce and thus they must not remain discontented. Therefore,
they reiterate their earlier recommendation that this matter should
be reviewed in-depth and the Government should make conscious
and concerted efforts to explore the feasibility of employing and
recruitment of adequate number of workforce in CPWD in future.
The Committee had recommended to fill up the 178 vacant posts
of work-charged staff of CPWD for the year 2004-05 as work-charged
staff of CPWD are regular employees of CPWD in Group ‘C’ and
‘D’. In this context, they note the Government’s assurance that the
matter will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance and DoPT.
The Committee again find this reply dissatisfactory and would like
to know whether the same has been done and if there has been any
concrete result on this front.
The Committee has also recommended that engineering graduates
must get an opportunity to serve in the CPWD and help in the
growth of this organization and that the process of recruitment should
be reviewed so as to fill up various vacant posts. The Government
in their reply have taken the stand that Engineering Graduates are
recruited at the level of AEE through the Combined Engineering
Service Examination conducted by UPSC. The Committee would,
however, like to know as to whether the required number of JEs
have since been employed in CPWD.
H. Delay in execution of works and costs overrun
Recommendation (Para No. 5.9)
30. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee have received a number of complaints about
delays in execution of maintenance as well as construction works
of CPWD carried out through Contractors. The Ministry have stated
that the delays in execution/completion of works/projects are due

18
to delays in preparation of preliminary estimates and preliminary
drawings by CPWD; delay in final approval to preliminary
drawings and estimates by client departments; non-release of
adequate and timely funds by the client departments; delay in
approval of plans by concerned local bodies; shortage or non-
availability of critical materials like cement, steel, labour etc.; non-
performance or slow performance by executing agency; large scale
changes in the original proposal by client department necessitating
closure/modification of Contracts; delay in grant of utility
connections like water supply, electricity etc. and encroachments
of site of work and thus not made available to the client. While
the Committee note that certain practical difficulties are faced by
CPWD in getting the works through their registered Contractors,
they expressed their deep concern over the fact that such delays
in execution/completion of projects/works would entail unwanted
and avoidable cost over-runs. The Committee, therefore, desire that
a high level ‘Review Committee’ must be constituted by the
Government so as to find out the proper via-media to ensure timely
and proper execution of workers by the Contractors.”
31. The Government have replied as under:
“The working of CPWD has been reviewed by a number of
committees including independent management experts and a
number of recommendations have been made to improve the
working of the department. All the experts have noted that there
are various reasons due to which projects get delayed resulting in
cost overruns. It has also been noted by the experts that most of
the reasons for delay are outside the control/purview of CPWD.
For such reasons, no action can be taken by the CPWD. In respect
of delay in execution of works by contracts, no escalation is paid
to them by the CPWD and in fact the contractors are penalized
for the delays as per the contract conditions.”
32. The Committee had shown deep concern regarding delay in
execution of works by CPWD and the consequent cost overruns and
had desired that a high level ‘Review Committee’ must be constituted
by the Government so as to find out the proper via-media to ensure
timely and proper execution of works by the Contractors. The
Government in their reply have stated that it has been noted by a
number of Committees including independent management experts
that most of the reasons for the delay are outside the control/purview
of CPWD and that for such reasons, no action can be taken by the
CPWD. Though the Committee do appreciate that certain factors

19
could be beyond the control/purview of CPWD, yet they are not
convinced with the reply of the Government since they feel that
many of the reasons for delay in works, cited by the Government,
fall within their control/purview. For instance, it is the bounden
duty of CPWD to coordinate with client department and pursue them
for timely approval of Preliminary Drawings and estimates and for
adequate and timely release of funds. CPWD must also coordinate
with the concerned local bodies for timely approval of plans and to
make available critical materials like cement, steel, etc. Besides,
CPWD must strictly supervise and monitor the working of the non-
performing and slow-performing executing agencies. Strict action
against the agencies for non-performance and slow performance
should be taken by blacklisting there. Appropriate target dates need
to be fixed and diligently adhered to in the most professional manner.
Besides, CPWD, being a Government agency, is also in a better
position, as compared to the private agencies, to see that utility
connections like water supply, electricity, etc. and the grant of
completion certificate by local bodies are not delayed. In the light
of the above suggestions, the Committee feel that the Government
should refrain from giving stereotyped replies to their
recommendations and work towards a sincere solution to avoid delays
and cost overruns.

20
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
The Committee would also like to emphasize that the study about
the maintenance activities at the Vasant Vihar Residential Complex in
Delhi may be considered as a sample case as similar problems exist in
other CPWD residential colonies or GPRAs in the country. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that all the shortcomings
in the maintenance activities and infrastructure facilities in all the
CPWD built/maintained residential colonies in Delhi as well as other
cities should be rectified by promptly attending to the problems of the
users of these residential units. The Committee may be apprised about
the action taken in the matter within two months of submission of
this Report.
Reply of the Government
To rectify the shortcomings in the maintenance activities and
infrastructure facilities in CPWD built/maintained houses, a number
of steps were initiated by CPWD in the past which included putting
in place a computerized complaint receiving and monitoring system
for lodging the complaints through telephone and Internet, preparation
of Annual maintenance plans, increased interaction by senior officers
with Residents Welfare Associations and general public and outsourcing
of maintenance in certain colonies in Delhi on experimental basis.
Further steps have been taken in this regard in the recent past
also, which are given as under:
1. The poor skill of workmen deployed by contractors and
leakage/seepage problems in Government houses have also
been identified as requiring attention. All concerned have
been directed to sensitize the field units towards these
problems and maintain close supervision for all works
carried out by the department and to ensure that quality
and end product is of expected standard. The field officers
at all levels have been directed to exercise a close watch on
quality of works as well as their timely completion.

21
2. Special drive to stop leakage/seepage in residential colonies
was launched and leakage free week was observed from
18th to 24th Feb’07 and instructions have been issued for
attending to special points identified during the driven by
15th April’07. A large number of complaints of leakage/
seepage work was attended to during this period. This
exercise will be undertaken on regular basis to ensure the
reduction of leakage/seepage to be minimum.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
The Committee note that CPWD have constructed and are
maintaining a large number of residential complexes in Delhi and
outside Delhi. From the break-up of financial allocations for Delhi and
outside, Delhi, it is noted that under Minor Head-2216, a budgetary
allocation of Rs. 144 crore has been made for 2006-2007 for the
maintenance works for 68,483 number of General Pool Residential
Accommodations (GPRAs) in Delhi and an amount of Rs. 66.69 crore
has been earmarked for similar works for 35,257 number of GPRAs
outside Delhi in 2006-2007. While the Committee trust that adequate
funds are allocated for the maintenance works for the GPRAs in Delhi
as well as outside Delhi, they desire that these funds are used prudently
by the executing agencies i.e. the CPWD Work charged workers or the
contract workers, so as to complete the repair/maintenance jobs in
time and in efficient manner. The Committee also insist that the end-
use of these funds, allocated for the maintenance works, must be
thoroughly verified by senior officials of the Ministry of Urban
Development and CPWD so as to obviate any kind of diversion of
funds.
Reply of the Government
There has been an increase in the allocation under maintenance
heads both under the head 2216 for residential buildings and under
the head 2059 for non residential buildings. Annual Action Plans have
been prepared and priorities have been fixed and items finalized based
on consultations held with the RAWs and the works are being taken
up as per these Annual Action Plan for maintenance. Since the priorities

22
of items of works are being fixed in consultation with RWAs and
efforts are being made to award annual contracts, this will ensure that
the funds are utilized prudently and maintenance works are completed
timely in efficient manner. These works are also being monitored by
officers at Senior level also.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report)
Handling of general complaints received from users of GPRAs
Recommendation (Para No. 2.34)
The Committee have received a number of complaints from the
users of the residential units constructed and maintained by CPWD
from various parts of the country as detailed in para 2.19 of the Report
ante. It is seen that mostly the complaints deal with the lack of attention
towards the complaints of the users by the Service Centres staff, rude
behavior of the Service Centre staff, non-maintenance of the Complaint
Books, inordinate delays in white-washing the external structures of
the residential buildings, leaving of works by contractors in the mid-
way and dumping of wastes in the area, usage of sub-standard
materials by contractors in sun-shades, seepage on ceilings and walls
of the quarters etc. It has been further complained by the users of
GPRAs that JEs/AEs are mostly not available at the Service Centres
and complaints are not being attended to promptly. There is lack of
water supply in certain CPWD Residential Complexes. The flooring of
the quarters need proper up gradation, while service lanes/approach
roads need maintenance as these are broken at many places. There are
inadequate street lights and the progress of works is very slow. The
Committee express their serious concern over the aforesaid problems
faced by the residents, who are the employees of the Government and
have been compelled to face difficulties in day-to-day living in their
officially provided accommodation. The Committee desire that CPWD
should resolve the problems faced by the occupants of GPRAs in a
two-pronged strategic way i.e.  firstly , the works done through
contractors must be completed in time and properly by using good
quality building materials etc. and secondly, the CPWD must coordinate
with the ULBs and Municipalities of the area concerned for construction
of service lines, roads, etc. and provide adequate number of street
lights and adequate water supply in and around the residential areas.
The Committee also recommend that attendance of the Enquiry Staff
of CPWD must be ensured in each locality.

23
Reply of the Government
The Committee expressed concern regarding  certain problems faced
by users of Government accommodation like lack of attention to
complaints in service centers, rude behaviour of staff, non maintenance
of complaint boxes, delay in white washing of external of houses, use
of sub standard material, non disposal of malba by contractor, problem
of seepage, non availability of JEs/AEs, shortage of water supply and
need for upgradation of flooring, repair of roads, lanes and street
lights.
Regarding lack of attention to complaints in service center etc., a
complaint redressal mechanism is in place as explained in para 2.10
above. Also periodical and regular meetings are held between EEs/
AEs with RWAs and the issues/problems discussed are attended to by
CPWD staff which also include any case of rude behaviour by staff.
Complaint boxes are available in most of the service centers.
Regarding delay in external white washing of residences, this work is
done periodically on rotation basis depending upon availability of
funds. Since additional funds have been allocated in the current year,
maximum number of units will be covered for external painting.
Regarding check on quality of work by contractors, the Senior
officers have also been directed to visit service centers and maintenance
works on regular basis to check the quality of works and to ensure
timely completion of works by contractors and simultaneous removal
of malba by contractors on completion.
Regarding problem of seepage, special drive to stop leakage/
seepage in residential colonies was launched and leakage free week
was observed from 18th to 24th Feb’07 and instructions were issued
for attending to special points identified during drive by 15th April’07.
A large number of complaints have been attended during this period.
Regarding availability of AEs/JEs in service centers, they are
generally available in the service centers in morning hours. However
senior officers during their regular inspection also check the availability
of AEs/JEs in the service centers.
Regarding need for upgradation of flooring, this work is being
under taken on vacation of quarters. Regarding repair of service roads,
lanes & street lights the nodal officers of CPWD are taking up these
issues with the officers of concerned local bodies as and when required.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]

24
Recommendation (Para No. 2.35)
The Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Urban
Development that for the year 2006-2007, additional funds have been
allocated to CPWD for carrying out the repair and maintenance works.
The Ministry has also assured that the works of up-gradation, repair
and maintenance of the CPWD quarters will be taken up in a phased
manner and will be completed during the current financial year. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that effective and timely
measures are taken by the CPWD in coordination with the Ministry of
Urban Development and other ULBs so to resolve all the difficulties
faced by the users of the residential areas under the care of CPWD in
coordination with the RWAs of each area.
Reply of the Government
There has been an increase in the allotment of funds in the capital
heads. Action Plan was prepared and the works of upgradation,
Aesthetic improvement etc. have been taken up during current year.
There has been increase in the allocation under maintenance heads
also. Annual Action Plan for maintenance were prepared and priorities
were fixed for items finalized based on consultations held with the
RWAs and the works have been taken up as per these Annual Action
Plans.
With the carrying out works of upgradation, retrofitting and
Aesthetic improvement and also additional works of repairs and
maintenance the level of satisfaction of occupants of CPWD maintained
residential and non residential accommodation will improve.
Regarding co-ordination with local bodies, the local bodies were
asked to nominate nodal officers to coordinate with CPWD officers of
the concerned geographical area. The local bodies namely MCD, NDMC
and Delhi Jal Board have appointed nodal officers. The list of these
nodal officers has been circulated to field units of CPWD for closely
liaising with them in relation to municipal functions discharge by these
local bodies in colonies maintained by CPWD. CPWD has already
appointed nodal officers for each colony to interact with RWAs and
take up common issues of colonies with concerned local bodies.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]

25
Redress of Complaints by CPWD
Recommendation (Para No. 2.37)
The Ministry of Urban Development have informed the Committee
that in many of the major day-to-day complaints relating to replacement
of broken doors and windows, overhead CI systems, replacement of
terrace tanks, replacement of corroded GI pipes and soil pipes, rewiring
etc. and other works of repair, rehabilitation and aesthetic
improvements, it has not been possible, for long, to attend to them on
a regular basis and in a comprehensive manner, because of paucity of
funds. However, in this financial year, Government has sanctioned
additional funds and these funds are planned to be spent as per an
Action Plan through a special repair drive. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that concerted efforts should be made by CPWD to
complete all repair works and to attend to al the pending complaints
in various CPWD Enquiry Offices through this Action Plan to meet
the requirements of the users of the GPRAs and office accommodations.
The Committee also recommend that concerted efforts should be made
by CPWD in coordination with the municipal bodies to provide
maintenance works in the areas of residential colonies falling under
the municipalities.
Reply of the Government
Major complaints requiring replacement of broken doors and
windows, overhead CI systems, replacement of terrace tanks,
replacement of corroded GI pipes and soil pipes, rewiring etc. and
other works of repair, rehabilitation and aesthetic improvements etc.
which are transferred to a register and action on consolidated cases is
taken periodically. This is done through an Annual Action Plan of
maintenance which is prepared at the beginning of the year. Due to
allotment of additional funds in the last financial year (2006-07), efforts
were made to carry out large number of pending repair works to
meet the requirement of users of GPRA and GPOA.
Regarding co-ordination with local bodies, the local bodies were
asked to nominate nodal officers to coordinate with CPWD officers of
the concerned geographical area. The local bodies namely MCD, NDMC
and Delhi Jal Board have appointed nodal officers. The list of these
nodal officers has been circulated to field units of CPWD for closely
liaising with them in relation to municipal functions discharge by these
local bodies in colonies maintained by CPWD. CPWD has already
appointed nodal officers for each colony to interact with RWAs and
take up common issues of colonies with concerned local bodies.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]

26
Complaints from Members of Parliament
Recommendation (Para No. 2.39)
As regards, the maintenance and up keep of the CPWD Residential
Complexes in North Avenue, South Avenue, V .P . House and the
Lutyen’s Bungalow Zone, the Committee have also received complaints
from the users, who are the Hon’ble Members of Parliament. These
complaints mostly pertain to poor maintenance of Air Conditions, non-
stop digging works in the vicinity of the premises by contractors,
dumping of wastes by contractors, poor maintenance of gardens, service
lanes, roads etc. and carrying out of the similar nature of jobs by
different contractors in different times for reasons best known to the
CPWD. The Committee note that at the House Committee’s
intervention, a separate special budget has been given for this area
apart from the total budget. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that prompt and effective measures are taken by CPWD
to rectify the above stated problems and to restore and maintain the
beautiful ambience of the ‘Central Vista Area’ of Delhi. The Committee
may be apprised about the action taken in the matter within two
month of presentation of this Report to the House.
Reply of the Government
Regarding maintenance and upkeep of CPWD residential complexes
in North Avenue, South Avenue, VP House & Lutyen’s Bungalow Zone,
the Committee has pointed out regarding poor maintenance of Air
Conditioners, non-stop digging works in the vicinity of the premises
by contractors, dumping of wastes by contractors, poor maintenance
of gardens, service lanes, roads etc.
Regarding poor maintenance of Air Conditioners it is stated that
the complaints received in this regards are attended regularly and no
complaints are pending of maintenance of Air-conditioners in VVIP
bungalows and MPs flats. Regarding non-stop digging in the vicinity
of the premises by contractors, dumping of wastes/malba, the service
lanes are maintained by NDMC and the malba generated are being
disposed off regularly to avoid complaint. There is proper coordination
with NDMC. Regarding maintenance of gardens, initiatives have been
taken to improve landscaping in North/South Avenue flats and LBZ
bungalows.
More attention is being given to improve the horticulture features
in the area of VVIP bungalows and MPs flats.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]

27
Prompt handling of grievances of the users of CPWD colonies
Recommendation (Para No. 2.40)
As regards, handling of the grievances of the users of the CPWD
residential areas the Committee recommend that special workshops
should be held by CPWD in order to train its work-force in prompt
disposal of maintenance works including civil works and electrical
works in all the CPWD colonies.
Reply of the Government
CPWD is imparting training to its workers on various issues
including dealing with the allottees. CPWD training institute has
initiated regular training progrmme for work charges staff in
co-operation with Construction Industries Development Council and
IGNOU and had imparted training to large number of workers in the
category of electrician, mason, carpenter & plumbers. During last two
financial years i.e. 2005-06 and 2006-07 the Workers Training Centres
under CPWD Training Institute located at New Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata
& Chennai had trained 1016 and 1638 workers respectively in the last
two financial years. This programme will be continued and this will
improve the disposal of all type of maintenance works.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)
The Committee have noticed that in certain buildings constructed
by CPWD, the local architecture, artifacts and design have not been
given due consideration by its Architectural and Technology Application
& Development Cell. One such example is the Central Institute of
Buddhist Studies at Choglamsar at Leh, which had been visited by
the Committee during its On-the-Spot Study visit on 30th May, 2006.
The Committee found to their dismay that this Central Institute of
Buddhist Studies was devoid of any type of Buddhist form of art,
design and architecture, which are in fact well-known forms of designs
in the area. The building gave a flat look. The Committee strongly feel
that the local forms of designs and style must be taken into
consideration while drawing blue prints for a building structure in a
particular area. The local ethos should be considered giving due regard
to the aesthetic, ambience and the tradition including the folk lore. As
the Central Institute of Buddhist Studies is yet to be completed, the
Committee, recommend that suitable facelift to this institute be given

28
by usage of Buddhist form of art and design so as to make it look
attractive enough for the tourists who are visiting Leh. The Committee
also recommend that as Leh region is faced by harsh winter and the
much-needed wooden flooring in the residential premises and other
office premises should be provided by CPWD, expeditiously .
Reply of the Government
While developing designs in CPWD local architectural style or
building materials are taken into consideration. As far as possible,
local architecture style are followed and local building materials are
used in CPWD design. However, to create a urban experience which
reflects modern day context, designers also use modern materials in
addition to local materials.
Regarding Central Institute of Buddhist Studies, it is informed that
architectural planning was outsourced by CIBS authorities. However,
it is submitted that the typical character, a carved decorated lintel
piece over windows and other openings has been replicated in concrete,
but without element of carving in wood, probably to conserve wood.
Typical “Arched doorway” from Ajanta caves has been replicated on
sides of buildings in plaster. Possibilities of incorporating more
Buddhist/local elements in buildings under construction at Leh is under
consideration.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.18)
As regards the question of adherence to the prevailing Municipal
laws and building bye-laws of an area, the Committee considers it
pertinent to point out that the local Municipal Laws and Building
Bye-laws must be followed by CPWD, while constructing a structure/
building. The Committee are also of the firm view the factors such as
Rainwater Harvesting must be given due attention by the CPWD in
its construction works and proper checks should be carried out to
oversee that the ‘Contractor’ adheres to the Municipal laws and
building laws of a given area. The Committee recommend that
necessary instructions should be issued to all concerned in this regard.
Reply of the Government
All building designs developed by CPWD adhere to the prevailing
Municipal Law and Building Bye-laws of an area. Rainwater Harvesting

29
has become mandatory by most of municipal building bye-laws and is
being adopted by CPWD. Necessary instructions has also been issued
to all ADGs and Chief Engineers to follow Local Municipal Laws and
Building Bye-laws, while constructing a Structure/Building and also
to give the attention to factors such as Rainwater Harvesting in its
construction works and also to carryout proper checks to oversee that
the ‘contractor’ adheres to the Municipal laws and building laws of a
given area.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Assigning of Project Managers by CPWD
Recommendation (Para No. 4.27)
The Committee note that there is a proposal in CPWD to designate
‘Project Managers’ who will be individually responsible for over all
delivery of projects to achieve the goals of the organization. CPWD
officers of the rank of EE/Superintending Engineers/Chief Engineers
would be designated as ‘Project Managers’ for individual projects with
enhanced powers to oversee the execution and completion of projects.
The Committee also note that there is also a proposal for CPWD to
engage consultants by outsourcing. In this regard,  the Committee are
of the view that the Ministry of Urban Development and CPWD should
devise in institute arrangement for designating the ‘Project Managers’
and ensure that efficient ‘Project Managers’ with sound knowledge of
latest technologies in construction works are appointed for the purpose.
The Committee also desire that from time to time comprehensive and
accurate project appraisals are carried out of all the on-going
construction projects of CPWD.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has noted that CPWD has initiated a proposal for
designated ‘Project Managers’ who will be individually responsible for
overall delivery of the projects to achieve the goals of the organization.
The Committee has opined that CPWD should devise an in-situ
arrangement for designating competent Project Managers and ensure
that only officers with sound knowledge and latest knowledge in
construction works are appointed for the purpose. The Committee has
desired to have time to time to review and appraisal of all on going
construction projects in the department.
In this regard it is mentioned that the designation of Project
Managers is done on a case to case basis after taking into consideration

30
all aspects which include the size, sensitivity and complexity of the
project and the technical and managerial competence of the officers
proposed to be designated as Project Manager.
The views of the Committee have been duly circulated to all ADGs
for keeping in view while deciding on designating of officers as Project
Managers. All major ongoing projects are being monitored periodically
on monthly basis through progress reports by Chief Engineers, ADGs
and upto DG level in the Directorate of CPWD. These projects are
also reviewed in the review meetings of Senior Officers taken by
DG(W).
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Research & Development in CPWD
Recommendation (Para No. 5.7)
The Committee note with satisfaction that CPWD gives the due
attention towards the R&D works and have the ‘Technology Advance
Cell’ for the purpose. The Committee desire that these R&D works are
carried out and updated from time to time to fall in line with the
State-of-art technologies in architecture/construction and quality
standards/certifications of the field.
Reply of the Government
CPWD is regularly updating its technology in Architecture/
Construction by incorporating new materials & techniques from time
to time.
The department is running its own training institute at Ghaziabad
& other regional training institutes under the control of Addl. Director
General (Training). In order to educate & keep aware of new
developments taking place in all fields, the staff is being sent for
training to these institutes on rotational basis.
Similarly new products in the field of Engineering are being
updated by the office of Chief Engineer (CSQ). Further the materials
used in building activities are tested by materials testing labs. Soil
testing is also carried out by Geotech lab.
All the Addl. Directors General are having their own independent
quality inspection units. Director General’s office is also monitoring
the quality aspects of all units at is own level through a Quality
Control Unit at Nirman Bhawan independently.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]

31
Transparency in works including contractual works
Recommendation (Para No. 5.12)
The Committee note that the CPWD Enlistment Rules provides for
checking of quality of works done by the contractors and ensure
transparency in the procedure of the contractual works carried out by
the CPWD. The Committee are informed that a Committee of officers
in the Organization keeps a check on the progress of Contractual works
from the stage of calling of tenders and it ensures transparency and
objectivity. However, the Committee desire that proper regulatory steps
should be taken to lay-down clear-cut guidelines to be followed by
the registered contractors in order to meet the demands of the users
of structures/buildings under CPWD. The Committee also desire that
earnest and effective measurers must be taken by the department to
ensure complete transparency and easy access to information to the
users as per the Right to Information Act, 2005. The Committee may
be apprised about the steps taken in this direction.
Reply of the Government
In order to meet the changing demands of users, CPWD has
already revised the rules for enlistment of contractors. The revised
rules called Enlistment Rules 2005, make it mandatory for the
contractors to maintain higher financial soundness, better technically
qualified manpower and modern tools and machinery. Contracting firms
meeting these higher standards will definitely result in better quality
& speed of execution of works and hence leading to better user
satisfaction.
There is complete transparency for which the Right to Information
Act, 2005 is fully implemented and the contractors are marking use of
this Act whenever they have any problem.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Vigilance of CPWD Officials
Recommendation (Para No. 5.15)
The Committee are informed that a Vigilance Unit exists in CPWD,
which is headed by Chief Engineer (Vigilance) and he is assisted by
three Superintending Engineers (Vigilance) for investigation of cases
and follow-up action. The Committee take a very serious note of the

32
fact that in spite of an insitue arrangement for vigilance by the Vigilance
Unit in the Department, the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) had
to intervene and report a number of cases of corruption by CPWD
officials by awarding ‘Major Penalties’ to five CPWD officials in 2003,
while it initiated enquiry proceedings against few other officers of
CPWD. The Committee, therefore, recommend that honest and earnest
steps must be taken to strengthen the ‘Vigilance Unit’ of CPWD to
ensure complete transparency of works and strict disciplinary action
must be taken against the defaulting/corrupt CPWD Officials. The
steps taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee,
expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
It is fact that Vigilance Unit, CPWD was headed by Chief Engineer
(Vig.) (now designated as CVO, CPWD) and there are three
Superintending Engineers for assisting the CVO in his functioning.
However the facts regarding intervention of CVC to report the cases
to Vigilance Unit, CPWD is not as per the records.
During 2003, 87 Nos. of cases were investigated after receipt of
complaints from various sources viz. private persons, CBI, CVC,
departmental officers, Contractors etc. As a result of these investigations,
charge sheet were issued to 116 Nos. of officials. During this year, on
account of disciplinary cases initiated in the past, 41 officers were
penalized.
In fact, the consultation of CVC for the cases relating to all
Group-A officers is mandatory as per the statue and that is why the
cases are referred to the Commission and in turn Commission tenders
their advice.
In the working of CPWD, corruption can normally be categorized
broadly in two stages viz. pre-tender stage and post-tender/execution
stage of the work. It is being ensured that tender notices get adequate
publicity. Tenders notices are being published on the web site. To
make the tendering system more transparent, the process of e-tendering
and e-payment is on the anvil and will be implemented shortly.
During the course of execution of a work, periodic checks are
conducted by CSQ unit to ensure the quality of work. Besides, every
Superintending Engineer is assisted by one AE (QC) in order to ensure
the quality of work being executed in the Circle. The work manual
2003 of CPWD fixes up responsibilities of various officers of CPWD
during execution of the work very categorically, thus, making it very
easy to fix the responsibility for any irregularity.

33
The circulars and guidelines issued by CVC are circulated in the
department for strict compliance. By and large these guidelines are
being followed religiously. However, after noticing any departure from
these guidelines, necessary preventive/punitive measures invariably
follow.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2,
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Re-habilitation works for Tsunami affected areas
Recommendation (Para No. 5.18)
The Committee note that CPWD was taken-up building around
6500 permanent houses for the people displaced by Tsunami in the
Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Since sizeable time has already lapsed in
execution of this project, the Committee expects that proper concerted
efforts be made by CPWD to complete this construction project in
time and within the estimated Project cost. The Committee may be
apprised about the latest position in the matter.
Reply of the Government
CPWD has started the construction of permanent houses for the
Tsunami affected people of A&N Islands on the following islands:
(i) Little Andaman
(ii) Car Nicobar
(iii) Katchal
(iv) Chowra
(v) Kamorta
(vi) Terressa
(vii) Noncowire
(viii) Great Nicobar
(ix) Little Nicobar
Out of 9797 houses to be built for the Tsunami affected people in
the Islands originally 6500 shelters were allocated to CPWD for
construction. Subsequently the number has been increased and now
7966 shelters are being built by CPWD. Foundation work for nearly
6000 units, for which locations have been identified is in progress.

34
Super structure work for houses has been awarded and fabrication of
material is under way. The design of the houses and the specifications
being adopted have been evolved by out a consultative process in
which all the stakeholders including individual beneficiaries, tribal
council members, village captains etc. were evolved. The houses have
been designed to be earthquake resistant and eco-friendly materials
are being used in construction.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2,
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Timely completion of the Commonwealth Games Village
Recommendation (Para No. 5.21)
The Committee note that the Commonwealth Games 2010 is to be
hosted at New Delhi and the construction work of the Commonwealth
Games Village at Akshardham in East Delhi by CPWD is yet to
commence. The Committee strongly recommend that timely steps
should be taken by Government in order to ensure timely completion
of the Project with high quality construction within the estimated cost
of Rs. 1500 crore. The Committee may be apprised about the progress
of the above works within two months of presentation of this Report
to the House.
Reply of the Government
It is to inform that para so referred does not pertain to CPWD as
the Commonwealth Games Village at Akshardham in East Delhi is in
the domain of Delhi Development Authority and does not pertain to
CPWD.
The CPWD is being involved only in the upgradation/renovation
& new construction of SAI infrastructure’s as in (a) Jawaharlal Nehru
Stadium, (b) Indira Gandhi Stadium, (c) Karni Singh Shooting Range,
(d) Major Dhyan Chand National Stadium, and (e) Dr. Shyama Prasad
Mukerjee Stadium (Talkatora). Accordingly the appointment of
Consultants has already been done and the submission of drawings
for the approval of the Local Bodies would be done on priority.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2,
Dated: 11th May, 2007]

35
Certain important points to be followed by CPWD in carrying out
its works
Recommendation (Para No. 5.23)
The Committee note that on the occasion of completion of 150
years of CPWD, Hon’ble President of India mentioned certain important
points to be followed by the CPWD in its works which are inter-alia
mentioned in para 5.22 ante. The Committee are confident that the
said points are duly noted by CPWD for follow-up action and they
would like to know about the steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Hon’ble President of India mentioned certain important points to
be followed by the CPWD in its works on the occasion of closing
ceremony of the 150 years of CPWD held in July 2004 in this regard
steps taken by CPWD are given as under:
1. Design of energy efficient building
Buildings being designed by CPWD are provided with features/
provision within the constraints of topography/orientation of site/
requirements of clients/constraints of funds, to make them energy
efficient.
2. Rain water harvesting & water management system
These features are being provided in all new project. Rainwater
harvesting has been provided in many existing buildings under various
zones.
3. Earthquake resistance building
Structural design of building is being done keeping in view
requirement to make the buildings earthquake resistant.
4. Constructed building to be seepage proof
Special care is being taken in workmanship during construction to
make the building leakage/water proof.
5. Integrated planning of services such a civil, Elect., water supply,
drainage, gas, communication
This mission is being taken up by calling composite tenders keeping
in view integrated services requirements.

36
6. Making building disabled friendly
The provisions for physically challenged persons are being done
in new building.
7. Max. use of green building materials
There is no identification for green materials to be used in buildings
in India. However in new building depending upon quality &
availability of same, CPWD is using energy efficient materials such as
fly ash.
8. ISO certification of CPWD & contractors
An exercise is being initiated for getting ISO certification for CPWD.
9. Conducting yearly seminar with partnership of Industry, for
efficient interactive
Interaction with builders & other technical institutions is a regular
feature. Officials from CPWD are being nominated for various seminars
being conducted by the other organizations for exposure in latest
technology & up gradation of knowledge and disseminating information
to other.
10. Developing a proper e-governance solution for its vast
organization
With introduction of PIMS, Web hosting, the CPWD has already
entered in the era of e-governance of human resources implementation
in CPWD.
Regarding e-governance solution a proposal has been initiated for
implementing an ERP solution in the Department.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2,
Dated: 11th May, 2007]

37
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Non-maintenance of complaints Books as Kurnool (AP), GPRA
Recommendation (Para No. 2.36)
The Committee are amazed to find that in the residential quarters
at Kurnool in Andhra Pradesh, no Complaint Book was available at
the Service Centre earmarked for CPWD. In this regard, the Ministry
have stated that CPWD could not pay attention towards maintenance
of the Central Excise Quarters at Kurnool, because, there is no regular
establishment of CPWD at Kurnool in the vicinity of the area. Also,
‘Complaint Book’ has now been proposed to be maintained with the
Welfare Office/Care-taker of the client department and that too perhaps
only at the intervention of the Committee. The Committee take serious
note of the lackadaisical manner in which CPWD has reacted towards
non-keeping of Complaint Books for registering of complaints by the
users of these residential units. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that proper Complaint Books must be kept and maintained in all the
residential units under the supervision and control of CPWD in the
country. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in
this matter. The CPWD should also have a regular establishment at
Kurnool to give better, timely and effective service.
Reply of the Government
Central Excise quarters of Kurnool are under the charge of the
said department. The maintenance of these quarters has been assigned
to CPWD. The complaints which are received are attended to promptly .
Appropriate arrangement has been made with the Central Excise
Department at Kurnool to receive complaints through complaint register
as well as complaint box available with the Welfare officer of the
client department. These complaints are taken up and attended to
promptly by the CPWD staff.
The complaint registers are also being maintained in all service
centers of CPWD and these are being monitored by field officers of
CPWD. Instructions have again been issued to field officers to continue

38
to ensure that complaint registers are maintained in all residential
units under control and supervision of CPWD in the country.
Regarding posting of regular establishment at Kurnool, it is stated
that there is shortage of JEs in the department. Efforts will be made
to get JE posted at Kurnool as and when availability of JEs improves
in the department.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2,
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Removal of encroachments in CPWD complexes
Recommendation (Para No. 2.38)
Another major issue which has come to the notice of the Committee
is the encroachment by slum dwellers in residential premises of CPWD
at Aram Bagh area and encroachments in the R.K. Puram area by the
so called ‘Sarswati Camp Jhuggies’ in Delhi. As regards, the Jhuggies
at Aram Bagh, the Committee are informed that CPWD has paid
Rs. 13,29,000/- to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) for
removal of these slums. The Committee strongly recommend that all
out and earnest efforts must be made by CPWD to persuade the ULB
concerned to remove the encroachments by slum dwellers immediately
in the vicinity and inside the residential areas under CPWD. The
Committee note that there is acute shortage of water supply in Aram
Bagh CPWD area and the booster pumps are not in working order.
There have been frequent power failures as there is no dedicated
separate electricity supply arrangements for the residential area and
the existing arrangements are linked with electricity supply to the
commercial areas of adjoining Paharganj area. The Committee would
like to know about the outcome of the efforts made by CPWD in the
aforesaid cases.
Reply of the Government
Regarding the encroachments in R.K. Puram area of ‘Saraswati
Camp Jhuggies’, the survey of the area has been conducted by L&DO
and MCD slum wing for relocation of slums but so far estimate for
relocation has not been received from MCD.
Regarding encroachment in Aram Bagh area payment of Rs. 13.29 lacs
for removal of Jhuggies has been made to MCD slum wing, however,
action for resettlement of Jhuggi dwellers is still awaited from M.C.D.
Efforts are being made to persuade MCD in this regard.

39
Regarding acute shortage of water supply in Aram Bagh, Delhi Jal
Board has been approached for increasing the water supply but they
have shown in ability to do so due to its over all shortage. However
individual PVC tanks have been provided in place of brick tanks to
avoid leakage and seepage and this has improved the situation to
certain extent.
Frequent disruption in power supply in Aram Bagh Colony is due
to single 11 KVA feeder feeding the residential colony as well as
commercial areas of Paharganj etc. due to which during overloading/
breakdown/load shedding in commercial areas, the power supply to
the residential area also gets disconnected. BSES Yamuna Pvt. Ltd.
have been requested to provide separate 11 KVA feeder for exclusively
feeding Aram Bagh Residential Colony to avoid frequent disruption of
electric supply.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Calling of tenders for works
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15)
The Committee note that CPWD carries out most of the ‘Major
Projects’ of buildings through calling of ‘Tenders’ for the construction
works. The ‘Architectural & Designing’ aspect of the buildings are
carried out by technically qualified personnel of the CPWD. The
Committee also note that the Charter of CPWD specified categorically
that the awarding of contract must be in a transparent manner and in
the best interest of the Government by ensuring maintenance of all
round integrity as well as best possible standards and adequate
supervision by the Department. While the Committee are satisfied to
learn that well laid out procedures are followed in the calling of tenders
and the work rates awarded are based on prevailing market rates of
material and labour’ they, however, stress that sincere and concerted
efforts should be made to review and upgrade the process of calling
of tenders from time to time by the CPWD by forming an internal
‘Review Committee’ in order to keep pace with the changing arts and
architectural designs and ensuring transparency at the same time. Since
there are other private players in the building industry doing yeomen
services to construction industry, the Committee are of the firm view
that CPWD also should make proper and timely efforts for
standardization of its new buildings with the latest architectural designs
in a cost-effective manner. The Committee may be apprised about the
steps taken in this direction.

40
Reply of the Government
The review and upgrading the process of calling tenders is being
done from time to time. At present, a committee headed by ADG
(Border) is reviewing the different provisions of CPWD Works Manual,
which includes the tendering process also. These issues are deliberated
regularly in the forums like Senior Officers Conference & Technical
Board etc. Based on its long experience in the field of execution of
works and the deliberations at various levels in the department as
well as the recommendations of various working groups and
committees formed by Ministry of UD, Planning Commission etc., the
department is constantly reviewing the system of tendering and
updating the same.
Further, work on tendering process through internet i.e. E-tendering
has already been taken up by a Committee headed by DG (W), CPWD.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Abolition of posts in CPWD and Cadre Review for Draftsmen
Recommendation (Para No. 4.24)
The Committee note that the Expenditures Reforms Committee of
the Government had examined the working of CPWD and it gave
recommendations for rationalization of the working of the department.
It recommended abolition of 600 posts out of about 1275 sanctioned
posts of ‘Draftsmen’ in CPWD. In this regard, the Ministry have
explained that in view of the changing technologies being used in
CPWD in preparation of drawings etc., it was felt that the working of
CPWD will not be affected if the number of posts of ‘Draftsmen’ are
reduced. The Committee are, however, not satisfied by the above stated
reasoning of the Ministry for reducing the posts of ‘Draftsmen’. The
Committee are of the firm opinion that the CPWD has well established
training institutions and instead of resorting to reduction in posts of
‘Draftsmen’, it must impart the State-of-the-art/latest technological
knowledge and training to these ‘Draftsmen’, for utilizing their services
fruitfully. The Committee are informed that CPWD has requested the
Ministry of Urban Development to reconsider the issue and undertake
the ‘Cadre Review’ of Draftsmen in CPWD which is under examination.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the ‘Cadre Review’ of
Draftsmen must be carried out by a high level internal ‘Review
Committee’ so that the judicious claims of the Draftsmen of CPWD
are met by the Government in a time-bound manner. The Committee
may be apprised about the latest position in the matter.

41
Reply of the Government
Consequent to the setting up of the 6th Central Pay Commission
of the Government, the Ministry of Finance has vide its O.M. No. 5/
16/2006-E.III. A dated 21.12.2006 directed that all issues relating to
Cadre Review etc. must be referred to the Pay Commission. The
concerned service association representing the Draftsmen has made a
representation to the Pay Commission.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Cadre Review for Engineering Staff
Recommendation (Para No. 4.25)
In respect of the ‘Cadre Review’ of Junior Engineers (JE)/Assistant
Engineers (AEs) and Executive Engineers (EEs), the Committee note
that the ‘Cadre-Review’ proposals for different grades in the department
for Group ‘A’ Officers have been framed and are under consideration
of the Ministry of Urban Development. The Committee are amazed to
note that almost 47% of the posts of Executive Engineers (EEs) have
been lying vacant in CPWD. These vacancies have piled-up mainly
due to pending litigations before various courts of law. It has been
informed that in July 1999, as per the decision of the Ministry of
Urban Development, Department of Personnel and Training (DOPT)
and UPSC, the backlog of 550 unfilled vacancies in grade of EE (Civil
and Electrical) as per Recruitment Rules, 1954 had been diverted from
the Quota of Class-I (Direct Recruit) Assistant Executive Engineers (Civil
and Electrical) to quota of Assistant Engineers (Civil and Electrical).
Accordingly, based on DPC, only 412 officers had been recommended
for promotion in the Civil and electrical sides on 3rd November, 1999.
However, the Class-I officers Association challenged this action of the
Department before the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) and in
the High Court of Delhi. Hence, the vacancies in EE (Civil and
Electrical) could not be filled up since 1999 due to pendency of
litigations. Lately, the High Court of Delhi vide its order dated 31.3.2006
has allowed the department to make ad hoc appointments in EEs grades
against 313 vacancies and 118 vacancies in EE (Civil) and EE (Electrical),
respectively, under the Recruitment Rules, 1996. Accordingly, ad hoc
appointments of 278 Officers in EE (Civil) and 89 Officers in EE
(Electrical) have been made in the April-May, 2006 by CPWD.

42
Reply of the Government
The Hon’ble Committee has noted that the ‘Cadre Review’
proposals for different grades in the department for Group ‘A’ officers
are under consideration of the Ministry of Urban Development. The
Hon’ble Committee has also noted that a large number of post of
Executive Engineers had been laying vacant in CPWD due to pending
litigations before various courts of law and 550 unfilled vacancies in
the grade of EE (Civil & Electrical) had been diverted from the quota
of Class-I (Direct recruit) AEE to quota of AE and therefore only
412 officers were recommended for promotions on 3rd Nov.’1999 and
this action was challenged by Class-I Association in courts of law and
lately the High Court of Delhi allowed ad hoc promotion to the posts
of EE on 31.3.2006 and adhoc appointments have been made in Apr.-
May 2006 by CPWD.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Delay in Execution of Projects in West Bengal
Recommendation (Para No. 5.10)
The Committee would like to point out that due to inordinate
delays in construction of the CPWD Residential Complex at Kolkata,
CPWD incurred an avoidable expenditure of Rs. 1.65 crore. Also that
the C&AG of India has pointed out slackness in enforcing contractual
provisions and completion of works in the Indo-Bangla Border Road
in Cooch Behar district of West Bengal. This delay in Indo-Bangla
Border Road has resulted in extra expenditure of Rs. 18.45 lakh and
loss of Rs. 18.85 lakh towards non-recovery of dues. The Committee
express their deep concern on the aforesaid matter and recommend
that proper corrective action must be taken by CPWD’s Senior Officials
on a regular and timely basis so that such avoidable extra expenditure
is not incurred in future in CPWD projects. The Committee may be
apprised about the action taken in this direction with two months of
presentation of this Report to the House.
Reply of the Government
Regarding inordinate delay in construction of the General Pool
Residential complex at Iron side road Kolkata, the delays were initially
due to delay in receipt of sanction and writ petition filed by one of
the agency during pre-qualification and delay in approval of plans by
KMC. The unavoidable expenditure pointed out by C&AG included

43
Rs. 30.20 lacs paid for escalation, Rs. 28.68 lacs paid as revision fee for
plans to KMC and Rs. 1.05 crore as loss of license fee and HRA due
to delay in completion of works. There has not been any delay on the
part of CPWD and the amount as spent for payment of escalation was
in terms & condition of the contract, the payment made to KMC was
for sanction fee to be paid as per rules & regulations of KMC and
there has not been any loss of Rs. 1.06 crore by way of HRA/license
fee due to lapses on the part of CPWD which was worked out on
hypothetical assumption by the Audit.
Regarding the extra expenditure of Rs. 18.45 lacs and loss of
Rs. 18.85 lacs towards non-recovery of dues in the works in the Indo-
Bangla Border Road in Cooch Behar district of West Bengal as pointed
out by C&AG, the delay in the completion of works was because only
part of the site could be handed over initially for construction due to
non-payment of land compensation to land losers and hindrance created
by residents of the area. Due to this the work had to be executed in
parts in available land/area. Due to this the progress of the works
was slow and ultimately the work had to be rescinded, which resulted
in the extra expenditure. The amount which has become due from the
contractor is being recovered through arbitration case which is in
progress.
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee for taking corrective
action in future by Senior Officers to avoid the situation of extra
expenditure due to extra delay has been noted for compliance.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]

44
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10)
The Committee note that the CPWD’s Charter clearly demarcates
that for both the residential as well as non-residential buildings periodic
and day-to-day repair and maintenance works may be undertaken for
ensuring habitability and aesthetic of buildings constructed by CPWD.
However, in response to their Press Communiques the Committee
received several complaints from the users of the residential buildings/
accommodations about lack of proper and timely maintenance and
repair works by CPWD authorities in various residential areas. The
Committee, therefore, felt it expedient to undertake an on-the-sport-
study visit to the Vasant Vihar Residential Complex, New Delhi in
order to gather first hand information in this matter. Accordingly, the
Committee visited the above stated Complex on 21st September, 2005
and physically inspected these quarters and held discussions with the
users of these quarters and the Residential Welfare Association (RWA)
of the area. The Committee were surprised to find the exposed iron-
rods coming out of the roofs of these residential buildings and hunks
of cement falling from the roofs and the shabby look of these buildings.
Reply of the Government
Regarding complaints of lack of proper and timely maintenance
and repair works by CPWD received by Hon’ble Committee, it is
submitted that Day to Day and periodic repair and maintenance works
are undertaken by CPWD for ensuring habitability and to maintain
and improve the aesthetic of buildings. For this, time frame for
attending different type of complaints has been specified:
(i) Complaints pertaining to electrical discipline, plumbing
services and drainage system, is to be attended within
24 hours.
(ii) Minor complaints relating to the trades of Mason and
Carpenter are attended within 48 hours.
(iii) Complaints requiring replacement of fixtures and fittings,
which exercise is normally done through contracts, are
monitored separately through Major Complaint Registers.

45
Action is periodically taken by consolidating major complaints.
Annual Action Plan of maintenance is also prepared in which all such
items are included.
The Construction of Vasant Vihar Complex which was inspected
by Hon’ble Committee was completed by CPWD between 1986 to
1991. The old structures were giving dilapidated look. The dilapidated
look of the houses was due to exposure of reinforcement due to
disintegration and falling of plaster due to corrosion of reinforcement
because of weathering effect. Action has been taken to rehabilitate
these distressed structures in phases as per details given in reply to
Para 2.11 below so as to improve the condition of flats in this complex.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)
Regarding the repair works in the Vasant Vihar Complex, the
Director General, CPWD has assured during the course of oral evidence
before the Committee that all repair works in this complex will be
completed in the present financial year i.e. 2006-2007. The Committee
therefore, strongly recommend that all repair and maintenance works
at the Vasant Vihar Residential Complex must be completed by CPWD
within this financial year, as assured by them to the Committee. The
Committee also recommend that senior CPWD officials must properly
coordinate with the concerned RWA so as to ensure appropriate repair
and maintenance works in the complex i.e. up to the satisfaction of
the users of these residential quarters. The Committee also recommend
that suitable external finishing or face-lift must be given to these
residential buildings which should be of permanent nature. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken in the
matter within two months of presentation of this Report to the House.
Reply of the Government
As explained in para 2.10 above efforts are being made to improve
the condition of flats in Vasant Vihar Complex. For this, the work of
repair and rehabilitation and repair of damaged external surface of
quarters was taken up in two Phases. Most of (about 90%) rehabilitation
work of RCC structures by short-creating has been completed under

46
Phase-I. Part of work under Phase-II only could be completed upto
March’07. The remaining works under Phase-II could not be completed
by end of March, 2007 due to ground difficulties such as delay in
availability of occupied quarters as per the convenience of the occupants
and shortage of cement etc. The work is now likely to be completed
by September, 2007.
Regarding co-ordination meeting with RWA, Regular monthly
meetings are being held between Executive Engineer, AE & JE and the
local RWA officer bearers. Efforts are made to attend to the problems/
issues pointed out and discussed during the meeting.
Regarding permanent finish of external surface, estimates for the
same are being prepared and the work will be taken up during the
current financial year 2007-08.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
The residents of the Vasant Vihar Complex have further brought
to the notice of the Committee the following points:—
(i) A Shopping Complex had been built by CPWD in the area.
It is dysfunctional but it is occupied by unauthorized
persons.
(ii) There is acute shortage of water supply in the Residential
Complex.
As regards encroachment of the Shopping Complex, the Committee
recommend that suitable coordinative measures must be taken by the
Ministry of Urban Development and CPWD with the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi/other Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) so as to remove
unauthorized occupation in the said Shopping Complex. The Committee
also recommend that appropriate steps must be taken for allotment of
shops and opening-up of proper consumer goods shops in the Shopping
Complex for the use of the residents of the Vasant Vihar government
residential complex.
Reply of the Government
At present there is no encroachment in the main shopping complex
at the Vasant Vihar.

47
Regarding shortage of water supply in the area, several
communications have been addressed to Delhi Jal Board for getting
sufficient quantity of water. The RWAs of the area are also pursuing
the matter with DJB. During a meeting held at the residence of
Smt. Barkha Singh, Hon’ble MLA of the area, on 17th Oct’06 also
which was attended by Delhi Jal Board and CPWD officers, it was
requested to them to take necessary action for supply of additional
water to the complex in view of additional water being available with
DJB from Sarita Vihar treatment plant. Subsequently also matter was
taken up with DJB but no additional water has been given to the
complex so far.
Regarding allotment of shops and opening of consumer goods
stores etc. in Vasant Vihar Shopping Complex, the shops in this complex
have been transferred to MCD as per Cabinet decision of Oct’2005
and Gazette notification issued by Land and Development Office. The
matter therefore pertains to MCD.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)
Regarding the shortage of water supply in the aforesaid area, the
Ministry have stated that since the campus of Vasant Vihar is located
at the tail end of the Delhi Jal Board‘s (DJB) supply, the availability of
water is very less. The Ministry have also stated that the DJB is
primarily responsible for ensuring is very less. The Ministry have also
stated that the DJB is primarily responsible for ensuring adequate water
supply but it has been supplying only 10 to 15% of the total
requirement of water of this Complex. In order to deal with the
shortage of water supply, CPWD had tried re-boring of old tube wells
and increasing the depth of existing tube wells in the area, but all this
had improved the yield of water only marginally. In August 2005,
CPWD also got new tube wells bored after approval of the Central
Ground Water Authority (CGWB) and these tube wells gave the yield
of about 2 KL per hour. Two additional tube wells have also been
sanctioned by CGWB and financial sanction for the same is being
obtained by CPWD. However, the Ministry have informed that as the
water table of the area has receded and the yield from existing tube
wells has been unviable, this project has been abandoned. They have,

48
finally, stated that at present, about 70 to 80 KL of water supply per
day is being pumped into the Sump through tube wells and
supplemented by the DJB Water Tankers supply to mitigate the water
shortage of the Residential Complex.
Reply of the Government
The Hon’ble Committee have noted the steps taken by CPWD to
deal with the shortage of water supplied by Delhi Jal Board in Vasant
Vihar area by supplementing the shortage partly through tube wells
and balance through water tankers.
CPWD Officers are continuing their efforts to pursue with DJB in
getting more water supply. However to augment shortage of water
supply CPWD is making efforts by arranging water through tankers
from DJB and from private sources. The water arranged through tankers
is added to the water received in the under ground tank through DJB
supply line and then it is pumped to overhead tank to be supplied to
houses by gravity through existing pipe line system. However there is
still over all shortage of water supply even after augmenting supply
through tankers.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14)
While the Committee express their serious concern over the acute
shortage of water supply in the Vasant Vihar Residential Complex of
CPWD, they are not at all convinced that the availability of water is
less because this campus is located at the tail end of the Delhi Jal
Board (DJB) supply. The Committee are of the firm view that CPWD
and DJB are duty bound to find a permanent solution to the water
crisis in the area and provide the much-needed water supply at the
Vasant Vihar Residential Complex. The Committee strongly recommend
that concerted efforts must be made by the Ministry of Urban
Development/CPWD to persuade the DJB to lay down adequate pipe
lines and build water tanks by taking the required financial sanction
for the same so as to provide adequate and regular DJB water supply
to the aforesaid residential complex. The recent availability of water
from Sonia Vihar Water Works should be suitably made use of to

49
augment the water supply to the colony. The Committee may be
apprised about the action taken in this regard within two months of
presentation of this Report to the House.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has expressed serious concern about shortage of
water supply and have expressed the view that CPWD and Delhi Jal
Board should find a permanent solution to water crisis in the area.
In this regard, several communications have been addressed to
Delhi Jal Board for getting sufficient quantity of water. The RWAs of
the area are also pursuing the matter with DJB. During a meeting
held at the residence of Smt. Barkha Singh, Hon’ble MLA of the area
on 17th Oct’-06 also which was attended by Delhi Jal Board and CPWD
officers, it was requested to them to take necessary action for supply
of additional water to the complex in view of additional water being
available with DJB from Sarita Vihar treatment plant. Subsequently
also matter was taken up with DJB but no additional water has been
given to the complex so far.
CPWD Officers are continuing their efforts to pursue with DJB in
getting more water supply. However to augment shortage of water
supply CPWD is making efforts by arranging water through tankers
from DJB and from private sources. The arranged through tankers is
added to the water received in the under ground tank through DJB
supply line and then it is pumped to overhead tank to be supplied to
houses by gravity through existing pipe line system. However there is
still overall shortage of water supply even after augmenting supply
through tankers.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report)
Appearance of cracks at the Central Institute of Buddhist Studies
buildings
Recommendation (Para No. 3.17)
Further, the Committee found that superficial cracks had appeared
in the structures already completed at the Central Institute of Buddhist
Studies, Choglamsar, Leh. The Committee take a serious note of this
fact and recommend that proper safeguards and protective measures

50
are taken to remove such cracks on the buildings and make them
earthquake resistant, as Leh falls under the high seismic zone. The
Committee may be kept informed about the steps taken in this
direction.
Reply of the Government
The superficial cracks observed by the Hon’ble Committee in the
buildings completed at Central Institute of Buddhist Studies were due
to abnormal change in temperature in Leh. During winter the variation
in temperature takes place from below 0° C i.e. upto -30° C to
substantial degree above 0° C i.e. upto +25° C. These cracks have
since been repaired.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 26 of Chapter I of the Report)
Ban on recruitment in CPWD
Recommendation (Para No. 4.20)
The Committee note that due to ban in the recruitment of workers
since 1985 there has been a continuous decline in the strength of work
charged staff of all categories due to retirement etc. in CPWD. To cope
up with shortage of staff, the maintenance of available works charged
staff, is being supplemented by carrying out work at locations through
contracts. Therefore, the CPWD officers have been forced to recruit
workers on casual basis after the ban on recruitment in the department.
Reply of the Government
The Hon’ble Committee has noted the continuous decline in the
strength of CPWD work charged staff due to ban on recruitment of
workers since 1985. The Hon’ble Committee has also noted that to
cope up with shortage of staff the maintenance works are being
supplemented by carrying out through contracts and recruitment of
workers through contracts.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter I of the Report)

51
Recommendation (Para No. 4.21)
The Committee express their deep concern over the fact that a
complete ban on recruitments had been imposed by Government
including the deployment of daily-rated muster roll/hand-receipt
workers w.e.f. 19.11.1985 in CPWD. Besides this, the Government and
the Central Advisory Contract Labour Board further imposed a ban
on employment of Contract labourers in respect of 15 categories w.e.f.
31.07.2002, which contained the categories of Air Conditioner Mechanic,
Air Conditioner Operators, Air Conditioner Khalasi/Helper, Electrician,
Wiremen, Khalasi (Electrical), Carpenter, Mason, Fitter, Plumber,
Helper/Beldar, Mechanic, Sewer-man, Sweeper and Foreman.
Reply of the Government
The Hon’ble Committee has expressed concern over the ban on
recruitments and deployment of daily-rated muster roll/hand-receipt
workers w.e.f. 19.11.1985 in CPWD, besides ban imposed by contract
labour board in respect of 15 categories of contract labourers.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)
The Committee need hardly emphasize that the aforesaid bans in
employing labour force in CPWD including work charged workers
and contract labourers has had an adverse impact on the efficiency
and working of CPWD. The Committee note that the Employees Union
of this Department have approached the courts of law and a number
of court cases field by the grieving employees are still pending before
the Courts, thereby, involving the CPWD management in unfruitful
works. The Committee are concerned about the damaging effects of
these recruitment bans on the efficient functioning of CPWD. The
Committee recommend that this matter should be reviewed in-depth
in order to restore and maintain the expertise of the CPWD trained
personnel in various construction technologies by employing/promoting
the original workers of CPWD rather than resorting to the hired or
contract workers in various fields. The Committee, therefore, strongly
feel that conscious and concerted efforts have to be made by
Government to explore the feasibility of employing and recruitment of

52
adequate number of workforce in CPWD in future. Steps in this regard
should be taken urgently.
Reply of the Government
The Hon’ble Committee has noted that the ban in employing
labourers in CPWD including work charged workers and contract
labourers has had an adverse impact on the efficiency of working of
CPWD. The Hon’ble Committee has also noted that the various unions
representing the workers have approached the Courts of Law and
filed numerous court cases, thus, involving the CPWD management in
unfruitful work. The Committee has expressed concern about damaging
effect of these bans on the efficient functioning of CPWD. The
Committee has recommended that the matter should be reviewed in
order to maintain the expertise of the CPWD trained personnel in
various construction technologies by employing/promoting the original
workers in various fields. The Committee has recommended that the
Government should explore the feasibility of employing and recruitment
of adequate number of workforce in CPWD in future. In this regard,
it may be mentioned that the recruitment, to fill in various vacancies,
is carried out as per the guidelines issued by the Government from
time to time. The nature of the job, which CPWD carries out,
necessitates a correct mix of contract of departmental workers. A
balance in this regard has to be maintained. It has been felt that contract
workers, who are skilled in more trades than one, can perform some
maintenance operations more efficiently and economically. However,
in sensitive areas it is necessary to have regular departmental workers.
To this extent, the CPWD is utilizing the resources presently available
and supplement these through maintenance contracts. The skill sets
available with the departmental workers are being upgraded through
regular training progrmmes in collaboration with IGNOU and CIDC.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter I of the Report)
Ban on Direct Recruitment
Recommendation (Para No. 4.23)
The Committee also note that the Ministry of Finance vide its O.M.
dated 5th August, 1999 had imposed a ban on filling up of the posts
in the Direct Recruitment Quota. Until recently, the screening Committee
vide its communication dated 22nd February, 2006 had also not given

53
permission to fill-up the vacant posts borne on the work-charged
establishment of CPWD and it abolished all the 178 vacant posts of
work-charged staff of CPWD for the year 2004-2005. The Committee
are informed that the work-charged staff of CPWD are regular
employees of CPWD in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ and their salaries are charged
to the ‘Account Head’ of maintenance and not the ‘Account Head’ for
salaries of the Government of India. Hence, from the above it may be
seen that 178 vacant and regular posts had been abolished in CPWD
by Government. The Committee take a serious view of the above facts
and stand-by the cause of the aspiring candidates for employment in
CPWD. The Committee feel that engineering graduates must get an
opportunity to serve in CPWD and help in the growth of this
organization and recommend that the process of recruitment should
be reviewed to filling various vacant posts.
Reply of the Government
Recruitment in CPWD to fill the vacant post through Direct
Recruitment is carried out as per existing guidelines issued by the
Government of India as applicable from time-to-time. It has always
been the endeavour of the Department to recruit the correct mix of
engineers and other staff against the number of vacancies approved to
be filled in by the Government. It is also a fact that the reduction in
the overall strength of the department, as per guidelines of the
Government, has a direct impact on the functioning of the organisation.
We are of the view that functional organisations should be allowed to
maintain the desired strength so that they can perform their roles
effectively. Recommendations of the Committee to review the process
of recruitment for filling in the various vacant posts in CPWD has
been noted and the matter will be taken up with the Ministry of
Finance and DoPT. In so far as recruitment of Engineering Graduates,
it is mentioned they are recruited at the level of AEE through the
Combined Engineering Services Examination conducted by UPSC. The
minimum qualification for JE, recruited in the CPWD, is a diploma in
the concerned branch of engineering. However, many engineering
graduates also enter the department as JE.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2,
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter-I of the Report)

54
Delay in execution of works and costs overrun
Recommendation (Para No. 5.9)
The Committee have received a number of complaints about delays
in execution of maintenance as well as construction works of CPWD
carried out through Contractors. The Ministry have stated that the
delays in execution/completion of works/projects are due to delays in
preparation of preliminary estimates and preliminary drawings by
CPWD; delay in final approval to preliminary drawings and estimates
by client departments; non-release of adequate and timely funds by
the client departments; delay in approval of plans by concerned local
bodies; shortage or non-availability of critical materials like cement,
steel, labour etc.; non-performance or slow performance by executing
agency; large scale changes in the original proposal by client
department necessitating closure/modification of Contracts; delay in
grant of utility connections like water supply electricity etc. and
encroachments of site of work and thus not made available to the
client. While the Committee note that certain practical difficulties are
faced by CPWD in getting the works through their registered
Contractors, they expressed their deep concern over the fact that such
delays in execution/completion of projects/works would entail
unwanted and avoidable cost over-runs. The Committee, therefore,
desire that a high level ‘Review Committee’ must be constituted by
the Government so as to find out the proper via-media to ensure
timely and proper execution of workers by the Contractors.
Reply of the Government
The working of CPWD has been reviewed by a number of
committees including independent management experts and a number
of recommendations have been made to improve the working of the
department. All the experts have noted that there are various reasons
due to which projects get delayed resulting in cost overruns. It has
also been noted by the experts that most of the reasons for delay are
outside the control/purview of CPWD. For such reasons, no action
can be taken by the CPWD. In respect of delay in execution of works
by contracts, no escalation is paid to them by the CPWD and in fact
the contractors are penalized for the delays as per the contract
conditions.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2,
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 32 of Chapter-I of the Report)

55
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Posting of full time JE (Electrical) at the Enquiry Office
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee by the residents
of the Vasant Vihar Complex that no full time JE (Electrical) has been
posted at the CPWD Enquiry Office in their complex and mostly the
CPWD officials are not present to attend to the daily complaints of
the residents. The Committee, therefore, recommend that suitable
disciplinary action must be taken against the officials absenting
themselves from the Enquiry Office of the Complex and ensure prompt
handling of the complaints of the residents. The Committee also desire
that a suitable full time JE (Electrical) may be posted at the said CPWD
Enquiry Office for handling complaints.
Reply of the Government
Regarding posting of full time JE (Elect.) in the Vasant Vihar
complex, it is stated that there shortage of JEs in the department.
Efforts will be made to get JE (E) posted at the complex as and when
availability of JEs improves in the department.
For attending to daily complaints of the residents, JE (E) and AE
(E) have been asked to be available in the complex in the morning
hours.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2,
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.26)
While the Committee are happy to note that with the intervention
of the High Court of Delhi 278 EE (Civil) and 89 EE (Electrical) have
been given ad hoc promotion, the Committee feel that this step may

56
resolve only a pint of the ocean of problems being faced by the well-
qualified engineers in their carrier progression in the services of CPWD.
The Committee recommend that a comprehensive ‘Cadre Review’ must
be carried out by the Ministry of Urban Development so as to give
assured career progression to the Technically qualified and experienced
personnel of CPWD.
Reply of the Government
Consequent to the setting up of the 6th Central Pay Commission
of the Government, the proposal for Cadre Review of the Group ‘A’
Services in CPWD has been forwarded to the Pay Commission for its
consideration.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2,
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Out-Sourcing of works and Pilot Project in Delhi
Recommendation (Para No. 5.5)
The Committee note that a ‘Review Committee’ headed by
Shri Nitin Gadkari and a private consultant namely M/s ICRA consultants
appointed to study the working of CPWD, have recommended
outsourcing of maintenance operations of CPWD by inviting private
players in such works. The Committee are also informed that
maintenance activities have been outsourced by CPWD itself, in various
other stations of the country, except, Delhi. For outsourcing of
maintenance works in residential colonies on ‘Pilot‘ basis, seven colonies
have been presently selected by CPWD. The Ministry have assured
the Committee in this regard that in this new system of outsourcing,
the entire responsibility will continue to rest with CPWD but the actual
works including receiving, distribution and attending to complaints
will be done by the selected private agency. During the course of oral
evidence, Secretary , Ministry of Urban Development has stated before
the Committee that if it ( i.e. maintenance outsourcing works) improves
the quality of maintenance of CPWD then it is worth trying. The
Committee, however, strongly feel that outsourcing of maintenance
activities by CPWD would not perhaps bring any sea change in the
quality of performance in maintenance of the CPWD residential
complexes unless and until the CPWD officials are involved at the

57
ground level of these activities to properly supervise the maintenance
works. The Committee desire that a close watch must be kept by
senior CPWD Engineers upon the aforesaid ‘Pilot Project’ of outsourced
maintenance in seven complexes in Delhi. The Committee would like
to be apprised abut the outcome of the ‘Pilot Project’ and the latest
developments in this matter within two months of submission of the
Report.
The Committee also desire that a comprehensive review or
evaluation must be carried out on the effectiveness of the aforesaid
‘Pilot Project’ with active involvement of the residents and the
Residential Welfare Association (RWAs) of these seven CPWD colonies.
The Evaluation Report of the ‘Pilot Project’ must be submitted to the
Committee in a specific time-frame.
Reply of the Government
The performance of the Service Centres, which are being outsourced
for maintenance activity is being regularly reviewed by senior officers
of the CPWD. So far review indicates that the performance is quite
satisfactory. A comprehensive review is being carried out and a detailed
report will be sent for consideration of the Committee.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. 19011/02/2003/W2,
Dated: 11th May, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
6 September, 2007 Chairman,
15 Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban
Development.

58
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 30TH AUGUST, 2007
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in the Chairman’s
Chamber Room No. 119, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
3. Shri Kailash Joshi
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
7. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
8. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
9. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
10. Shri Manohar Joshi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Saxena — Director
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Harchain — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to
the sitting of the Committee. The Committee first took up for
consideration the draft report on Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the

59
Committee on the subject Central Public Works Department (CPWD).
After some deliberation, the Committee adopted the draft report
without any modification.
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft
report on the subject “Directorate of Estates”. Members suggested
certain minor changes/modifications to the draft report. The Committee
then adopted the draft report with those modifications.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise both
the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Ministries and present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

60
APPENDIX II
[vide para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN
DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 36
II. Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government: 16
Para Nos. 2.15, 2.33, 2.34, 2.35, 2.37, 2.39, 2.40,
3.16, 3.18, 4.27, 5.7, 5.12, 5.15, 5.18, 5.21 and 5.23
Percentage to total recommendations (44.44%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not 6
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 2.36, 2.38, 3.15, 4.24, 4.25, 5.10
Percentage to total recommendations (16.66%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para Nos. 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 3.17, 4.20, 11
4.21, 4.22, 4.23 and 5.9
Percentage to total recommendations (30.55%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final 3
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.16, 4.26 and 5.5
Percentage to total recommendations (8.33%)

TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
CENTRAL PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT (CPWD)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Standing
Committee on Urban Development]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 6.9.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 6.9.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
September, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 24
Price : Rs. 68.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 20
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 37
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee ........................................................... 44
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 55
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the second sitting of the Committee held
on 30.8.2007 .............................................................................. 58
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in Seventeenth Report
of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) .................................. 60
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
5. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
6. Shri Anant Gudhe
7. Shri Pushp Jain
8. Shri Kailash Joshi
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar
10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
12. Shri A.K. Moorthy
13. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
14. Shri L. Rajagopal
15. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Papu Yadav
16. Shri D. Vittal Rao
17. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
18. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
19. Shri Jagdish Tytler
20. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
21. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
27. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
28. Shri Penumalli Madhu
29. Shri Mukul Roy
30. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
31. Shri Manohar Joshi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S. Balshekar — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Saxena — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Harchain — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2007-08) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Twenty-Fourth Report on the Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Seventeenth Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development on Central Public Works Department (CPWD).
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
28th November, 2006. The replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 16th May,
2007.
3. The Replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
30th August, 2007.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2007-08) is given in Appendix II.
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
6 September, 2007 Chairman,
15 Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban
Development.
(v)

24
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
CENTRAL PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT (CPWD)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Standing
Committee on Urban Development]
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
