1
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT AND
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT AND
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.8.2004
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 23.8.2004
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2004/Sravana, 1926 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory ................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Analysis of Demands for Grants for the year
2004-2005 ..................................................................... 3
CHAPTER III Urban Poverty Alleviation Programmes. ............ 8
CHAPTER IV Urban Housing. ......................................................... 44
CHAPTER V Hindustan Prefab Limited. ..................................... 49
APPENDICES
I. Plan allocation and expenditure of Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation. ............. 51
II. Statement showing brief summary of Demands for
the last five years and the percentage variations. .... 54
III. SJSRY—unspent balances with States/UTs. ................. 56
IV . Statement showing physical achievement under
SJSRY. ..................................................................................... 58
V . Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee held
on 10.8.2004 .......................................................................... 59
VI. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held
on 17.8.2004 .......................................................................... 61
VII. Statement of observations/recommendations. ............. 63

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Pushp Jain
6. Shri Sajjan Kumar
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Amitava Nandy
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
11. Shri L. Rajgopal
12. Shri D. Vittal Rao
13. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
14. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
15. Shri Rakesh Singh*
16. Shri Sugrib Singh
17. Shri K. Subbarayan
18. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
19. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
20. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
21. Shri Suresh Ganpat Wagmare
(iii)
*Ceased to be a member of this Committee w.e.f. 16.08.2004 consequent upon his
nomination to the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
24. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
25. Shri Jayantilal Barot
26. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
27. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
28. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
29. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
30. Shri Vidya Nivas Misra
31. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
4. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
5. Shrimati Neera Singh — Under Secretary

ABBREVIATIONS
ACA — Additional Central Assistance
BE — Budget Estimate
BMTPC — Building Material and Technology Promotion
Council
BPL — Below Poverty Line
CBO — Community Based Organisation
DUs — Dwelling Units
DUDA — District Urban Development Agency
DWCUA — Development of Women and Children in Urban
Areas
EWS — Economically Weaker Section
HFI — Housing Finance Institution
HPL — Hindustan Prefab Limited
HUDCO — Housing and Urban Development Corporation
IIPA — Indian Institute of Public Administration
LIG — Low Income Group
MIS — Management Information System
NGO — Non-Governmental Organisation
NHB — National Housing Bank
NP — Non Plan
NSDP — National Slum Development Programme
RE — Revised Estimate
SJSRY — Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
SUDA — State Urban Development Agency
UCs — Utilisation Certificates
UEPA — Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
UI — Urban Infrastructure
UNCHS — United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
UPA — Urban Poverty Alleviation
UTs — Union Territories
UWEP — Urban Wage Employment Programme.
(v)

(vii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the First Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-2005) of the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation.
2. Demands for Grants have been examined by the Committee
under Rule 331E (1) (a) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation on 10th August
2004.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting
held on 17th August. 2004.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation for placing
before them the requisite material and their considered views in
connection with the examination of the subject.
6. They would also like to place on record their deep sense of
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the
officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
18 August, 2004 Chairman,
27 Sravana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
1.1 The Ministry of Urban Development & Poverty Alleviation has
been bifurcated into two separate Ministries viz. Ministry of Urban
Development and the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation w.e.f. 27th May, 2004. Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation is entrusted with the responsibility of broad policy
formulation and monitoring of programmes and schemes in the areas
of housing and urban poverty alleviation. Poverty, for the most part
takes the shape of misery and deprivation among individuals and
households from security, fulfilment of survival needs and quality life.
In an environment where the poor are exploited and ignored, there is
major role for the States and its agencies including the Urban Local
Bodies (ULBs) in finer urban governance and urban development. The
Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation basically deals
with the following areas of concern:
(i) Formulation of housing policy and programme (except rural
housing), which is assigned to the Department of Rural
Development, review of the implementation of the Plan
schemes, collection and dissemination of data on housing,
building materials and techniques, general measures for
reduction of building costs and nodal responsibility for
National Housing Policy;
(ii) Human Settl ements including the United Nations
Commission for Human Settlements and International
Cooperation and Technical Assistance in the field of Housing
and Human Settlements;
(iii) Urban Development including Slum Clearance Schemes and
the Jhuggi and Jhonpri Removal Schemes. International
Cooperation and Technical Assistance in this field;
(iv) National Cooperative Housing Federation;
(v) Implementation of the specific programmes of Urban
Employment and Urban Poverty Alleviation including other
programmes evolved from time to time; and

2
(vi) All matters relating to the Housing and Urban Development
Corporation (HUDCO) other than those relating to urban
infrastructure.
1.2 The Ministry implements the above work through formulation
of appropriate policies, implementation of specific Plan programmes
of Housing and generation of employment in urban areas, and
supporting autonomous bodies for undertaking relevant programmes
and schemes.
1.3 The Planned Programmes supported by this Ministry comprise
of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes and Central Schemes. The Centrally
Sponsored Schemes are: (i) Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
(SJSRY); (ii) Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY); (iii) Integrated
Low Cost Sanitation Scheme for Liberation of Scavengers (ILCS);
(iv) National Scheme for Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers
and their dependents (NSLRS); (v) Scheme for provision of
Infrastructure facilities in displaced persons urban colonies in West
Bengal; (vi) Night Shelter Schemes; and (vii) Building Centers; The
Central Schemes are: (i) Building Materials and Technology Promotion
Council (BMPTC); (ii) National Cooperative Housing Federation
(NCHF); (iii) Central Government Employees Welfare Housing
Organization (CGEWHO); (iv) United Nations Center for Human
Settlements (UNCHS); (v) National Building Organization (NBO);
(vi) Urban Indictors Programme.
Urban Reforms Incentive Fund (URIF)
1.4 During the year 2002-2003, the Government had set up a fund
named ‘Urban Reforms Incentive Fund’ (URIF) to provide reform linked
assistance to States as part of the Central assistance to State Plan.
Consequently, in addition to Centrally Sponsored Schemes and Central
Schemes, the Ministry also administers URIF. Funds are released for
URIF as Additional Central Assistance to Annual Plan of States by
Ministry of Finance on the basis of recommendations made by the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation.
1.5 Budget of the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation comprises of one Demand for Grants, i.e. Demand No.
103-Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation.

CHAPTER II
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005)
Demand No.: 103
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
(Rs. in crore)
Revenue Capital Total
Charged — — —
Voted 530.13 311.55 841.68
2.2 The overall B.E. 2004-2005 is Rs. 841.68 crore (Gross), including
both Plan and Non-Plan. The respective provisions on the Revenue
and Capital sides are Rs. 530.13 crore and Rs. 311.55 crore respectively.
The break-up of Plan and Non-Plan provision is Rs. 830.00 crore and
Rs. 11.68 crore, respectively.
2.3 The details of financial requirements for different programmes
over the last five years is given in Appendix-I. Major Head-wise break-
up over the last five years showing the percentage variations is given
in Appendix-II.
Comparative Budget Proposals
Demand No. 103 BE 2003-04 RE 2003-04 BE 2004-05 % variation over
BE 2003-2004
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan
Revenue 347.90 7.20 387.90 7.17 523.00 7.13 50.33% -0.97%
Capital 277.10 9.79 277.10 5.00 307.00 4.55 10.79% -53.52%
Total 625.00 16.99 665.00 12.17 830.00 11.68 32.80% -31.25%
2.4 While presenting the overall position with regard to the total
Budget allocation of the Ministry during 9th and 10th Plan, the
3

4
Secretary of the Ministry stated as below:
“The Ministry comprises of only one grant, for which the total
budget allocation for 2004-05 is Rs. 841.68 crore. The 9th Plan
outlay 1997-2002 was Rs. 1685.35 crore as against this the 10th
Plan outlay is more than 3
1/2 times of the 9th Plan which is
Rs. 4,710 crore. That itself is a substantial increase. During 2003-
04, though we have only a few schemes, our expenditure was
98 percent of the final grant. During the current financial year,
four more Schemes have been added. Two of them were added
during the last year at the RE and supplementary stages. The
National Scheme for liberation of scavengers which came to us
form the Ministry of Social Justice and the Low Cost Sanitation
Scheme which was operated with the Budget provided in the UD
grant. The new Scheme for this year-resettlement of slums in
Dharavi with an initial budget of Rs. 75 crore and another small
Scheme with UNDP assistance of national strategy for urban poor
with a budget estimate of Rs. 4 crore. This is at a very initial
stage. We are yet to go into further details.”
2.5 The Ministry in the written note has stated that during 10th
Plan the Government aims for eradication of poverty and creation of
high quality gainful employment. Further, the Common Minimum
Programme of UPA Government aims at massive expansion of housing
in towns and cities with particular attention of the needs of slum
dwellers. CMP also aims to take care to provide housing to urban/
semi urban poor near to their work place. In the Budget Speech of
Finance Minister, it has been indicted that UPA Government propose
to provide 100 days employment of the bread earner in each family
at the minimum wage. With regard to the overall scenario of urban
housing and slum population in urban areas, the Ministry has furnished
the following information:
“There is housing shortage of 8.89 million units in the beginning
of Tenth Plan. Further, anticipated shortage by the end of the Tenth
Plan is likely to be 22.44 million dwelling units.”
2.6 As regards slum population, the Committee have been informed
that the population in slums which was 148.249 lakh during 1981
increased to 188.659 lakhs during 1991 and further increased to 254.811
lakhs during 2001.
2.7 Attention may be drawn towards the audit reports contained
in the C&AG Report relating to the Ministry of Urban Employment &

5
Poverty Alleviation, wherein it has been mentioned that during the
years 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 major portion of the disbursements on
Grants-in-Aids to States/UTs, capital Outlays and investments were
made in the last month of the financial year i.e. the month of March.
Since the funds were released in the fag end of the financial year to
various organizations, these allocations could not be constructively spent
during the year. C&AG commented that it was not possible to conclude
as to whether the funds were applied during the same year for the
purpose for which they were authorized.
2.8 The Committee find that under the jurisdiction of the
Ministry there are two major Schemes viz. V AMBAY and SJSRY to
tackle the problem of urban slums and to provide self-employment
to urban poor. The detailed analysis of the aforesaid Schemes has
been made in the subsequent chapters of the Report. Here the
Committee would like to note that the allocation under the two
aforesaid Schemes i.e. Rs. 280.58 crore and Rs. 103 crore during
2004-05 is not adequate. The Committee note that there are big
challenges before the Ministry in the areas of addressing various
problems relating to slum population and employment to urban poor.
They feel that the allocation of the Ministry is too meagre. The
Committee strongly recommend to the Government to provide
adequate allocation under the respective Schemes of the Ministry.
While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee would also
like that the Ministry should first of all do the proper homework
before going to the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for
higher allocation.
2.9 The Committee find that although the UPA Government has
assured 100 days wage employment to the bread earner in each family
at the minimum wage, there is no clear cut strategy on the part of
the Government to achieve the said targets. The Committee note
that one of the major employment Scheme, SJSRY is under the
jurisdiction of the Ministry. They also find that the Yojana is plagued
with various bottlenecks resulting in ineffective implementation of
the programme. While the Yojana has been dealt with in detail in
the subsequent chapter, the Committee would like to highlight that
it is high time that the Ministry revise the guidelines of the Yojana,
after consultation with the State Governments, urban local bodies
and all concerned. After doing the proper planning they should
increase the targets.
2.10 As the name of the Ministry suggests the main task of the
Ministry is to tackle the issue of urban employment. To enable the

6
Government to fulfil the promise of providing 100 days wage
employment to the bread earner in each family, the major task before
the Ministry is to have the clear-cut data of urban unemployed.
Besides in consultation with the State Governments and all the Union
Ministries concerned with providing employment in urban areas a
clear cut strategy should be chalked out so that the promises made
by the Government are translated into reality. The Committee should
be informed accordingly.
2.11 The Committee note from the Budget allocations that the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation have been
allocated an overall B.E. 2004-2005 amounting to Rs. 841.68 crore
(Gross) which includes both Plan and Non-Plan. The respective
provisions on the Revenue and capital sides are Rs. 530.13 crore and
Rs. 311.55 crore, respectively. The break-up of Plan and Non-Plan
provision is Rs. 830.00 crore and Rs. 11.68 crore, respectively. The
Committee also note that in the Revenue Section the budgetary
allocation in the Plan section in year 2003-2004 amounted to
Rs. 347.9 crore but it has increased to Rs. 523 crore in year 2004-
2005, marking almost 50.33% increase in planned allocations in the
present financial year. Certain schemes have been added to the
portfolio of the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation
as the Integrated Low Cost Sanitation scheme for Liberation of
Scavengers (ILCS) and National Scheme for Liberation and
Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their dependents (NSLRS) were
transferred from the Ministry of Urban Development and Ministry
of Social Justice and Empowerment, respectively. Further, a new
scheme for re-settlement of slums in Dharavi, Mumbai has been
launched for which a provision of Rs. 75 crore has been made in
the BE 2004-2005. Although with the addition of the said schemes,
the 50.33% increase in the Revenue Section attributes to be notional
for the required ongoing expenses. The Committee are of the firm
view that the increased allocation of funds be utilized in the right
perspective.
2.12 The Committee express their deep concern about the
continuous nature of unspent balances of funds lying with the State
Governments, which were released by the Centre for implementation
of various poverty alleviation schemes depicting the incomplete
implementation of the schemes/programmes. The Committee need
hardly emphasize that inordinate delay in release of Central share
of funds to the States gives very less time to the State Government
and ULBs for the implementation of a programme thereby defeating

7
the main purpose behind each of these poverty alleviation
programmes/schemes. The Committee, therefore strongly recommend
that comprehensive monitoring should be done at the Central level
and periodical and timely review of the functioning of the
programmes under implementation should be made by a high level
body of the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation
so as to ensure proper implementation of the schemes. The
Committee also recommend that concrete steps must be taken to
obviate incidences of rush hour spending or release of funds towards
the fag end of a financial year so that the allocated budgetary funds
are utilized constructively. The Ministry should chalk out a time-
frame regarding releases of funds under the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme of their Ministry to States/UTs.

CHAPTER III
URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION PROGRAMMES
Urban Poverty Alleviation
3.1 As per the 10th Five Year Plan document of the Planning
Commission, the number of urban unemployed in the country for
1999-2000 was 7.11 million, i.e. 7.65% of the labour force. The number
of persons living below the poverty line in urban areas is estimated
to be 67.1 million, i.e. 23.62% of the total urban population. As per the
Poverty Estimates prepared by the Planning Commission, the National
average per capita income defining the Poverty line for the urban
areas, as in 1999-2000, Rs. 454.11 per month. In order to combat poverty
in the country, the 10th Five Year Plan has targeted a reduction of
poverty ratio by 5 percentage points by 2017 and by 15 percentage
points by 2012.
3.2 In order to tackle the massive problem of unemployment/
poverty a multipronged strategy has to be formulated with more
schemes with adequate financial allocations and their effective
implementation. As per the 10th Plan document the implementation of
programme for the urban poor is beset with enormous problems. The
problem of inadequate funding has been compounded by under-
utilisation of Central funds, diversion of funds released for specific
programmes, and infructuous expenditure. Monitoring at the Central
level has been weak and ineffective. Success stories have not been
publicised or adopted on a wider scale. The understanding of the
programme, their objective and modalities relating to implementation
has been weak and superficial, leading to inaction in many areas that
are of vital concern to the urban poor. There are few master plans and
very little effort at monitoring the benefits that are expected to flow
to the target communities. In addition, there has been too much
emphasis on engineering or the works aspects of programmes without
adequate understanding of the social, psychological and other dynamics
of poverty. Many a times even the beneficiaries have not been consulted
nor given a voice in the implementation of programmes.
3.3 When asked about the success of the Government in alleviation
of poverty in realistic terms, the Ministry of Urban Employment &
Poverty Alleviation in a written note has stated that in 1993-94, the
8

9
urban poverty ratio was 32.4% and it came down to 23.6% in
1999-2000 i.e. a decrease of 8.8%. This decrease in poverty ratio can
inter-alia, be attributed to the impact and effective implementation of
the various urban poverty alleviation programmes of the Government.
3.4 Regarding this vital question of eradication of urban poverty
and the growing volume of urban unemployment in the country and
the mode to confront this misery, the Ministry of Urban Employment
& Poverty Alleviation have informed the Committee that the Ministry
of Urban Employment Poverty Alleviation is implementing an urban
poverty alleviation scheme named Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar
Yojana on all India basis. Taking into consideration the availability of
funds under the Scheme, including the unspent balances from earlier
poverty alleviation schemes, in the 10th Plan (2000-07) a target to
provide 4 lakh self employment opportunities and 5 lakh skill
upgradation opportunities to the BPL persons has been fixed. In
addition, under Wage Employment component of the Scheme, there is
a provision to provide wage employment to the BPL population.
3.5 On a question of adequacy of funds allocated for the
employment and poverty alleviation programmes including the
allocation of Rs. 830 crore for 2004-2005 for urban employment and
poverty alleviation to solve the problem urban poor in this area, the
Ministry in the written reply has stated that the allocation of Rs. 830
crore for 2004-05 is for all the schemes implemented by the Ministry
of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation and SJSRY is the urban
poverty alleviation programme and the allocated funds are inadequate
to meet the requirement of the urban poor population of 67.1 million.
3.6 The Committee note that in 1993-94, the urban poverty ratio
was 32.4% and it came down to 23.6% in 1999-2000 i.e. a decrease of
8.8%. The Committee are, however, not at all convinced by the stand
taken by the Ministry that this decrease in poverty ratio is attributed
to the impact and effective implementation of the various urban
poverty alleviation programmes of the Government as they are of
the firm view that the Government have yet to go a long way in
tackling the problem of poverty alleviation and effective
implementation of schemes/programmes earmarked for upliftment
of the urban poor population. The Committee endorse the observation
made in the 10th Plan Document that the implementation of
programmes for the urban poor is beset with enormous problems
and the problem of inadequate funding has been compounded by
under-utilisation of Central funds, diversion of funds released for

10
specific programmes, and infructuous expenditure. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that concerted efforts be made by the Central
as well as the State Governments in line with the planned objectives
of poverty eradication by way of efficient monitoring at the Central
level and involvement of State level coordinators, urban local bodies
and NGOs.
3.7 The Committee note that the Ministry’s contention is that
the funds allocated to the poverty alleviation scheme are inadequate
to meet the requirements of about 67.1 million urban poor population.
In this respect, the Committee would like to emphasize that ongoing
poverty and employment schemes should be fully and effectively
implemented at first in the States and periodic and timely monitoring
of the schemes should be carried out at Central level. The Committee
are also of the firm view that appropriate punitive measures must
be taken at the Ministerial level in cases where misuse and diversion
of funds has come to the notice. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the steps taken in this direction at the earliest.
Allocation for North-Eastern Region including Sikkim
3.8 A decision was taken by the Government of India in the year
2001 that 10% of the total budget provision for the Ministries/
Departments will be spent on the projects/schemes of development
for the North Eastern Region including Sikkim. Funds under the
provision are non-lapsable and unspent balances under this provision
in a financial year are pooled up in the non-lapsable central fund
meant for these States, and are governed by the Department of
Development of North-Eastern Region.
3.9 Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation in
concerned with the project proposals for the North-Eastern States in
the following identified areas:
(i) Housing projects (predominantly for the urban poor)
(ii) Poverty alleviation projects.
(iii) Slum improvement/upgradation projects.
Accordingly, the project proposals are invited from the State
Governments of North Eastern Region including Sikkim and considered
in the Department of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation under
the 10% lump sum provision of the Budget of the Department of
Development of North Eastern Region, placed separately for the
projects/schemes for the benefit of North Eastern Region and Sikkim.

11
3.10 Financial allocations made under the scheme for the years
2002-2003 to 2004-2005 are as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure
2002-2003 62.50 62.50 44.17
2003-2004 62.50 62.50* 51.00
2004-2005 83.00 — 1.54
*Rs. 10.50 crore re-appropriated to SJSRY and was fully utilised. Rs. 1.00 crore was
re-appropriated to VAMBAY and was fully utilised.
3.11 When asked for reasons for variations in budget estimates,
revised estimates and actual expenditure during 2002-2003, 2003-2004
and BE 2004-2005 the Ministry has stated in a written reply that during
2002-2003 at the BE stage Rs. 62.50 crore only were provided. NE
States and Sikkim had furnished their Project Proposals very late during
the year 2002-2003. On receipt of these Project Proposals, these were
got appraised through National Building Construction Corporation
(NBCC). NBCC also took some time in the appraisal of these Reports
as it involved site visits and detailed consultations with the concerned
State Government Officials. Therefore, the Ministry could released
Central funds to the Executing Agencies in the last Quarter of the
Financial year.
3.12 The Committee note that consequent to a decision taken in
2001 by the Government, 10% of the total budget provision of the
Ministries/Departments is liable to be spent for the development
projects in North Eastern States including Sikkim. The Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation also implements the
schemes/programmes related to following areas viz. (i) Housing
projects predominantly for the urban poor; (ii) Poverty alleviation
projects and (iii) Slum improvement/upgradation projects. The
financial allocations for the year 2002-2003 amounted to Rs. 62.50
crore and the Actual expenditure amounted to Rs. 44.17 crore and
for the year 2003-2004, the budget allocation amounted to Rs. 62.5
crore but the actual expenditure amounted to Rs. 51 crore. Regarding
the year 2004-2005, the budget estimate is equal to Rs. 83 crore. On
the question of under-spending and existing variations in budget
estimates, revised estimates and actual expenditure during 2002-2003
and 2003-2004, Ministry have explained that North Eastern States

12
and Sikkim had furnished their Project Proposals very late during
the year 2002-2003. On receipt of these Project Proposals, these were
got appraised through National Building Construction Corporation
(NBCC). NBCC also took some time in the appraisal of these Reports
as it involved site visits and detailed consultations with the concerned
State Government Officials. Therefore, the Ministry could release
Central funds to the Executing Agencies in the last Quarter of the
financial year. The Committee deprecate that the Central funds had
been released to the executing agencies in the last quarter of the
Financial year, thereby leaving ample possibility for incidence of
unspent balances. The Committee recommend that proper efforts
should be made by the Ministry to address the North Eastern State
Governments to expedite their submission of project proposals for
timely release of funds and concerted measures be also taken by
NBCC in the appraisal of the proposals revised from the States so
that the schemes/programmes could be implemented in a time-bound
manner.
Urban Poverty  Alleviation Programmes
1. Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY)
3.13 Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) was launched
on 01.12.1997 after subsuming the earlier three Urban Poverty
Alleviation Schemes, namely Urban Basic Services for the Poor (UBS),
Nehru Rojgar Yojana (NRY) and Prime Ministers Integrated Urban
Poverty Eradication Programme (PMIUPEP), with a view to provide
gainful employment to the urban unemployed or underemployed
through encouraging the setting up of self-employment ventures or
provision of wage employment. This programme relies on creation of
suitable community structures and delivery of inputs is through the
medium of urban local bodies and such community structure. The
SJSRY is funded on 75:25 basis between Centre and States.
3.14 This programme targets the urban poor, as those living below
the urban poverty line, as defined from time to time by the Planning
Commission.
Salient Features of SJSRY
3.15 Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) consists of two
major components, namely:
(a) The Urban Self Employment Programme (USEP)
(b) The Urban Wage Employment Programme (UWEP)

13
The Urban Self Employment Programme (USEP)
3.16 The salient features of this component are:
(i) Assistance to individual urban poor beneficiaries for setting
up gainful self-employment ventures;
(ii) Assistance to groups of urban poor women for setting up
gainful self-employment ventures. This sub-scheme has been
titled as “The Scheme for Development of Women and
Children in the Urban Areas (DWCUA)”
(iii) Training of beneficiaries, potential beneficiaries and other
persons associated with the urban employment programme
for upgradation and acquisition of vocational and
entrepreneurial skills;
(iv) Special attention is given to women, person belonging to
Scheduled Castes/Tribes, disabled persons and other such
categories as may be indicated by the Government from
time to time;
(v) The percentage of women beneficiaries under this
programme should not be less than 30%. All other conditions
being equal, women beneficiaries belonging to women-
headed household, viz. widows, divorcees, single women or
even households, where women are the sole earners, are
ranked higher in priority. SCs and STs must be benefited at
least to the extent of the proportion of their strength in
local population. A provision of 3% should be reserved for
the disabled;
(vi) There is no minimum educational qualification for
beneficiaries under this programme. However, this scheme
is not applicable to the persons educated beyond the IXth
standard;
(vii) A house-to-house survey for identification of genuine
beneficiaries is prescribed. Non-economic parameters are also
applied to the urban poor in addition to the economic
criteria for the purpose of prioritization within the BPL;
(viii) Setting up Micro-Enterprises with maximum unit cost of
Rs. 50,000 and Skill Development of beneficiaries and to
provide training and infrastructure support; and

14
(ix) Development of women and Children in Urban Areas
(DWCUA) by encouraging the women to take up Self-
Employment.
The Urban Wage Employment Programme (UWEP):
3.17 (i) This component seeks to provide wage employment to
prospective beneficiaries living below the poverty line within
the jurisdiction of urban local bodies by utilising their labour
for construction of socially and economically useful public
assets;
(ii) This programme applies to the urban local bodies having
population less than 5 lakh as per the 1991 Census;
(iii) The material labour ratio for works under this component
is to be maintained at 60:40. The prevailing minimum wage
rate, as notified from time to time for each area, has to be
paid to beneficiaries under this component;
(iv) This programme is dovetailed with the State Sector EIUD
scheme as well as the NSDP . This programme is not
designed to either replace or substitute the EIUS, the NSDP ,
or any other State Sector schemes.
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) and Community
Structure Components.
3.18 With a view to playing an effective role in coordination and
in organising training, monitoring, evaluation, dissemination of
information etc. a new component of IEC has been evolved under
SJSRY. It is proposed to have a coordinated and uniform level of
training across the country for training of trainers, elected
representatives, functionaries of Urban Local Bodies and field
functionaries like Project Officers, Community Organisers etc. through
National Training Institutes and selected State Training/Field Training
Institutes.
3.19 Under SJSRY, Community Structure is created in all the urban
towns of the country. The State Governments have taken action to set
up community structure, create Community Development Societies
(CDSs) and form Thrift & Credit Society etc.

15
Allocation of funds under Swarna Jayanti Sahari Rozgar Yojana
(SJSRY)
3.20 Total outlay for the SJSRY scheme during the 9th Five Year
Plan and 10th Five Year Plan (first three years) is Rs. 1009 crore and
Rs. 541 crore respectively. Year-wise outlay details are as under:
Year Amount
9th Five Year Plan (Total outlay Rs. 1009 crore)
1997-98 Rs. 102.54 crore
1998-99 Rs. 162.28 crore
1999-2000 Rs. 126.35 crore
2000-2001 Rs. 95.03 crore
2001-2002 Rs. 45.50 crore
10th Five Year Plan (Total outlay Rs. 541 crore)
2002-2003 Rs. 105.00 crore
2003-2004 Rs. 94.50 crore
2004-2005 Rs. 103.00 crore
3.21 When asked whether the low allocation of funds in the 10th
Plan as compared to the 9th Plan is an indicator of Ministry’s inability
to fully utilise the amount provided for the Scheme, the Ministry in
their written reply has stated that the low allocation of funds in 10th
Plan by the Planning Commission as compared to the 9th Plan is
because of the fact that the unspent balance of the earlier schemes in
the 9th Plan was more than Rs. 553 crore and the amount made
available in the Scheme in the 9th Plan was Rs. 531.68 crore. State-
wise details of funds available at the beginning of the SJSRY Scheme
in the 9th Plan as also the availability of the funds in the beginning
of the 10th Plan are given in the Appendix-III.
3.22 When asked about the amount of unspent balances left with
States/UTs as on 30.06.2004 under SJSRY, the Ministry has stated that
as on 30.06.2004, an amount of Rs. 271.55 crore was available with the
States/UTs as unspent balances (both Central+States share) under the
SJSRY Scheme.

16
Physical progress under SJSRY
3.23 When asked about the physical targets, if any, laid down for
the scheme during the 9th Plan and 10th Plan period the Ministry has
stated that during the 9th Plan no physical targets were fixed under
the Scheme and it was left to the States/UTs concerned to fix the
targets at State level as per their needs. However, in the 10th Plan,
under SJSRY, target of 4 lakh self-employment benefits and skill
development training to 5 lakh BPL persons have been fixed. Physical
progress of the Scheme year-wise as well as cumulative since inception
of the Scheme (1997-98) is given in the Appendix-IV. Cumulative physical
progress reported by the States under the scheme upto 31.3.2004 is
given as under:
Community Structures:
(a) No. of Urban Poor identified under the Scheme-317.17 lakh
(b) No. of towns where house to house survey conducted-3528
towns
(c) No. of Community Development Societies formed-6669.
Urban Self Employment Programme (USEP) & Development of
Women and Children in Urban Areas (DWCUA)
(a) No. of beneficiaries assisted to set up micro
Enterprises 5,11,030
(b) No. of DWCUA groups formed 30,636
(c) No. of women beneficiaries assisted under 97,042
DWCUA Groups to set up Community
Self-Employment Ventures
(d) No. of persons trained for skill up gradation 5,98,111
(e) No. of Thrift & Credit Societies formed 1,03,843
Urban Wage Employment Programme (UWEP)
No. of mandays of work generated 484.22 lakhs
3.24 The house-to-house survey has been reported to have been
conducted by the States/UTs in 3528 towns out of a total of 3770
towns identified under the Scheme Number of identified towns where

17
house-to-house survey is yet to be conducted under scheme is 242.
State-wise details are given below:
Sl. Name of States No. of identified towns
No. where house-to-house
survey is yet to be
conducted
1. Assam 1
2. Bihar 103
3. Chhattisgarh 35
4. Jammu & Kashmir 45
5. Jharkhand 47
6. Madhya Pradesh 2
7. Punjab 3
8. West Bengal 6
Total 242
3.25 When asked about the reasons for not conducting the house-
to-house survey in the remaining identified towns, the Ministry has
stated that in most of the States, in newly created towns, survey is yet
to take place. In the case of Bihar and Jharkhand, response of the
State Government is still awaited, despite several reminders.
Monitoring/Evaluation of SJSRY
3.26 The scheme is being monitored through quarterly progress
reports and periodical review meetings under the Chairmanship of
Minister/Secretary/Joint Secretary/Deputy Secretary of the Ministry.
To further improve the implementation of the Scheme, a proposal to
modify the guidelines of the scheme is under consideration of the
Government on the basis of the problems faced by the States/UTs.
The revised guidelines are likely to be implemented in due course.
3.27 When asked whether the views of all concerned including
beneficiaries have been taken into consideration before modifying the
guidelines, the Ministry in a written reply stated that the views of all
the stakeholders will be taken into consideration before finalising the
proposal for modification of the guidelines. It is expected that the

18
modified guidelines of the scheme will expand the scope of SJSRY
Scheme to cater to the requirements of the urban poor to a greater
extent.
3.28 When asked about the problems being faced by the States/
UTs in the implementation of the Scheme, Ministry in their written
reply has stated that the major problems being faced by the States/
UTs in the implementation of the Scheme are inter alia, non-cooperation
by the banks in providing micro credit to the urban poor and non-
formation of Self Help Groups (DWCUA) due to diversity in the
community structure.
3.29 When asked whether banks are meeting the credit needs of
beneficiaries/self help groups, the Ministry has stated that they are
monitoring the implementation at the State level only. Bank related
issues that come up during the course of the implementation are being
sorted out at the ULB with the concerned banks and at the State
Level Bankers Committee Meeting. However specific cases of non
cooperation by the Banks brought to the notice of the Ministry are
taken up with the RBI.
3.30 Concurrent evaluation of SJSRY in six States of Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Rajasthan and Uttar
Pradesh has been got conducted through Indian Institute of Public
Administration (IIPA) and other renowned agencies. A study of
“Evaluation of SJSRY in the country” has been entrusted to Human
Settlement Management Institute (HSMI), New Delhi, in March, 2004.
The study will cover all the States/UTs.
3.31 As regards the implementation and monitoring of the
programmes/schemes under the Ministry, the representatives of the
Ministry stated during the course of oral evidence that:
“Implementation is invariably through State Government or through
the Scheduled Castes Development Corporation in the State
Governments, State Urban Local bodies, municipal bodies and the
like.”
3.32 The representatives of the Ministry added that it may not be
too presumptuous to say that there is in fact a tremendous need on
our part to further step up and intensify our efforts towards improving
the implementation of these schemes to make them not only more
effective but also sustainable and meaningful.

19
3.33 The representative further stated that apart from VAMBAY in
other schemes there is a weakness which is that we are dependent on
the State Government and required intensive joint monitoring with
the State Government has not yet been accomplished. For this, the
Ministry will make efforts in future.
3.34 The Committee are constrained to note that about 50 per
cent of allocation during the 9th Plan period had been made available
for the SJSRY scheme, however, the unspent balances of the Scheme
in the 9th Plan was to the tune of more than 553 crore. As on 30th
June, 2004, the unspent balance amounting to Rs. 271.55 crore exists
with the States/UTs. Since a tangible amount of unspent balances
including the Centre and State shares persists to remain with the
States/UTs, the Committee are of the firm view that urgent attention
should be given by the concerned States/UTs towards this unspent
balance.
3.35 The Committee recommend that earnest efforts be made by
the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation to
provide an appropriate monitoring mechanism to ensure timely and
full implementation of SJSRY Scheme. During the course of evidence,
the representatives of the Ministry apprised the Committee that most
of the Schemes are being implemented by the States and ULBs. The
Ministry is trying for a joint monitoring mechanism with the State
Governments and admitted that monitoring has to be stepped up
and evaluation of the Schemes have not been done. For under-
spending, it has been stated that States share has not been given in
certain cases due to financial difficulties or inadequate funds. As
assured by the Ministry, the Committee expect that effective
monitoring mechanism is formulated in a specific time frame and
the position is apprised to the Committee.
3.36 The Committee note that SJSRY scheme is being monitored
through quarterly progress report and periodical review meetings
under the Chairmanship of Minister/Secretary/Joint Secretary/Deputy
Secretary of the Ministry. To further improve the implementation of
the scheme, a proposal to notify the guidelines of the scheme is
under consideration of the Government on the basis of the problems
faced by the States/UTs. The revised guidelines are likely to be
implemented in due course. The Committee desire that keeping in
view the slow progress of the SJSRY the Ministry should strengthen
the monitoring of the Scheme at both the Central and State levels
by conducting field visits of the senior officers of the Ministry to

20
have first hand information about the actual implementation of the
scheme. The Committee note that the Ministry is in the process of
revising the guidelines of SJSRY. They would like that the various
issues resulting in ineffective implementation of the programme
should be analyzed threadbare after consultation with State
Governments, Reserve Bank of India and other, respective Banks
viz. Commercial, Cooperative Banks involved with the Scheme, Urban
Local Bodies and NGOs, through them the public at large. The
Committee would also like that the various issues raised by the
erstwhile Standing Committee on urban and Rural Development with
regard to SJSRY, should also be taken into consideration while
finalizing the guidelines of the Scheme. The Committee hope that
the revised guidelines of the Scheme would be finalised at the
earliest. The Committee also hope that the revised/modified
guidelines of the Scheme will expand the scope of SJSRY scheme to
cater to the requirements of the urban poor to a greater extent
including street vendors and hawkers.
3.37 The Committee are informed that during the 9th Plan, no
physical targets were fixed under the SJSRY schemes and it was left
to the State/UTs concerned to fix the targets at State level as per
their needs. However, in 10th Plan under SJSRY target of 4 lakh
self-employment benefits and skill development training to 5 lakh
BPL persons have been fixed. The Committee are of the view that
without fixing targets for a scheme, it is very difficult to assess the
success of a scheme. The Committee hope that all out efforts will be
made to meet the targets as set forth by the Government.
3.38 It may be pointed out that the Committee (2003) had
conducted an on the spot study visit to Aurangabad on 11 September,
2003 and they found that SJSRY was being implemented in a novel
way. Under the Scheme, two Lok Seva Kendras were established.
The Kendras were acting as a service provider to meet the day today
needs of plumbing, electrical, masonry works of the local residents.
The youth trained in various such trades were enrolled with the
Kendras,—Municipal Corporation had provided telephone instruments
and furniture worth Rs. 12,000 for each of the Kendra. Wide publicity
was also given by the Municipal Corporation. The Committee found
it a novel way of providing employment to unemployed youths as
well as providing the basic services to the local residents. The
Committee desire that the Government should explore the feasibility
of adopting the above novel model on all India basis so as to provide
gainful employment to unemployed trained youths.

21
3.39 The Committee note under the Community structures
component of SJSRY schemes house to house survey is yet to
conducted in 242 towns. The break-up of 242 towns is as given
below:
Assam 1
Bihar 103
Chhattisgarh 35
Jammu & Kashmir 45
Jharkhand 47
Madhya Pradesh 2
Punjab 3
West Bengal 6
Total 242
3.40 The Committee are surprised to find that during the
examination of Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the erstwhile
Department of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation, the
Department had furnished a figure of 230 towns where house to
house survey was yet to be conducted. Now this year the Ministry
has informed the Committee that house to house survey under the
Scheme is yet to be conducted in 242 towns. The Committee desire
that the Ministry should verify the accurate number of towns where
house to house survey is yet to be conducted and hope that in
future the Ministry would furnish accurate data to the Committee.
The Committee would like to emphasise that Ministry should
complete the first stage of the programme i.e. identification of
beneficiaries by conducting house to house survey in remaining
towns where house to house survey is yet to be conducted as without
the identification of beneficiaries it is very difficult to fix the physical
targets and assess the achievement of the Scheme. The Committee
hope that the Government would impress upon the State
Governments to conduct house to house survey in the remaining
242 towns at the earliest.
3.41 The Committee note that as per the guidelines of the Urban
Self Employment Programme (USEP) there is no minimum
educational qualifications for beneficiaries under the programme.
However, this Scheme is not applicable to the persons educated
beyond the 9th Standard.

22
3.42 The Committee feel that as per the guidelines, the higher
education beyond 9th Standard acts as an disincentive to urban poor
as he is not entitled to avail of the benefits of the Scheme. The
Committee feel that there is a need to review the said condition.
The benefit under the scheme should be available to urban poor
irrespective of his educational qualification so that more and more
young poor can come forward and by getting the benefits of the
Scheme cross the poverty line.
3.43 The Committee note that the erstwhile Nehru Rozgar Yojana
meant to provide employment to poor urban youth was restructured
as SJSRY. The Committee conclude from what has been stated above
that there are serious problems being faced in the implementation
of the Scheme as has been admitted by the Ministry itself. There is
no proper monitoring mechanism, Union Government is dependent
upon the State Governments for monitoring. Further, even the survey
for identification of beneficiaries that is the first stage of
implementation is underway. Beyond this there is the problem of
non-cooperation of Banks. The Committee feel that at the field level
there are certain type of problems viz. huge gap between the number
of applicants and the sanction and disbursement of loan, the
applications are rejected on flimsy ground. All the issues related to
the Banks should be sorted out after interaction with the Ministry
of Finance, RBI and the concerned Banks. There should be a
mechanism to hold the regular meetings with RBI and Banks and
the necessary follow-up action should be taken to make the
programme effective. Not only that there is a need to improve the
delivery mechanism of the Scheme through augmenting training and
proper monitoring. Further stress should be on Self Help Groups by
providing them forward and backward linkages. The Ministry should
think of providing better market facilities to enable SHGs to sell
their products. Besides, the products made by SHGs should be sold
through various Shilp Melas like Saras being organized at Delhi
International Trade Fair. Such melas should be organized in other
big cities also of the country. Besides, like Delhi Haat, in other
cities too such Haats should be opened and the products produced
by SHGs should be sold. Wide publicity should also be given to
the products produced by the SHGs so as to encourage them. Another
area of concern is to make the products produced by Self Help
Groups (SHGs) competitive. There is a need to provide training to
improve the quality of the products. More and more NGOs should
be involved in the task. SHGs should be involved in the trade
according to the local needs of the area where these are manufactured

23
so as to ensure the viability of SHGs. Once SHGs are viable and
are engaged in profit making activity, there will not be any problem
of Bank loan. Banks would come forward themselves to provide
loan under the Scheme. In view of the aforesaid position there is an
urgent need to take all the corrective steps as given above so as to
make the programme more effective.
2. Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana (V AMBAY)
3.44 With a purpose to provide shelter or upgrade the existing
shelter for people living below poverty line in urban slums in a march
towards the goal of slumless cities with a healthy and enabling urban
environment, a new Centrally Sponsored Scheme called Valmiki
Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY) was launched during the year 2001-
2002 in accordance with the announcement made by the Hon’ble Prime
Minister on 15th August, 2001. The target group under VAMBAY is all
slum-dwellers in urban areas, who are below the poverty line including
members of EWS, who do not possess adequate shelters. Nirmal Bharat
Abhiyan is an integral component of VAMBAY for construction of
community toilets and sanitation. The funding pattern under VAMBAY
would be 50:50 basis between the Central and State Governments.
Financial allocation
3.45 Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY) was formally
launched on 02.12.2001 with a budget provision of Rs. 69.00 crore
provided out of the savings of the Departmental budget during the
year 2001-2002. However, a sum of Rs. 73.56 crore was finally released
out of the savings of the Departmental budget during the year 2001-
2002.
3.56 In the 10th Plan Rs. 2040 crore have been allocated for the
scheme. The detail of financial allocation during the last three years is
as under:
2002-2003 Rs. 256.85 crore
2003-2004 Rs. 238.50 crore
2004-2005 Rs. 280.58 crore
3.47 Out of total allocation of Rs. 256.85 crore for the year 2002-
2003 under VAMBAY, central subsidy of Rs. 218.35 crore was released
for construction of 110388 dwelling units (more than the target set i.e.
1,00,000) and 21,488 community toilets. However, 15% of the allocated

24
amount could not be utilised due to non-receipt of proposals, complete
in all respects, from the State Governments in some of the components
of VAMBAY though in shelter component the demand was enough to
utilise all the allotted amount. The request for re-appropriation of funds
from other components of VAMBAY to the shelter component was
taken up with Ministry of Finance. They however, did not agree to
the request.
3.48 In the year 2003-2004, an amount of Rs. 238.55 crore was
utilised under the scheme an amount of Rs. 95 lakh was surrendered
under rental housing component for want of projects from the States,
while additionally a sum of Rs. 1.00 crore was utilised under the
scheme from the NER lump sum fund.
3.49 When enquired about the major components of VAMBAY
where demands were not enough to utilise all the allotted amount the
Ministry in a written reply have stated that Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan
(NBA) is the only major component of VAMBAY where enough demand
was not received in the year 2002-2003 and 2003-2004.
Target
3.50 No physical target has been prescribed under VAMBAY for
the entire period of 10th Five Year Plan as VAMBAY being a demand
driven scheme. However, the then Prime Minister had set a target of
construction of one lakh dwelling units in the financial year 2002-
2003. Similarly, at target of construction of 1.06 lakh dwelling units
was set internally by the Ministry for the financial year 2003-2004. For
the current financial year 2004-2005, a target of construction of 1.12
lakh dwelling units has been set internally by the Ministry.
3.51 Under VAMBAY Central Subsidy is granted for construction
of dwelling units @ Rs. 20,000 for general cities, Rs. 25,000 for Metro
cities and Rs. 30,000 for mega cities and for construction of toilet seats
@Rs. 20,000/-per WC. Target is fixed by taking average cost of
construction of a dwelling units i.e. Rs. 25,000.
3.52 When asked whether States/UTs have ever requested the
Ministry to enhance the existing cost of construction of a dwelling
unit under VAMBAY the Ministry has stated that some of the States,
like, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, etc., have requested to enhance the
existing cost of construction/central subsidy of a dwelling unit. The
revision in cost ceiling can be considered on merits when modifications
to VAMBAY guidelines are examined.

25
Monitoring/Evaluation
3.53 The VAMBAY scheme is being monitored at the National Level
through regular review meetings at Secretary/Joint Secretary levels with
the State Government’s Secretaries/nodal Officers. Core groups from
HUDCO have also been formed which have started visiting the States
for overseeing the implementation of the programme. The Government
of India has issued an order for the formation of a State Level
Coordination Committee (SLCC) for monitoring the implementation of
VAMBAY at the State Level.
3.54 When asked about the details of the work done so far by the
Core Group for overseeing the implementation of the Scheme the
Ministry in a reply has stated that initially Core Groups were formed
in HUDCO to oversee the implementation of VAMBAY in the States
where projects were being implemented. However, orders were issued
by the Ministry formally for constitution of State Level Co-ordination
Committees (SLCC) comprising State Government/agency officials,
representatives of the Ministry, HUDCO and NGOs to monitor the
progress of VAMBAY scheme in the States.
3.55 The Committee note that main purpose behind V AMBAY
scheme is to provide shelter or upgrade the existing shelter for BPL
persons living in urban slums of the country. This scheme, launched
in 2001-2002 has been allocated funds amounting to Rs. 2,040 crore
in the Tenth Plan period. The financial allocation in 2002-2003
amounted to Rs. 256.85 crore and in 2003-2004 the allocation was to
the tune of Rs. 238.50 crore. Out of the total allocation of Rs. 256.85
crore for the year 2002-2003 under V AMBAY, central subsidy of
Rs. 218.35 crore was released for construction of 1,10,388 dwelling
units (more than the target set i.e. 1,00,000) and 21,488 community
toilets. However, 15% of the allocated amount could not be utilised
due to non-receipt of proposals from the State Governments in some
of the components of V AMBAY though in shelter component, the
demand was enough to utilise all the allotted amount. In such
circumstances, the Committee cannot but express their distress about
the sorry state of affairs of implementation of the V AMBAY scheme.
The Committee are compelled to re-emphasise that the delivery
mechanism of the Ministry needs to be really beefed up in
coordination with the concerned State Governments and ULBs. The
Committee recommend that an accountable system of checks should
be chalk out so as to ensure timely release of funds and full
implementation of V AMBAY programme. The Committee would like
to be apprised about the steps taken in this regard in due course.

26
3.56 The Committee find that V AMBAY was started in the
year 2001. They note that under Nirmal Abhiyan Component of
V AMBAY, sufficient demand was not received during 2002-2003 and
2003-2004. The Committee note that almost three years have elapsed
since the Scheme was started. The Ministry should review the various
components of the Scheme in consultation with State Governments
and Urban Local Bodies so that projections for the different
components of V AMBAY can be made. After a review of various
components and after proper analysis the Government should revise
the guidelines.
3.57 The Committee are contented to note that V AMBAY being
a demand driven scheme, a target of construction of 1.12 lakh
dwelling units has been set internally by Ministry for the current
financial year 2004-2005. The Committee are of the firm view that it
is essential to have a target for achieving as well as assessment of
implementation of a scheme like V AMBAY which is the only scheme
for providing shelter or upgrading the existing shelter for slum
dwellers in urban slums.
3.58 The Committee note that under V AMBAY Central subsidy
is granted for construction of dwelling unit @Rs. 20,000 for general
cities, Rs. 25,000 for Metro Cities and Rs. 30,000 for mega cities.
Some States like Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh etc. have requested to
enhance the existing cost of construction/central subsidy of a dwelling
unit. The Committee have been given to understand that the funding
pattern under V AMBAY between Central and State Governments is
on 50:50 basis. In regard to unit cost of dwelling unit as given
above, the Committee are of the opinion that meaningful amount of
Central subsidy should be granted to the State Governments for
construction of dwelling units keeping in view the current market
prices and cost of construction involved in the units. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that comprehensive State-wise assessment of
escalation of cost of construction of units under the V AMBAY scheme
should be made and the central subsidy for V AMBAY projects be
enhanced, accordingly.
3.59 The Committee note that initially Core Groups were formed
in HUDCO to over-see the implementation of V AMBAY in the States

27
where projects were being implemented. However, orders were issued
by the Ministry formally for constitution of State level Co-ordination
Committees (SLCC) comprising of State Government/agency officials,
representatives of the Ministry, HUDCO and NGOs to monitor the
progress of V AMBAY scheme in the States. In this regard, the
Committee are of the firm view that State Level Co-ordination
Committees should involve local representatives and also end
beneficiaries for monitoring the implementation of V AMBAY at the
State level to plug the loopholes or lacunae in implementation of
the Scheme at the grass-root level. The Committee also desire that
for further strengthening the monitoring of the Scheme at both the
Centre and State level, regular field visits should be made by the
Senior Officers of the Ministry/HUDCO to have the first hand
information of the schemes so as to ensure that the benefits of
V AMBAY reach the genuine beneficiaries.
4. Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme for liberation of Scavengers
(ILCS)
3.60 This Centrally Sponsored scheme has been under
implementation through Ministry or Urban Development since 1989-90
till 2003-2004. This scheme has been transferred to Ministry of urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation w.e.f. 2004-2005 as regards
budgetary provision but its implementation has been effected by this
Ministry w.e.f. 2003-2004 itself. It provides for conversion of existing
dry latrines into low cost water seal pour flush latrines and construction
of new sanitary units where none exist to prevent open defecation.
The basic objective is to liberate the scavengers from the obnoxious
practice of carrying head loads of night soil and the scheme is being
implemented on a whole town basis.
3.61 The National Action Plan for Total Eradication of Manual
Scavengers prepared by the Planning Commission envisages total
eradication of manual scavenging by 2007.
3.62 The scheme is being operated by providing subsidy from
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation and loans from
Housing and Urban Development Corporation (HUDCO) in a
synchronised manner so that the conversion/construction of low cost

28
sanitation units and liberation of scavengers is done on a whole town
basis. The financing pattern in the scheme is as under:
(1) For substructure i.e. upto plinth level:—
Category Subsidy Loan Beneficiary Contribution
EWS 45% 50% 5%
LIG 25% 60% 15%
MIG/LIG Nil 75% 25%
(2) For superstructure  i.e.  above plinth level:—
Category Subsidy Loan Beneficiary Contribution
EWS Nil 95% 5%
LIG Nil 85% 15%
MIG Nil 75% 25%
HIG Nil 60%
3.63The HUDCO is extending loan at an interest rate of 8% floating
or 8.5% fixed per annum. The loan is recoverable over a period of
7 years. The progress of the ILCS scheme in the country upto
31.03.2004.
1. Total No. of Schemes Sanctioned by HUDCO 866
2. No. of Towns covered 1534
3. Project cost of sanctioned schemes Rs. 2,04,328.14 lakh
4. Subsidy sanctioned Rs. 56,847.81 lakh
5. Loan sanctioned Rs. 77,501.38 lakh
6. Subsidy released by HUDCO to State Rs. 29,360.44 lakh
7. Loan released by HUDCO to State Rs. 47,877.80 lakh
8. No. of units sanctioned for Conversion+Construction 51,69,580
9. No. of units completed Conversion+Construction 17,30,194
10. No. of units in progress Conversion+Construction 3,11,860
11. No. of scavengers to be liberated with the 1,18,464
implementation of sanctioned schemes.

29
The Financial performance of the Scheme is as below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year Actual Expenditure
(released to HUDCO)
1997-1998 26.80
1998-1999 23.80
Ninth Plan 1999-2000 27.35
2000-2001 29.80
2001-2002 10.00
Tenth Plan 2002-2003 04.80
2003-2004 04.80
2004-2005 10.00 (upto 15th June, 2004)
3.64 The total outlay endorsed by the Planning Commission for
the 9th Plan was Rs. 200 crore. However, the actual amount released
upto March, 2002 was Rs. 117.75 crore.
3.65 In the 10th Plan, Rs. 200 crore have been allocated for the
scheme. For the year 2004-2005, an amount of Rs. 30 crore has been
proposed.
3.66 When asked about the reasons for slow financial and physical
progress of ILCS Scheme the Ministry has stated that the main reasons
for the slow financial and physical progress are as under:
• Some State Governments are not according priority to the
programme. There is delay in providing government
guarantee and budgetary provision for the loan component.
Time overruns result in cost overruns and even changes in
demand position resulting in revision of scheme and further
delay in implementation.
• In some States where loan portion is fully arranged by the
State Governments out of their State budgets, the progress
is slow, as such, contributions from the State budgets are
not forthcoming. Such states use only the upfront subsidy
and curtail the original scope of work without submission
of Utilisation Certificates.
{
{

30
• Some State nodal agencies do not send the utilisation
certificates in respect of the availed subsidy amounts.
3.67 When asked about the difficulties being faced by implementing
agencies in the implementation of ILCS Scheme, the Ministry stated
that the difficulties being faced by the implementing agencies are :
• There is no fund for Information, Education and
Communication (IEC).
• In the absence of subsidy for super-structure portion, the
units are seldom completed and funds remain unutilized.
• In the congested areas, due to non-availability of sufficient
space, the individual latrines can not be constructed with
twin pits.
• Units connected to under ground sewerage in view of land
constraint or construction of community toilets as alternative
solution are not eligible for subsidy.
• Poor recovery from individuals.
• State Governments being reluctant to provide Govt.
guarantee for securing HUDCO loan, where loan & subsidy
are sought to be dovetailed.
• In the year 2000, the Hon’ble Delhi High Court issued orders
on submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) for the availed
subsidy. With this in view, no new proposals were to be
sanctioned tot he States with pending UCs and no further
release in the schemes with pending UC (for the same
borrowing agency). This affected the States, more so those
states which had only one nodal agency, as non-submission
of U.C. for one scheme or town led to stopping of funds
for the remaining.
3.68 When asked about the steps being taken by the Government
in removing above difficulties, the Ministry in a written reply stated
that the National Action Plan for Total Eradication of Manual
Scavengers prepared by the Planning Commission has proposed funds
for IEC (Information, Education, Communication), involvement of
NGOs, subsidy  for complete unit including superstructure etc.
3.69 When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry and
HUDCO for better performance and monitoring of the Scheme the
Government have stated in a written reply that HUDCO have circulated
the formats for reporting under the programme and periodical progress
reports are received by the Ministry from HUDCO.

31
3.70 The Committee are constrained to note the slow financial
and physical progress of ILCS Scheme. The Scheme is infested with
numerous problems. The Committee express their doubt as to
whether manual scavenging could be eradicated by 2007 as envisaged
in the National Action Plan for Total Eradication of Manual
Scavengers given the present state of functioning of this scheme.
The Committee feel that it is a matter of shame for the country that
after 50 years of planned development, abolition of manual
scavenging is still a distant dream. Manual Scavenging need to be
eradicated at any cost. It is an insult to the humanity and in no way
can be tolerated. The Government should make earnest efforts and
persuade the States where the scheme has not been successful. An
earnest effort is required with proper motivation and action.
Periodical review of the Scheme is necessary with proper punitive
legal action against those who are indulgent. The Committee
deprecate the continuous inhuman use of manual scavengers and
desire that urgent corrective measures be made in this regard. The
Committee therefore, recommend that the Government should review
the existing guidelines of the Scheme and modify the terms of
reference of the Scheme so as to make it feasible and liberate the
Scavengers from the obnoxious practice of manual scavenging. The
Committee also recommend that liberation and rehabilitation of
Schemes for scavengers should also be integrated with this Scheme
for effective implementation and proper monitoring so that better
results could be achieved and manuals cavenging is eradicated by
2007.
5. National Scheme for Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers
and their dependents (NSLRS)
3.71 The Scheme was launched in 1991-1992 with the objective of
providing financial assistance to scavengers handling night soil and
filth manually for their training and rehabilitation in the alternative
occupations. As a consequence of Hon’ble Prime Minister’s
announcement on Independence Day 2002 regarding total abolition of
Manual Scavenging by 2007, it was decided to ensure convergence of
different Schemes on the subject handled by different Ministries.
Accordingly the National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of
Scavengers and their dependents (NSLRS) was transferred form
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment tot he Department of
Urban employment and Poverty Alleviation (Ministry of Urban
development and Poverty Alleviation) in the year 2003-2004.
3.72 Under the Scheme, assistance is provided for training in the
institutes run by the Government, local bodies and NGOs as per

32
TRYSEM norms. The training is given for a maximum duration of six
months. Stipend @Rs. 200 to Rs. 500 is provided depending upon the
training institute. Cost of raw materials, allowance for tool kit, etc. are
covered under the Scheme.
3.73 Apart from assistance for training, the scanvegers are assisted
for taking up alternate projects costing upto Rs. 50,000. This is funded
through 50% subsidy subject to a ceiling of Rs. 10,000, 15% of the
project cost as margin money loan which is shared between the central
and State Governments in the ratio of 49:51, and the rest is provided
as loan.
3.74 The entire subsidy is provided by Government of India as
100% grant. The margin money is provided by the State Schedule
Caste Development Corporation at a concessional rate of interest of
4%. Banks provide the loan component under their priority sector
lending. The National Safai Karamchari Finance and Development
Corporation(NSKFDC) is also now providing loans.
3.75 The Scheme is implemented by the respective State SCDCs.
In States where such Corporations have not been set up, the Scheme
is implemented by the State Governments.
Rs. 736.41 crore have been released for assisting 1,68,184 scavengers
for training and 4,28,139 for rehabilitation upto 2003-04.
Physical and financial achievements
3.76 The physical and financial performance of the Scheme since
1997-98 is given below:—
Year Central Assistance No. of Scavengers No. of scavengers
Released (Rs. in crore) Trained assisted for
Rehabilitation
1997-98 90.00 15476 32771
1998-99 5.90 7981 37122
1999-2000 70.00 7184 27283
2000-01 60.92 5063 24740
2001-02 9.20 15277 25954
22002-03 40.95 6266 12599
2003-04 24.27 ** **
**Information from States/UTs is still to be received.

33
3.77 The total outlay in the 9th Plan indicated by the Planning
Commission for the above Scheme was Rs. 335 crore. However, the
actual amount released till March 2002 was Rs. 236.02 crore. Rs. 460
crore have been allocated by the Planning Commission for the 10th
Plan period. Rs. 20.00 crore has been proposed for the year 2004-2005.
3.78 When asked about the reasons for two financial progress of
NSLRS Scheme the Ministry stated that the scheme was transferred to
this Ministry in mid 2003-04 only. During the 2nd half of the year
when the Scheme was with this Ministry,  an amount of Rs. 24.27
crore were sanctioned and released. Prior to 2003-04, this scheme was
being dealt with by Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and
as reported by Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, huge
unspent balances with the SCDCs was one of the main reasons for
slow progress of the scheme.
3.79 However, some of the other reasons for slow progress of the
scheme are :
(a) Lack of new schemes/proposals sent by the State/SCDCs.
(b) Non-submission of utilization certificates by the States on time.
3.80 When asked about the steps taken by the Government to
reduce unspent balances available with State Scheduled Castes
Development Corporation (SCDCs) the Government have stated that
the State Governments have been impressed upon by the Ministry for
utilizing the unspent balances of the amount sanctioned in the earlier
years for eradicating the inhumane practice of manual scavenging.
3.81 The Committee appreciate that the two schemes viz.
Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCS) and National Scheme
for Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their dependents
(NSLRS) dealing with the issue of liberating the Scavengers from
the manual scavenging in different States and rehabilitation of the
liberated Scavengers have been brought under one umbrella. The
said scheme shave been transferred to the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation from the Ministries of Urban
Development and Social Justice and Empowerment respectively. The
Committee hope that there will be better coordination between the
two issues viz. liberation and rehabilitation of scavengers and the
country would be able to get rid of the obnoxious task of manual
scavenging expeditiously.

34
3.82 The Committee note that the main reasons for slow progress
of the NSLRS scheme are huge unspent balances with State
Scheduled Caste Development Corporation (SCDCs), lack of new
schemes/proposals sent by the States/SCDCs and non-submission of
utilization certificates by the State on time. The Committee take a
serious view over the lack of response from the States and the fact
that huge unspent balances with the SCDCs exists. The Committee
desire that the Ministry should impress upon the State Governments
to minimise the unspent balances under the scheme by effective
implementation and submit the utilisation certificates on time.
6. Night Shelter Scheme for Urban Shelterless
3.83 The Scheme was launched in 1988-89 to ameliorate the shelter
condition of absolutely shelterless and pavement dwellers in
metropolitan cities. Since 1990-1991, this Scheme is being implemented
through HUDCO. In the light of various suggestions from the
implementing agencies, the scheme was modified in 1992 and again in
2002 in consultation with the Planning Commission and the Ministry
of Finance. The present scheme is now limited to construction of Night
Shelter with community toilets and baths with Central Subsidy for
construction of composite night shelter @ 50% of the cost of
construction subject to the cost-ceiling of Rs. 20,000/per bed for night
shelter. Balance would be a loan from HUDCO (Optional) or any other
organisation.
The component of independent pay and use toilets has sine been
decided to be merged with VAMBAY.
Financial Allocations
Total 9th Plan outlay — Rs. 1.00 crore
The year-wise allocation is as under
Year Amount (Rs. in crore)
1997-1998 1.00
1998-1999 1.00
1999-2000 1.00
2000-2001 3.40
2001-2002 4.56

35
Total outlay earmarked for 10th Plan is Rs. 30.97 crore B.E. for the
year 2004-2005 is Rs 4.00 crore.
Physical and Financial progress
3.84 Cumulatively, as on 9.7.2004, HUDCO has sanctioned 99 Night
Shelters/Pay and Use Toilets schemes. On completion, these projects
would provide 17,599 beds, 17,279 WCs, 2,671 baths and 2,422 urinals.
A subsidy of Rs. 1,580.21 lakh has been released by HUDCO for these
schemes apart from loan release of Rs. 1053.05 lakh. Under Night
Shelter Scheme, Government’s financial assistance is for construction
of the Night Shelter building structure/compound. Individual persons
are not financially assisted under the scheme, as the shelters are
normally run by local bodies.
Subsidy provided by the Central Government and
loan advanced by HUDCO
(Rs. in Lakh)
Year Government Subsidy Loan Advanced by HUDCO
Sanctioned Release Sanctioned Release
1999-2000 725.34 100.20 228.14 25.00
2000-2001 342.40 137.11 38.56 203.50
2001-2002 544.60 65.10 444.90 0.00
2002-2003 15.96 345.80 0.00 190.66
2003-2004 10.00 195.28 0.00 64.36
3.85 When asked about the role of NGOs in the implementation of
Night Shelter Scheme the Ministry stated that the existing guidelines
have a role for NGOs in the Night Shelter Scheme. The projects under
this scheme are formulated, constructed and operated by the municipal
bodies or agencies identified by the State Government or local bodies.
Apart from this, Building Centres, public sector undertakings, NGOs,
Community Based Organisations, charitable institutions, etc. can be
involved in project formulation, execution and/or management of the
shelters as per requirements. The existing guidelines of the scheme
provides for role of NGOs and community based organizations along
with Urban Local Bodies, Charitable Institutions, Public Sector
undertakings, etc. The Scheme is under revision in consultation with
the concerned agencies including NGOs/State Governments to make

36
the Scheme more attractive. This may lead to an increasing role for
NGOs.
3.86 During the course of oral evidence of the Ministry, the
Committee asked about the steps taken by HUDCO in construction of
Night Shelter for Urban Shelterless and whether the night Shelters in
Delhi and other cultural cities such as Puri, Varanasi etc. have been
provided/are being provided adequately. To this, the representative of
the Ministry stated that about the night shelters, there have been a
very few takers because there is a problem for the local bodies to get
land at the proper places where the night shelters can be constructed.
Secondly, there is an O&M problem. The grant only provides for the
initial construction. There was a diversion that this night shelter scheme
was used mainly for pay-and-use toilets. In many places, pay-and-use
toilets were put up under this programme. Now, after it was merged
with VAMBAY, the toilets are coming under VAMBAY programme. So,
this Night shelter Scheme is also being reviewed that how to make it
popular may be by involving NGOs, like Dharamshala concept. This
is being reviewed in the Ministry.
3.87 The representatives of the Ministry further informed that
recently they had two interaction with group of NGOs and other
community group and organisations in the Ministry. In fact, the Minister
was very keen and she called meetings of these people. There are
these groups who are working in specific areas. We had one
organisation working with rag-pickers. We had some other organisations
similarly working with these targeted groups in small areas. Some are
working with pavement workers and street vendors and so on.
3.88 The representative of the Ministry assured that :
“We also intend to going further especially with organisations like
Sewa because Sewa has now branched but in various States. We
also have Sewa in Delhi and they also came for the meeting.
There is one NGO, through whom the Delhi Government is running
a night shelter. They are trying to find but ways and means.
Locating a place is a difficult task but some private schools have
agreed and these schools can be used. Like this, some arrangement
is worked out. Of course, it is run through the NGOs. We are
engaged in this and we can only step up our efforts as you have
pointed out.”
3.89 The Committee note that the Night Shelter Scheme was
launched in 1988-89 to ameliorate the shelter condition of absolutely

37
shelterless and pavement dwellers in metropolitan cities. Since 1990-
1991, this Scheme is being implemented through HUDCO. In the
light of various suggestions from the implementing agencies, the
scheme was modified in 1992 and again in 2002 in consultation with
the planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. The present
scheme is now limited to construction of Night Shelter with
community toilets and baths with Central Subsidy for construction
of composite night shelter @ 50% of the cost of construction subject
to the cost-ceiling of Rs. 20,000 per bed for night shelter. HUDCO
or any other organisation bears the balance portion of funds by way
of extending of loans. The Committee also note that the component
of independent pay & use toilets has since been decided to be
merged with V AMBAY.
3.90 The Committee are informed that as on 9.7.2004, HUDCO
has sanctioned 99 Night Shelters/Pay and Use Toilets schemes. On
completion, these projects would provide 17,599 beds, 17,279 WCs,
2671 baths and 2422 urinals. A subsidy of Rs. 1580.21 lakh has been
released by HUDCO for these schemes apart from loan release of
Rs. 1053.05 lakh. Under Night Shelter Scheme, Government’s financial
assistance is for construction of the Night Shelter building structure/
compound. As per procedure, individual persons are not financially
assisted under the scheme, as the shelters are normally run by local
bodies/organizations. The Committee note that the total outlay in
the 10th Plan period for this scheme is Rs. 30.97 crore and the Budget
Estimates for the year 2004-2005 is Rs. 4 crore. The Committee are
surprised to learn that the Government subsidy in 2001-2002
amounting to Rs. 544.6 lakh had been sanctioned but only Rs. 65.10
lakh were actually released and HUDCO advanced a loan of
Rs. 444.9 lakh but released no amount in 2001-2002. In their 45th
Report the Standing Committee on Urban and Rural Development
had also expressed their deep displeasure that during the year 2001-
2002, no expenditure was incurred on the Night Shelter Scheme as
the scheme was not attractive. In 2002-2003, the Government subsidy
as released for this scheme amounts to Rs. 345.8 lakh and the
HUDCO loans is to the tune of Rs. 190.66 lakh. Further, the
Government subsidy in 2004-2005 is equivalent to Rs. 195.28 lakh
and HUDCO loan as released is Rs. 64.36 lakh. The Committee are
unable to concur that on the one hand the Ministry had stated that
the Night Shelter scheme was unattractive due to which funds had
not been released in 2001-2002 and on the other hand subsidy and
loans have been released, consequently, in 2003-2004 and 2004-2005
for the same scheme. In the circumstances, the Committee are

38
compelled to hold that the Ministry seems to resort to flimsy pleas
for the poor performance of the Night Shelter Schemes.
3.91 The Committee note that the guidelines stipulate that ULBs,
NGOs, Charitable Institutions, Public Sector Undertakings etc. be
involved in implementation of the Night Shelter Scheme. The present
scheme is under revision in consultation with the concerned agencies
including State Governments/NGOs to make the Schemes more
attractive. This may lead to an increased role for NGOs. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the modified guidelines for
Night Shelter Scheme be finalised at an early date and the role of
NGOs in implementation of the Scheme be clearly demarcated so as
to make the implementation of the scheme in a smooth and timely
manner.
3.92 As regards adequate provision of funds for the scheme, the
Committee desire that realistic assessment of budget estimates be
put forth and HUDCO be advised to release/sanction loans/advances
to cooperative societies/organisations/NGOs etc. by modification of
eligibility conditions etc., if required, so that the facility of Night
Shelters is provided to the destitute and beneficiaries.
7. National Slum Development Programme
3.93 The National Slum Development Programme (NSDP) was
initiated in August 1996. Under the programme, funds in the form of
Additional Central Assistance (ACA) are allocated by the Planning
Commission annually on the basis of slum population of the State/
UTs for development of Urban Slums. While the Ministry of Finance
releases funds to the States under this Programme, the Ministry of
Home Affairs also releases the funds to the Union Territories. The
States release the funds to the implementing Agencies as per their
requirements. The Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation has been nominated as the Nodal Ministry to monitor the
progress of the programme in respect of States.
3.94 The objective of this programme is upgradation of urban slums
by providing physical amenities like water supply, storm water drains,
community bath, widening and paving of existing lanes, sewers,
community latrines, street lights etc. Besides, the funds under NSDP
can be used for provision of community infrastructure and social
amenities like pre-school education, non-formal education adult
education, maternity, child health and primary health care including
immunization etc. The programme also has a component of shelter
upgradation or construction of new houses.

39
3.95 Since the inception of the programme and upto 30.6.2004 a
total of Rs. 2,485.85 crore have been released by the Central
Government, and as reported by the States/UTs, about 3.74 crore slum
dwellers have been benefited from this programme.
3.96 Draft National Slum Policy is under the consideration of the
Ministry. Draft National Slum Policy, inter alia,  envisages an inclusive
approach for slum dwellers and granting land tenure to them on
‘tenable sites’ either insitu or by relocation.
3.97 When asked whether the Government has the data with regard
to slum population in each of big cities the Ministry in a written reply
stated that the slum development being a State subject, State
Governments survey and take stock of slums in their respective States.
However, Town and Country Planning Organisation (TCPO) conducted
a study on slums in 1995-96 and brought out a report titled “A
Compendium on Indian Slums-1996”. According to this report, the
slum population of 23 big cities (metropolitan cities) for 2001 is
estimates at 254.811 lakh. Slum population which was 148.249 lakh in
1981 increased to 188.659 lakh during 1990-1991 and further increased
to 254.811 in 2001. An attempt has also been made for the first time
during the census of India 2001 by the Registrar General of India to
collect detailed data about slum areas of the country particularly cities/
town having 50,000 population or more based on 1991 census. As per
the provisional figures of the census of India, 2001, the total slum
population of the 26 big cities (metropolitan cities) is 165.65 lakh.
3.98 The Committee note that as per study conducted by TCPO
slum population which was 148.249 lakh during 1981 increased to
188.659 lakh during 1990-1991 and further increased to 254.811 lakh
during 2001. The Committee further find that different data of slum
population have been indicated by two different studies conducted
by TCPO and census studies. As per TCPO the slum population
during 2001 in 26 big cities is 254.811 lakh but as per census of
India based on the Registrar Census of India, slum population in 26
big cities is 165.65 lakh. The Committee feel that sincere efforts
have not been made to know the slum population in the country.
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should first of all
conduct a study to know about the slum population in all the big
cities of the country in order to arrive at the correct estimate of
State/UTs. Besides there should be some mechanism to review the
data with regard to slum population after a fixed period of time say
five years. Such a data is required for formulating plan for tackling

40
the various issues like rehabilitation, relocation and providing
infrastructure and hygienic conditions in urban slums. Besides for
urban planning as well as finalisation of Urban Policy, such a data
is the necessary input.
3.99 The Committee are constrained to note the poor performance
of National Slum Development Programme. Upto 30 June 2004 a
total of Rs. 2,475.85 crore has been released by the Central
Government and about 3.74 crore slum dwelles have been benefited
from the programme which means that on an average about Rs. 662
per head was spent during the last eight years on slum dwellers
whereas according to the 2001 Census, there are 40.6 million persons
living in slums in 607 towns/cities in the entire country. The
Committee desire that the Government should enhance the release
of funds to the State under this Programme and should ensure that
release should be made for specific projects with adequate and proper
Central monitoring of the projects under the Programme.
3.100 The Committee further note that Draft National Slum Policy
is under the consideration of the Ministry. Draft National Sum Policy
Inter-alia  envisages an inclusive approach for slum dwellers and
granting land tenure to them as tenable sites either in-situ or by
relocation. The Committee desire that Draft National Slum Policy
should be finalised and implemented at the earliest as such policy
could bring an attitudinal change among the Government bodies
and general public including slum dwellers, regarding measures to
improve the quality of life of slum dwelllers.
8. Urban Reforms Incentive Fund Scheme (URIF)
3.101 The Urban Reforms Incentive Fund Scheme was approved
by the Government on 28.6.2003 with an outlay of Rs. 500 crore per
annum during the 10th Plan Period. The objective of the scheme is to
provide reform linked assistance to States so as to incentives and
accelerate the process of urban reforms identified by Government of
India, Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation. An
allocation of Rs. 500 crore is divided among the States/UTs on the
basis of their percentage of urban population to the total urban
population of the country. The incentive is given as Additional Central
Assistance (ACA) and is released as 100% grant by the Ministry of
Finance on the recommendation of this Ministry. For availing benefits
under the Scheme, States/UTs are required to enter into a prescribed
Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) with the central Government. 50%
of the eligible allocation during the year 2003-2004 was released as

41
incentive on signing of Memorandum of Agreement by the State
Government for the agreed reform areas and the balance 50% was to
be released on achievement of prescribed milestones, as indicated in
the Memorandum of Agreement. Releases for the year 2004-2005
onwards would depend upon the achievement of milestone for that
year as detailed in the Memorandum of Agreement. Initially seven
reform areas were identified. These are (i) Repeal of ULCRA;
(ii) Rationalization of stamp Duty; (iii) Reform of Rent Control Laws;
(iv) Introduction of computerised process of registration; (v) Reform of
Property Tax; (vi) Levy of reasonable user charges; and
(vii) Introduction of double entry system of accounting in Urban Local
Bodies. The guidelines under the scheme have been finalized and
circulated to the State Governments/UTs.
3.102 When asked whether the State/UT Governments were
consulted before implementing the URIF Scheme the Ministry in their
written reply have stated that the Urban Reforms Incentive Fund (URIF)
Scheme was brought to the notice of all the State Governments. Draft
Memorandum of Agreement (to be signed with them) was also
circulated to them. This issue was also deliberated in the Housing
Ministers’ Conference held on 12.9.2002.
3.103 When asked about the response from the State/UT
Governments to the Scheme the Ministry stated that most of the States
suggested that it may not be possible for them to sign Memorandum
of Agreements in respect of all the seven reform areas and carry out
all the reforms in one go, simultaneously. It was, therefore, decided by
the Government that weightage may be given to each reform area and
truncated Memorandum of Agreement may be allowed to be signed
so that releases may be made as per the weightage given to the agreed
reform areas and as per the achievement of the milestone(s) in each
reform area separately.
3.104 When asked about the details of States/UTs Government
which have signed Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) with the
Ministry, the Ministry stated that the 21 States and 3 UTs signed
Memorandum of Agreements/Truncated Memorandum of Agreements
with the Ministry till 31.3.2004. The names of the States are : Tamil
Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Tripura, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Manipur, Kerala, Haryana, Chandigarh, Andhra Pradesh, Andaman &
Nicobar Islands, West Bengal, Orissa, Nagaland, Delhi, Goa, Arunachal
Pradesh, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Meghalaya, Bihar, Rajasthan and
Himachal Pradesh.

42
Monitoring of the Scheme
3.105 The implementation of the scheme is monitored by the
Empowered Committee set up under the Chairpersonship of Secretary,
Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation, the Committee
assess whether a State has achieved a particular milestone in a reform
area before recommending to the Ministry of Finance for release of
funds/incentive corresponding to that milestone and reform area. Other
Members of the Committee include Secretary, Department of
Expenditure or his nominee; Secretary, Planning Commission or his
nominee; Joint Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development and Joint
Secretary (Housing).
3.106 The Committee note that the objectives of the URIF is to
provide reform linked assistance to States so as to provide required
incentives and accelerate the process of urban reform identified by
the Government. An allocation of Rs. 500 crore is divided among
the States/UTs on the basis of their percentage of urban population
to the total urban population of the Country. The incentives are
given as Additional Central Assistance (ACA) and the outlay is
released as 100 per cent grant by the Ministry of Finance on the
recommendation of the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation. For availing benefits under the Scheme, States/UTs are
required to enter into a prescribed Memorandum of Agreement
(MoA) with the Central Government. Releases for the year 2004-2005
onwards would depend upon the achievement of milestone for that
year as detailed in Memorandum of Agreement. The Committee
further note that before implementing the URIF scheme, the same
was brought to the notice of all State Governments. Draft
Memorandum of Agreement (to be signed with them) was also
circulated to them. This issue was also deliberated in Housing
Ministers Conference held on 12.9.2002. The Committee also note
that most of the States suggested that it may not be possible for
them to sign Memorandum of Agreement in respect of all the seven
reform areas and carry out all the reforms in one go. Simultaneously,
it was therefore, decided by the Government that weightage may be
given to early reform areas and truncated Memorandum of Agreement
may be allowed to be signed so that releases may be made as per
the weightage given to the agreed reform areas and as per the
achievement of the milestone in each reform area separately. Till
31 March, 2004, 21 States and 3 UTs have signed Memorandum of
Agreements/Truncated Memorandum of Agreement with the Ministry.

43
3.107 The Committee are of the firm view that before launching
any scheme Government should first take the concurrence and
approval of the scheme from States and should also examine whether
adequate infrastructure exist with States/UTs to launch such scheme.
merely by indicating all the State Governments regarding launching
of scheme do not serve the purpose. Without proper follow-up
measure the targets can not be achieved. The Committee apprehend
that the poor progress in URIF Scheme is due to lack of coordination
and poor response of the State Governments. The Committee
recommend that the Government at this stage should adopt holistic
approach and the guidelines of the URIF Scheme be modified in
order to make it more viable so that the remaining States/UTs concede
to sign Memorandum of Agreements in respect of all reform areas
with the Ministry so that process of urban reform could be
accelerated. Schemes should not be launched superficially without
finding its relevance and whether the same can take off. In the
above case, this was not done. A perfunctory approach may lead to
waste of time, money, material and human resources. Such casual
move on the part of the Ministry is deprecated and they should be
careful in future before resorting to such puerile approach. The
Ministry should re-analyze the above scheme with feasibilities and
spell out the steps which could lead to its success.

CHAPTER IV
URBAN HOUSING
4.1 Housing and Human Settlement is a State subject. Each State
prepares its own action Plan. As per the National Housing and Habitat
Policy, 1998, the role of the Central Government is that of an enabler
and not of a provider. However, various schemes for housing and
human settlement implemented by the Government, provide additional
funds to the State Governments by way of grant/loan to boost their
efforts.
4.2 The National Agenda for Governance focusses on Housing for
all as a priority area, with particular emphasis on the needs of the
Economically Weaker Sections and Low Income Group category. This
programme envisages to facilitate construction of 2 million additional
units every year. Out of which 7 lakh would be taken up for
construction in Urban areas and 13 lakh houses would be taken up
for construction in rural areas. HUDCO is to meet the target of 4 lakh
units in urban areas and 6 lakh dwelling units in rural areas annually.
A target of 2 lakh dwelling units in Urban areas to be met by Housing
Finance Institutions (HFIs) recognized by National Housing Bank (NHB)
& Public sector Banks and the balance 1 lakh dwelling units in Urban
areas by the Cooperative Sector. Loans are disbursed by these agencies
for construction of dwelling units.
4.3 The progress under the ‘Two Million Housing Programme’ since
its inception in 1998-99 is as under:—
Dwelling units sanctioned under two million Housing Programme from
1998-1999 to 2003-2004
Sl.No. Year HUDCO HFIs Banks Cooperative Total
1. 1998-1999 430399 153932 39739 174944 799014
2. 1999-2000 460218 135035 91460 88218 774931
3. 2000-2001 470881 171496 162240 80899 885516
4. 2001-2002 401078 262991 195624 73659 933352
5. 2002-2003 459969 259772 377319 73461 1170521
6. 2003-2004 427455 291955 329376 55000 1103786
Total 2650000 1275181 1195758 546181 5667120
44

45
Amount sanctioned under two million Housing Programme
from 1998-1999 to 2003-2004
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Year HUDCO HFIs Banks Cooperative Total
1. 1998-1999 1193.35 5032.69 1090.36 1205.88 8522.28
2. 1999-2000 1159.11 3583.64 2055.75 1240.86 8039.36
3. 2000-2001 578.87 4587.30 4284.36 1367.72 10818.25
4. 2001-2002 450.48 7420.89 5449.23 1392.90 14713.50
5. 2002-2003 2792.91 7433.21 11715.50 1287.09 23228.71
6. 2003-2004 685.77 11548.78 10942.57 550.00 23727.12
Total 6860.49 39606.51 35537.77 7044.45 89049.22
4.4 The Working Group on Housing in the Planning Commission
estimated shortage of 22.44 million houses during the 10th Plan. The
Working Group on Housing observed that 90 percent of housing
shortage pertains to the weaker section. Under the Two-Million Housing
Programme, an annual target of 7 lakh urban houses has been set.
4.5 When asked about the salient features of recommendations
made by the National Commission on Urbanization with reference to
Urban Housing the Ministry stated that Recommendations of the
National Commission on Urbanization relating to housing are as
below:—
(i) Housing policy must aim a increasing the supply of serviced
land and low-cost shelter, improving and upgrading slums
and conserving the existing housing stock;
(ii) The State must facilitate housing and ensure access to basic
inputs. It should not become a real estate developer;
(iii) The sites and services programme should be extended to
cover the entire cross-section of society. Besides providing
housing, the programme should be used to generate
employment;
(iv) Apart from providing access to land, the housing programme
must also provide for finance, infrastructure development,
and community facilities;
(v) Inner city upgradation  and housing repair must be
encouraged;
(vi) Public agencies in the housing sector should be restructured
for fufilment of their new role as facilitators rather than
providers of housing; and

46
(vii) Rent acts should be modified to limit tenancy protection to
the poor and to the existing tenancies and to provide for
annual revision of rents to reflect increases in the cost of
living, the increases varying between residential and non-
residential premises and houses above and below 80 square
metres.
4.6 National Housing & Habitat Policy, 1998 has taken into account
these recommendations as is evident from the aims of the Policy which
inter-alia provides :—
Aims of National Housing & Habitat Policy
(i) Creation of surpluses in housing stock either or rental or
ownership basis.
(ii) Providing quality and cost effective housing and shelter
options to the citizens, especially the vulnerable group and
the poor.
(iii) Ensuring that housing, along with the supporting services,
is treated as a priority and at par with the infrastructure
sector.
(iv) Planning of urban transport is to be an integral part of the
urban Master Plan.
(v) Development of cities and villages in a manner which
provide for a healthy environment, increased use of
renewable energy sources and pollution free atmosphere
with a concern for solid waste disposal.
(vi) Using the housing sector to generate more employment and
achieve skill upgradation in housing and building activity,
which continue to depend on unskilled and low wage
employment to a large extent.
(vii) Ensuring that all dwelling units have easy accessibility to
basic sanitation facilities and water.
(viii) Removing legal, financial and administrative barriers for
facilities access to land, finance and technology.
(ix) Progressive shift from a subsidy based housing scheme to
cost sharing or cost recovery-cum-subsidy schemes for rural
housing.
(x) Progressive shift of rural housing strategies from target
orientation to a demand driven approach.
(xi) Using technology for modernizing the housing sector to
increase efficiency, productivity, energy efficiency and quality.
Technology would be particularly harnessed to meet the
housing needs of the poor.

47
(xii) Forging strong partnerships between private, public and
cooperative sectors to enhance the capacity of the
construction industry to participate in every sphere of
housing and habitat.
4.7 The Committee note that housing and human settlement is a
State subject. Each State prepares its own action plan. As per the
National Housing and Habitat Policy, 1998, the role of the Central
Government is that of an enabler and not of a provider. However,
various schemes for housing and human settlement implemented by
the Government, provide additional funds to the State Governments
by way of grant/loan to boost their efforts. The Committee further
note that the National Agenda for Governance focuses on ‘Housing
for all’ as a priority area with particular emphasis on the needs of
the Economically Weaker Sections and Low Income Group Category.
The working Group on Housing estimated shortage of 22.44 million
houses during the 10th Plan. 90 percent of housing shortage pertains
to the weaker sections. The Committee feel that keeping in view the
shortage of 22.44 million houses during the 10th Plan and 90 per
cent of shortage pertaining to the weaker sections there is an urgent
need to increase the supply of affordable houses to the Economically
Weaker Sections and Low Income Group category through a holistic
programme of allocation of land, extension of funding assistance
and provision of loan on low interest rate for construction of houses
for EWS category. The Committee also feel that to boost the housing
construction activities in the country, there is a need to encourage
and enlarge the participation of private sector, public sector,
cooperatives and individuals in this priority sector. The Committee
further feel that to overcome the enormous shortage of housing in
the country there is a need to encourage rental housing which
requires legislative changes in existing rent control laws. The
Government should think it over and come out with a proposal.
Equity to HUDCO for Housing
4.8 HUDCO is the only Housing finance institution in the country
which earmarks substantial portion of its loaning pertions for weaker
sections. 55% of HUDCO’s housing loans are meant for EWS/LIG
housing. Loans for EWS programmes are given at comparatively lower
rates. The main objective of providing equity support to HUDCO has
been reasonable provision of subsidised loan for EWS housing
programmes in the State through cross subsidisation.
4.9 The equity is released against the authorised capital of HUDCO
in accordance with the Budget provision available. No target has been
fixed. However, HUDCO signs a Memorandum of Understanding with
the Ministry for each financial year, indicating the quantum of loans
to be sanctioned and released for housing and urban infrastructure.
Separate targets are fixed for sanction and release of loans for EWS/

48
LIG along with number of EWS/LIG units to be constructed each
year. HUDCO has been meeting these targets.
4.10 The authorised capital of HUDCO is Rs. 2,500 crore which is
to be fully subscribed by Government of India. Paid up capital is Rs.
2,000.25 crore (as on 7.6.2004). In order to meet the expansion
programme of HUDCO and yet keep the Capital Adequacy Ratio of
HUDCO, further infusion of equity to HUDCO would be necessary
from time to time.
4.11 Total outlay in the 9th vis-a-vis 10th Five Year Plan, year-wise
towards equity to HUDCO for Housing is as follows:—
Total 9th Plan outlay Rs. 500 crore (Rs. in crore)
Year 1997- 1998- 1999- 2000- 2001-
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Amount 35.00 110.00 150.00 155.00 155.00
Total 10th Plan Outlay Rs. 1000 crore (Rs. in crore)
Year 2002-2003 2003-2004 2004-2005
Amount 180.00 215.60 225.00
4.12 Cumulatively till 31st March 2004, HUDCO has sanctioned
15,275 schemes involving a total project cost of Rs. 1,19,121 crore
(excluding HUDCO Niwas) with loan component of 63,472 crore. An
amount of Rs. 43663 crore has been released. HUDCO’s assistance has
helped in the construction of 143 lakh residential units, about 61 lakh
sanitation units and in undertaking 1,110 urban infrastructure schemes
effectively improving the living conditions in the urban and rural areas,
in 1,790 towns.
4.13 The Committee note the main objective of providing equity
support to HUDCO has been reasonable provision of subsidised
loan for EWS housing programmes in the States through cross
subsidisation. A sum of Rs. 225 crore have been allocated during
the year 2004-2005 to HUDCO for equity support. Cumulatively till
31st March, 2004, HUDCO has sanctioned 15,275 schemes involving
a total project cost of Rs. 119121 crore with loan component of
Rs. 63,472 crore. An amount of Rs. 43,663 crore has been released.
HUDCO assistance has helped in the construction of 143 lakh
residential units. The Committee cannot but express their hope that
with the equity support from Government, HUDCO would help in
reducing the 90 per cent of housing shortage pertaining to the weaker
sections. The Committee would like to be apprised about the progress
made by HUDCO in this regard in due course.

CHAPTER V
HINDUSTAN PREFAB LIMITED
5.1 Hindustan Prefab Limited is a Public Sector Enterprise under
the administrative control of Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation is incurring losses since last 10 years. To enable it
to pay the wages and salaries to its employees, Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation is providing loan to HPL to pay
these statutory dues.
5.2 During the year 2002-2003 only Rs. 1.50 crore have been
approved and another demand of Rs. 1.50 crore was approved. In
2003-2004 Rs. 4.79 crore was approved in BE which was revised to
Rs. 5.00 crore. For the current year a sum of Rs. 4.50 crore is earmarked
as BE out of which Rs. 1.50 crore have been released so far. The loan
to HPL is provided under non-plan scheme to meet the expenses on
wages/salaries and VRS etc. being a sick unit.
Future of Company
5.3 During the examination of Demands for Grants 2003-2004 of
the Department of Employment and Poverty Alleviation the Ministry
informed that the Company has an accumulated loss of Rs. 60.00 crore
(anticipated) as on 31.3.2002. The estimated net worth as on 31.3.2002
is (-) Rs. 53.62 crore. The staff strength as on 1.1.2002 was 557,
consisting of 480 regular employees, 49 contract employees and
28 appointed on compassionate ground, yet to be regularized.
5.4 Because of the poor performance of HPL, the case of HPL was
referred to the Disinvestment Commission. The Disinvestment
Commission, in its Report submitted in November 1997, had identified
HPL as a non-ore PSU. The Commission recommended the
disinvestment of its shares to the extent of 74%. The Core Group of
Secretaries at the meeting held on 6.3.2000, had reconsidered the
recommendation of the Disinvestment Commission and recommended
closure of the Company. It recommended that a Voluntary Retirement
Scheme may be offered to the employees and the Ministry of Finance
may sanction a suitable on-plan loan to the company to implement
the scheme. The VRS scheme has been implemented in the company
since 1999-2000.
49

50
5.5 The Ministry had also informed that a draft Cabinet Note has
been prepared to decide the future operations of the HPL. The final
decision regarding the future operations is under consideration of the
Ministry in consultation with other concerned departments/Ministries.
5.6 When asked about the present status of future operations of
HPL the Ministry stated in a written reply that the status of the future
operation of HPL is yet to be finalised.
5.7 When asked about the action initiated on the recommendation
of the Committee to fix the responsibility for the dilapidated status of
operation of the HPL the Ministry in a written reply stated that the
Company was established in 1950s. It stated making losses from 1974
onwards except one or two years in between. The reasons for losses
were not due to any individual, but because of increased overhead
cost due to pay revisions, excise duty, etc. Further, obsolete technology,
excess manpower, lack of funds for modernization added to the losses.
5.8 The Committee had examined the issue of dilapidated
condition of Hindustan Prefab Limited in their earlier Reports on
Demands for Grants and recommended that Government should take
an early decision about the future operations of HPL. They note
that the issue is yet to be finalised. The Committee while reiterating
their earlier recommendation desire that the issue should be finalised
within a stipulated timeframe.
   N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
18 August, 2004 Chairman,
27 Sravana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

APPENDIX III
SWARNA JAYANTI SHAHARI ROZGAR YOJANA
UNSPENT BALANCES (CENTRAL + STATE) WITH STATES/UTs
(Rs. in lakhs)
Sl. Name of the Funds available at the Funds available at the
No. States/UTs bginning of Ninth five beginning of Tenth Five
Year Plan (1.12.1997) Year Plan(1.4.2002)
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 3953.27 2552.42
2. Arunachal Pradesh 458.65 606.55
3. Assam 1787.24 2511.40
4. Bihar 4647.40 6143.47
5. Chhattisgarh 0.00 539.33
6. Goa 221.90 127.21
7. Gujarat 2644.31 1532.84
8. Haryana 464.76 79.79
9. Himachal Pradesh 698.03 91.22
10. Jammu & Kashmir 939.21 883.56
11. Jharkhand 0.00 310.38
12. Karnataka 4888.75 1487.10
13. Kerala 846.82 359.02
14. Madhya Pradesh 3053.95 1556.56
15. Maharashtra 4860.44 4807.99
16. Manipur 531.58 834.23
17. Meghalaya 324.86 472.21
18. Mizoram 90.58 186.31
56

57
12 3 4
19. Nagaland 428.46 554.70
20. Orissa 1116.34 677.77
21. Punjab 1541.47 374.20
22. Rajasthan 3160.17 1643.98
23. Sikkim 106.16 91.71
24. Tamil Nadu 7514.65 1014.36
25. Tripura 98.20 163.97
26. Uttranchal 0.00 130.85
27. Uttar Pradesh 7364.15 2623.93
28. West Bengal 2679.15 1332.57
29. A&N Islands 120.31 313.52
30. Chandigarh 77.70 167.55
31. D&N Haveli 81.34 196.12
32. Daman & Diu 81.65 210.73
33. Delhi 262.53 486.15
34. Pondicherry 259.13 561.45
Total 55303.16 35625.15

APPENDIX IV
STATEMENT SHOWING PHYSICAL ACHIEVEMENT UNDER
SWARNA JAYANTI SHAHRI ROZGAR YOJANA
Year No of Micro- No. of persons No. of Mandays
Enterprises set up Trained under Generated under
under USEP USEP UWEP (in lakhs)
1997-1998 10382 10085 13.63
1998-1999 42643 38030 79.92
1999-2000 135221 104534 111.52
2000-2001 122844 39516 166.36
2001-2002 103403 85789 57.49
2002-2003 127880 99411 31.26
2003-2004 100903 121594 34.62
Total 643276 498959 494.80
58

APPENDIX V
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 10TH AUGUST, 2004
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Room No. 62,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
7. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
8. Shri D. Vittal Rao
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar
10. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
11. Shri Rakesh Singh
12. Shri Sugrib Singh
13. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
14. Shri Suresh Ganpat Wagmare
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
16. Shri Nandi Yelllaiah
17. Shri Jayantilal Barot
18. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
19. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
21. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
22. Shri Vidya Nivas Misra
59

60
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
3. Shrimati Neera Singh — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Employment
and Poverty Alleviation
1. Smt. Chitra Chopra, Secretary
2. Shri Ajeer Vidya, Joint Secretary & FA
3. Shri Pankaj Jain, Joint Secretary (HEPA)
4. Shri U.S. Pant, Chief Controller of Accounts
5. Dr. P .S. Rana, Chairman and Managing Director, HUDCO
6. Shri D.B.N. Rao, Director General, BMTPC
7. Col. R.K. Singh, Chief Executive Officer, CGEWHO
8. Dr. M.L. Khurana, Managing Director, NCHF
9. Shri A.R. Chaudhury, CMD, NBCC
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation to the sitting
and then drew their attention to the provision of direction 55 (1) of
the Directions by the Speaker. The Secretary, Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation briefly explained the overall position with regard
to the allocation and expenditure of the Ministry as well as the
projection of the Ministry during 10th Plan period. He also outlined
about the features of and enumerated the problems being faced in
implementation of schemes of the Ministry. The Committee then
discussed in detail the various issues related to the examination of the
Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry with special emphasis
on major Centrally sponsored Schemes viz. Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rozgar Yojana, Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY), Integrated
Low Cost Sanitation Scheme for liberation of Scavengers (ILCS),
National Scheme for Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and
their dependents (NSLRS) and Night Shelter Schemes of the Ministry.
The representatives of the Ministry clarified to the queries of the
members.
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

61
APPENDIX VI
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON TUESDAY, THE 17TH AUGUST, 2004
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
3. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
4. Shri Amitava Nandy
5. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
6. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
7. Shri L. Rajgopal
8. Shri D. Vittal Rao
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar
10. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
11. Shri Sugrib Singh
12. Shri K. Subbarayan
13. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
14. Shri Suresh Ganpat Wagmare
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
16. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
17. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
18. Shri Jayantilal Barot
19. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
22. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brama

62
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
3. Shrimati Neera Singh — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of
the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the
draft Report on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation. After deliberations the
Committee adopted the draft report with slight modifications.
3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
Report on the basis of factual verification from the concerned Ministry
and present the same to the House of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX VII
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Sl.No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations
12 3
1. 2.8 The Committee find that under the
jurisdiction of the Ministry there are two
major Schemes viz. VAMBAY and SJSRY to
tackle the problem of urban slums and to
provide self-employment to urban poor. The
detailed analysis of the aforesaid Schemes
has been made in the subsequent chapters
of the Report. Here the Committee would
like to note that the allocation under the
two aforesaid Schemes i.e. Rs. 280.58 crore
and Rs. 103 crore during 2004-05 is not
adequate. The Committee note that there
are big challenges before the Ministry in
the areas of addressing various problems
relating to slum population and
employment to urban poor. They feel that
the allocation of the Ministry is too meagre.
The Committee strongly recommend to the
Government to provide adequate allocation
under the respective Schemes of the
Ministry. While recommending for higher
outlay, the Committee would also like that
the Ministry should first of all do the
proper homework before going to the
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance
for higher allocation.
2. 2.9 The Committee find that although the UPA
Government has assured 100 days wage
employment to the bread earner in each
family at the minimum wage, there is no
clear cut strategy on the part of the
Government to achieve the said targets. The
63

64
12 3
Committee note that one of the major
employment Scheme, SJSRY is under the
jurisdiction of the Ministry. They also find
that the Yojana is plagued with various
bottlenecks resulting in ineffective
implementation of the programme. While
the Yojana has been dealt with in detail in
the subsequent chapter, the Committee
would like to highlight that it is high time
that the Ministry revise the guidelines of
the Yojana, after consultation with the State
Governments, urban local bodies and all
concerned. After doing the proper planning
they should increase the targets.
3. 2.10 As the name of the Ministry suggests the
main task of the Ministry is to tackle the
issue of urban employment. To enable the
Government to fulfil the promise of
providing 100 days wage employment to
the bread earner in each family, the major
task before the Ministry is to have the clear-
cut data of urban unemployed. Besides in
consultation with the State Governments
and all the Union Ministries concerned with
providing employment in urban areas a
clear-cut strategy should be chalked out so
that the promises made by the Government
are translated into reality. The Committee
should be informed accordingly.
4. 2.11 The Committee note from the Budget
allocations that the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation have
been allocated an overall B.E. 2004-2005
amounting to Rs. 841.68 crore (Gross) which
includes both Plan and Non-Plan. The
respective provisions on the Revenue and
capital sides are Rs. 530.13 crore and
Rs. 311.55 crore, respectively. The break-up

65
12 3
of Plan and Non-Plan provision is
Rs. 830.00 crore and Rs. 11.68 crore,
respectively. The Committee also note that
in the Revenue Section the budgetary
allocation in the Plan section in year 2003-
2004 amounted to Rs. 347.9 crore but it has
increased to Rs. 523 crore in year 2004-2005,
marking almost 50.33% increase in planned
allocations in the present financial year.
Certain schemes have been added to the
portfolio of the Ministry of Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviation as the
Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme for
Liberation of Scavengers (ILCS) and
National Scheme for Liberation and
Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their
dependents (NSLRS) were transferred from
the Ministry of Urban Development and
Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment, respectively. Further, a new
scheme for re-settlement of slums in
Dharavi, Mumbai has been launched for
which a provision of Rs. 75 crore has been
made in the BE 2004-2005. Although with
the addition of the said schemes, the 50.33%
increase in the Revenue Section attributes
to be notional for the required ongoing
expenses. The Committee are of the firm
view that the increased allocation of funds
be utilized in the right perspective.
5. 2.12 The Committee express their deep concern
about the continuous nature of unspent
balances of funds lying with the State
Governments, which were released by the
Centre for implementation of various
poverty alleviation schemes depicting the
incomplete implementation of the schemes/
programmes. The Committee need hardly
emphasize that inordinate delay in release

66
12 3
of Central share of funds to the States gives
very less time to the State Government and
ULBs for the implementation of a
programme thereby defeating the main
purpose behind each of these poverty
alleviation programmes/schemes. The
Committee, therefore strongly recommend
that comprehensive monitoring should be
done at the Central level and periodical and
timely review of the functioning of the
programmes under implementation should
be made by a high level body of the
Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty
Alleviation so as to ensure proper
implementation of the schemes. The
Committee also recommend that concrete
steps must be taken to obviate incidences
of rush hour spending or release of funds
towards the fag end of a financial year so
that the allocated budgetary funds are
utilized constructively. The Ministry should
chalk out a time-frame regarding releases
of funds under the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme of their Ministry to States/UTs.
6. 3.6 The Committee note that in 1993-94, the
urban poverty ratio was 32.4% and it came
down to 23.6% in 1999-2000 i.e. a decrease
of 8.8%. The Committee are, however, not
at all convinced by the stand taken by the
Ministry that this decrease in poverty ratio
is attributed to the impact and effective
implementation of the various urban
poverty alleviation programmes of the
Government as they are of the firm view
that the Government have yet to go a long
way in tackling the problem of poverty
alleviation and effective implementation of
schemes/programmes earmarked for
upliftment of the urban poor population.

67
12 3
The Committee endorse the observation
made in the 10th Plan Document that the
implementation of programmes for the
urban poor is beset with enormous
problems and the problem of inadequate
funding has been compounded by under-
utilisation of Central funds, diversion of
funds released for specific programmes, and
infructuous expenditure. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that concerted efforts
be made by the Central as well as the State
Governments in line with the planned
objectives of poverty eradication by way of
efficient monitoring at the Central level and
involvement of State level coordinators,
urban local bodies and NGOs.
7. 3.7 The Committee note that the Ministry’s
contention is that the funds allocated to the
poverty alleviation scheme are inadequate
to meet the requirements of about 67.1
million urban poor population. In this
respect, the Committee would like to
emphasize that ongoing poverty and
employment schemes should be fully and
effectively implemented at first in the States
and periodic and timely monitoring of the
schemes should be carried out at Central
level. The Committee are also of the firm
view that appropriate punitive measures
must be taken at the Ministerial level in
cases where misuse and diversion of funds
has come to the notice. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the steps taken
in this direction at the earliest.
8. 3.12 The Committee note that consequent to a
decision taken in 2001 by the Government,
10% of the total budget provision of the
Ministries/Departments is liable to be spent
for the development projects in North

68
12 3
Eastern States including Sikkim. The
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation also implements the schemes/
programmes related to following areas viz.
(i) Housing projects predominantly for the
urban poor; (ii) Poverty alleviation projects;
and (iii) Slum improvement/upgradation
projects. The financial allocations for the
year 2002-2003 amounted to Rs. 62.50 crore
and the Actual expenditure amounted to
Rs. 44.17 crore and for the year 2003-2004,
the budget allocation amounted to Rs. 62.5
crore but the actual expenditure amounted
to Rs. 51 crore. Regarding the year
2004-2005, the budget estimate is equal to
Rs. 83 crore. On the question of under-
spending and existing variations in budget
estimates, revised estimates and actual
expenditure during 2002-2003 and 2003-2004,
Ministry have explained that North Eastern
States and Sikkim had furnished their
Project Proposals very late during the year
2002-2003. On receipt of these Project
Proposals, these were got appraised through
National Building Construction Corporation
(NBCC). NBCC also took some time in the
appraisal of these Reports as it involved
site visits and detailed consultations with
the concerned State Government Officials.
Therefore, the Ministry could release
Central funds to the Executing Agencies in
the last  Quarter of the financial year. The
Committee deprecate that the Central funds
had been released to the executing agencies
in the last quarter of the Financial year,
thereby leaving ample possibility for
incidence of unspent balances. The
Committee recommend that proper efforts
should be made by the Ministry to address
the North Eastern State Governments to

69
12 3
expedite their submission of project
proposals for timely release of funds and
concerted measures be also taken by NBCC
in the appraisal of the proposals revised
from the States so that the schemes/
programmes could be implemented in a
time-bound manner.
9. 3.34 The Committee are constrained to note that
about 50 per cent of allocation during the
9th Plan period had been made available
for the SJSRY scheme, however, the unspent
balances of the Scheme in the 9th Plan was
to the tune of more than 553 crore. As on
30th June, 2004, the unspent balance
amounting to Rs. 271.55 crore exists with
the States/UTs. Since a tangible amount of
unspent balances including the Centre and
State shares persists to remain with the
States/UTs, the Committee are of the firm
view that urgent attention should be given
by the concerned States/UTs towards this
unspent balance.
10. 3.35 The Committee recommend that earnest
efforts be made by the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation to
provide an appropriate monitoring
mechanism to ensure timely and full
implementation of SJSRY Scheme. During
the course of evidence, the representatives
of the Ministry apprised the Committee that
most of the Schemes are being implemented
by the States and ULBs. The Ministry is
trying for a joint monitoring mechanism
with the State Governments and admitted
that monitoring has to be stepped up and
evaluation of the Schemes have not been
done. For under-spending, it has been
stated that States share has not been given

70
12 3
in certain cases due to financial difficulties
or inadequate funds. As assured by the
Ministry, the Committee expect that
effective monitoring mechanism is
formulated in a specific time frame and the
position is apprised to the Committee.
11. 3.36 The Committee note that SJSRY scheme is
being monitored through quarterly progress
report and periodical review meetings
under the Chairmanship of Minister/
Secretary/Joint Secretary/Deputy Secretary
of the Ministry. To further improve the
implementation of the scheme, a proposal
to notify the guidelines of the scheme is
under consideration of the Government on
the basis of the problems faced by the
States/UTs. The revised guidelines are likely
to be implemented in due course. The
Committee desire that keeping in view the
slow progress of the SJSRY the Ministry
should strengthen the monitoring of the
Scheme at both the Central and State levels
by conducting field visits of the senior
officers of the Ministry to have first hand
information about the actual
implementation of the scheme. The
Committee note that the Ministry is in the
process of revising the guidelines of SJSRY.
They would like that the various issues
resulting in ineffective implementation of
the programme should be analyzed
threadbare after consultation with State
Governments, Reserve Bank of India and
other, respective Banks viz. Commercial,
Cooperative Banks involved with the
Scheme, Urban Local Bodies and NGOs,
through them the public at large. The
Committee would also like that the various
issues raised by the erstwhile Standing

71
12 3
Committee on Urban and Rural
Development with regard to SJSRY, should
also be taken into consideration while
finalizing the guidelines of the Scheme. The
Committee hope that the revised guidelines
of the Scheme would be finalised at the
earliest. The Committee also hope that the
revised/modified guidelines of the Scheme
will expand the scope of SJSRY scheme to
cater to the requirements of the urban poor
to a greater extent including street vendors
and hawkers.
12. 3.37 The Committee are informed that during
the 9th Plan, no physical targets were fixed
under the SJSRY schemes and it was left
to the State/UTs concerned to fix the targets
at State level as per their needs. However,
in 10th Plan under SJSRY target of 4 lakh
self-employment benefits and skill
development training to 5 lakh BPL persons
have been fixed. The Committee are of the
view that without fixing targets for a
scheme, it is very difficult to assess the
success of a scheme. The Committee hope
that all out efforts will be made to meet
the targets as set forth by the Government.
13. 3.38 It may be pointed out that the Committee
(2003) had conducted an on-the-spot study
visit to Aurangabad on 11 September, 2003
and they found that SJSRY was being
implemented in a novel way. Under the
Scheme, two Lok Seva Kendras were
established. The Kendras were acting as a
service provider to meet the day today
needs of plumbing, electrical, masonry
works of the local residents. The youth
trained in various such trades were enrolled
with the Kendras,—Municipal Corporation

72
12 3
had provided telephone instruments and
furniture worth Rs. 12,000 for each of the
Kendra. Wide publicity was also given by
the Municipal Corporation. The Committee
found it a novel way of providing
employment to unemployed youths as well
as providing the basic services to the local
residents. The Committee desire that the
Government should explore the feasibility
of adopting the above novel model on all
India basis so as to provide gainful
employment to unemployed trained youths.
14. 3.39 The Committee note under the Community
structures component of SJSRY schemes
house to house survey is yet to conducted
in 242 towns. The break-up of 242 towns
is as given below:
Assam 1
Bihar 103
Chhattisgarh 35
Jammu & Kashmir 45
Jharkhand 47
Madhya Pradesh 2
Punjab 3
West Bengal 6
Total 242
15. 3.40 The Committee are surprised to find that
during the examination of Demands for
Grants (2003-2004) of the erstwhile
Department of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation, the Department had
furnished a figure of 230 towns where
house to house survey was yet to be

73
12 3
conducted. Now this year the Ministry has
informed the Committee that house to
house survey under the Scheme is yet to
be conducted in 242 towns. The Committee
desire that the Ministry should verify the
accurate number of towns where house to
house survey is yet to be conducted and
hope that in future the Ministry would
furnish accurate data to the Committee. The
Committee would like to emphasise that
Ministry should complete the first stage of
the programme i.e.  identification of
beneficiaries by conducting house to house
survey in remaining towns where house to
house survey is yet to be conducted as
without the identification of beneficiaries it
is very difficult to fix the physical targets
an assess the achievement of the Scheme.
The Committee hope that the Government
would impress upon the State Governments
to conduct house to house survey in the
remaining 242 towns at the earliest.
16. 3.41 The Committee note that as per the
guidelines of the Urban Self Employment
Programme (USEP) there is no minimum
educational qualifications for beneficiaries
under the programme. However, this
Scheme is not applicable to the persons
educated beyond the 9th Standard.
17. 3.42 The Committee feel that as per the
guidelines, the higher education beyond 9th
Standard acts as an disincentive to urban
poor as he is not entitled to avail of the
benefits of the Scheme. The Committee feel
that there is a need to review the said
condition. The benefit under the scheme
should be available to urban poor
irrespective of his educational qualification

74
12 3
so that more and more young poor can
come forward and by getting the benefits
of the Scheme cross the poverty line.
18. 3.43 The Committee note that the erstwhile
Nehru Rozgar Yojana meant to provide
employment to poor urban youth was
restructured as SJSRY. The Committee
conclude from what has been stated above
that there are serious problems being faced
in the implementation of the Scheme as has
been admitted by the Ministry itself. There
is no proper monitoring mechanism, Union
Government is dependent upon the State
Governments for monitoring. Further, even
the survey for identification of beneficiaries
that is the first stage of implementation is
underway. Beyond this there is the problem
of non-cooperation of Banks. The
Committee feel that at the field level there
are certain type of problems viz. huge gap
between the number of applicants and the
sanction and disbursement of loan, the
applications are rejected on flimsy ground.
All the issues related to the Banks should
be sorted out after interaction with the
Ministry of Finance, RBI and the concerned
Banks. There should be a mechanism to
hold the regular meetings with RBI and
Banks and the necessary follow-up action
should be taken to make the programme
effective. Not only that there is a need to
improve the delivery mechanism of the
Scheme through augmenting training and
proper monitoring. Further stress should be
on Self Help Groups by providing them
forward and backward linkages. The
Ministry should think of providing better
market facilities to enable SHGs to sell their
products. Besides, the products made by

75
12 3
SHGs should be sold through various Shilp
Melas like Saras being organized at Delhi
International Trade Fair. Such melas should
be organized in other big cities also of the
country. Besides, like Delhi Haat, in other
cities too such Haats should be opened and
the products produced by SHGs should be
sold. Wide publicity should also be given
to the products produced by the SHGs so
as to encourage them. Another area of
concern is to make the products produced
by Self Help Groups (SHGs) competitive.
There is a need to provide training to
improve the quality of the products. More
and more NGOs should be involved in the
task. SHGs should be involved in the trade
according to the local needs of the area
where these are manufactured so as to
ensure the viability of SHGs. Once SHGs
are viable and are engaged in profit making
activity, there will not be any problem of
Bank loan. Banks would come forward
themselves to provide loan under the
Scheme. In view of the aforesaid position
there is an urgent need to take all the
corrective steps as given above so as to
make the programme more effective.
19. 3.55 The Committee note that main purpose
behind VAMBAY scheme is to provide
shelter or upgrade the existing shelter for
BPL persons living in urban slums of the
country. This scheme, launched in 2001-2002
has been allocated funds amounting to
Rs. 2,040 crore in the Tenth Plan period.
The financial allocation in 2002-2003
amounted to Rs. 256.85 crore and in 2003-
2004 the allocation was to the tune of
Rs. 238.50 crore. Out of the total allocation
of Rs. 256.85 crore for the year 2002-2003

76
12 3
under VAMBAY, central subsidy of Rs.
218.35 crore was released for construction
of 1,10,388 dwelling units (more than the
target set  i.e.  1,00,000) and 21,488
community toilets. However, 15% of the
allocated amount could not be utilised due
to non-receipt of proposals from the State
Governments in some of the components
of VAMBAY though in shelter component,
the demand was enough to utilise all the
allotted amount. In such circumstances, the
Committee cannot but express their distress
about the sorry state of affairs of
implementation of the VAMBAY scheme.
The Committee are compelled to re-
emphasise that the delivery mechanism of
the Ministry needs to be really beefed up
in coordination with the concerned State
Governments and ULBs. The Committee
recommend that an accountable system of
checks should be chalk out so as to ensure
timely release of funds and full
implementation of VAMBAY programme.
The Committee would like to be apprised
about the steps taken in this regard in due
course.
20. 3.56 The Committee find that VAMBAY was
started in the year 2001. They note that
under Nirmal Abhiyan Component of
VAMBAY, sufficient demand was not
received during 2002-2003 and 2003-2004.
The Committee note that almost three years
have elapsed since the Scheme was started.
The Ministry should review the various
components of the Scheme in consultation
with State Governments and Urban Local
Bodies so that projections for the different
components of VAMBAY can be made.
After a review of various components and

77
12 3
after proper analysis the Government
should revise the guidelines.
21. 3.57 The Committee are contented to note that
VAMBAY being a demand driven scheme,
a target of construction of 1.12 lakh
dwelling units has been set internally by
Ministry for the current financial year 2004-
2005. The Committee are of the firm view
that it is essential to have a target for
achieving as well as assessment of
implementation of a scheme like VAMBAY
which is the only scheme for providing
shelter or upgrading the existing shelter for
slum dwellers in urban slums.
22. 3.58 The Committee note that under VAMBAY
Central subsidy is granted for construction
of dwelling unit @Rs. 20,000 for general
cities, Rs. 25,000 for Metro Cities and
Rs. 30,000 for mega cities. Some States like
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh etc. have
requested to enhance the existing cost of
construction/central subsidy of a dwelling
units. The Committee have been given to
understand that the funding pattern under
VAMBAY between Central and State
Governments is on 50:50 basis. In regard
to unit cost of dwelling unit as given above,
the Committee are of the opinion that
meaningful amount of Central subsidy
should be granted to the State Governments
for construction of dwelling units keeping
in view the current market prices and cost
of construction involved in the units. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that
comprehensive State-wise assessment of
escalation of cost of construction of units
under the VAMBAY scheme should be

78
12 3
made and the central subsidy for VAMBAY
projects be enhanced, accordingly.
23. 3.59 The Committee note that initially Core
Groups were formed in HUDCO to over-
see the implementation of VAMBAY in the
States where projects were being
implemented. However, orders were issued
by the Ministry formally for constitution of
State level Co-ordination Committees
(SLCC) comprising of State Government/
agency officials, representatives of the
Ministry, HUDCO and NGOs to monitor
the progress of VAMBAY scheme in the
States. In this regard, the Committee are of
the firm view that State Level Co-ordination
Committees should involve local
representatives and also end beneficiaries
for monitoring the implementation of
VAMBAY at the State level to plug the
loopholes or lacunae in implementation of
the Scheme at the grass-root level. The
Committee also desire that for further
strengthening the monitoring of the Scheme
at both the Centre and State level, regular
field visits should be made by the Senior
Officers of the Ministry/HUDCO to have
the first hand information of the schemes
so as to ensure that the benefits of
VAMBAY reach the genuine beneficiaries.
24. 3.70 The Committee are constrained to note the
slow financial and physical progress of
ILCS Scheme. The Scheme is infested with
numerous problems. The Committee express
their doubt as to whether manual
scavenging could be eradicated by 2007 as
envisaged in the National Action Plan for
Total Eradication of Manual Scavengers
given the present state of functioning of

79
12 3
this scheme. The Committee feel that it is
a matter of shame for the country that after
50 years of planned development, abolition
of manual scavenging is still a distant
dream. Manual Scavenging need to be
eradicated at any cost. It is an insult to the
humanity and in no way can be tolerated.
The Government should make earnest
efforts and persuade the States where the
scheme has not been successful. An earnest
effort is required with proper motivation
and action. Periodical review of the Scheme
is necessary with proper punitive legal
action against those who are indulgent. The
Committee deprecate the continuous
inhuman use of manual scavengers and
desire that urgent corrective measures be
made in this regard. The Committee
therefore, recommend that the Government
should review the existing guidelines of the
Scheme and modify the terms of reference
of the Scheme so as to make it feasible
and liberate the Scavengers from the
obnoxious practice of manual scavenging.
The Committee also recommend that
liberation and rehabilitation of Schemes for
scavengers should also be integrated with
this Scheme for effective implementation
and proper monitoring so that better results
could be achieved and manuals scavenging
is eradicated by 2007.
25. 3.81 The Committee appreciate that the two
schemes viz. Integrated Low Cost Sanitation
Scheme (ILCS) and National Scheme for
Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers
and their dependents (NSLRS) dealing with
the issue of liberating the Scavengers from
the manual scavenging in different States
and rehabilitation of the liberated

80
12 3
Scavengers have been brought under one
umbrella. The said scheme shave been
transferred to the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation from
the Ministry of Urban Development and
Social Justice and Empowerment
respectively. The Committee hope that there
will be better coordination between the two
issues viz. liberation and rehabilitation of
scavengers and the country would be able
to get rid of the obnoxious task of manual
scavenging expeditiously.
26. 3.82 The Committee note that the main reasons
for slow progress of the NSLRS scheme are
huge unspent balances with State Scheduled
Caste Development Corporation (SCDCs),
lack of new schemes/proposals sent by the
States/SCDCs and non-submission of
utilization certificates by the State on time.
The Committee take a serious view over
the lack of response from the States sand
the fact that huge unspent balances with
the SCDCs exists. The Committee desire
that the Ministry should impress upon the
State Governments to minimise the unspent
balances under the scheme by effective
implementation and submit the utilisation
certificates on time.
27. 3.89 The Committee note that the Night Shelter
Scheme was launched in 1988-89 to
ameliorate the shelter condition of
absolutely shelterless and pavement
dwellers in metropolitan cities. Since 1990-
1991, this Scheme is being implemented
through HUDCO. In the light of various
suggestions from the implementing
agencies, the scheme was modified in 1992
and again in 2002 in consultation with the

81
12 3
planning Commission and the Ministry of
Finance. The present scheme is now limited
to construction of Night Shelter with
community toilets and baths with Central
Subsidy for construction of composite night
shelter @ 50% of the cost of construction
subject to the cost-ceiling of Rs. 20,000 per
bed for night shelter. HUDCO or any other
organisation bears the balance portion of
funds by way of extending of loans. The
Committee also note that the component
of independent pay & use toilets has since
been decided to be merged with VAMBAY.
28. 3.90 The Committee are informed that as on
9.7.2004, HUDCO has sanctioned 99 Night
Shelters/Pay and Use Toilets Schemes. On
completion, these projects would provide
17,599 beds, 17,279 WCs, 2671 baths and
2422 urinals. A subsidy of Rs. 1580.21 lakh
has been released by HUDCO for these
schemes apart from loan release of
Rs. 1053.05 lakh. Under Night Shelter
Scheme, Government’s financial assistance
is for construction of the Night Shelter
building structure/compound. As per
procedure, individual persons are not
financially assisted under the scheme, as the
shelters are normally run by local bodies/
organizations. The Committee note that the
total outlay in the 10th Plan period for this
scheme is Rs. 30.97 crore and the Budget
Estimates for the year 2004-2005 is Rs. 4
crore. The Committee are surprised to learn
that the Government subsidy in 2001-2002
amounting to Rs. 544.6 lakh had been
sanctioned but only Rs. 65.10 lakh were
actually released and HUDCO advanced a
loan of Rs. 444.9 lakh but released no
amount in 2001-2002. In their 5th Report

82
12 3
the Standing Committee on Urban and
Rural Development had also expressed their
deep displeasure that during the year 2001-
2002, no expenditure was incurred on the
Night Shelter Scheme as the scheme was
not attractive. In 2002-2003, the Government
subsidy as released for this scheme amounts
to Rs. 345.8 lakh and the HUDCO loans is
to the tune of Rs. 190.66 lakh. Further, the
Government subsidy in 2004-2005 is
equivalent to Rs. 195.28 lakh and HUDCO
loan as released is Rs. 64.36 lakh. The
Committee are unable to concur that on the
one hand the Ministry had stated that the
Night Shelter Scheme was unattractive due
to which funds had not been release in
2001-2002 and on the other hand subsidy
and loans have been released, consequently,
in 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 for the same
scheme. In the circumstances, the
Committee are compelled to hold that the
Ministry seems to resort to flimsy pleas for
the poor performance of the Night Shelter
Schemes.
29. 3.91 The Committee note that the guidelines
stipulate that ULBs, NGOs, Charitable
Institutions, Public Sector Undertakings etc.
be involved in implementation of the Night
Shelter Scheme. The present scheme is
under revision in consultation with the
concerned agencies including State
Governments/NGOs to market the Schemes
more attractive. This may lead to an
increased role for NGOs. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the modified
guidelines for Night Shelter Scheme be
finalised at an early date and the role of
NGOs in implementation of the Scheme be
clearly demarcated so as to make the

83
12 3
implementation of the scheme in a smooth
and timely manner.
30. 3.92 As regards adequate provision of funds for
the scheme, the Committee desire that
realistic assessment of Budget Estimates be
put forth and HUDCO be advised to
release/sanction loans/advanced to
cooperative societies/organisations/NGOs
etc. by modification of eligibility conditions
etc., if required, so that the facility of Night
Shelters is provided to the destitute and
beneficiaries.
31. 3.98 The Committee note that as per study
conducted by TCPO slum population which
was 148.249 lakh during 1981 increased to
188.659 lakh during 1990-1991 and further
increased to 254.811 lakh during 2001. The
Committee further find that different data
of slum population have been indicated by
two different studies conducte dby TCPO
and census studies. As per TCPO the slum
population during 2001 in 26 big cities is
254.811 lakh but as per census of India
based on the Registrar Census of India,
slum population in 26 big cities is 165.65
lakh. The Committee feel that sincere efforts
have not been made to know the slum
ppulation in the country. The Committee
recommend that the Ministry should first
of all conduct a study to know about the
slum population in all the big cities of the
country in order to arrive at the correct
estimate of State/UTs. Besides there should
be some mechanism to review the data with
regard to slum population after a fixed
period of time say  five years. Such a data
is required for formulating plan for tackling
the various issues like rehabilitation,

84
12 3
relocation and providing inrastructure and
hygienic conditions in urban slums. Besides
for urban planning as well as finalisation
of Urban Policy, such a data is the
necessary input.
32. 3.99 The Committee are constrained to note the
poor performance of National Slum
Development Programme. Upto 30 June
2004 a total of Rs. 2,475.85 crore has been
released by the Central Government and
about 3.74 crore slum dweller shave been
benefited from the programme which
means that on an average about Rs. 662
per head was spent during the last eight
years on slum dwellers whereas according
to the 2001 Census, there are 40.6 million
persons living in slumbs in 607 towns/cities
in the entire country. The Committee desire
that the Government should enhance the
release of funds to the States under this
Programme and should ensure that release
should be made for specific projects with
adequate and proper Central monitoring of
the projects under the Programme.
33. 3.100 The Committee further note that Draft
National Slum Policy is under the
consideration of the Ministry. Draft National
Sum Policy Inter-alia  envisages an inclusive
approach for slum dwellers and granting
land tenure to them as tenable sites either
in-situ or by relocation. The Committee
desire that Draft National Slum Policy
should be finalised and implemented at the
earliest as such policy could bring an
attitudinal change among the Government
bodies and general public including slum
dwellers, regarding measures to improve
the quality of life of slum dwellers.

85
12 3
34. 3.106 The Committee note that the objectives of
the URIF is to provide reform linked
assistance to States so as to provide
required incentives and accelerate the
process of urban reform identified by the
Government. An allocation of Rs. 500 crore
is divided among the States/UTs on the
basis of their percentage of urban
population tot he total urban population of
the Country. The incentives are given as
Additional Central Assistance (ACA) and
the outlay is released as 100 per cent grant
by the Ministry of Finance on the
recommendation of the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation. For
availing benefits under the Scheme, States/
UTs are required to enter into a prescribed
Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) with
the Central Government. Releases for the
year 2004-2005 onwards would depend
upon the achievement of milestone for that
year as detailed in Memorandum of
Agreement. The Committee further note
that before implementing the URIF scheme,
the same was brought to the notice of all
State Governments. Draft Memorandum of
Agreement (to be signed with them) was
also circulated to them. This issue was also
deliberated in Housing Ministers
Conference held on 12.9.2002. The
Committee also note that most of the States
suggested that it may not be possible for
them to sign Memorandum of Agreement
in respect of all the seven reform areas and
carry out all the reforms in one go.
Simultaneously, it was therefore, decided by
the Government that weightage may be
given to early reform areas and truncated
Memorandum of Agreement may be
allowed to be signed so that releases may

86
12 3
be made as per the weightage given to the
agreed reform areas and as per the
achievement of the milestone in each term
area separately. Till 31 March, 2004,
21 States and 3 UTs have signed
Memorandum of Agreements/Truncated
Memorandum of Agreement with the
Ministry.
35. 3.107 The Committee are of the firm view that
before launching any scheme Government
should first take the concurrence and
approval of the scheme from States and
should also examine whether adequate
infrastructure exist with States/UTs to
launch such scheme. Merely by indicating
all the State Governments regarding
launching of scheme do not serve the
purpose. Without proper follow-up measure
the targets can not be achieved. The
Committee apprehend that the poor
progress in URIF Scheme is due to lack of
coordination and poor response of the State
Governments. The Committee recommend
that the Government at this stage should
adopt holistic approach and the guidelines
of the URIF Scheme be modified in order
to make it more viable so that the
remaining States/UTs concede to sign
Memorandum of Agreements in respect of
all reform areas with the Ministry so that
process of urban reform could be
accelerated. Schemes should not be
launched superficially without finding its
relevance and whether the same can take
off. In the above case, this was not done.
A perfunctory approach may lead to waste
of time, money, material and human
resources. Such casual move on the part of
the Ministry is deprecated and they should

87
12 3
be careful in future before resorting to such
puerile approach. The Ministry should re-
analyse the above scheme with feasibilities
and spell out the steps which could lead
to its success.
36. 4.7 The Committee note that housing and
human settlement is a State subject. Each
State prepares its own action plan. As per
the National Housing and Habitat Policy,
1998, the role of the Central Government
is that of an enabler and not of a provider.
However, various schemes for housing and
human settlement implemented by the
Government, provide additional funds to
the State Governments by way of grant/
loan to boost their efforts. The Committee
further note that the National Agenda for
Governance focuses on ‘Housing for all’ as
a priority area with particular emphasis on
the needs of the Economically Weaker
Sections and Low Income Group Category.
The Working Group on Housing estimated
shortage of 22.44 million houses during the
10th Plan. 90 percent of housing shortage
pertains to the weaker sections. The
Committee feel that keeping in view the
shortage of 22.44 million houses during the
10th Plan and 90 per cent of shortage
pertaining to the weaker sections there is
an urgent need to increase the supply of
affordable houses to the Economically
Weaker Sections and Low Income Group
category through a holistic programme of
allocation of land, extension of funding
assistance and provision of loan on low
interest rate for construction of houses for
EWS category. The Committee also feel that
to boost the housing construction activities
in the country, there is a need to encourage
and enlarge the participation of private
sector, public sector, cooperatives and
individuals in this priority sector. The

88
12 3
Committee further feel that to overcome the
enormous shortage of housing in the
country there is a need to encourage rental
housing which requires legislative changes
in existing rent control laws. The
Government should think it over and come
out with a proposal.
37. 4.13 The Committee note the main objective of
providing equity support to HUDCO has
been reasonable provision of subsidies loan
for EWS housing programmes in the States
through cross subsidisation. A sum of
Rs. 225 crore have been allocated during
the year 2004-2005 to HUDCO for equity
support. Cumulatively till 31 March, 2004,
HUDCO has sanctioned 15,275 schemes
involving a total project cost of Rs. 119121
crore with loan component of Rs. 63,472
crore. An amount of Rs. 43,663 crore has
been released. HUDCO assistance has
helped in the construction of 143 lakh
residential units. The Committee cannot but
express their hope that with the equity
support from Government, HUDCO would
help in reducing the 90 per cent of housing
shortage pertaining to the weaker sections.
The Committee would like to be apprised
about the progress made by HUDCO in this
regard in due course.
38. 5.8 The Committee had examined the issue of
dilapidated condition of Hindustan Prefab
Limited in their earlier Reports on Demands
for Grants and recommended that
Government should take an early decision
about the future operations of HPL. They
note that the issue is yet to be finalised.
The Committee while reiterating their
earlier recommendation desire that the issue
should be finalised within a stipulated time-
frame.

51
APPENDIX I
MINISTRY OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT & POVERTY ALLEVIATION
PLAN ALLOCATION & EXPENDITURE
(Rs. in crore)
9th Plan 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Allocation Actual Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE
Sl.No.    Name of Schemes Proposed by BE Exp. (9th Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp.
Planning allocation plan) up (Prov.)
Commission to
31.3.02
1 2 3 4 56 7 89 1 01 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 51 61 7 1 81 9 2 02 12 2
A. Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
1. Housing
2. SJSRY 4869.20 1009.00 705.00 512.89 180.65 126.35 123.00 168.00 95.03 85.91 168.00 45.50 39.18 105.00 105.00 103.42 94.50 94.50 101.81 103.00
3. Equity to HUDCO 280.00 500.00 605.00 605.00 150.00 150.00 150.00 155.00 155.00 155.00 155.00 155.00 155.00 180.00 180.00 180.00 215.60 215.60 21 5.60 225.00
4. Housing Census 15.00 5.00 3.32 0.82 0.52 0.25 0.07 0.50 0.25 0.22 0.30 0.03 0.25 0.30 0.30 —————
Periodic Survey & MIS
through NBO
5. S&T Grants to 12.00 7.00 15.00 15.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 —————
Institute and other
Programme including
Building Centres
6. Night Shelter Schemes 8.00 1.00 10.96 6.60 1.00 1.00 1.20 3.40 3.40 3.40 4.56 4.56 0.00 5.00 5.00 3.00 4.50 4.50 1.00 4.00

52
1 2 3 4 56 7 89 1 01 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 51 61 7 1 81 9 2 02 12 2
7. Resettlement of  Slums 75.00#
in Dharavi
8. IYSH activities/
Conferences 3.00 2.00 2.69 1.39 0.60 0.60 0.29 0.57 0.30 0.20 0.32 0.32 0.31
9. Nehru Rojgar Yojana 0.00 0.00 80.00 31.20
10. Urban Basic Services 0.00 0.00 20.00 8.47 Merged with SJSRY
for Poor
11. P .M.’s integrated 0.00 0.00 88.00 31.90
Urban Poverty
12. Low Cost Sanitation 30.00
for Liberation of
Scavengers
13. National Scheme for 40.00 24.27 20.00
Liberation &
Rehabilitation of
Scavengers
14. BMTPC 28.75 25.00 20.80 23.16 4.00 3.50 4.00 4.00 4.00 6.50 4.00 5.41 3.86 4.00 4.00 4.40 3.00 4.00 4.00 5.00
15. Grants to NCHF 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.56 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.22 0.20 0.20 0.22 0.40
16. VAMBAY 0.00 0.00 0.00 73.56 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 69.00 73.56 256.85 256.85 218.35 238.50 238.50 238.55 280.58
17. Infrastructure facilities 45.00 25.00 53.80 34.57 5.00 0.10 0.00 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.30 6.30 6.30 8.03 8.03 0.00 6.00 5.00 4.44 0.01
in D.P . Colonies in
West Benngal
}

53
1 2 3 4 56 7 89 1 01 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 51 61 7 1 81 9 2 02 12 2
18. UNDP Assistance for 4.00#
National Strategy for
Urban Poor
19. HPL for VRS 4.00 6.50 0.00 7.00 2.50
20. Urban Indicators 627.50 5.00 3.78 0.38 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.33 0.32 0.28 0.32 0.32 0.10 0.12 0.12 0.14 0.20 0.20 0.11 0.01
Programme
21. N.E. Areas 76.00 33.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 38.00 33.00 33.00 62.50 62.50 44.17 62.50$ 62.50 $51.00 83.00
Grand Total 5889.45 1580.00 1685.35 1378.94 345.00 285.00 281.76 341.50 272.00 267.71 380.00 330.00 317.26 625.00 625.00 553.70 625.00 665.00 641. 00 830.00
#New Schemes
$Rs. 10.5 crore out of Rs. 62.5 crore re-appropriated to SJSRY and was fully utilized.

54
APPENDIX II
STATEMENT SHOWING BRIEF SUMMARY OF DEMANDS FOR THE LAST FIVE YEARS 1999-2000,
2000-2001, 2001-2002, 2002-2003, 2003-2004
THE PERCENTAGE OF INCREASE/DECREASE
DEMAND NO. 103 MINISTRY OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT & POVERTY ALELVIATION
(Rs. in Crore)
Major Head Plan+Non-Plan % Plan+Non-Plan % Plan+Non-Plan % Plan+Non-Plan % Plan+Non-Plan %
Increase Incease Increase Increase Increase
1999-2000 2000-2001 2000-2001 2001-2002 2001-2002 2002-2003 2002-2003 2003-2004 2003-2004 2004-2005
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
REVENUE SECTION
Secretariat 2052 1.33 1.50 12.78% 1.50 1.50 0.00% 1.50 1.50 0.00% 1.50 1.55 3.33% 1.55 1.65 6.45%
Water Supply &
Sanitation 2215 50.00
Housing 2216 18.14 20.91 15.27% 20.91 19.37 -7.36% 19.37 275.84 1324.06% 275.84 252.95 -8.30% 252.95 300.37 18.75%
Urban Development 2217 0.00 0.00 0.00% 0.00 0.00 0.00% 0.00 0.00 0.00% 0.00 0.00 0.00% 0.00 75.00 100%
Other General
Economic Services
Swarna Jayanti 3475 6.45 6.29 -2.48% 6.29 6.29 0.00% 6.29 6.29 0.00% 6.29 6.29 0.00% 6.29 6.29 0.00%
Shahari Rozgar
Yojana

55
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Grants in aid to State
Government 3601 175.87 165.40 -5.95% 165.40 165.20 -0.12% 165.20 103.93 -37.09% 103.93 91.40 -12.06% 91.40 93.91 2.75%
Grants-in-aid to UTs 3602 2.53 1.91 -24.51% 1.91 1.91 0.00% 1.91 1.91 0.00% 1.91 1.91 0.00% 1.91 1.91 0.00%
North Eastern Areas 2552 0.00 38.00 0.00% 38.00 19.00 -50.00% 19.00 31.25 64.47% 31.25 1.00 -96.80% 1.00 1.00 0.00%
Total 204.32 234.01 14.53% 234.01 213.27 -8.86% 213.27 420.72 97.27% 420.72 355.10 -15.60% 355.10 530.13 49.29%
CAPITAL SECTION
Capital Outlay on 4216 150.00 155.00 3.33% 155.00 155.00 0.00% 155.00 180.00 16.13% 180.00 215.60 19.78% 215.60 225.00 4.36%
Housing
North Eastern Areas 4552 0.00 0.00 0.00% 0.00 19.00 0.00% 19.00 31.25 64.47% 31.25 61.50 96.80% 61.50 82.00 33.33%
Investment in PSUs 6216 10.00 10.00 0.00% 10.00 10.00 0.00% 10.00 10.00 0.00% 10.00 9.79 -2.10% 9.79 4.55 -53.52%
Total 160.00 165.00 3.13% 165.00 184.00 11.52% 184.00 221.25 20.24% 221.25 286.89 26.97% 286.89 311.55 8.60%
Grand Total 364.32 399.01 9.52% 399.01 397.27 -0.44% 397.27 641.97 61.60% 641.97 641.99 0.00% 641.99 841.68 31.10%