CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Urban Development (2007-08) deals with the
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their Twentieth
Report on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of Urban Development
which was presented to the Lok Sabha on 27th April, 2007.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all
the 13 recommendations which have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 2.7, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 4.23, 4.24, 4.25, 4.43, 4.44, 5.11 and 5.12
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of Government’s replies:
Para No. Nil
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.8 and 4.33
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited:
Para No. Nil
3. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some
of these recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.
Need to project realistic Budgetary Estimates
Recommendation (Para No. 2.7)
4. The Committee had noted as below:—
The Committee, while examining the Expenditure Details of the Ministry of
Urban Development from the year 2000-2001 to 2006-2007 note that there exists a
substantial mismatch between Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and actuals both in
Plan and Non-Plan expenditure of the Ministry of Urban Development from the year
2001-2002 to 2006-2007. While the Committee do agree that the progress and
performance of schemes cannot be uniform, hampering thus the allocation of funds at
RE stage, they are of the view that the Budget planning could be made more accurate
with a realistic assessment of the contributing factors. To quote an instance, the
Committee note that in the year 2005-2006, while the BE for Plan Expenditure was

2
Rs. 2080.33 crore, the RE was Rs. 2580.33 crore and the figures for Actual Expenditure
came out as Rs. 2810.43 crore which means a gap of Rs. 730.10 crore between BE and
Actual Expenditure. There was a difference of Rs. 230.00 crore (approx.) between RE
and the Actual. The Committee feel that the Ministry has a major responsibility in this
regard and thus, should be more careful while projecting their estimates at the Budget
Estimate stage itself only so as to avoid the practice of seeking unnecessary
Supplementary grants.
5. The Government have Replied as below:—
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance.
6. The Committee while taking note of the substantial mismatch among the
Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actuals both in the Plan and the Non-
Plan expenditure of the Ministry of Urban Development from the year 2001-02 to
2006-07, had recommended that the Ministry should be more careful, while
projecting their Estimates at the Budget Estimates stage itself, so as to avoid the
practice of seeking unnecessary supplementary grants. The Ministry in their action
taken reply have merely stated that the observations of the Committee have been
noted for compliance. The Committee are not satisfied with the routine one line
reply by the Ministry as it has been noticed that year after year, there does not
seem to be any noticeable improvement in the Ministry’s Budgetary exercise despite
the earlier observations of the Committee. The Committee are at a loss to know
whether any exercise has been initiated on this front at all. They would like to
know as to what concrete steps have actually been taken by the Ministry to project
realistic estimates at B.E. stage for the year 2008-09 by adopting the concept of
Zero-based Budgeting. Also, they would urge the Ministry to adopt a rationale
approach during the preparation of Budgetary proposals, keeping in view the
performance of various schemes on the ground as well as the requirement of funds
in view of the targeted performance during the next year, lest the overall efficiency
of the Ministry should continue to suffer from setbacks due to either unavailability
of funds at the right time or its under-utilization.
Intensive monitoring of States’ performance to prevent non-utilization of funds
Recommendation (Para No. 2.8)
7. The Committee had noted as below:—
The Committee express their concern over the fact that the Ministry of Urban
Development had surrendered substantial quantum of funds during the years
2001-2002 to 2005-2006 under its Demands Nos. 99, 100 and 101. In this connection,
the Ministry sought to justify the surrenders on the grounds that final approval of some
of the projects/scheme could not be obtained in time. The Committee do not find
justification convincing, since they feel that such occurrences can be prevented provided the
planning/estimation/projections are submitted in a strictly time-bound manner and pushed
forward vigorously thereafter. Also, the Committee note that as on 31 December 2006

3
Rs. l142.78 crore was lying as unspent balance with the State Governments under various
schemes of the Ministry of Urban Development. The Committee are inclined to conclude
from the foregoing that the performance of various schemes of the Ministry has not
been up to the mark. Besides, the Ministry need to strengthen the monitoring mechanism
of the ongoing schemes both at the Central and the State levels and impress upon the
slow performing State Governments to utilize allocated funds appropriately in a time
bound manner so that the plan funds lying idle with the States could be utilized for the
development of the urban areas.
8. The Government have replied as under—
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance.
The Ministry has drawn up programmes in consultation with all the stake holders to
optimally utilize the funds allocated by the Ministry. State Governments and
implementing agencies are regularly impressed upon to utilize allocated funds to them
in a time bound manner and submit utilization certificates.
9. The Committee had expressed their concern over the fact that the Ministry
had surrendered substantial funds during the year 2001-2002 to 2005-2006 under
its respective Demands and as on 31st December, 2006, an amount of Rs. 1142.78
crore was lying unspent with the State Governments under various Schemes. The
Ministry have now informed in the Action Taken Reply that they have drawn up
programmes in consultation with all the stakeholders to optimally utilize the funds
allocated and that the State Governments and implementing agencies were regularly
impressed upon to utilize allocated funds to them in a time bound manner and
submit utilization certificates. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply. They
would like to recall that in the Statement laid before the Parliament as required
under the FRBM Act, 2003 in February 2007, it was stated that delays in receipts
of Utilization Certificates were broadly indicative of the poor implementation
strategy, among other things. The said Statement had also indicated that given the
poor fund management skills available with the implementation agencies, the
returns on such parking of funds was lower than the cost of borrowed funds to the
Central Government. The Committee, therefore, feel deeply concerned at the failure
of the Ministry to effectively play its role of the facilitator and the coordinator and
are of the view that the Ministry should study factors that adversely affect the
implementation and monitoring of various schemes so that States/ UTs make
optimum utilization of funds allocated to them for intended purposes and submit
UCs in a time bound manner.
Development of Satellite towns /cities with appropriate funding
Recommendation (Para No. 3.12)
10. The Committee had noted as below:—
The Committee are of view that due to rapid urbanization there has been a
stupendous rise in the migration of rural population to big cities in search of employment

4
and livelihood. This influx has resulted in the haphazard growth of planned cities, a
steep rise in slums and unauthorized colonies and has contributed to enormous strain on
urban infrastructure. The Committee have been given to understand that the concept of
National Capital Region has been formulated basically to check this trend. The Committee
note that the Government is replicating this model to other big cities also, like Mumbai.
However, they are also aware of the concerns expressed in various quarters on the need
to ensure better connectivity and infrastructure in the satellite towns so as to make them
more attractive for the migrant population. They therefore, cannot but overemphasize
on the need to ensure a balanced and harmonious development of mega cities and their
adjacent towns with adequate allocation of funds.
11. The Government have replied as under:—
Ministry of Urban Development has formulated the Scheme of Urban
Infrastructure Development in Satellite Towns / Counter Magnets of Million plus Cities.
In this regard, Planning Commission has already allocated Rs.50.00 lakh for the same
as a token allocation during 2007-08. The objectives of the Scheme are:
/head2rightTo develop existing satellite towns/counter magnets around million plus
Urban Agglomerations (UAs) covered under JNNURM preferably with a
population of more than one lakh with urban infrastructure facilities such
as transport, power, communication, drinking water, sewerage, drainage
and solid waste management comparable with the mother city.
/head2rightTo channelise their future growth so as to reduce pressure on million
plus UAs.
/head2rightTo promote sustainable development in the million plus city region so as
to develop these as self-contained entities.
/head2rightTo adopt innovative public-private partnerships model for development.
The draft Guidelines for the Scheme of Urban Infrastructure Development in
Satellite Towns / Counter Magnets of Million Plus Cities have been prepared and sent
to all States/UTs for comments/observations based on which the draft Guidelines are to
be discussed in a Brainstorming Session with participation of all the States/UT
Governments before its finalization for implementation—The States/UTs have also been
requested to list the satellite towns around the million plus cities of the State/UT, which
are covered under JNNURM.
12. The Committee had in their original recommendation emphasized on
the need to check the haphazard growth of cities and influx of migrants from rural
areas to cities by ensuring a balanced and harmonious development of mega cities
and their adjacent towns with adequate allocations of funds. The Ministry in their
reply have now informed that they have formulated the Scheme of Urban
Infrastructure Development in Satellite Towns / Counter Magnets of million
plus cities and in this regard, the Planning Commission has already allocated
Rs. 50 lakh for the same as a token allocation during 2007-08. The draft guidelines

5
of the Scheme have been sent to States/UTs for comments. The Committee feel that
this is a step in the right direction and desire that the Ministry should finalize the
guidelines of the Scheme expeditiously taking into consideration all the comments/
observations received from the States/UTs and other stake holders in the Scheme.
The Committee further feel that Rs. 50 lakhs, though a token allocation, is a meager
amount in view of the large infrastructure requirements of Satellite Towns and
Counter Magnet Areas and thus there is an urgent need to increase the amount
allocated for the scheme. The Committee understand that in the States of
West Bengal and Karnataka, certain towns are being developed on Public-Private-
Partnership (PPP) mode successfully. The Committee desire that the Ministry
should undertake a study of such experiments to arrive at a fast track and
dependable scheme.
Need to have better funding for UIDSSMT
Recommendation (Para No. 4.33)
13. The Committee had noted as below:—
The Committee note that the UIDSSMT is the scheme meant for improving the
overall urban infrastructure in approx. 5100 cities/towns excluding the 63 cities
covered under JNNURM. The scheme proposes to cover areas like water supply and
sanitation, sewerage and solid waste management, construction/improvement of roads
and drains, prevention of soil erosion etc. The Committee further note that an
allocation of mere Rs.702.22 crore has been made for UIDSSMT for the year
2007-2008 against the proposed requirement of Rs. 2500 crore. This implies that instead
of Rs.49 lakhs (approx.) for each city under UIDSSMT as proposed, the Ministry has
been given a measly sum of Rs.14 lakhs (approx.) for each city. The Committee find the
gap between the two very wide and feel that the budget allocation of Rs.702.22 crore
for the towns / cities covered under UIDSSMT during the year 2007-2008 would be
insufficient. The Committee are of the view that without allocation of adequate funds,
capital intensive projects under UIDSSMT would not be completed in time and this will
defeat the very purpose of the scheme. The Committee desire that the Ministry should
pursue the matter so as to get adequate funds for the scheme during the 11th Plan period
to cover all 5100 towns/cities, during the operation period of the scheme upto
2011-2012. The Committee are also of the view that as resource crunch is being felt for
the scheme, the Government should take steps to mobilize resources through Public
Private Partnership for the 282 projects sanctioned so far. Further, the Committee feel
that the public assets thus created must have the capacity to generate funds for their own
maintenance later so that the dependence on Government grants could be lessened.
14. The Government have replied as under:—
During the year 2007-08 under Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for
Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) an amount of Rs. 702.22 crore has been allocated
which may fall short of the demand. Till date (27th June,2007) 419 projects in 336
towns have been approved for a total project cost of Rs. 6165.54 crore. As such committed

6
liability of 1st Installment of Additional Central Assistance (ACA) works out to
Rs. 2485.79 crore. Cumulative ACA amounting to Rs. 1336.45 crore has been released
till date and a balance of Rs. 1149.35 crore is to be released as part of the committed
liability of the year 2006-07. Moreover new projects would also be covered during
2007-08 besides assistance to be given to the ongoing schemes/projects. Therefore,
allocation for the Financial Year 2007-08 is inadequate and needs to be enhanced.
As per UIDSSMT Guidelines development of parking lots are to be taken up in
Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. One such parking scheme for Latur town in
Maharashtra has been approved at a total cost of Rs. 37.00 lakh and ACA amounting to
Rs. 14.80 lakh has been released for this scheme. Although Guidelines have not specified
clearly, other components may also be taken up on PPP mode. However, experience
shows that there is hardly any project approved so far other than parking lots where
State Governments have opted for PPP mode which may be due to poor response from
the private sector. The efforts will be made to encourage PPP in other sectors also. The
State Governments/Urban Local Bodies will have to maintain the public assets created
under the Scheme for which operation and maintenance cost is a part of the project
report.
As regards allocation under the Scheme, matter has been taken up with Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance to increase the allocation under the UIDSSMT
Scheme of JNNURM Mission in view of the large number of towns to be covered under
the Scheme.
15. From the Action Taken Reply submitted by the Ministry, the Committee
note that the inadequacy of the Budgetary allocation for UIDSSMT in the current
year as well as the need for its enhancement has since been taken up with the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance, as without an increase in the
allocation under the Scheme, a large number of towns required to be covered will
not be in a position to show any progress further. The Committee are in total
agreement with the views of the Ministry that an allocation of Rs. 702.22 crore
under the Scheme for the year 2007-08 would not be able to meet even the committed
liabilities of the year 2006-07. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry should complete whatever exercise is required to ensure that adequate
funds are available for the Scheme during the 11th Plan to cover all 5100 towns /
cities during the operation period of the Scheme. Besides, the Committee is fully
aware that the Central funds are to be spent through the agencies of State
Governments and thus reiterate that the main priority for the Ministry should be
to extensively monitor the implementation of the Scheme, particularly in areas
which constantly show unsatisfactory performance levels. As regards their
recommendation urging the Ministry to mobilize resources through PPP mode,
the Committee are dismayed to note from the Action Taken Reply that so far no
project has been approved, other than those for parking lots, where State
Governments have opted for PPP mode. The Committee have been given to
understand that one possible reason for this could be attributed to poor response
from the private sector. The Committee have also been informed that under

7
UIDSSMT guidelines, development of parking lots are to be taken up in PPP mode
but other components may also be taken up on this mode, though guidelines have
not specified this clearly. The Committee would like to understand the issue in
clearer terms and thus desire that the Ministry should clear all ambiguities
regarding components to be taken up in Public - Private - Partnership Mode under
the Scheme.
Grant of Income Tax exemption to NCRPB
Recommendation (Para No 4.44)
16. The Committee had noted as below:—
The Committee note that the NCRPB is paying Rs. 28 crore to Rs. 35 crore as
advance income tax every year. The Committee also note that NCRPB was exempted
from paying income tax since its inception in 1985. This exemption was withdrawn on
1st April 2003. In the Committee’s view, the heavy tax burden on NCRPB is seriously
affecting the Board’s financial ability. The Committee desire that since NCRPB is engaged
in the development activity of advancement of public utilities in the National Capital
Region for improving civic life, infrastructure development and decongestion of Delhi,
it has a strong case for Income Tax exemption. In this context, the Committee have been
apprised of the various efforts of the Board as well as the Ministry. The Committee are
of the opinion that in view of the tax exemption already granted to bodies like National
Highways Authority of India (NHAI) and Punjab Infrastructure Development Board
(PIDB), it would create an anomaly, if NCRPB continues to pay advance income tax.
They therefore, urge upon the authorities to correct this anomaly and grant income tax
exemption to the NCRPB at their earliest.
17. The Government have replied as under:—
The issue of grant of Income Tax exemption to National Capital Regional Planning
Board (NCRPB) has been taken up with Department of Revenue / Central Board of
Direct Taxes (CBDT). The case is under examination with CBDT and is being followed
up by the Ministry.
18. The Committee express their satisfaction that the issue of grant of
Income-Tax exemption to NCRPB is under examination with the Central Board of
Direct Taxes (CBDT) and is being followed by the Ministry. The Committee desire
that the Ministry should vigorously follow up the issue of grant of Income Tax
exemption with the CBDT and, if required, the matter may be taken up at the
Ministerial level They hope that the decision would be in favour of the NCPRB.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.7)
Need to project realistic Budgetary Estimates
The Committee, while examining the Expenditure Details of the Ministry of Urban
Development from the year 2000-2001 to 2006-2007 note that there exists a substantial
mismatch between Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and actuals both in Plan and
Non-Plan expenditure of the Ministry of Urban Development from the year 2001-2002
to 2006-2007. While the Committee do agree that the progress and performance of
schemes cannot be uniform, hampering thus the allocation of funds at RE stage, they are
of the view that the Budget planning could be made more accurate with a realistic
assessment of the contributing factors. To quote an instance, the Committee note that in
the year 2005-2006, while the BE for Plan Expenditure was Rs. 2080.33 crore, the RE
was Rs. 2580.33 crore and the figures for Actual Expenditure came out as Rs.2810.43
crore which means a gap of Rs.730.10 crore between BE and Actual Expenditure. There
was a difference of Rs. 230.00 crore (approx.) between RE and the Actual. The Committee
feel that the Ministry has a major responsibility in this regard and thus, should be more
careful while projecting their estimates at the Budget Estimate stage itself only so as to
avoid the practice of seeking unnecessary Supplementary grants.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
[Please see Paragraph No. 6 of Chapter I of the Report]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.10)
Requirement for allocation in proportion to growth in Urban Population
From the figures furnished regarding the growth in urbanization and the allocation
of funds made in favour of the Ministry of Urban Development in the last few years, the
8

9
Committee note that the increase in the Budgetary allocations for enhancing basic services
and urban infrastructure does not correspond with the growth of urban population in the
country and this has inflicted severe hardships on the urban population. The Committee
also note that although around 55% of India’s GDP is contributed by the urban population,
the percentage share of Urban Development Budget in term of GDP is decreasing every
year from 0.06% in 2001-2002 to 0.03% since 2003-2004. The Committee are of the
view that infrastructure inadequacies in urban area are a major factor constraining
development and growth and it is high time that the Government recognizes the massive
rise in urban population and decides to commensurately invest in rejuvenating and
enhancing the urban infrastructure. The Committee therefore, recommend that the
Government should strive to increase the percentage share of Urban Development Budget
in terms of GDP to a level which ensures that the cities are able to offer a reasonable
quality of life to the citizens. This the Committee feel, would enable them to become
national assets rather than liabilities, and engines of economic growth as well in
accordance with what the Government has pledged in their National Common Minimum
programme.
Reply of the Government
Planning Commission has been requested vide Ministry’s O.M. No. K-14011/
39/07- UD.II dated 14.5.2007 for higher allocation under Urban Development Sector
while finalizing allocation for 11th Five Year Plan. (2007-2012).
In addition, Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM)
and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small & Medium Towns
(UIDSSMT) was launched in December, 2005 to provide infrastructure facilities to
all urban towns including water supply, sewerage, drainage and solid waste management
facilities.
The objectives of the Mission focused attention on integrated development
of infrastructural services, secure effective linkages between asset creation and
asset management so that the infrastructural services created in the cities are not
only maintained efficiently but also become self-sustainable over the time and
ensure adequate investment of funds of fulfill deficiencies in the urban infrastructural
services.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.11)
Alternate mechanism for investment in Urban Infrastructure
The Committee further feel that since the requirements for urban infrastructure
are large and public resources are scarce, the Government should encourage and stimulate
an alternate mechanism for investment in urban infrastructure with adequate regulatory
mechanism.

10
Reply of the Government
The Working Group constituted by the Planning Commission, to assess the fund
requirement for Urban Development, has assessed that Rs. 1,27,025 crore are required
to provide water supply, sewerage and sewage treatment, drainage, solid waste
management, Management and Information System (MIS) and Research and
Development (R&D). However, the Planning Commission has provided a gross outlay
of Rs.20079 crore during the Tenth Five Year Plan for the State as well as Central
Sector. This necessitated exploring possible additional sources of funding other than
Government sources in the Water Supply & Sanitation sector and the following sources
were identified:—
1. Central Sector outlay : The Central Sector outlay to be stepped up from
the present Rs. 40,000 crore (under JNNURM/UIDSSMT) to around
Rs.70,000 crore under the ongoing Central programme of JNNURM and
UIDSSMT so that great thrust could be given to water supply and sanitation
sector in the urban areas.
2. State Sector Outlay: Likewise the State sector outlay which stands at
Rs. 18,749 crore during the 10th Plan to be stepped up to around Rs.35,000
crore.
3. Institutional Financing : Funds to be mobilized through national financial
institutions such as Life Insurance Corporation (LIC), Housing Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. (HUDCO). India Leasing and Financial
Service (IL&FS) etc. to the tune of Rs. 10,000 crore.
4. Additional assistance from external support agencies (ESA) : Through
external funding agencies viz. World Bank, ADB and other Bilateral
Agencies such as JBIC, funds to the tune of about Rs. 10,000 crore.
5. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and Private Sector: In addition, through
foreign direct investment and private sector, funds upto Rs.2,025 crore to
be mobilized to support the sector activities.
Thus, the summary of proposed fund flow for the sector is a follows:
Source of funding Amount (Rs. in crore)
Central Sector outlay 70000
State Sector outlay 35000
Institutional Financing 10000
Assistance from External Support Agencies 10000
FDI & Private sector 2025
Total 1,27,025
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]

11
Recommendation ( Para No.3.12 )
Development of Satellite towns/cities with appropriate funding
The Committee are of view that due to rapid urbanization there has been a
stupendous rise in the migration of rural population to big cities in search of employment
and livelihood. This influx has resulted in the haphazard growth of planned cities, a
steep rise in slums and unauthorized colonies and has contributed to enormous strain on
urban infrastructure. The Committee have been given to understand that the concept of
National Capital Region has been formulated basically to check this trend. The Committee
note that the Government is replicating this model to other big cities also, like Mumbai.
However, they are also aware of the concerns expressed in various quarters on the need
to ensure better connectivity and infrastructure in the satellite towns so as to make them
more attractive for the migrant population. They therefore, cannot but overemphasize
on the need to ensure a balanced and harmonious development of mega cities and their
adjacent towns with adequate allocation of funds.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Urban Development has formulated the Scheme of
Urban Infrastructure Development in Satellite Towns / Counter Magnets of Million
plus Cities. In this regard, Planning Commission has already allocated Rs.50.00 lakh
for the-same as a token allocation during 2007-08. The objectives of the Scheme are:—
/head2rightTo develop existing satellite towns/counter magnets around million plus
Urban Agglomerations (UAs) covered under JNNURM preferably with a
population of more than one lakh with urban infrastructure facilities such
as transport, power, communication, drinking water, sewerage, drainage
and solid waste management comparable with the mother city.
/head2rightTo channelise their future growth so as to reduce pressure on million plus
UAs.
/head2rightTo promote sustainable development in the million plus city region so as
to develop these as self-contained entities.
/head2rightTo adopt innovative public-private partnerships model for development.
The draft Guidelines for the Scheme of Urban Infrastructure Development in
Satellite Towns / Counter Magnets of Million Plus Cities have been prepared and sent
to all States/UTs for comments/observations based on which the draft Guidelines are to
be discussed in a Brainstorming Session with participation of all the State/UT
Governments before its finalization for implementation. The States/UTs have also been
requested to list the satellite towns around the million plus cities of the State/UT, which
are covered under JNNURM.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]

12
Comments of the Committee
[Please see Paragraph No. 12 of Chapter I of the Report]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.23)
Allocation of adequate funds for JNNURM
The Committee note that in order to cope with the massive problems resulting
from a rapid urban growth, the Jawaharlal Nehru Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM)
was launched by the Government in December, 2005, for a 7 year period beginning
2005-2006 with a total budget of Rs. 50,000 crore. At present, it envisages urban renewal
projects in 63 selected cities in a mission mode approach. The Committee further note
that for Sub-Mission-I on Urban infrastructure and Governance under JNNURM, which
is administered by the Ministry of Urban Development, a provision of Rs. 2474.90
crore has been made as Additional Central Assistance to States for the year 2007-2008.
The Committee also note the contention of the Ministry that the sum of Rs. 2474.90
crore would not be adequate to meet the requirements of various States to meet the
deficiencies in urban infrastructural services. The Committee are of view that since the
Government intends to push the JNNURM as an ambitious programme to bring about
urban renewal in the country, it is imperative to allocate adequate budgetary provisions
for the Sub-Mission-I under JNNURM. The Committee recommend that adequate
allocation for the scheme should be made so that the objectives of the JNNURM regarding
integrated development of urban infrastructure and services in 63 selected cities could
be achieved. At the same time, the Committee also expect the Ministry to have a fast
track and coherent approach for a sustainable development of the selected cities.
Reply of the Government
In the year 2007-08, an allocation of Rs. 2805.00 crore has been made for Urban
Infrastructure & Governance by Planning Commission on 26-03-2007. Matter has been
taken up with Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission to increase the allocation
for the scheme.
The appraisal of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) is done expeditiously and Central
Sanctioning & Monitoring Committee (CSMC) meets regularly to consider the Projects.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.24)
Need for expeditious appraisal of CDPs
The Committee note that the Ministry of Urban Development has already received
City Development Plans (CDPs) from 62 cities out of the 63 cities selected for
development. The 63rd CDP from Panaji, according to the Ministry, is to be received
shortly. The Committee further note that 45 CDPs have been approved so far by the

13
Ministry. They also note that the Ministry has taken a number of steps to encourage the
slow performance cities to submit CDPs/DPRs under the Scheme so as to sensitize
them and improve their performance in the preparation of acceptable CDPs/viable DPRs
which include knowledge sharing and crash training programmes. While the steps taken
by the Ministry are in the right direction, the Committee also desire that Government
should take all expeditious measures to avoid delay in the appraisal of CDPs/DPRs
submitted by the cities since the Mission needs to gain momentum in the second year of
its launching.
Reply of the Government
All 63 cities have submitted City Development Plans (CDPs). 60 CDPs have
been appraised and three CDPs are under appraisal. These are being appraised
expeditiously. The Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) being received are also appraised
expeditiously.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.25)
Unspent balances with State Governments
The Committee note that a substantial amount as unspent balance is lying with
some States under JNNURM, for instance Gujarat, Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh.
The Ministry have sought to justify this by stating that the arrangement earlier was to
release funds in some schemes but now only project based approvals are given and thus
only 25% funds are released at one go. The second installment is released only if the
earlier amount is utilized. Since the duration of JNNURM is 7 years, beginning from
2005-2006, the Committee desire that the Ministry should review the performance of
those States where large amount of funds are lying unutilized in the implementation of
JNNURM. If flexibility in the guidelines of the scheme is required for the overall
efficiency of the scheme keeping in view the local conditions of States, the same should
be assessed and worked upon, without any further loss of time so that funds under the
scheme do not remain unutilized.
Reply of the Government
Four intensive regional review meetings on Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban
Renewal Mission (JNNURM) have been held in the last 3 to 4 months at the level of
Secretary (UD). Areas of review include pace of implementation of projects, reforms,
project pipelines, matching contribution, fund utilization,  best practices and new
initiatives. Further, the Central Sanctioning & Monitoring Committee (CSMC) under
the Chairmanship of Secretary (UD), apart from approving the projects, also reviews

14
and monitors the progress of the ongoing projects under the mission, including utilization
of funds. A Quarterly Reporting System has also been introduced with focus on progress
on projects and reforms implementation. This covers physical and financial progress of
projects and additionally includes highlights of any innovative approaches implemented,
key issues being faced etc.
States/Urban Local Bodies have separately been addressed to intimate present
status in respect of unutilized funds together with reasons for non-utilisation of the
released funds.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.43)
NCRPB to raise additional resources from outside
The Committee note that the key rationale for constituting a National Capital
Region was to reduce the rate of in-migration into the National Capital as well as to
develop the Region at a level comparable to the best regions in the world. For translating
this vision into ground reality the National Capital Regional Planning Board (NCRPB)
was set up, whose responsibility was preparing a Regional Plan alongwith complementary
plan, monitoring their implementation and arranging for and overseeing the financing
of the selected projects in the NCR. The Committee have been given to understand that
the Board has a creditable loaning performance and its financial operations are getting
highest ratings by CRISIL. The Committee note that the NCRPB had projected an amount
of Rs.300 crore for the year 2007-2008 as budgetary support to which the NCRPB has
been allocated Rs.100 crore only. As the Board has a very sound financial base, the
Committee expect them to meet this shortfall by raising additional support from outside
so that their activities do not face resource crunch. The Committee recommend the
Government to take an early decision in this matter.
Reply of the Government
The NCR Planning Board has a loan disbursal target of Rs. 700.00 crore for
the year 2007-08 for financing selected infrastructure development projects in
the National Capital Region and Counter Magnet Areas. The Board is making all efforts
to meet this target with the help of budgetary support from Ministry of Urban
Development, contribution from Delhi Govt. and internal accruals including loan
repayments. The Board will raise additional support from outside, if required, to meet
the target.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]

15
Recommendation (Para No. 4.44)
Grant of Income Tax exemption to NCRPB
The Committee note that the NCRPB is paying Rs. 28 to Rs. 35 crore as advance
income tax every year. The Committee also note that NCRPB was exempted from paying
income tax since its inception in 1985. This exemption was withdrawn on 1st April
2003. In the Committee’s view, the heavy tax burden on NCRPB is seriously affecting
the Board’s financial ability. The Committee desire that since NCRPB is engaged in the
development activity of advancement of public utilities in the National Capital Region
for improving civic life, infrastructure development and dccongestion of Delhi, it has a
strong case for Income Tax exemption. In this context, the Committee have been apprised
of the various efforts of the Board as well as the Ministry. The Committee are of the
opinion that in view of the tax exemption already granted to bodies like National
Highways Authority of India (NHAI) and Punjab Infrastructure Development Board
(PIDB), it would create an anomaly, if NCRPB continues to pay advance income tax.
They therefore, urge upon the authorities to correct this anomaly and grant income tax
exemption to the NCRPB at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The issue of grant of Income Tax exemption to National Capital Regional Planning
Board (NCRPB) has been taken up with Department of Revenue/Central Board of Direct
Taxes (CBDT). The case is under examination with CBDT and is being followed up by
the Ministry.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
[Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report]
Recommendation (Para No. 5.11)
Adherence to targets set for various transportation projects
The Committee express serious concern over the well known fact that the
rapidly growing urban population is putting a heavy burden on the urban transport
system and the resultant deterioration in the urban transport system is being reflected
in the lower economic productivity as well as an irreversible damage to the environment.
They desire that since urban transport is crucial for the socio-economic development
of the country, a concerted and multi pronged action covering all modes of transport
is required. The Committee also feel that adequate investment is required in urban
transport, to encourage the use of public transport as well as promote alternate

16
technologies in various modes of transport. While appreciating the hitherto successful
DMRC Project-Phase-I, the Committee note that the Ministry have extended 40% cost
of quite a few similar transportation projects as grant to several State Governments,
which are currently under various stages of progress. The Committee hope that targets
set for the same would be met by the implementing agencies. The Committee are
also aware of the concern raised in some quarters about the impact of transportation
projects on the urban landscape and urge the Ministry of sensitize the States in this
respect so that the huge amount of public money invested in these projects does not
get wasted.
Reply of the Government
First this may be submitted that the Ministry provides 40% of the total cost of the
Comprehensive Traffic & Transportation Study/Feasibility Study/Detailed Project Report
as grant and not for transportation projects to the State Governments/UTs.
The Government has formulated a National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP),
2006 which, inter-alia, promotes development of integrated land use and transport plan
for all the cities. This Ministry extend financial support for preparation of such integrated
land use and transport plan in developing such plans provided such proposals are NUTP
compliant.
Amongst all mode of public transport, city bus service is prime mode of public
transport. State Governments have been advised to introduce state of the art city bus
service on public-private partnership model. Urban transport is an eligible component
for availing central financial assistance under Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal
Mission of the Ministry. Accordingly, Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS) proposals for
city of Ahmedabad, Bhopal, Indore, Pune and Vijayavada have been approved. These
BRTS proposals are most cost effective and high capacity public transport systems.
Since metro projects require huge investment, these projects are supported through
Viability Gap Funding and budgetary grant of the Ministry.
To achieve the objective of addressing traffic and transportation issues related to
policy making, planning, coordination, regulation, implementation, etc. a Task Force
comprising representatives of different Central Ministries and State Governments has
been set up for Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA) in all million plus
cities. The terms of reference of the Task Force, inter-alia, include to suggest institutional
mechanism(s) such as UMTA, independent regulators, traffic management body, etc.
for greater coordination in policy formulation, planning and regulation of traffic and
transportation and implementation of urban transport programmes and projects in all
million plus cities. NUTP calls for incorporating urban transportation as an important
parameter at the urban planning state itself rather than being a consequential requirement
It emphasize need for encouraging integrated land use, bringing about a more equitable
allocation of road space, institutional mechanism for enhanced coordination raising

17
finance through innovative mechanism and association of private sector. Accordingly,
State Governments/UTs have been advised with regard to the following:—
(i) Set up a standing arrangement to regularly guide and coordinate issues
relating to urban transport.
(ii) Ban development on 500 meter on the sides of new bypasses so that
development takes place along the pre-defined transport axes in a linear
form rather than a redial form.
(iii) To formulate comprehensive mobility plan giving priority to
pedestrianization, non-motorized transport, public/intermediate public
transport.
(iv) To amend byelaws relating to parking policy and using land as
resource.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No.5.12)
National Urban Transport Policy
The Committee understand that a National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP)
has been approved by the Government in April 2006. It, inter-alia, seeks to promote
integrated land use, transport planning, greater use of public transport, non-motorized
modes of travel, and use of cleaner technologies. The policy also offers Central
Government’s financial support, capacity building innovative financing mechanism,
institutional coordination, association of the private sector etc. The NUTP has been
circulated to all the States. While the objective of the NUTP sounds laudable, the
Committee recommend that the Central Government should impress upon the States to
strive to implement the National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP). In this connection,
the Committee also feel that the existing capacity, capability and experience in IT sector
for instance ‘intelligent transport system’, could be of great help in planning and
developing the urban transport in the cities. Further, the Committee desire that the
Government should conduct regular capacity building programmes at institutional and
individual level so as to create awareness regarding need to encourage public-private
participation in Urban Transport.
Reply of the Government
As a capacity building exercise in urban transport, regular workshops are organized
by this Ministry with the help of international experts to develop awareness, skills and
a deep understanding of State/city level officials in the various areas of urban transport
planning. Different workshops on Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS) have also been

18
organized to create awareness for implementation of BRT projects through Public Private
Partnership (PPP) model.
Indore has taken a lead and evolved a very good PPP model for operation of
their city bus services. All the State Governments / UTs have been suggested to introduce
city bus service on Indore model which can then be upgraded to BRTS.
The Ministry has also drafted a comprehensive scheme for capacity building in
urban transport for better understanding and coordinated approach towards developing
mobility plan and implementation of urban transport projects. The scheme would have
the following components:—
(i) Training
(ii) Education
(iii) Conference and Journals
(iv) Institutional Development, etc.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]

19
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
– NIL –

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.8)
Intensive monitoring of States’ performance to prevent non-utilization of funds
The Committee express their concern over the fact that the Ministry of Urban
Development had surrendered substantial quantum of funds during the years 2001-
2002 to 2005-2006 under its Demands Nos. 99, 100 and 101. In this connection, the
Ministry sought to justify the surrenders on the grounds that final approval of some of
the projects/scheme could not be obtained in time. The Committee do not find justification
convincing, since they feel that such occurrences can be prevented provided the planning
/estimation/projections are submitted in a strictly time-bound manner and pushed forward
vigorously thereafter. Also, the Committee note that as on 31 December 2006, Rs. l142.78
crore was lying as unspent balance with the State Governments under various schemes
of the Ministry of Urban Development. The Committee are inclined to conclude from
the foregoing that the performance of various schemes of the Ministry has not been up
to the mark. Besides, the Ministry need to strengthen the monitoring mechanism of the
ongoing schemes both at the Central and the State levels and impress upon the slow
performing State Governments to utilize allocated funds appropriately in a time bound
manner so that the plan funds lying idle with the States could be utilized for the
development of the urban areas.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance.
The Ministry has drawn up programmes in consultation with all the stake holders to
optimally utilize the funds allocated to the Ministry. State Governments and implementing
agencies are regularly impressed upon to utilize allocated funds to them in a time bound
manner and submit utilization certificates.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
[Please see paragraph No.9 of Chapter I of the Report.]
20

21
Recommendation (Para No.4.33)
Need to have better funding for UIDSSMT
The Committee note that the UIDSSMT is the scheme meant for improving the
overall urban infrastructure in approx. 5100 cities/towns excluding the 63 cities covered
under JNNURM. The scheme proposes to cover areas like water supply and sanitation,
sewerage and solid waste management, construction/improvement of roads and drains,
prevention of soil erosion etc. The Committee further note that an allocation of mere
Rs.702.22 crore has been made for UIDSSMT for the year 2007-2008 against the
proposed requirement of Rs.2500 crore. This implies that instead of Rs.49 lakhs (approx.)
for each city under UIDSSMT as proposed, the Ministry has been given a measly sum
of Rs.14 lakhs (approx.) for each city. The Committee find the gap between the two
very wide and feel that the budget allocation of Rs.702.22 crore for the towns/cities
covered under UIDSSMT during the year 2007-2008 would be insufficient. The
Committee are of the view that without allocation of adequate funds, capital intensive
projects under UIDSSMT would not be competed in time and this will defeat the very
purpose of the scheme. The Committee desire that the Ministry should pursue the matter
so as to get adequate funds for the scheme during the 11th Plan period to cover all 5100
towns / cities, during the operation period of the scheme upto 2011-2012. The Committee
are also of the view that as resource crunch is being felt for the scheme, the Government
should take steps to mobilize resources through Public Private Partnership for the 282
projects sanctioned so far. Further, the Committee feel that the public assets thus created
must have the capacity to generate funds for their own maintenance later so that the
dependence on Government grants could be lessened.
Reply of the Government
During the year 2007-08 under Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for
Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) an amount of Rs.702.22 crore has been allocated
which may fall short of the demand. Till date (27th June, 2007) 419 projects in 336
towns have been approved for a total project cost of Rs.6165.54 crore. As such committed
liability of 1st Installment of Additional Central Assistance (ACA) works out to
Rs.2485.79 crore. Cumulative ACA amounting to Rs. 1336.45 crore has been released
till date and a balance of Rs.1149.35 crore is to be released as part of the committed
liability of the year 2006-07. Moreover new projects would also be covered during
2007-08 besides assistance to be given to the ongoing schemes/projects. Therefore,
allocation for the Financial Year 2007-08 is inadequate and needs to be enhanced.
As per UIDSSMT Guidelines development of parking lots are to be taken up in
Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. One such parking scheme for Latur town in
Maharashtra has been approved at a total cost of Rs.37.00 lakh and ACA amounting to
Rs.14.80 lakh has been released for this scheme. Although Guidelines have not specified
clearly, other components may also be taken up on PPP mode. However, experience
shows that there is hardly any project approved so far other than parking lots where
State Governments have opted for PPP mode which may be due to poor response from

22
the private sector. The efforts will be made to encourage PPP in other sectors also. The
State Governments / Urban Local Bodies will have to maintain the public assets created
under the Scheme for which operation and maintenance cost is a part of the project
report.
As regards allocation under the Scheme, matter has been taken up with Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance to increase the allocation under the UIDSSMT
Scheme of JNNURM Mission in view of the large number of towns to be covered under
the Scheme.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/l/2007-Bt.(UD)
Dated: 16th July, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
[Please see paragraph No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report]

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES  OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
– NIL –
NEW DELHI; MOHD. SALIM
21 November, 2007 Chairman,
30 Kartika, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
23

APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY , 20TH NOVEMBER, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’.
Parliament House Annexe. New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
3. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
4. Shri L. Rajagopal
5. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
6. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Rajya Sabha
7. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
8. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
9. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
10. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
11. Shri Manohar Joshi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Saxena — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Harchain — Deputy Secretary-II
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee took up for consideration the draft report on Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry
24

25
of Urban Development. The Committee adopted the draft action taken report with slight
modifications.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration another draft report on Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry
of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation. After some deliberations, the Committee
adopted the draft action taken report with some modifications.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize both the Reports
and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
[Vide Para No. 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 13
II. Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government 11
Para Nos. 2.7, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 4.23, 4.24, 4.25, 4.43,
4.44, 5.11 and 5.12
Percentage of total recommendations (84.62%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not Desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies
Nil Nil
Percentage of total recommendations (0%)
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committe:
Para No. 2.8 and 4.33 2
Percentage of total recommendations (15.38%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final Replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Nil Nil
Percentage of total recommendations (0%)
26

STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Twentieth
Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
26

TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
( FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.11.2007
Presented in Rajya Sabha on 22.11.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka)

C.U.D No. 26
Price : Rs. 32.00
© 2007 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by National Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .............................................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government ................................................................................... 8
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s reply ................................. 19
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ........... 20
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect  which final replies of the
Government are still awaited ....................................................... 23
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee held on
20.11.2007 ..................................................................................... 24
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth report of
the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ................................................ 26

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2007-08)
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
5. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
6. Shri Anant Gudhe
7. Shri Pushp Jain
8. Shri Kailash Joshi
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar
10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
12. Shri A.K. Moorthy
13. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
14. Shri L. Rajagopal
15. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Papu Yadav
16. Shri D. Vittal Rao
17. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
18. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
19. Shri Jagdish Tytler
20. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
21. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
27. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
28. Shri Penumalli Madhu
29. Shri Mukul Roy
30. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
31. Shri Manohar Joshi

(iv)
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R. K. Saxena — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2007-08)
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present
the Twenty-Sixth Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twentieth Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Urban
Development.
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27th April, 2007. The
replies of the Government to 13 recommendations contained in the Report were received
on 23rd July, 2007.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered
and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 20th November, 2007.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twentieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in
Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; MOHD. SALIM
21 November, 2007 Chairman,
30 Kartika, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
(v)