38
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2008
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 18.12.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 41
Price : Rs. 76.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
PART I
A. Introductory ................................................................................... 1
B. Municipal Solid Waste (Handling & Management) Rules,
2000 ................................................................................................. 4
C. National Urban Sanitation Policy ............................................ 7
D. Magnitude of Municipal Solid Waste in Urban India ...... 9
E. Financing and Implementation of Solid Waste Management
Projects under JNNURM, UIDSSMT, Pilot-Project of SWM
in 10 Airfield Towns and other initiatives ........................... 11
F. Existing mechanism for dumping Garbage in and around
Delhi................................................................................................ 19
G. Monitoring of Solid Waste Management Projects ............... 22
H. Task Force on Integrated Plant Nutrient Management
Using City Compost ................................................................... 24
I. Different Stakeholders and their Roles in Sustainable Solid
Waste Management ..................................................................... 28
J. Waste Characterisation and Feasibility Studies ................... 32
K. Management of Different kinds of Municipal Solid Waste .. 33
L. Concept of Segregation of Waste ............................................ 37
M. Public-Private-Partnership in Solid Waste Management .... 39
N. Setting up of landfill facilities for Waste Disposal ............ 40
PART II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee ............ 42

PAGE
ANNEXURES
I. Action points of the various Ministries involved
in implementation of the recommendations of the
Task Force .................................................................................... 56
II. Setting up of Landfill Facilities for Waste Disposal ........ 61
III. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Standing Committee
on Urban Development (2007-08) held on 24th January,
2008 ............................................................................................... 63
IV . Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee
on Urban Development (2007-08) held on 15th July,
2008 ............................................................................................... 65
V. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Standing Committee
on Urban Development (2008-09) held on 17th December,
2008 ............................................................................................... 67(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2008-2009)
Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
5. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
6. Shri Anant Gudhe
7. Shri Pushp Jain
8. Shri Kailash Joshi
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar
10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
12. Shri A.K. Moorthy
13. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
14. Shri L. Rajagopal
15. Shri D. Vittal Rao
16. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
17. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
18. Shri Jagdish Tytler
19. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
20. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
21. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Dr. Prabha Thakur
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
27. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
28. Shri Penumalli Madhu
29. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
30. Shri Manohar Joshi
31. Shri Mukul Roy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. Ravinder Kumar Chadha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Arvind Sharma — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2008-09), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Thirty-Eighth Report on the subject
‘Solid Waste Management’ relating to the Ministry of Urban
Development.
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Urban Development and the Ministry of Environment and
Forests on 24th January and 15th July, 2008 respectively.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting
held on 17th December, 2008.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Urban Development and the Ministry of Environment
and Forests for placing before them the requisite material and their
considered views in connection with the examination of the subject.
5. They would also like to place on record their deep sense of
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the
officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
17 December, 2008 Chairman,
26 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Urban Development.
(v)

REPORT
PART I
A. Introductory
Municipal solid waste* consists of household waste, market waste
construction and demolition debris, sanitation residue, and waste from
streets. This waste is generated mainly from residential and commercial
complexes. With rising urbanization and change in lifestyle and food
habits, not only the amount of municipal solid waste has been
increasing rapidly but its composition is also changing. There are
different types of solid waste generated in the cities depending on
their sources which can be further classified as household waste or
municipal waste, industrial waste or hazardous waste, biomedical waste
or hospital waste and electronic waste.
1.2 Cities, being centres of industrial activity, generate large amount
of hazardous waste. These comprise toxic chemicals, radioactive
materials, and bio-medical or infectious wastes. These materials threaten
sanitation workers through occupational exposure and the general
public in their homes, communities, and general environment. Exposure
to these materials can occur near the site of generation, along the path
of its transportation, and near their ultimate disposal sites. Most
hazardous waste results from industrial processes that yield unwanted
byproducts, defective products, and spilled material. The generation
and disposal of hazardous wastes is controlled through a variety of
international and national regulations.
1.3 Cities also have a sizeable number of hospital and health-care
institutions which produce the biomedical wastes, that is, solid, liquid
and sharps, evolved from such health-care (medical) activities like
diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, prevention of disease or alleviation
of handicap in humans or animals, including related biomedical
research. Also, the number of patients suffering from life-style diseases
e.g. diabetes, obesity, etc., are constantly on the rise in cities and towns,
which has increased the use of disposable syringes, medications and
equipments at homes. This activity has resulted in adding bio-medical
hazardous waste in the household garbage of cities. The bio-medical
waste is different from the biological waste in the sense that the former
*Abbreviated and used as ‘MSW’ in the Report.

2
is generated from a man-made way whereas the latter from a natural
ecological cycle. Proper handling of biomedical waste is crucial to the
public health and needs to be convened with standard operating
procedures.
1.4 The Ministry of Urban Development informed the Committee
in a written note as under:
“Rapid urbanization has led to over-stressing of urban infrastructure
services including Municipal Solid Waste Management because of
poor resources and inadequacies of the existing systems. Therefore,
augmenting, operating & maintaining solid waste management
system* in a sustainable manner by urban local bodies would
require huge capital investment, introduction of latest technologies
which are cost effective, Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) in waste
management and introduction of appropriate waste management
practices in order to prevent waste from causing environmental
pollution and health hazards. Over the last few years, the consumer
market has grown rapidly leading to products being packed in
cans, aluminium foils, plastics, and other such non-biodegradable
items that cause incalculable harm to the environment. In India,
some municipal areas have banned the use of plastics and they
seem to have achieved success. Problems of urban waste
management is notable not only because of large quantities
involved, but also its spatial spread across 5161 cities and towns
and enormity and variety of problems involved in setting up and
managing systems for collection, transportation and disposal of
waste”.
1.5 India’s population as per 2001 Census was 1027 million with
285.35 million people residing in 5161 cities/towns. In Post
Independence era, while the population of India had grown three times,
urban population grew five times. The urban population has grown
from 17.3% of total population in the year 1951 to 27.87% in 2001 and
it is likely that 33% of the total population of the country would be
living in urban areas by 2021 A.D. As per the information available on
the website of TERI**, in 1947, cities and towns in India had generated
an estimated 6 million tonnes of solid waste, whereas in 1997 it was
about 42 million tonnes. More than 25% of the municipal solid waste
was still not being collected at all and; 70% of the Indian cities lacked
adequate capacity to transport it. Also there were no sanitary landfills
for waste disposal.
 *Abbreviated and used as ‘SWM’ in the Report.
**The Energy & Resources Institute, Delhi, India

3
1.6 When asked to explain the steps taken by the Ministry of
Urban Development regarding waste disposal, the Committee were
informed as under:
“Sanitation is a State subject and it is the responsibility of the
State Government to plan, design, implement, operate and maintain
solid waste management schemes. The Government of India,
Ministry of Urban Development is, however, facilitating the State
Governments and ULBs in implementing solid waste management
schemes in their cities and towns by way of the guidelines
indicated in the Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management
published by the Ministry. The Ministry of Environment and Forests
has notified Municipal Solid Waste (Management & Handling Rules,
2000, which has specific directives to the Local Bodies, District
Administrations and the Urban Development Departments of the
State Governments for proper and scientific management of
municipal solid waste. (These rules are being amended by the
Ministry of Environment & Forests)”.
1.7 When asked by the Committee, the Ministry of Urban
Development identified the following major issues in SWM, which in
a nutshell, were responsible for the present grim scenario:
“(i) Absence of segregation of waste at source.
(ii) Absence of funds and capacity with ULBs.
(iii) Lack of planning, technical expertise and appropriate
institutional arrangements.
(iv) Unwillingness of ULBs to introduce segregation at source,
proper collection, transportation and treatment/disposal.
(v) Indifference of citizens and lack of community participation
towards waste management due to lack of awareness.”
1.8 An effective management of solid waste, according to the
Ministry of Urban Development, involved a multi-material, multi-
source, environmentally sustainable management approach, with
following activities associated with it:
“(i) Waste generation
(ii) W aste handling and sorting, storage and processing at source
(iii) Collection
(iv) Sorting, processing and transformation

4
(v) Transfer and transport
(vi) Treatment and Disposal”.
1.9 It was further informed that the waste management options
included the hierarchy of:
“(i) Waste minimization
(ii) Recycling
(iii) Waste processing
(iv) Waste transformation
(v) Disposal on land.”
1.10 The Committee examined these and various other issues
concerning the magnitude of the problem of municipal solid waste
and its management in urban India, along with role of different stake
holders in mitigating the problem, which is reproduced in the
subsequent sections of the Report:
B. Municipal Solid Waste (Handling & Management) Rules, 2000
2.1 While examining the subject, the Committee observed that the
Government undertook the framing of the Manual on MSW (2000),
notifiying of MSW (Handling & Management), Rule (2000) and setting
up of the Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on SWM (1999), etc.,
following a PIL No. 888/1996 and a Writ Petition (2004) filed in the
Supreme Court of India. This PIL sought appropriate measures for
scientific methods to treat and process MSW in all class I cities of the
country. The Committee sought information from the Ministry of Urban
Development on the matter. From the details furnished by the Ministry,
the Committee noted that several measures were taken by the Ministry
of Urban Development, Ministry of Environment and Forests and the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, on matters related to SWM
projects in the country following the orders of the Supreme Court on
above-stated PIL and Writ Petition, which boosted the Government’s
efforts in this direction.
2.2 The Committee were apprised by the Ministry of Urban
Development that the Government of India, Ministry of Environment
& Forests notified the MSW (Handling & Management) Rule, 2000
under Environment Protection Act. The Municipal and Solid Waste
(MSW) Rules, Schedule V indicated the following roles and
responsibilities of different stakeholders:

5
(a) Every municipal authority within the territorial area of the
municipality is responsible for implementation of the
provisions of these rules, and for any infrastructure
development for collection, storage, segregation,
transportation, processing and disposal of municipal solid
waste.
(b) The Secretary-in-Charge of the Department of Urban
Development of the concerned State or the Union Territory ,
as the case may be has the overall responsibility for the
enforcement of the provisions of these rules in the
metropolitan cities.
(c) The District Magistrate or the Deputy Commissioner of the
concerned district has the overall responsibility for the
enforcement of the provisions of these rules within the
territorial limits of their jurisdiction.
(d) The State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) or the State Level
Committee which has to monitor the compliance of the
standards regarding groundwater, ambient air, leachate
quality and the compost quality including incineration
standards as specified in the Schedule of the rules and grant
authorization for setting up waste processing and disposal
facility including landfills, shall examine the proposal taking
into consideration the views of other agencies like the State
Urban Development Department, the Town and Country
Planning Department, Airport or Air Base Authority , the
Ground Water Board or any such other agency prior to
issuing the authorization.
(e) The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) coordinates with
the State Boards and the State Level Committees with regard
to implementation and review of standards and guidelines
and compilation of monitoring data.
2.3 The Ministry of Urban Development had also brought out a
Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, in May, 2000 to
facilitate the ULBs to address the SWM issues. Emphasizing upon the
role of State Governments and ULBs in this connection, the Ministry
submitted to the Committee as under:
“Since the Ministry has already disseminated the Manual of
Municipal Solid Waste Management regarding disposal of garbage,
disposal of non-combustible, non-decomposable wastes and disposal
of industrial wastes such as chemicals, paints, sand, etc., the State

6
Governments/ULBs have to follow the guidelines indicated in the
said Manual to address the aforesaid issues on disposal of solid
waste.”
2.4 As regards the query of the Committee on the policy to handle
the municipal waste, a representative of the Ministry of Urban
Development during the briefing meeting held on 24th January, 2008
stated as under:
“The Environment and Forest Ministry’s Municipal Solid Waste
Management and Handling Rules, 2000, is the policy on how to
handle the municipal waste”.
2.5 On their specific query about any National Waste Policy, the
Committee were informed by the Ministry of Urban Development that
there was no National Waste Policy (Solid Waste Management).
2.6 The witness further added:
“...most of the State Governments, city administrations, and
municipal bodies have attempted to achieve this. The fact remains
that these Waste Management and Handling Rules are not being
fully complied with by the municipal bodies. They were supposed
to adhere to these conditions by 2003. Since they were not able to
fully comply with the conditions, the time limit for fully complying
with them has been extended up to December, 2008.”
2.7 The Committee desired to know the reasons for the inability of
the ULBs to implement the MSW, 2000 and steps taken by the Ministry
to sensitize the ULBs in the matter. The Ministry of Urban Development
in a written reply informed the Committee inter alia as under:
“...In order to implement the provisions of the MSW Rules, 2000
huge capital investment is necessary to implement solid waste
management projects and operate & maintain these facilities. Due
to budgetary constraints, lack of planning, inadequate house-to-
house collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of municipal
solid waste, most of the ULBs could not achieve the desired goals”.
2.8 When asked by the Committee whether there had been any
demand to simplify the guidelines available for solid waste
management to formulate Detailed Project Reports by ULBs and the
initiatives taken on this front, the Ministry of Urban Development in
a written reply informed the Committee as under:
“The Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, published
by the Ministry of Urban Development, has brought out very
exhaustively, guidelines in respect of planning and formulation of

7
solid waste management schemes with a view to guide ULBs for
the management of municipal solid waste. The Ministry is of the
opinion that further simplification of the guidelines is not required.
No demand has been received in the Ministry from the State
Governments/ULBs requesting simplification of the guidelines on
solid waste management for formulation of DPRs by ULBs.
For preparation of quality DPRs, the Ministry had organised a
number of Regional Workshops in the year 2006-07 at Coimbatore
(covering various cities in the Southern Region), Nagpur (covering
the Western Region), Chandigarh (covering Northern Region),
Orissa (covering Eastern Region), Guwahati (covering North-Eastern
Region) and Lucknow (covering Uttar Pradesh & Bihar), where all
the State representatives were present and got trained in the
preparation of DPR as per the Manuals and JNNURM guidelines.
In addition, the JNNURM Division has already identified a few
institutes for imparting rapid training to the ULBs for preparation
of DPRs, which is a continuous process.
Moreover, the Ministry had published a report of Technology
Advisory Group on solid waste management in May , 2005 which
includes various treatment and technological options, advantages,
limitations, etc. The report has been forwarded to all the State
Governments. It is also available on the Ministry’s website.”
C. National Urban Sanitation Policy
3.1 Lack of urban sanitation adds to the difficulties faced by the
city managers in handling MSW. The Committee were informed by
the Ministry of Urban Development about the steps taken for the
formulation of National Sanitation Policy as follows:
“The National Urban Sanitation Policy has been approved by the
Cabinet on 3rd October 2008. Urban Sanitation Policy is brought
out with a view to formulate policy guidelines, strategies for
implementation of sewerage and sanitation facilities in the urban
areas, with a specific focus to eliminate open defection in the cities
and towns”.
3.2 About the goals of the National Urban Sanitation Policy , the
Ministry of Urban Development furnished the following information
to the Committee:
“(i) Awareness Generation and Behavioural Change
a. Generating awareness about sanitation and its linkages with
public and environmental health amongst communities and
institutions;

8
b. Promoting mechanisms to bring about and sustain
behavioural changes aimed at adoption of healthy sanitation
practices;
(ii) Open Defecation Free Cities
The ultimate objective is that all urban dwellers will have access
to and be able to use safe and hygienic sanitation facilities and
arrangements so that no one defecates in the open. In order to achieve
the goal, the following activities shall undertaken:
a. Promoting access to households with safe sanitation facilities
(including proper disposal arrangements);
b. Promoting community-planned and managed toilets
wherever necessary, for groups of households who have
constraints of space, tenure or economic constraints in
gaining access to individual facilities;
c. Adequate availability and 100% upkeep and management
of Public Sanitation facilities in all Urban Areas, to rid them
of open defecation and environmental hazards;
(iii) Integrated City Wide Sanitation
Re-orienting Institutions and mainstreaming Sanitation by
(a) Mainstreaming thinking, planning and implementing
measures related to sanitation in all sectors and departmental
domains as a cross-cutting issue, especially in all urban
management endeavours;
(b) Strengthening national, state, city and local institutions
(public private and community) to accord priority to
sanitation provision, including planning, implementation and
Operation & Maintenance (O&M) management;
(c) Extending access to proper sanitation facilities for poor
communities and other un-served settlements;
(iv) Sanitary and Safe Disposal
100% of human excreta and liquid wastes from all sanitation
facilities including toilets must be disposed of safely. In order to achieve
this goal, the following activities shall be undertaken:
(a) Promoting proper functioning of network-based sewerage
systems and ensuring connections of households to them
wherever possible,

9
(b) Promoting proper disposal and treatment of sludge from
on-site installations (septic tanks, pit latrines, etc);
(c) Ensuring that all the human wastes are collected safely
confined and disposed of after treatment so as not to cause
any hazard to public health or the environment;
(v) Proper Operation and Maintenance of all Sanitary Installations
(a) Promoting proper usage, regular upkeep and maintenance
of household, community and public sanitation facilities;
(b) Strengthening Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to provide or
cause to provide, sustainable sanitation services delivery”.
D. Magnitude of Municipal Solid Waste in Urban India
4.1 The Committee were apprised that one of the major reasons
for inadequate solid waste management in major cities and the smaller
cities was unregulated growth of these urban areas and increase in
their population leading to staggering magnitude of MSW generated
there.
4.2 According to a written note submitted by the Ministry of Urban
Development, the magnitude of MSW in urban India was assessed as
under:
“The per capita waste generation varies between 0.2 kg to 0.6 kg
per day in cities with population ranging from 1.0 lakh to 50 lakh.
An assessment has been made that because of increase in per
capita waste generation of about 1.3% per year, the growth of
urban waste in the cities is about 5% Waste collection effection
efficiency ranges from 50% to 90%. ULBs spend between Rs. 500/-
to Rs. 1500/- per MT on solid waste management of which 60%
to 70% is spent on collection alone, 20% to 30% on transportation
and less than 5% on treatment and disposal which is very essential
to prevent environmental pollution. Crude dumping is normally
resorted to by ULBs without adopting scientific and hygienic
approach of sanitary landing”.
4.3 About the quantity of Indian municipal waste, the Committee
were apprised by the Ministry of Urban Development as follows:—
“Urban India produces about 42 million tonnes of municipal solid
waste annually i.e. 1.15 lakh metric tonnes per day (TPD), out of
which 83,378 TPD is generated in 423 class I cities works out to

10
72.5% of the total waste generated as given in the table below.
This needs to be tackled on priority.
Qty . % of total
(TPD) garbage
Waste generated in 6 mega cities 21,000 18.35%
Waste generated in metro cities
(Population 10 lakhs+ 19,643 17.08%
Waste generated in other Class I towns
(1.0 lakh plus population) 42,635.28 37.07%
83,378.28 72.50%
4.4 In this context, a representative of the Ministry of Urban
Development during the briefing meeting held on 24th January, 2008
informed the Committee as under:—
“As per our assessment, the per capita waste generation varies
between 200 grams to 600 grams per day per person... The problem
of municipal solid waste management is acute. It is because of the
following reasons. First, a large amount of waste is generated.
Secondly, we have a large number of cities, approximately 5161
cities and towns, where the issue is serious. Then, there are the
issues involved in collection, transportation and scientific way of
disposing it. In urban India, these 5161 cities and towns produce
42 million tonnes of solid waste annually and 72.5 per cent of that
is produced by 423 class I cities. So, the moment the problem is
addressed in these class I cities, about 72.5 per cent of the problem
is addressed”.
4.5 As regards various technologies for treatment of disposal of
municipal solid waste, the Ministry of Urban Development informed
the Committee in a written note as under:
“Various technological options for treatment and disposal of
municipal solid waste have been given in the TAG Report and the
manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management. Some of them are
as under:
(a) Composting including vermi composting
(b) Anaerobic digestion/biomethanation
(c) Incineration

11
(d) Gasification/Pyrolysis including Plasma Pyrolysis
(e) Production of Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF)/Pelletisation
(f) Sanitary Landfilling/Landfill Gas Recovery
However, appropriate and cost effective technology will have to
be chosen by the ULB based on the quantum of waste, its quality
and characterstics, field conditions, etc. The Ministry help the ULBs
to select suitable technology according to these parameters in
respect of projects proposed under JNNURM.”
E. Financing and Implementation of Solid Waste Management
Projects under JNNURM, UIDSSMT, Pilot-Project of SWM in 10
Airfield Towns and other initiatives
5.1 As part of a major initiative, the Ministry had launched two
programmes in the year 2005 viz. the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban
Renewal Mission (JNNURM) to cover 63 selected towns and the Urban
Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small & Medium Towns
(UIDSSMT) to cover 5098 urban towns for providing infrastructure
facilities including solid waste management in all urban areas in a
seven year Mission period. In addition, a Centrally-Sponsored Scheme
for providing Solid Waste Management & Drainage facilities in
10 selected India Air Force Airfield towns was launched in the year,
2003 which was targeted to be completed by the end of March, 2008.
5.2 SWM generally is not a matter of top priority for the State
Governments/ULBs. The Ministry of Urban Development informed the
Committee that the State Governments/ULBs had prioritized the
various components in their respective City Development Plans for
possible financial assistance under JNNURM. As per the priority, the
DPRs were being formulated and approved under JNNURM. Since
certain cities had prioritized other sectors over solid waste management,
many SWM projects were not posed under JNNURM for possible
financial assistance. As per the information received on 21st November,
2008 from the Ministry, it was stated that so far around 8.83% of the
total projects (351 in number) sanctioned under Sub-Mission I of
JNNURM had been for SWM. Elaborating further, it was informed
that 31 SWM projects costing around Rs. 158215.36 lakh were sanctioned
with funds amounting to Rs. 22207.24 lakh released till date under the
Mission.

12
5.3 Further, under UIDSSMT, it was informed that 40 projects for
SWM, costing Rs. 281.90 crore, had been approved, for which Rs. 116.71
crore were released till date. These projects were assessed by the
Ministry as only 3% of the total 691 projects sanctioned under the
scheme.
5.4 The 12th Finance Commission had made a provision of
Rs. 2500 crore in June, 2005 for ULBs exclusively for setting up Solid
Waste Management systems in 423 class I cities during 2005-2010. The
Ministry of Urban Development suggested that as SWM was a State
subject, it would be appropriate to appoint an Independent Evaluation
and Monitoring Agency at State level to monitor the working of these
systems. On being enquired about the present status of implementation
status of solid waste management system in these 423 cities, the
Ministry submitted that these grants, sanctioned under 12th Finance
Commission, were being released to the State Governments by the
Ministry of Finance. Since the fund was being managed by the Ministry
of Finance, the Ministry of Urban Development had no information
regarding the progress. The Ministry informed the Committee that the
details were being asked for from the Ministry of Finance and would
be forwarded on receipt.
5.5 As regards the details of the SWM projects taken up by National
Buidling Construction Corporation (NBCC-the company under the
administrative control of the Ministry of Urban Development) in Jammu
& Kashmir and Andaman & Nicobar Islands and the major challenges
faced by NBCC to execute SWM projects in Hilly areas and islands,
as compared to plains & landlocked areas, the Ministry of Urban
Development informed the Committee in a written reply as under:
“NBCC has reported that they have taken up the following SWM
projects in Jammu & Kashmir:
(a) Dods
(b) Bhaderwah
(c) Akhnoor
(d) Poonch
(e) Samba
(f) Kathua
(g) Sunderbani
The capacity of each project is about 10 TPD except Kathua which
is about 20 TPD. THe construction work is in progress.

13
The main challenge to develop an SWM scheme in Hilly regions
is the non-availability of suitable land for the processing plant. Most
of the land are in inaccessible locations, in river valleys, mountain
sides, etc., which require huge amount of expenditure on basic site
development like roads excavation, earth-filling, etc. Secondly, protection
against heavy rains, snow, etc., are also required. Provision of electrical
& water services also require huge costs as off take points are not
available nearby and water table is very low.
The Operation and Maintenance of these schemes are also a
problem as the quantity of waste and thereby product recovery is
very low. The biodegradable waste is seldom disposed off by people
in leading to poor economics of O&M cost vis-a-vis revenues from sale
of products. The recovery of compost is likely to be very low and not
adequate to offset the expenditure on O & M. The plants shall need to
be operated by the State Government at own cost.
The cost of waste collection in hilly regions is also very high due
to scattered houses & lack of collection points. Moreover, the municipal
bodies of these towns are economically very weak & not able to meet
the cost of waste collection & transportation of waste to the processing
sites. In J&K, the landed costs of materials and equipments when sent
from other States is also abnormally high due to Entry Tax on Goods
of the order of 12.5% and High Toll tax @ Rs. 400/- per tonne. Even
the costs of Registration for sales tax is very high as Bank Guarantee
@ 10% of contract value is required to be provided to J&K authorities.
NBCC has entered into an agreement with Central Pollution Control
Board (CPCB) to develop solid waste management schemes in Hilly
regions which shall be sued to develop standard designs for future
use. A scheme in Mandi, HP has been taken up at present and is in
design stage.
NBCC has not yet started execution of solid waste management
scheme in Andaman & Nicobar Islands as the work is yet to be
entrusted to NBCC by A&N Administration. However, on preliminary
survey of the situation in the islands, the problem of MSW and
specially littering with plastic is a major environmental hazard which
needs to be tackled.”
5.6 According to the Annual Report of the Ministry of Urban
Development (2007-08) NBCC was also associated with SWM schemes
at Faridabad, Karnal, Rohatak, Yamuna Nagar and Jagaadari in
Haryana.

14
5.7 The Committee were further informed that in a meeting held
on December, 2007, the Ministry of Urban Development decided to
approach the Ministry of Finance to get funds to the extent of Rs. 900
crores as capital investments, transport and subsidy for the Solid Waste
Management. The Non-Plan Committee under the Ministry of Finance
was to consider this proposal. Asked about the present status of the
proposal, the Committee were informed by the Ministry of Urban
Development in a post evidence reply as under:
“Ministry of Finance was approached for implementation of
recommendations made in the Task Force report vide letter dated
19/12/07 and dated 16.1.2008 and subsequently reminded to
expedite the same vide D.O. letter dated 03.03.08 and 23.4.08.
However, during the review meeting held under the Chairmanship
of the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on the
implementation of the recommendations made in the said report
on 19th August, 2008, the Ministry of Finance requested this
Ministry to formulate a proposal in this regard and forward the
same to the Ministry of Finance for initiating necessary action.
The Ministry is in the process of formulating the proposal and the
same will be forwarded to the Ministry of Finance”.
5.8 Asked about the budgetary support provided to the Ministry
of Urban Development with regard to solid waste management, during
the last five years, the Committee have been informed in a written
note as under:—
“As per the recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial Joint Sub-
Committee constituted in February, 1999, the Centrally-sponsored
Scheme for Solid Waste Management & Drainage in 10 selected
Indian Air Force Airfield towns* had been launched and is being
implemented at an estimated cost of Rs. 99.34 crore since 2002-
2003 with the approval of Departmental Expenditure Finance
Committee and approval of the Full Planning Commission in
October, 2003.
The schemes for 8 towns viz. Gwalior, Ambala, Jodhpur, Tezpur,
Dindigul, Sirsa, Adampur and Pune are being implemented by the
National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC) and the
schemes for the other two towns viz. Hindon and Bareilly are
being implemented by the UP Jal Nigam.
*The Committee had earlier examined and commented on the scheme in their
33rd Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2008-2009)’ of the Ministry of Urban Development.

15
The originally approved cost of the scheme was Rs. 99.34 crore at
2001-02 price level. Subsequently, there has been an increase in the
cost of the scheme due to time and cost overruns, change in the
scope of the airfield projects and agency charges. Due to this, the
project cost has been revised and the revised estimated cost, works
out to Rs. 130.68 crore, which has been approved by the
Department Expenditure Finance Committee of the Ministry of
Urban Development on 15.1.2008. The expenditure incurred under
this scheme for the 10 airfield towns is as under:
(Rs. in lakh)
Plan Year BE RE Actual Expenditure
2003-04 5000 - 99.01
2004-05 4000 4000 4008.48
2005-06 5500 5500 5896.79
2006-07 3500 1500 600.00
2007-08 2000 - -
No budget estimate is proposed for 2008-09 as the programme
will be coming to an end by March, 2008”.
5.9 Reporting the progress of the scheme, the Ministry of Urban
Development, in their action Taken reply to the recommendations
contained in 33rd Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants,
had informed that out of 10 selected Airfield Towns, projects in six
towns, namely, Sirsa, Jodhpur, Adampur, Dundigal, Gwalior and
Ambala have been completed. The Ministry of Urban Development
had also informed the Committee that though the scheme was
supposed to be finished by March, 2008, yet it had been delayed
badly in Pune, Tejpur and Hindon. Only 45 per cent 10 per cent and
45 per cent of work was stated to be completed in Pune, Tejpur and
Hindon respectively as on 30.06.08. As regards the project in Bareilly ,
completion of 82% of the work was reported.
5.10 The Committee were also informed in October, 2008 that out
of 6 completed projects, 5 projects namely at Sirsa, Ambala, Gwalior,
Jodhpur and Adampur had been commissioned and were being
operated and maintained by private firms engaged by NBCC. These
firms were stated to be operating the scheme without any financial
burden on ULBs and the O&M cost were being met through sale of
compost made from garbage.

16
Solid Waste Management Scheme in Hindon Airfield, Ghaziabad,
U.P .
5.11 During the oral evidence, the Committee had expressed their
dismay over the tardy progress in the SWM in Ghaziabad town and
desired to be apprised about the matter in detail. Accordingly, the
Ministry were asked to furnish a wiritten note on the same. In their
post evidence reply the Ministry of Urban Development had informed
the Committee that the Detailed Project Report for Solid Waste
Management & Drainage Scheme for Ghaziabad town (Hindon Airfield)
at an estimated cost of Rs. 13.52 crore was approved by the Ministry
vide letter No. Q-15014/94-CPHEEO dated 23.8.2005. The project was
commenced on 1.1.2006. As against the total release of Rs. 12.76 crore,
the expenditure incurred on the project so far was Rs. 6.05 crore.
5.12 The component-wise physical & financial progress reported
by UP Jal Nigam in respect of Hindon Airfield, as submitted by the
Ministry of Urban Development to the Committee, is as under:—
Components Physical Financial
Progress Progress
(in lakh)
Solid Waste Collection 100% 169.58
Solid Waste Transportation & Handling 100% 48.40
Sanitary Landfill Unit 10% 36.80
Compost Plant (100 TPD) 7% 18.89
Infrastructure Facilities at Solid Waste 20% 87.08
Disposal Facility (SWDF)
Vermi-Compost Unit (20TPD) — 0.00
Sewerage/Drainage Facility near 98% 220.00
Sensitive Zone
Creating Public Awareness & Public Participation
of Citizens through NGOs. Electronic media,
Benefit Monitoring & Evaluation in Solid Waste
Management Schemes, Training of Implementation
Agency staff of urban local body in other
municipal corporations for HRD & Capacity
Buidling — 25.00
Total 605.75

17
The progress in respect of sanitary landfill & compost plant is
10% and 7% respectively. These components could not be completed
due to dispute in the land measuring 43 acres, which was originally
identified by the Ghaziabad Nagar Nigam at Dooda Hera,
Chippiyana Bujurg in Ghaziabad (situated about 5-6 km away from
Ghaziabad-Delhi by pass)”.
5.13 As regards the reasons for not completing the aforesaid two
components of sanitary landfill and compost plant, the Ministry of
Urban Development informed the Committee as under:—
“Out of 43 acres of land identified by the Ghaziabad Nagar Nigam
at the aforesaid locations, 14 acres of land at Dooda Hera had
been landed over by Ghaziabad Nagar Nigam to U.P . Jal Nigam
on 20.10.2004. The U.P . Jal Nigam has constructed compound wall
and earth work excavation for sanitary landfill at Dooda Hera. In
the meantime, a writ petition (No. 12496 of 2006) was filed by
Shri Anil Kumar Tyagi, resident of Ghaziabad in the Hon’ble High
Court, Allahabad stating that the aforesaid site is falling under the
residential zone as per the Ghaziabad Master Plan 2021 which
was approved by the State Government vide its GO No. 2891/
08.03.05-14/2005 dated 14.7.2005. On hearing the Hon’ble High
Court directed the Vice-Chairman, Ghaziabad Development
Authority (GDA) on 1.3.2006 that all the concerned parties should
be listened and to take appropriate decision. The Ghaziabad Nagar
Nigam has taken efforts to take possession of the remaining and
of 29 acres from the Gram Sabha Chippiyana Bujurg. In this regard,
a meeting was held on 4.5.2006 under the Chairmanship of
Secretary, Nagar Vikas in Lucknow and as per his directions revised
proposal Chippiyana Bujurg was sent by the District Magistrate of
Gautam Budh Nagar on 24.5.2006 to Principal Secretary (Revenue).
Another meeting was held again on 22.8.2006 under the
Chairmanship of Shri A.K. V erma, Principal Secretary , Nagar Vikas
in Lucknow for Chippiyana Bujurg land, District Gautam Budh
Nagar. Secretary (Revenue) informed in the meeting that the
required approval on revised proposal will be accorded very shortly
and there was no problem now. Again on 9.10.2006 and 11.1.2007,
the Hon’ble Minister for Nagar Vikas Khand has given instructions
to Principal Secretary (Revenue) for speedy transfer of land to
Ghaziabad Nagar Nigam/U.P . Jal Nigam so that the work can be
completed in time. Again Shri Anil Kumar Tyagi filed a writ
petition (No. 57172 of 2006) in the Hon’ble High Court and on
hearing the Court vide its order dated 1.11.2006 had restrained the
Nagar Nigam Ghaziabad/UP Jal Nigam to proceed further any

18
kind of construction activities regarding solid waste disposal on
Dooda Hera site and directed the Vice-Chairman, Ghaziabad
Development Authority (GDA) to hear the concerned parties and
dispose the case with a detailed speaking order. Due to this, the
work was held up at Dooda Hera.”
5.14 The Ministry of Urban Development informed the Committee
about further development in this connection as under:—
“In a meeting held on 17th December, 2007 in the Ministry to
review the progress of airfield projects in respect of Hindon &
Bareilly towns, the Principal Secretary, Department of Housing &
Urban Planning, Government of UP has indicated that the GDA
has already initiated action for acquiring 43 acres of land at Dasna
in Ghaziabad, which is about 9 km away from the ongoing site
and is feasible for construction of solid waste disposal facilities.
Also, UP Jal Nigam vide their letter dated 14th July, 2008 has
reported that on 1st July, 2008 a High Level meeting was held in
Lucknow in which Hon’ble Minister for Housing and Hon’ble
Minister for Urban Development and the respective Principal
Secretaries and other concerned departments participated. It was
decided that in order to take final decision regarding the site for
landfill at Dasna, the consent of Hindon airfield should be taken”.
5.15 In this regard, the Committee were apprised by the Ministry
of Urban Development on 27th October, 2008 that the Principal
Secretary (Housing), Government of UP had inspected the site at Dasna
on 14.7.2008 and directed the following:—
“(i) GDA will apply in formal format for the NOC of Hindon
Air Field and UP Pollution Control Board.
(ii) Air Force officers should give their final inspection report/
NOC to GDA for Dasna site.
(iii) UP Pollution Control Board to give their NOC to GDA for
Dasna site
(iv) District Magistrate, Ghaziabad will speed up the land
acquisition process of Dasna site”.
5.16 Accordingly, the Ministry informed the Committee as under:—
“Once the land is made available by the GDA to Ghaziabad Nagar
Nigam/UP Jal Nigam, the work in respect of sanitary landfill and
compost plant will be completed and the scheme will be
commissioned”.

19
F. Existing mechanism for dumping garbage in and around Delhi
6.1 During oral evidence, the Committee expressed serious concern
over no proper allocation of proper dumping yard/landfill areas in
and around cities including NCR, particularly Guragaon and Ghaziabad.
On a specific subsequent query about the absence of a proper dumping
yard in Gurgaon, that had resulted in Gurgaon-Faridabad road
becoming the most preferred spot for dumping garbage, the Ministry,
in a written note, submitted on 5.8.2008 the following information as
received by them from HUDA Circle, Gurgaon:
“Gurgaon has seen unprecedented growth in population over the
last few years and is today one of the fastest growing cities in
India. Although, the 2001 Census indicates that population of
Gurgaon city was 3.42 lakh, the estimated present population is
more than 10 lakh. This growth had led to a situation where most
of the urban infrastructural facilities including SWM & Sanitation
have become stretched. The old dumping ground on Basai road
has been filled to the brim and has since been closed. A Committee
was formed by the State Government and city administration to
look at alternate sites for disposal of solid waste. The Committee
having wide representation from the major stakeholders, after
evaulating several sites, short listed a 30 acre plot in Bandhwari
village on Gurgaon-Faridabad road. The city administration has
decided to develop this site as an integrated MSW proceeding and
sanitary land filling site. The consultants were appointed after the
bidding process to prepare the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for
municipal solid management in Gurgaon city in compliance with
the Municipal Solid Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 2000.
The requisite environmental clearance from the Ministry of
Environment & Forest, Government of India based on the
Environmental Impact Assemment (EIA)/Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) prepared by the consultants has been
received. A few remaining clearances for implementing the project
are in the pipeline. It is proposed to develop the integrated SWM
proceeding and SLF plant at Bandhwari, on Build-OWN-Operate-
Transfer (BOOT) basis through a Public Private Partnership (PPP)
model and the necessary documentation for the same has been
prepared and submitted for formal approval from the State
Government. As part of an integrated municipal solid waste
management action plan, it is proposed to follow scientific method
at each operation including door to door collection, segregation,
secondary collection and transportation apart from the proposed
plant at Bandhwari to process MSW based on Refused Derived

20
Fuel (RDF) technology with a msall capacity power plant and a
sanitary land filling plant. The door to door collection, segregation
centres, transfer stations as well as transportation of MSW are also
proposed to be developed on a PPP mode and the requisite action
plan with the technical inputs submitted to the State Government
for final clearance. The RDF and SLF plants would take time (about
16-18 months) for implementation and commissioning. However,
all other activities, especially the door to door collection and
segergation would be initiated in the next 3-4 months. In the
interim period, the city administration has come down heavily on
the polluters of the environs who are dumping the waste on the
Gurgaon-Faridabad highway. Haryana Urban Development
Authority (HUDA) has also contracted an agency to undertake
regular spraying of Effective Microorganism (EM) spray on the
MSW being illegally dumped in the area to weed out odour
problems as well as to keep rodents, insects other animals at bay.
With the focus on door to door collection as well as segregation
of recyclables, it is proposed to reduce the quantum of the waste
to be disposed off”.
6.2 The Committee were further apprised in October, 2008 that
according to HUDA, Gurgaon, the Proeject at Bandhwari village on
Gurgaon-Faridabad road was likely to take one and a half years for
completion from the date of release of funds to the implementing
agency.
6.3 In contrast, on being pointed out by the Committee about the
efficient management of waste in Surat and Rajkot districts of Gujarat
by a private company where municipal authorities are not paying
anything to the company, a representative of the Ministry of Urban
Development informed the Committee as under:—
“In Gujarat, cities like Surat, Vadodara, etc. have proposed private
sector participation in handling this organic waste, that is,
biodegradable waste into compost and also apart from the
biodegradable waste, even the othe combustible waste like paper,
plastic, etc., is being separated and that will be treated with RDF.
That facility is being put up. The inert matter is taken out and
they are making bricks out of that. So, the waste generated has
been brought down even up to zero level and only a little portion
is going to the landfill site. That way, Gujarat is, of course, very
forward looking State”.
6.4 When enquired as to why such things were not being
implemented in cities like Delhi, the Committee were apprised by a

21
representative of the Ministry during the briefing meeting as
under:—
“As per the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, about 95 per cent of
Delhi is covered under MCD, it is the responsibility of the
individual house owner to take the municipal waste to the dhalao,
which means ‘a huge concrete bin for dumping garbage’. The
number of dhalaos is not as much as required for the waste
generated. Therefore, at many places, the waste is piled on to the
roadside. Cows and dogs surround that area to take away and eat
what they can. Wherever an attempt has been made to put iron
gates, those iron gates were damaged by cows and other animals.
Therefore, the fact remains that in cities like Delhi, we must move
from roadside dumping to direct house collection in two schemes—
one is biodegradable waste and the other is recyclable. Ideally
speaking, the recyclable should go to a recycling plant, and
biodegradable waste must go to the vermi compost or other
compost site or whatever it may be. Under the situation, almost
60-70 per cent is inert material, and much of it does not come
from inside the house, but that comes from construction places,
sites, etc., and that can go to the landfill sites.”
6.5 As regards the compliance of MSW, Rules 2000 in Delhi, the
Ministry of Urban Development has furnished the following
information:—
“As per the compliance report of MSW rules furnished by CPCB,
door-to-door collection is being carried out in some zones of Delhi.
The MCD has already implemented transportation of the MSW in
six zones of MCD, through private concessionaires. Now, the MCD
is likely to implement the door-to-door collection of waste in
various parts of Delhi in phased manner. In first phase Expression
of Interest (EoI) are likely be called for Civil Line Zone and Rohni
Zone, Dwarka, Vasant Vihar, Ward No. 164, 165 of South Zone.
Thus the city shall be free from dust bins/dhalaos”.
6.6 During the oral evidence, the Committee enquired if the
Government of India could treat at least one city as a model city with
no garbage and allot enough money for that purpose. In this regard
the Committee were later informed that Namakkal Municipality, Tamil
Nadu had implemented Green Productivity Demonstration Project
(GPDP) sponsored by the Asian Productivity Organization, Tokyo
during 2004-05, 2005-06 and executed by the National Productivity
Council, India (NPC) to move towards making the Namakkal town a
model “Eco-city” through Green Productivity approach.

22
G. Monitoring of Solid Waste Management Projects
7.1 The Ministry of Urban Development informed the Committee
that since SWM was a State subject, they act only as a facilitator for
the State Governments/ULBs by providing technical guidelines and
funds under various Central programmes and from external funding
agencies. Since the monitoring of solid waste management was not
directly undertaken by the Ministry of Urban Development, the
Committee desired to know as to how the implementing agencies of
various SWM projects ensured that the assigned tasks was completed
in a satisfactory manner. In this regard, the Ministry of Urban
Development informed the Committee in a written reply that they
monitor implementation of approved solid waste management projects
through various mechanisms such as the Quarterly Progress Reports,
field visits, etc. As regards the monitoring mechanism of Ministry of
Urban Development to sensitize, stimulate and make the ULBs active,
the Ministry had informed as follows:
“At Government of India level, the Ministry of Urban Development
is responsible for formulation of broad policies, various programmes
and prepare guidelines for urban water supply and sanitation sector
including solid waste management. Central Public Health and
Environmental Engineering Organization (CPHEEO) is the technical
wing of the Ministry, which assists the Ministry in all technical
matters relating to water supply and sanitation sector. It is a small
organization having a sanctioned strength of 9 officers. Out of this
50% of the posts are lying vacant. CPHEEO does not have adequate
manpower for monitoring of the water supply and sanitation
scheme including solid waste management implemented by the
State Governments. In case, the water supply, sewerage & solid
waste management schemes implemented by the State
Governments/ULBs are monitored at Central level, the CPHEEO
needs to be strengthened beyond its sanctioned strength. A proposal
for creation of 11posts (one Joint Adviser (PHE), 3 Deputy Advisers
(PHE), 6 Assistant Advisers (PHE) and one Scientific Officer) has
been forwarded to the Ministry of Finance for approval.”
7.2 Explaining the monitoring mechanism of SWM projects
sanctioned under JNNURM, the Ministry informed the Committee as
follows:
“For monitoring and management of sanctioned projects of various
sectors including SWM under JNNURM, the Project Implementation
Unit (PIU) at ULB level and Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) at
State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA) level are being set up. Besides

23
this, an Independent Review and Monitoring Agency (IRMA) for
3rd party inspection of the projects is also being set up. So far 4
IRMAs, 12 PMUs and 30 PIUs have been established”.
7.3 On being asked about any provision of feedback or time-bound
furnishing of information by the Pollution Control Boards with reference
to solid waste management to the Central Ministry via their respective
State Governments, so that the information could be used for planning
and necessary amendments in the MSW Rules, 2000, the Committee
were apprised in a written note as under:
“The CPCB convenes meetings of Chairman & Member Secretaries
of various SPCBs every year and seek information in respect of
initiatives taken by ULBs for improving collection, segregation,
storage and transportation of waste, setting up landfill facility and
compost plants, etc. and review the information furnished by the
various SPCBs”.
7.4 As regards the initiative taken to create National level
compilation of monitoring data of SWM through JNNURM programme,
the Ministry of Urban Development have informed the Committee
that the CPCB was compiling data as per the MSW Rules, 2000 for
various cities and towns. The Ministry had also compiled Quartely
Progress Report furnished by the various JNNURM cities where SWM
schemes were approved. Further, as JNNURM does not cater to all the
ULBs, a national compilation under JNNURM was reportedly not
envisaged at the moment.
7.5 Asked about the steps taken to build capacity of various ULBs
to implement SWM, the Ministry informed the Committee that they
organized workshops and Rapid Training Programmes to impart
training to the ULB engineers and officers to get quality DPRs prepared
in all respects as per JNNURM norms. Vijaywada city of Andhra
Pradesh and Mysore city of Karnataka were stated to have submitted
their DPRs on Solid Waste Management, scrutinized by CPHEEO, the
technical appraisal agency of Ministry of Urban Development, who
guided them to modify their DPRs as per the norms of JNNURM.
7.6 In this context, the Ministry of Urban Development further
informed the Committee that according to a study on “Solid Waste
management and its disposal” conducted by the Associated Chambers
of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), Kerala had created
a special purpose vehicle (SPV) to dispose-off its solid waste for power
generation by closely integrating its 60 municipalities with three

24
intermediate depots, to collect its garbage and waste to dispose it off
in large containers. Further, the Ministry , the Ministry of Urban
Development informed that Ahmedabad and Bangalore had also created
SPVs for managing their municipal solid waste.
7.7 Asked about any waste tariff imposed for solid waste
management, the Ministry of Urban Development informed the
Committee in a written note as under:
“As per JNNURM & UIDSSMT guidelines, the SWM schemes are
being sanctioned with certain mandatory and obligatory reforms
to be carried out by the cities and towns. One of the mandatory
reforms is levy of reasonable user charges by the ULBs/State
parastatals with the objective that the full cost of operation and
maintenance (O&M) or recurring cost is collected to make the
schemes sustainable. However, cities and towns in North-East and
other special category States may recover at least 50% of the O&M
charges initially. These cities and towns should graduate to full
O&M recovery in a Phased manner. And one of the obligatory
reform is to encourage PPP as well in these schemes to increase
efficiency and to reduce financial burden of the ULBs in capital
and recurring expenditure”.
7.8 Further, in a similar context when enquired as to whether tax-
free municipal bond could be raised for SWM by ULBs, the Ministry
responded as follows:
“There is no specific tariff for solid waste management. Hence, it
is difficult to generate tax free bonds for solid waste management
and hence, ULBs are not formulating any proposal for raising funds
through tax free bonds for municipal solid waste management”.
H. Task Force on Integrated Plant Nutrient Management Using City
Compost
8.1 In response to a query posed by the Committee, the Ministry
informed that consequent to the orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
of India dated 14.1.2003 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 888/96 on Solid
Waste Management and subsequent directions of the cabinet Secretariat
in its meeting held on 18.2.2003, an ‘Inter-Ministerial Task Force on
Integrated Plant Nutrient Management using ‘City Compost’ was
constituted by Ministry of Urban Development on 26.8.2003. The Task
Force was set up to prepare policy/strategy on action plans for
promoting “Integrated Plant Nutrient Management”. The Task Force
filed their report in the Hon’ble Supreme Court on 6.5.2005, wherein

25
they recommended an integrated plant nutrient management, using
city compost so that it can be supplied within 50 km radius of all
ULBs and their compost plants. About the followup of this
recommendation, in a written note, the Ministry had informed the
Committee that they had forwarded the said report to all the State
Governments and concerned Ministries for implementation of its
recommendations. The report was also said to be uploaded in the
Ministry’s website for wide publicity. The Ministry also requested the
concerned Ministries to implement the recommendations, vide letter
No.Q-11021/1/97-PHE.II (Vol.XI) dated 12th November 2007.
8.2 In this context, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development
during oral evidence further informed the Committee as under:
“As a follow up of this recommendation of the task force, we had
taken an inter-ministerial meeting in which the Agriculture,
Fertilizer and the Finance Ministries’ representatives participated.
That is where we mooted the idea of working out a method by
which compost so-produced can be made available to the farmers
for which, as I mentioned in my statement, we also suggested that
idea; this alone cannot be transported because it may not be a
viable proposition. But when fertilizers get transported, we could
consider the point about adding this also to that transportation so
that this also becomes available to the farmers. We also follow up
on that. We had this dialogue. But we have to carry this forward”.
8.3 The Committee were further informed that as a follow up
action, the Ministry convened three meetings. The last meeting was
held on 19.8.08 under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Development wherein members from all the concerned Ministries
including Agriculture, Environment & Forest, Chemicals & Fertilizers
participated. In the meeting, the representative from Ministry of
Environment & Forests informed that their Ministry had already
advised the Department of Forests to utilize the compost produced
from municipal waste for afforestation activities. Similarly,
representatives from the Ministries of Railways and Surface Transport
informed that their Ministries have already asked all the railway
divisions across the country to use compost for development of
plantation/afforestation activities as well as to all the National
Highways Departments to make use of compost for development of
greeneries, embankments, etc. The Ministry of Agriculture was reported
to be providing subsidies for setting up of compost plant under the
Centrally sponsored “Balanced and Integrated Use of Fertilizers” with
a view to produce composting for agricultural use.

26
8.4 In this context, the Committee noted that the JNNURM
Programme also envisaged the following use of the SWM efforts by
ULBs as mentioned in the Mission document:
(i) Solid waste generated by the cities can be used in a vermi-
composting plant for generation of manure.
(ii) The Corporation’s revenues would rise as manure generated
from SWM will become an income stream.
8.5 Asked about the efforts that have been taken by the Government
of India for promoting composting including providing subsidies to
entrepreneurs to promote production of compost from municipal waste
under various programmes, the following written information based
on the information from the Ministry of Agriculture Cooperation was
furnished by the Ministry of Urban Development:
“(i) Providing financial assistance for setting up/strengthening
of soil testing laboratories in the country during VIII & IX
Plan under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme “National
Project on Balanced and Integrated Use of Fertilizers”. This
has resulted in expansion of soil testing laboratories in the
country, whose number is now 533 with annual analyzing
capacity of 8 million samples. This includes 59 laboratories
with fertilizer industry.
(ii) Funds to the extent of Rs. 9.00 crore have also been provided
for setting up of 30 mechanical compost plants in different
states for conversion of biodegradable organic city waste
into compost. However, most of these plants are either not
working to their optimum capacity or not functioning at
all.
(iii) Financial assistance for setting up of Bio fertilizer units
@ Rs. 20 lakh per unit has been provided under the National
Project on Development and use of Bio-fertilizers during
VII to IX Plan and Rs. 11.07 crore were released as grant
for setting up of 77 units. This has substantially enhanced
the production capacity to the extent of 18500 metric tonnes
per annum though the actual production is about 16,000
tonnes per annum”.
8.6 On the issues concerning standardization of city compost, the
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development informed that the Fertilizer
Control Order, 2006 for compost has been published wherein standards
were laid down for compost.

27
8.7 In this regard, when asked about the standardization and
marketing of compost so that it could further attract farmers, a
representative of the Ministry of Urban Development informed the
Committee during evidence as under:
“Actually the compost itself is not a full-fledged fertilizer, it is
only a soil conditioner because the carbon-nitrogen ratio is in the
range of 1:20; where as the chemical fertilizer contains the requisite
quantum of phosphorus, nitrogen and other nutrients. Though the
chemical fertilizers are applied to the field, gradually it will remove
the benefit of the soil. Therefore, compost is being added to enrich
the soil.
As far as the recommendations of the Task Force, various measures
have been recommended, that is, in all the outlets of chemical
fertilizers, at least, one bag of compost for every 3 bags of chemical
fertilizer should be marketed in order to promote marketing of the
municipal compost. We had a meeting last year also and we
requested the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers and also Ministry
of Agriculture to look into these aspects as to how best the
composts can be integrated with chemical fertilizers so that farmers
can be benefited. Still we have not got response from these
Ministries.”
8.8 The Ministry of Urban Development had further informed the
Committee that as per the report of Technical Advisory Group (TAG)
on Solid Waste Management published in May 2005, the Ministry of
Environment & Forests had initiated a scheme to provide financial
subsidy to the tune of 50% of the capital cost to set up pilot/
demonstration project on MSW composting.
8.9 In this connection, a representative of the Ministry of the
Ministry of Environment and Forests informed the Committee during
evidence on 15.7.2008:
“Realizing the problems, we have sanctioned about 12
demonstration projects. These 12 demonstration projects are
scattered throughout the country. They are covering collection,
transportation, treatment and disposal of municipal solid waste.
Out of 12, three projects have already been completed. This gives
us the idea as to what is required to be done, what is the success
of a particular technology, whether it can be implemented
immediately in the field. That kind of experience we are gaining
out of these demonstration projects. Then, these are shared with
the local municipalities for its implementation.

28
Actually, this has been funded by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests by giving 50 per cent grant and 50 per cent is shared
by the State Government concerned. In case of North-Eastern States,
we are sharing 90 per cent and 10 per cent is shared by the
respective States. This programme has been very successful and
we would be duplicating it”.
I. Different Stakehoders and their Roles in Sustainable Solid Waste
Management
9.1 A concerted effort of the citizens, the State, the city managers
and the civil society is required for a city to be clean with well-
managed garbage handling practices. The role of different Stakeholders
in sustainable solid waste management is given in the following sub-
paras:
(a) Central Government
9.2 According to the Ministry, the role of Central Government in
SWM was as under:
“Through sanitation is a State subject, the Central Government has
laid down the standards on waste processing and disposal
technologies including approval of technologies. Also, the Central
Government is providing funding for pan-India schemes on Solid
Waste Management. In addition to this, the Central Government
at its level has the duty of compilation of monitoring data, on all
India basis. The Ministry has also compiled Quarterly Progress
Report (QPR) furnished by the various JNNURM cities where solid
waste management schemes have been approved”.
9.3 Also the Ministry of Urban Development furnished to the
Committee possible future role of several Central Ministries in
implementing the recommendations of the Task Force on Integrated
Plant Nutrient Management using city compost, which is appended to
the Report.*
(b) The Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering
Organization (CPHEEO)
9.4 The Committee were also informed that the Central Public
Health and Environmental Engineering Organization (CPHEEO), the
technical wing of the Ministry of Urban Development, Government of
India, dealt with matters related to Urban Water Supply and Sanitation,
*Annexure I.

29
including Solid Waste Management, in the Country. The website of
CPHEEO explained its role as under:
“The policies, strategies and guidelines are being provided by
CPHEEO to the States and UTs Governments including Municipal
Corporations/Committees. The CPHEEO plays a vital role in
processing the schemes posed for external funding agencies
including World Bank/JBIC/ADB and Bilateral and Multilateral
funding agencies and institutional financing such as LIC. It acts as
an Advisory body at Central level to advise the concerned State
agencies and ULBs in implementation, operation and maintenance
or urban water supply, sanitation and solid waste management
projects and helps to adopt latest technologies in these sub-sectors.
Besides, the CPHEEO also implemented the Centrally sponsored
Accelerated Urban Water Supply Programme (AUWSP) for small
towns (scrutinizing/approving the schemes received from State
Departments from techno-economic angle), Solid Waste Management
in 10 airfield towns, sponsors research studies, organizes training
courses for the in-service engineers working in the water supply
and sanitation sector.”
(c) Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
9.5 The CPCB convenes meeting of Chairman and Member
Secretaries of various States Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) every
year to review the information furnished by the various SPCBs. The
CPCB was stated to be also compiling data as per the MSW Rules,
2000 for various cities and towns.
(d) State Governments and Urban Local Bodies
9.6 The Committee were informed that the Secretary-in-Charge of
the Department of Urban Development of the concerned State or the
Union Territory, as the case may be, had the overall responsibility for
the enforcement of the provisions of these rules in the metropolitan
cities. Also, the District Magistrate or the Deputy Commissioner of the
concerned district had the overall responsibility for the enforcement of
the provisions of these rules within the territorial limits of their
jurisdiction.
9.7 In response to a query raised by the Committee, the Ministry
of Urban Development informed in writing that every municipal
authority within the territorial area of the municipality was responsible
for implementation of the provisions of these rules, and for any
infrastructure development for collection, storage, segregation,
transportation, processing and disposal of municipal solid waste.

30
9.8 Explaining the role of ULBs in SWM, it was stated as under:
“The ULBs keeping SWM in priority can provide or facilitate
infrastructural inputs and services as well as seek authorization
from SPCB for setting up waste processing and disposal facilities.
The ULBs need to have a definite organizational set up with trained
staff. The ULBs need to adopt segregation at source and 3 R
principle, i.e. Reduce, Reuse and Recycle so as to ensure that
minimum inert and non-biodegradable waste only shall reach the
sanitary landfill site.”
9.9 When enquired by the Committee, the Ministry of Urban
Development furnished details on States/UTs where ULBs had taken
initiatives for improving collection, segregation, storage and
transportation of waste. Some of these States/UTs were Chandigarh,
Gujarat, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra
and Kerala. The Committee gathered that in States/UTs like Bihar,
Orissa, Daman & Diu, etc., same was yet to be started.
(e) State Pollution Control Board (SPCB)
9.10 Explaining the role of SPCBs, the Ministry submitted as under:
“It is the responsibility of the SPCB to issue an authorization to
the municipal authority or an operator of a facility stipulating
compliance criteria and standards. It is the responsibility of SPCB
to monitor the compliance of the standards regarding waste
processing, ground water, ambient air/leachate quality and the
compost quality including incineration standards as specified in
the schedule of the rules. SPCB is supposed to examine the
proposals of SWM taking into consideration the views of other
agencies like the State Urban Development Department, the Town
and Country Planning Department, Airport or Air Base Authority ,
the Ground Water Board or any such other agency prior to issuing
the authorization.”
(f) Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)/Social Workers
9.11 Highlighting the role NGOs can play in SWM, the Ministry
stated as follows:
“NGOs and social workers will have to take lead in forming Ward
Committees and community participation. Networking of similar
minded organizations in the area and integrated efforts may be
done by them to avoid duplication of the jobs. The NGOs can use

31
existing contacts with the Municipality and other influential bodies
to ensure maximum support. These organizations can involve
unemployed youth in the area for various jobs such as managing
collection of garbage, helping the organizers in conducting
road-shows, etc. They can also organize/sponsor Clean City
campaigns.”
(g) Public (including school children and housewives)
9.12 The Ministry of Urban Development informed the Committee
that public, by practicing sustainable consumption, could help in
reduction and segregation of waste at source.
9.13 During briefing, when the Committee asked if there was any
specific fund provided to promote to create awareness among the
public, a representative of the Ministry of Urban Development
submitted as under:
“We have a programme called Community Participation Fund.
Under that, the community can conceive a project and submit it
through the municipality to the Union Government. Then, we can
give funds up to Rs. 9.5 lakh. The Community will contribute five
or ten per cent of the project. In the case of slums, it is five per
cent and for other it is ten per cent. Fifty-one per cent of voters
living there will sign a document saying that they need this kind
of project. The Urban Local Bodies will then forward it to the
Central Government. But we have not been receiving too many
projects. We are trying to do whatever we can. We have a complete
team sitting for this. I think it is very well conceived scheme. We
have received three schemes from Madurai.”
(h) Rag Pickers
9.14 Rag pickers contribute a great deal to waste management as
they scavenge the recyclable matter thereby saving the municipality of
the cost and time of collecting, segregating and transporting garbage
to the dumps.
9.15 The Ministry of Urban Development had informed the
Committee that in India, 60 per cent of plastic waste was recycled as
compared to average of 15-20 per cent of plastic waste being recycled
in the world, due to rag pickers.
9.16 When asked about how much of this collection of recycled
plastic waste was in the organized or unorganized sector (through rag

32
pickers), the Committee were apprised by a representative of the
Ministry of Environment and Forests as under:
“There are 1.3 lakh rag pickers. They are picking up all available
matters—plastic and paper. There are some 2300 recycling units
for plastics. So, it is giving employment to quite a few people.
The problem of occupational health is associated with that and the
answer to that is that let them be provided with personal protective
equpment like gloves and spectacles and things like that so that
they do not contract diseases. As far as recycling of plastic is
concerned, working practices would have to be inculcated amongst
rag pickers....”
J. Waste Characterisation and Feasibility Studies
10.1 As regards the quality of municipal solid waste, a
representative of the Ministry of Urban Development has informed
that:
“...an analysis of the kind of municipal solid waste that is
generated—30 to 35 per cent is biodegradable; 40 to 55 per cent is
inert; and 5 to 15 per cent is recyclable. The biodegradable waste
being 30 to 35 per cent, the moment successful vermi-composting
is done, it can be addressed to that extent. Since, 40 to 55 per cent
is inert matter, it can straightway go to sanitary landfill sites
without any adverse conditions on the environment. Since 5 to
15 per cent is recycable matter, like paper, glass metals, a recyclable
system can be thought of which can be made functional.”
10.2 In response to the query raised by the Committee with regard
to the steps taken for waste characterization, the Ministry of Urban
Development informed the Committee in a written note that the
characteristics of the MSW had been invariably furnished in all the
DPRs which were analyzed an approved under JNNURM. Based on
the waste characteristics, various treatment and disposal facilities
proposed by ULBs were appraised by CPHEEO and approved by
Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) under
JNNURM. Further it was informed by the Ministry that in the absence
of information on waste characterization, the projects were not being
considered under JNNURM. Necessary guidelines for sampling and
waste characteristics had been included in the Manual on Municipal
Solid Waste Management published by the Ministry.
10.3 The Committee were further informed that the Ministry of
Urban Development extended limited financial assistance for waste

33
characterization and feasibility studies. The scheme was introduced in
1992 and the Ministry had sanctioned the following three projects:
(i) The municipal solid waste management project, Nagar
Nigam, Ghaziabad at a cost of Rs. 55 lakh.
(ii) Pilot project for solid waste management for Hyderabad
City, Municipal Corporation, Hyderabad at a cost of
Rs. 53.3 lakh.
(iii) Pilot project for solid waste management in Shimla at a
total cost of Rs. 25 lakh.
However, it was informed that none of the above projects were
established or commissioned.
K. Management of Different kinds of Municipal Solid Waste
11.1 The Ministry of Urban Development informed the Committee
that the composition of waste varies with the size of the city, season
and income group. Bio-degradable component of waste could be
profitably converted into useful products and recyclables could be
utilized, leaving inerts to go to landfills.
11.2 The Ministry of Urban Development also informed that the
bio-degradable matters could be converted into products like compost
(organic manure), methane gas (used for cooking, heating, lighting,
production of energy) etc., through the following processes:
I. Wealth from Waste
(a) Waste to compost
(i) Aerobic
(ii) V ermi composting
(b) Waste to Energy
(i) Refuse derived fuel (RDF)/Pelletization
(ii) Bio-methanation
(iii) Incineration
(iv) Pyrolysis/Plasma gasification
II. Recycling of Waste

34
11.3 The Committee were further informed that materials like paper,
cardboards, plastics, polythene bags, pieces of metals, construction and
demolition wastes, and glass could be recycled.
(a) Construction and Demolition Waste
11.4 As regards the management of ‘demolition wastes’ due to the
non-stop construction activities in cities, the Committee were informed
that in the Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management published
by the Ministry of Urban Development, a Chapter on “Construction
and Demolition Waste” had been devoted to the issues pertaining to
‘demolition wastes’
11.5 When the Committee enquired that whether there was any
proposal of using processed construction waste for major reconstruction
purpose, as was done by Australia during 2000 Sydney Olympics, the
Ministry of Urban Development informed the Committee as under:
“While appraising the project, the ULBs are being advised by this
Ministry to segregate their construction and demolition wastes and
dispose of them in low lying areas and reuse it for preparation of
bricks which can be utilised for pavement. For instance, Surat is
adopting this method”.
11.6 In this regard, the comments of the Building Materials and
Technology Promotion Council forwarded to the Committee by the
Ministry of Urban Development are as under:
“The Council has initiated research and development projects with
YUVA (Youth for Unity and Voluntary Action), Mumbai. The main
objective of the proposal is to develop a technology for recycling
of construction and demolition wastes. In the proposed methodlogy,
construction and demolition waste will be recycled to produce fine
and coarse aggregates. The recycling material will be utilized for
production of bricks, blocks, pavers and light-weight blocks. The
proposed study will help in utlising construction and demolition
wastes generated in metropolitan cities. The use of recycled
materials will also help in reducing the use of natural resource
materials for production of building materials.”
11.7 According to BMTPC, the project initiated in the current
financial year 2008-09, is expected to be completed by march 2010.
(b) Plastic Waste
11.8 In recent times, plastic, particularly, carry bags made from it,
constitute a major part of municipal solid waste. As per the Ministry

35
of Urban Development, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals,
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, was the nodal Ministry for
plastics. The following information was procured by them from the
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and forwarded to the Committee:
“Plastics, in general, are chemically inert substances. Most of the
plastics are reprocessable and recycable in nature. They are ‘ per se’
not harmful to the environment and health. It is the indiscriminate
littering of plastic materials and the absence of organized
segregation/cleaning of plastic waste in urban centres, which is
the main problem. Even among plastic, the major problem relates
only to the littering of plastic carry bags.
Notification No. SO 908 (E) dated 25.9.2000 for Municipal Solid
Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 has been notified
by the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The rules are
applicable to every municipal authority responsible for collection,
segregation, storage, transportation, processing and disposal of
municipal solid waste.”
11.9 The Committee were also apprised that the Building Materials
and Technology Promotion Council (BMTPC), Ministry of Housing and
Urban Poverty Alleviation had initiated and sponsored a project in
Central Building Research Institute (CBRI), Roorkee to develop plastics
building products from recycled plastics the main emphasis on wastes
generated from the building industry.
11.10 The Committee were further informed that the project had
already been completed by CBRI, Rookee. Developed building products
had been tested as per Indian Standards to verify its suitability for
application. The basic raw material developed using plastic waste may
also be utilized for development of building products for special
application in disaster resistant construction technologies. It however,
did not specifically cover the test to verify the health and environment
friendliness of the technology.
11.11 On the issue of encouraging the use of biodegradable plastics,
the Ministry of Urban Development had stated that the high cost
problems, associated with mixing with normal plastic and limited
technical characteristics, were the main reasons for limited use of
biodegradable plastics.
11.12 During the course of oral evidence, when the Committee
desired to know the initiatives taken by the Government for plastic
waste management, a representative of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests stated as under:
“In fact, in India we are recycling 60 per cent of plastic wastes
which is the highest in the world. If you see the figures in abroad,
hardly 15 to 20 per cent of plastic waste is re-cycled as against
our 60 per cent re-cycling. Our track is very good as far as re-
cycling and use of plastic waste is concerned.”

36
11.13 In response to the query raised by the Committee about the
coordination with other Ministries for management of plastic waste,
the Ministry of Urban Development had informed the Committee that
the Ministry had been coordinating with the Ministry of Environment
and Forests on the environmental issues including the banning of
plastics by way of attending meeting held in the Ministry of
Environment and Forests regularly .
11.14 When the Ministry of Urban Development was asked about
the steps taken to avoid littering and segregation of plastic waste at
source, the Committee were informed about the following provisions
in the ‘Plastics Manufacturing and Usage (A) Rules, 2003’:
• Small and thin size plastic carry bags (8x12 inches and
20 micron or less) should not be manufactured and sold.
• The usage of recycled plastic carry bags for storing, carrying,
dispensing or packaging of foodstuff is banned in India.
• Usage of plastic carry bags is banned in pilgrimage and
tourists spots.
(c) Bio-medical Waste and Electronic Waste
11.15 As regards the steps taken by the Ministry of Urban
Development for bio-medical waste management, the Committee were
informed in a written reply that bio-medical waste management came
under the purview of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
11.16 However, during evidence, a representative of the Ministry
of Environment and Forests submitted to the Committee as under:
“As far as bio-medical wastes are concerned, we have already
brought out medical rules under the Bio-Medical Waste
(Management and Handling) Rules, 1998. Every nursing home and
hospital is required to provide necessary facilities for segregation
of bio-degradable and non bio-degradable wastes. They have to
have proper facilities. In the rules, the standards and procedures
and the methods have been prescribed properly. Things are
improving than what it used to be earlier that everything used to
get mixed with the municipal solid wastes.”
11.17 The Committee had enquired from the Ministry of urban
Development about the efforts of penalizing the errant hospitals by
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. In this regard, the Ministry

37
of Health and Family Welfare had informed in a written note that
based upon the Bio-Medical Waste (Management & Handling) Rules,
1998, a ‘National Guideline on Hospital Waste Management’ was
prepared by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and circulated
to States and Union Territories for information and compliance. These
guidelines were prepared to enable each hospital to implement the
said Rules, by developing comprehensive plan for hospital waste
management, in terms of segregation, collection, treatment,
transportation and disposal of the hospital waste. The example of
Central Government Hospitals in Delhi namely Safdarjung Hospital,
Dr. RML Hospital, Lady Harding Medical College & Smt. S.K. Hospital,
as well as All India Institute of Medical Sciences, were cited where
strict adherence to the Bio-Medical Waste (Management & Handling)
Rules, 1998 was reported.
11.18 The Committee had also discussed the issue of electronic
waste (e-waste) management during the briefing meeting. In this regard,
the Ministry had informed that Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
had brought out draft guidelines on e-waste management.
L. Concept of Segregation of Waste
12.1 While observing that the most important issue with regard to
solid waste management was the segregation of waste, the Committee
desired to be apprised about the various steps taken by the Ministry
in this direction. In response, the Ministry of Urban Development had
informed the Committee that they had sent an Advisory Note to all
the State Governments in October, 2007 urging them to advise their
urban local bodies to follow segregation of waste at source. While
appraising and approving the projects posed under JNNURM, the
activity of segregation at source had been emphasized by way of two
bag system at household level, one for biodegradable and the other
for non-biodegradable waste.
12.2 In view of the provision regarding using separate bins for
non-organic waste and organic waste, the Committee enquired about
the steps taken for spreading public awareness. In this regard, the
Ministry of Urban Development, in their written reply had informed
the Committee as under:
“They are aware that the key element for making the Solid Waste
Management successful is door-to-door collection of segregated
waste. In order to achieve this, funds are provided under JNNURM
for procurement of two buckets at household level to ensure
collection of bio-degradable and non-biodegradable wastes. Primary

38
collection and transportation ensure that the biodegradable waste
is sent to treatment plant with appropriate waste treatment facilities
and non-biodegradable waste is transported to the sanitary landfills.
JNNURM provide funds for Information, Education and
Communication (IEC) in order to educate all stakeholders including
waste collectors for efficient Solid Waste Management System”.
12.3 Emphasizing the need for segregating Municipal Solid Waste,
the Ministry had further informed the Committee as under:
“The Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC), while
sanctioning projects of Solid Waste Management suggests ULBs to
implement 100% segregation of garbage/waste at source through
NGOs, Private operators or themselves. They are also encouraged
to sensitize officials and people involved in door to door collection
to understand the significance of segregated municipal waste and
to have seminars/workshops. Moreover, the Information, Education
and Communication (IEC) Programme is also being incorporated
in the JNNURM and UIDSSMT programmes so that awareness is
created in the public to practice sustainable consumption, source
reduction and source segregation.
12.4 While observing that the people have a habit to litter
aluminium foils, plastic bags, soft drink bottles, etc., at public places,
railway stations and tourist spots, the Committee had desired to know
about awareness campaigns initiated by the Government to educate
people. In this regard, a representative of the Ministry of Environment
and Forest apprised the Committee during evidence:
“On the awareness part, in fact, we have a programme even at
the school level. Children are made aware about environmental
issues through eco plants. It is also a part of their curriculum up
to the 12th level. We provide funds to schools and they are being
exposed about the various environmental hazards and also about
the various measures that are needed to be taken for protecting
the environment. These programmes are going on. We are not
organizing any campaign exclusively on medical wastes at the
school level. But for bio-medical wastes courses are organized by
the Central Pollution Control Board with the help of the State
Pollution Control Board and that all the stake holders are really
exposed to the kind of rules and regulations and standards that
they are required to adhere to. I do agree with you that it has not
really percolated down to the people at large and there is need to
take up more such programmes”.

39
12.5 About the mechanism for collecting the solid waste and plastic
wastes separately, he added as under:
“It is provided in the Municipal Solid Waste Management rules,
segregation has to be done and it has to be done at the local level.
The municipalities are required to do it at the local level and it
should be done at the house level also. But as has been mentioned
by one of the Hon’ble Members that it is the question of habit.
We do not have the habit. We mix everything and send it. Unless
there is inculcation of habits of segregating and sending disposal,
things may not improve. Even now we are not doing separately.”
12.6 The Committee were further informed that while approving
the Solid Waste Management projects under JNNURM, the concerned
ULBs were being advised to amend their bye-laws incorporating the
provision of penalties to the defaulters, who were littering in open
spaces/public places with garbage including plastic waste.
M. Public-Private Partnership in Solid Waste Management
13.1 As regards the steps taken by the Ministry of Urban
Development for Public-Private Partnership (PPP) in Solid Waste
Management, the Committee were informed that under JNNURM
guidelines, ULBs had to implement obligatory reforms in which the
Ministry advocated to encourage PPP as one of the optional reforms.
Accordingly, while appraising the SWM projects, the Ministry advised
the ULBs to formulate proposals for PPP for various activities such as
treatment of the waste through composting facilities door-to-door
collection, transportation, sanitary land filling etc. In this regard, the
Ministry had reportedly approved PPP models, for (i) Indore city for
treatment and disposal of solid waste; (ii) Coimbatore & Madurai cities
for contribution of ULB share through PPP model for waste treatment
& disposal; (iii) Surat for waste treatment and disposal, and
(iv) Mumbai for waste treatment facilities.
13.2 With regard to Public-Private a Partnership (PPP) in Solid
Waste Management, a representative of the Ministry of Urban
Development further explained during the briefing as under:
“Public-Private Partnership has been attempted in some cities. Delhi
is typical example. Delhi has around 12 to 13 municipal zones and
at least in six zones the entire collection, transportation has been
given to private parties. So, Public-Private Partnership has been
attempted in some cities. There is a need to improve the capabilities
of municipal local bodies to handle waste. This capacity building

40
of local bodies can be definitely addressed under the Jawaharlal
Nehru National Renewal Mission. Many of the landfill sites are
just crude dumping grounds. Instead of that, today technology is
available to make engineered landfill sites so that the damage to
environment is minimized. In Delhi, presently we have three
dumping grounds, Bawana, Okhla and Gazipur, and none of the
three grounds are engineered landfill sites. All of them are
overflowing with these things. Soon they have to be closed. A
new one is being built in Jaitpur that is towards Badarpur side.
This will be an engineered landfill site whose impact on
environment will be considerably less compared to traditional
dumping sites. More dumping sites are required in cities like Delhi
and attempts are being made in that direction.”
13.3 In this regard, the Committee had been further informed that
the Secretary , Ministry of Urban Development vide D.O. letter dated
11th October 2007 had also sent an advisory to all the State
Governments wherein it had been advised that the ULBs should explore
the possibility of including PPP in the following components of Solid
Waste Management and also involve NGOs/CBOs/RWAs in planning,
implementation and Operation and Maintenance of Solid Waste
Management services:
- Door-to-door collection
-T ransportation
-T reatment facilities.
N. Setting up of landfill facilities for Waste Disposal
14.1 During the examination of the subject, the Committee observed
that the existing landfill sites in most of the large and medium cities
were filled to the brim and there was a serious shortage of landfills.
Accordingly, when asked so, the Ministry of Urban Development
submitted a statement* to the Committee which showed that out of
34 States/UTs, only 14 had taken initiatives to construct new landfills/
identify sites for landfills. These States include Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat,
Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu and Manipur.
14.2 Further the Committee, while referring to certain States like
Gujarat, where a few ULBs were coming together for setting up a
*Annexure II.

41
common landfill site, desired to be apprised of the essential
pre-requisites for such sites. The Ministry responded as under:
“The pre-requisites for identification of regional/common landfill
site for all the neighbouring ULBs are as under:
(i) Acceptance by all the ULBs to utilize it.
(ii) Identification of site which should be easily accessible and
close to all the participating Urban Local Bodies as far as
possible.
(iii) Memorandum of Understanding has to be signed among
the ULBs for sharing the cost of infrastructure to be
developed as well as O&M cost.
(iv) Consensus should be arrived at so as to implement and
operate & maintain by one urban local body, for which, the
urban local body will be designated in consultation with
other ULBs.
(v) Under JNNURM, SWM project has been approved with a
common landfill-site for Tambaram, Pallavaram and Alandur
Municipalities in which the nodal Municipality has been
designated as Pallavaram Municipality by the Municipal
Administration Directorate”.

42
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT—NEED FOR ALL STAKEHOLDERS
TO BE PROACTIVE
1. Solid Waste Management (SWM) is a State subject. As it is
essentially a municipal function, all the municipal authorities in India
deal with collection, transportation and disposal of the city garbage
so as to reduce its impact on public health, environment and
aesthetics. Management of commercial/industrial waste like
bio-medical waste/e-waste is usually the responsibility of the
generator. The Committee note that though there had been
phenomenal growth in Municipal Solid Waste generation in India
since Independence, there was hardly any progress towards
improving the overall Solid Waste Management system in cities so
as to match this growth, as Municipal Solid Waste Management was
typically assigned a lower priority than water supply and sanitation.
It was only at the intervention of the Supreme Court in the late
Nineties, that some attempts were made for ensuring proper and
scientific management of Municipal Solid Waste through the MSW
(Management & Handling) Rules and related Manual prepared by
the Central Ministries of Environment and Forests and Urban
Development respectively. A clean city is not an accident but a
concerted effort of the citizens, the State, the city managers and the
civil society. The Committee are of the view that in order to achieve
the objectives of a well-designed and scientific SWM system, all the
stakeholders need to be pro-active. They feel that particularly the
State Governments should not be found wanting in this respect.
The Committee’s observations and recommendations arising out of
the examination of these and other related issues are set out in the
following paragraphs.
IMPLEMENTATION OF MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE
(MANAGEMENT AND HANDLING) RULES, 2000
2. The Committee note that the Ministry of Environment and
Forests, Government of India, have notified the ‘Municipal Solid
Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 through which
specific directives have been issued to the urban local bodies, District
Administrations and Departments of Urban Development of the State
Governments to ensure proper and scientific management of

43
municipal solid waste. The Ministry of Urban Development have
not yet formulated any National Waste Policy for Solid Waste
Management as according to them the MSW (M&H) Rules, 2000 act
as the policy to handle MSW. However, the Ministry of Urban
Development brought out a Manual on Municipal Solid Waste
Management in May, 2000 to facilitate the ULBs to address issues
relating to the Solid Waste Management. In this connection, the
Committee are distressed to note that the deadline of December, 2003
for implementation of MSW (M & H) Rules, 2000 could not be
achieved due to huge capital investment required to implement,
operate and maintain solid waste management projects. Several other
impediments like lack of planning, absence of segregation of waste
at source, inadequate house-to-house collection, transportation,
treatment and disposal of municipal solid waste, etc., have been
identified by the Government in implementation of the MSW Rlues,
2000. Consequently, the Committee note that the deadline for State
Departments of Urban Development and Urban Local Bodies for
implementation of these rules has been extended upto December 2008.
The Committee are sure that even this deadline would not be met
since most of the ULBs and State Governments still lack requisite
investment and infrastructure facilities for the same. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Ministry should impress upon the States
that they should take all steps necessary to ensure that MSW (M&H)
Rules, 2000 are strictly implemented by all concerned as early as
possible. At the same time, the Committee also recommend that
while sanctioning the Solid Waste Management Projects submitted
by the States under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes like Jawaharlal
Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) and Urban
Infrastructure Development Scheme in Small and Medium Towns
(UIDSSMT), the Government should ensure the implementation of
MSW (M&H) Rules, 2000 as a pre-condition.
NATIONAL URBAN SANITATION POLICY
3. Open defecation, particularly, near urban slums and railway
tracks is still prevalent in most of the cities and urban areas. It acts
as a major hindrance in achieving ‘clean city’ status. The Committee
are happy to note that the long awaited National Urban Sanitation
Policy has been approved by the Cabinet on 3rd October, 2008 during
the International Year of Sanitation, with a view to formulate policy
guidelines, strategies for implementation of sewerage and sanitation
facilities in the urban areas, so as to eliminate open defecation in
the cities and towns. To achieve the goals of National Urban
Sanitation Policy, the Government is reportedly contemplating steps

44
like awareness generation and behavioural change, integrated city-
wide sanitation system, sanitary and safe disposal, proper
maintenance and management of all sanitary installation, etc. in due
course. The Committee feel that for effective implementation of the
National Urban Sanitation Policy, a time-bound action plan with
specified targets focussing on the prevailing conditions in a State
needs to be framed by the Government, with adequate financial
support so that ULBs could be strengthened to provide substantial
sanitation services. The Committee hope that the Central Government
and the States will take necessary steps to achieve this goal.
MAGNITUDE OF THE MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW)
4. From the information furnished by the Ministry, the Committee
note that at present urban India produces about 42 million tonnes
of municipal solid waste annually which would mean 1.15 lakh
metric tonnes per day (TPD). Out of this, 83,378 TPD is generated
in 423 class-I cities. They concur with the view of the Ministry that
as soon as the problem in these calss-I cities is addressed, 72.5% of
the total urban waste generated could be managed. The Committee
have also been informed that although Urban Local Bodies spend
between Rs. 500 to Rs. 1500 MT on Solid Waste Management, less
than 5% of this amount is used for treatment and disposal of waste
after spending 60% to 70% on collection and 20% to 30% on
transportation. The Committee, therefore, are convinced that more
financial resources are required for treatment and disposal of waste
generated. At present there is no tax/tariff on waste management
services. The Committee are of the view that the possibility of
levying direct tax for waste management services need to be explored
since it is a common public utility like water and electricity. They,
therefore recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development may
initiate steps on the same at the earliest.
SPECIAL PURPOSE VEHICLE (SPV) FOR MUNICIPAL SOLID
WASTE
5. Lack of funds with Urban Local Bodies has been identified as
a major hindrance in proper solid waste management. In this context,
the Committee have been informed that Kerala State Government
has created a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for power generation
by integrating its 60 municipalities with three intermediate depots
to collect garbage and waste to dispose it off in large containers.
Ahmedabad and Bangalore cities have also reportedly created SPV
for management of municipal solid waste. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Government should closely monitor these initiatives

45
and if found suitable, encourage other States, cities and ULBs to
create such SPVs to address the shortage of funds. The Committee
also recommend that the Government should examine the feasibility
of developing, with adequate financial support, model clean cities
in each State which demonstrate innovative MSW Management
system.
TECHNOLOGICAL OPTIONS A V AILABLE FOR DISPOSAL OF
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE
6. The Committee observe that various technological options like
composting including vermi composting, anaerobic digestion/
biomethanation, production of refuse derived fuel/pelletisation, etc.
are available for treatment and disposal of municipal solid waste.
The Committee further note that these technological options find
mention in the Technical Advisory Group (TAG) Report and in the
Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management. However, these
options are yet to gain wide acceptance. While deploring the crude
dumping of waste by the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in most of the
cities, the Committee recommend that the Government should take
the desired steps to encourge the State Governments/ULBs to adopt
the available and proven technologies for safe disposal of Municipal
Solid Waste. At the same time the Committee desire that the
Government must also ensure that only environment-friendly
technological options are adopted so as to prevent further worsening
of an already polluted urban environment.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PROJECTS IN HILLY REGION
7. In Hilly regions, difficult terrain, lack of adequate land huge
cost of basic site developments and weak financial positions of the
municipal bodies make SWM a daunting task. The Committee note
that 7 Solid Waste management Projects viz. Doda, Bhaderwah,
Akhnoor, Poonch, Samba, Kathua and Sunderbani in Jammu &
Kashmir have been entrusted to the National Building Construction
Corporations (NBCC), Ministry of Urban Development. The
Committee appreciate that NBCC has entered into an agreement with
the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) to develop solid waste
management schemes in hilly regions, which shall be used to
develop standard designs for future use. A scheme in Mandi,
Himachal Pradesh has been taken up at present and is reported to
be at design stage. The Committee are, however, concerned to observe
several constraints being faced by NBCC in implementation of the
projects in Jammu & Kashmir owing to the non-availability of

46
suitable land for the processing plant, poor economics of Operation
& Maintenance cost vis-a-vis revenue from sale of products, high
landed cost of material and equipment due to high entry and toll
taxes and high cost of registration for sales tax. They, therefore,
recommend that Ministry of Urban Development should take up
these issues with the concerned authorities so that the sanctioned
Solid Waste Management projects in Jammu & Kashmir are well-
supported financially and completed in time. At the same time, the
Committee recommend that the Government should work out the
cost of Solid Waste Management projects in the hilly and difficult
regions and accordingly raise the limit with respect to the project
costs being sanctioned for such regions.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE PROJECTS UNDER JAWAHARLAL
NEHRU NATIONAL URBAN RENEWAL MISSION, UIDSSMT, ETC.
8. The Committee have been convinced that the Government is
increasingly committed to improved MSW management through
JNNURM, UIDSSMT, the pilot project of SWM in 10 Airfield towns
and so on. The number of SWM projects sanctioned under JNNURM
and UIDSSMT are 31 and 40 respectively. The Committee further
note that the 12th Finance Commission had also made a provision
of Rs. 2500 crore in June, 2005 exclusively for Urban Local Bodies
for setting up Solid Waste Management systems in 423 class-I cities
during the period, 2005-2010. The Committee are, however, concerned
to note that only 26 schemes have been sanctioned so far at an
approved cost of Rs. 1458 crore and feel that the number of projects
undertaken so far is very low in comparison to the magnitude of
the problem. The Committee feel that though an overall momentum
has been established, yet the need of the hour is to expand and
improve the coverage of SWM schemes, which requires both
upgraded institutional and financial structures with suitable
investments as well as the willingness of the municipal bodies to
develop and implement clear-cut SWM projects for upgrading their
facilities at a sustainable pace.
PILOT PROJECT ON SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT IN 10
AIRFIELD TOWNS
9. The Committee are distressed to note that though the Scheme
of Solid Waste Management in 10 Airfield towns was scheduled to
be completed by March, 2008, it has been delayed badly in Pune,
Tejpur and Hindon. Only 45 per cent, 10 per cent and 45 per cent
of work has been completed respectively in the three towns as on
30.6.2008. The progress of work in respect of project at Bareilly has

47
also remained incomplete as per the information furnished to the
Committee. They are perturbed to note that despite their
recommendation in 31st Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09),
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Ministry of Urban Development urging the
Ministry to take necessary action in the matter for urgently
completing the schemes in the remaining 4 towns, substantial amount
of work is still left, particularly in Tejpur. While urging for
completion of these schemes without further delay, the Committee
would like to be apprised of the present status of implementation
of these projects, alongwith the steps taken by the Ministry in 2008
to remove the impediments in the projects pending till date. They
hope that the Ministry would take up the matter concerning Tejpur
with appropriate authorities urgently lest the very objective of the
scheme would stand defeated.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND SANITATION SCHEME FOR
GHAZIABAD TOWN (HINDON AIRFIELD), U.P .
10. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Urban
Development had approved a Solid Waste Management and
Sanitation scheme for Ghaziabad town (Hindon Airfield) at an
estimated cost of Rs. 13.52 crore. The project, which had commenced
on 1.1.2006 is till incomplete. As against a total release of funds of
Rs. 12.76 crore, the expenditure incurred on the project so far is
reported to be Rs. 6.05 crore. As regards the progress of work on the
project, the Committee note that in respect of sanitary landfill and
compost plant, only 10% and 7% of the total work has been
completed so far. These components could not be completed due to
dispute in acquisition of 43 acres of land which was origanally
identified by the Ghaziabad Nagar Nigam at Dooda hera,
Chippiyana Bujurg in Ghaziabad. The project has been further
delayed due to a Writ Petition filed in 2006 for shifting of the site.
The Committee have been further informed that on the direction of
the Hon’ble High Court, a new site has been identified at Dasna in
Ghaziabad which is about 9 Kms away from the present site.
However, No Objection Certificates were required from Hindon
Airfield and Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board by the Ghaziabad
Development Authority before the start of land acquisition process
at Dasna site, which is yet to be done. The Committee are dissatisfied
to note that the funds allocated and released for the scheme could
not be utilized fully due to several above-stated impediments and
that the project is still languishing due to non-acquisition of land.
The Committee hope that learning from the past experiences, the
Government vigorously pursue the matter with the Uttar Pradesh

48
State Government so that the scheme could be expedited. The
Committee also recommend that the Ministry should impress upon
the State Governments to take prudent measures for advance and
realistic planning so that all and acquisition of land for a Solid
Waste Management project are taken care of, before that start of the
project on ground. Further, the Committee desire that for such
projects the Government should take recourse to the Compulsory
Acquisition of Land Act in public interests.
LACK OF LANDFILL SITE IN GURGAON, HARYANA
11. The Committee note with concern that in the National Capital
Region, particularly, in Gurgaon, where the present population is
more than 10 lakh against the 3.42 lakh as per 2001 Census, the
problem of unmanaged municipal solid waste has created an uproar.
They have been given to understand that now an integrated site to
be developed on Build-Own-Operate-Transfer (BOOT) basis has been
identified at Bandhwari village on Gurgaon-Faridabad Road on a
Public-Private-Partnership model. The Committee note that although
all necessary clearances for the project has been obtained, the project
is likely to take one and a half years for completion after approval
of the budget. The Committee hope that keeping in view the problem
the project would be sanctioned and undertaken urgently and desire
that it should be completed without any delay.
MONITORING OF SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT (SWM)
PROJECTS
12. The Committee find that although monitoring of Solid Waste
Management is primarily not the responsibility of the Ministry of
Urban Development, the Ministry, however, monitor the
implementation of approved Solid Waste Management projects under
the Centrally-sponsored scheme through various mechanisms such
as quarterly Project Reports field visits, etc. The Committee have
been further apprised that for monitoring and management of
sanctioned projects of various sectors including SWM under
JNNURM, the Project Implementation Units (PIU) at ULB level and
Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) at State level are being set up. The
Committee are, however, constrained to note that in spite of the
aforesaid efforts taken by the Central Government, only 30 Project
Implementation Units (PIU), 12 Project Monitoring Units (PMU) and
4 Independent Review and Monitoring Agencies (IRMA) have been
set up so far to monitor and manage the sanctioned projects. The
Committee feel that it is grossly inadequate in view of the fact that

49
the issue of managing Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) concerns
5161 cities and towns. The Committee, therefore, recommend that to
give a major fillip to this programme, the Government should meet
frequently and make constant dialogue with the State Governments
so that more project implementation and monitoring units could be
set up at the ULB/State levels. Further the performance of PIUs,
PMUs and IRMAs also needs to be assessed in order to ensure that
no loopholes are left in the execution of SWM projects.
STRENGTHENING OF CENTRAL PUBLIC HEALTH AND
ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING ORGANIZATION (CPHEEO)
13. As regards the monitoring mechanism of Solid Waste
Management system in 423 class-I cities available with the Ministry
of Urban Development, the Committee observe that at present
CPHEEO—the technical wing of the Ministry assists the Ministry in
all technical matters relating to water supply and sanitation sector.
It is stated to be a small organization having a sanctioned strength
of only 9 officers. The Committee are further concerned to note that
out of these 9 officers, 50% posts are reported to be lying vacant.
The Committee have been further informed that a proposal for
creation of 11 posts have been forwarded to Ministry of Finance for
approval so that water supply, sewerage and solid waste management
schemes implemented by the State Governments/ULBs could be
monitored at Central level by CPHEEO. Taking note of the grossly
inadequate manpower with CPHEEO for monitoring the water supply
and sanitation services including solid waste management, the
Committee, while recommending the Government to take appropriate
action to fill up the existing vacancies at the earliest. The Committee
would also like to know the present status of proposal of the
Ministry to strengthen the organization by creation of 11 additional
posts. The Committee would also like to be apprised as to how,
with the increased strength of 20 officers, water supply and sanitation
services including solid waste management in 5161 cities and towns
in the country would be monitored by CPHEEO.
TASK FORCE ON INTEGRATED PLANT NUTRIENT
MANAGEMENT (IPNM)
14. The Committee note that subsequent to a Writ Petition filed
in the Hon’ble Supreme Court on solid waste management, an Inter-
Ministerial Task Force on Integrated Plant Nutrient Management
(IPNM) using city compost was created in August, 2003. In its Report
submitted to the Supreme Court on 6.5.2005, the Task Force had
recommended an integrated plant nutrient management using city

50
compost so that it can be supplied within 50 km radius of all ULBs
and their compost plants. The Committee find that as a follow up
action, the Ministry of Urban Development had advised all the State
Governments and concerned Ministries to implement the said
recommendation including use of compost for development of
plantation/afforestation and balanced integrated use of fertilizers. The
Committee are concerned to note that although assistance of Rs. 20
lakh per unit were released from VIIth to IXth Plan, no financial
assistance for setting up/strengthening of soil testing laboratories
and for setting up bio-fertilizer units were provided during
10th Plan period. The Committee are further dismayed to note that
although funds of Rs. 9.00 crore were provided for setting up of
30 mechanical compost plants in different States for conversion of
biodegradable organic city waste into compost, most of these plants
are either not working to their optimum capacity or are not
functioning at all. While recommending the Government to take
appropriate steps to ensure an optimum utilization of installed
capacity of these compost plants, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the reasons for their non-functioning as well as absence
of financial assistance/subsidy for setting up of more compost plants
during the 10th and 11th Plans.
The Committee are further disappointed to note that despite the
efforts made by the Ministry of Urban Development to involve the
Central Ministries of Chemicals & Fertilizers and Agriculture to know
as to how best the city composts can be integrated with chemical
fertilizers for the benefit of farmers, these Ministries have not shown
any enthusiasm for the same. They feel that as SWM concerns several
stakeholders including these Ministries, such an attitude is uncalled
for. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Urban Development
should again approach these Ministries to bring them on board.
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION FUND
15. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Urban
Development have created a Community Participation Fund (CPF)
under which a community can conceive a project on municipal solid
waste and submit it through the local Municipality to the Union
Government. Funds to the tune of Rs. 9.5 lakh can be granted with
community contributing 5% in case of slums and 10% in case of
others. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the
response to the scheme has not been very encouraging as only three
schemes from Madurai city have been received by the Government
so far. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government

51
should analyse the reasons for CPF not being attractive enough and
obviate the same. They should also create an awareness campaign
among the public through Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)/Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs) so that more and more
community participation projects could be taken up for municipal
solid waste management. The Committee also feel that communities
availing CPF should also undertake efforts to convince citizens to
reduce waste and encourage exchange/gift of unwanted usable items
instead of throwing them away.
PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT TO MUNICIPAL STAFF AND RAG
PICKERS
16. The Committee observe that as per guidelines given in the
Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, 2000, the local body
should provide adequate protective equipment including clothing
and health check up from time to time to the staff to ensure that
their health is not adversely affected on account of their handling of
solid waste. Further, free medical services should be made available
to those whose health is affected on account of handling of solid
waste. The Committee are, however, convinced that very few ULBs
have implemented these rules. They are also dismayed to note that
the Ministry of Urban Development could not obtain any information
from the State Governments/ULBs about the staff engaged in garbage
disposal, who are not properly provided with the protective
equipment as required under the Manual on Solid Waste
Management, 2000. The Committee would like to urge the authorities
to ensure that not only the waste handling municipal staff but the
rag-pickers in unorganized sector, who are reported to be about
1.3 lakh in number and play a special role in segregation of waste,
should also be provided with the adequate protective equipment
and health check up including other incentives like identity cards
and use of public sanitation services. The Committee desire that the
continuous monitoring of implementation of the guidelines in this
regard should also be ensured at each level.
PROJECTS FOR WASTE CHARACTERIZATION AND FEASIBILITY
STUDIES
17. The Committee note that a scheme for financial assistance
for waste characterization and feasibility studies was introduced in
1992 under which the Ministry had sanctioned 3 projects viz. (i) the
municipal solid waste management project, Nagar Nigam, Ghaziabad
at a cost of Rs. 55 lakh, (ii) Pilot project for solid waste management
for Hyderabad City, Municipal Corporation, Hyderabad at a cost of
Rs. 53.3 lakh, and (iii) Pilot project for solid waste management in

52
Shimla at a total cost of Rs. 25 lakh. However, none of these projects
have been reported to be commissioned. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the date of sanction of these projects, the reasons
for their non-commissioning and the actual progress alongwith
expenditure incurred, if any, on these projects. The Committee
strongly urge the Government to fix responsibility for the failure of
commissioning these projects.
RE-CYCLING OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE,
PLASTIC ETC.
18. The Committee note that ULBs have been advised by the
Ministry of Urban Development to segregate their construction and
demolition waste and dispose them off in low lying areas. The
Committee have also been apprised that Building and Material
Technology Promotion Council (BMTPC) initiated a research and
development project with Youth for Unity and Voluntary Action,
Mumbai, for recycling of construction and demolition wastes as the
use of recycled materials will help in reducing the use of natural
resource materials for production of building materials. The
Committee further observe that in Surat, Gujarat, the construction
and demolition waste is reused for preparation of bricks for laying
pavements. While appreciating the Research and Development project
by BMTPC for recycling of construction and demolition waste, the
Committee recommend that more such projects should be undertaken
and implemented in other parts of the country. The Committee have
also been informed that BMTPC has initiated and sponsored a project
in the Central Building Research Institute (CBR), Roorkee to develop
plastics building products from recycled plastics with emphasis on
wastes generated from the building industry. The Committee also
learn that CBRI, Roorkee has developed building products using
plastic waste, for special application in disaster resistant construction,
though it has not been verified on the grounds of health and
environment friendliness. While strongly recommending to promote
the use of recycled plastic building products, the Committee feel
that the impact of these products on health and environment needs
to be tested and verified before putting it up for large-scale use.
The Committee also feel that there is an urgent need to frame laws
to encourage recycling by specifying mandatory deposit and return
requirements to shift the burden of waste disposal and recovery of
materials back to the manufacture of products by ensuring that
retailers and wholesalers take back materials which is no longer
required. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to
gather expert opinion on this matter and approach the appropriate
authority to initiate such a move.

53
IMPLEMENTATION OF BIO-MEDICAL WASTE (MANAGEMENT
AND HANDLING) RULES, 1998
19. The Committee note that based upon the Bio-medical Waste
(Management and Handling) Rules, 1998, the Ministry of Health and
Family welfare had prepared National Guidelines on Hospital Waste
Management and circulated it to States and Union Territories for
information and compliance. The hospitals are required to implement
these Rules by developing a comprehensive plan for hospital waste
management in terms of segregation, collection, treatment,
transportation and disposal of the wastes. Although the Committee
have been informed that the Central Government hospitals are strictly
adhering to the Bio-medical waste (Management and Handling) Rules,
1998 and implementation of these Rules by other Nursing homes
and hospitals has also improved, the Committee would like to know
the monitoring mechanism available with the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare to check any violation of rules and guidelines
issued in this regard. At the same time, the Committee would like
to know the steps taken by the Ministry of Urban Development to
ensure that these wastes are not dumped with the other Municipal
wastes.
AWARENESS CAMPAIGN FOR SEGREGATION OF WASTE AT
SOURCE
20. The Committee note that 30 to 55 per cent of municipal solid
waste comprises bio-degradable matter, 40 to 55 per cent is inert and
5 to 15 per cent is recyclable. The Committee are concerned to note
that door-to-door collection of waste is not carried out in most parts
of the country and its is still the responsibility of individual house
owner to take the municipal waste to the dhalaos. The Committee
cannot but deplore the way in which most of the Urban Local Bodies
are ignoring the provision using separate bins for non-organic and
organic waste inspite of the Advisory Note sent in October, 2007 by
the Ministry of Urban Development to all State Governments. In
this context, the Committee observe that in Gujarat, cities like Surat
and Vadodara have proposed private sector participation in handling
this organic waste and converting it into compost. Even other
combustible wastes like paper, plastic, etc., are being separated and
treated with Refuse Derived Fuel. Similarly, Municipal Corporation
of Delhi is reported to have implemented the door-to-door collection
of waste in various parts of Delhi in a phased manner.
Notwithstanding these few instances, the Committee still feel that
the most important aspect in Solid Waste Management, i.e. reduction
of waste and the segregation of waste at source, is the most neglected
one. In view of the Committee, it is probably because of indifference
of citizens towards inculcating the habit of segregating wastes as

54
well as lack of community participation towards waste management.
The Committee feel that the task of creating facilities to treat the
wastes either for producing energy or for composting or recycling
and bringing awareness about reduction and segregation of waste at
source by involving citizens rests with the Ministry of Urban
Development and the State Governments. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should boost up measures for
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) of the public on
the matter through print and electronic media, NGOs, student
community, women, institutions, etc., at all available opportunities.
IMPLEMENTATION OF PLASTICS MANUFACTURING AND
USAGE (A) RULES, 2003
21. The Committee note that to avoid littering and segregation
of plastic waste at source, ‘Plastics Manufacturing and Usage (A)
Rules, 2003 has come into force. Besides stipulating not to
manufacture and sell thin plastic carry bags, the rules also prohibit
the usage of recycled plastic carry bags for storing, carrying,
dispensing or packaging of foodstuffs in India. Further, usage of
plastics carry bags is banned in pilgrimage and tourists spots. In
this regard, the Committee are of the opinion that although in some
States use of plastic carry bags has been totally banned, these
provisions are not strictly followed by all the States/Urban Local
Bodies. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to
pursue all the State Governments/Urban Local Bodies not only to
incorporate a clause for penalty on the defaulters in their by-laws
but their implementation should also be strictly adhered. The
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken by the
Government in this regard.
MONITORING OF PUBLIC PRIV ATE PARTICIPATION (PPP)
PROJECTS
22. The Committee note that under Jawaharala Nehru National
Urban Renewal Mission guidelines, Urban Local Bodies shall have
to implement obiligatory reforms in which the Ministry of Urban
Development has advocated for encouraging Public Private
Participation (PPP). Further, the Ministry has approved PPP model
for Indore, Coimbatore, Madurai, Surat and Mumbai. In six municipal
zones in Delhi, the entire collection and transportation of waste has
been given to private parties. The Committee have been also
informed that the Ministry of Urban Development, in an advisory
note sent to all State Governments in October, 2007, had advised
them that the ULBs should explore possibility of including PPP and
Non-Governmental Organizations/Resident Welfare Associations in
door-to-door collection, transportation and treatment facility for
municipal solid waste. The Committee, however, note that in some

55
of the cities, Public Private Participation mode has been implemented
successfully, while in others the performance has been dismal. They
feel that an issue in PPP mode, which requires attention, is
strengthening the ULB’s capacity to enter into contracts and the
private sector’s ability to deliver professionally against a contract.
They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to address the matter
carefully keeping in view these crucial issues and initiate measures
to tackle the same.
ACUTE SCARCITY OF LANDFILLS
23. Disposing of inert municipal solid waste in a landfill requires
properly designed and well-managed landfills. Such landfills can be
a hygienic and relatively inexpensive method of disposing of waste
materials. However, the Committee are seriously concerned to note
that lack of appropriate land for landfills has resulted in mounds of
MSW which has become severe eyesores alongside roads in most of
the class I and medium cities in the country. The most recent
instances noticed by the Committee in this connection are Gurgaon
and Ghaziabad, where several public protests were witnessed on
this account. In addition to it, old, poorly designed or poorly
managed landfills in cities are creating several adverse environmental
conditions, for instance, wind-blown litter, generation of liquid
leachate, poisonous gases, bad odours, attraction of vermin and
bacteria etc. In this connection, the Committee note that certain State
Governments are in the process of setting up landfill facilities, for
instance, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Karantaka, Maharashtra, Manipur, Rajasthan, West Bengal and
Tamil Nadu. The Committee also note that 12 ULBs of AUDA
(Ahmedabad Urban Development Authority), Gujarat have taken
initiatives to construct a common landfill site. The Committee desire
that the Ministry of Urban Development should assess the success
of this common facility, once completed and counsel other State
Governments to follow suit, wherever feasible, particularly in those
States where severe land crunch is experienced. The Committee are
also dismayed that in Delhi, Goa, Bihar, Uttarakhand, Punjab,
Chhattisgarh, Mizoram and Lakshadweep, no initiatives were reported
on the part of their ULBs towards setting up of landfill facilities for
waste disposal. The Committee would urge expeditious steps to
address this issue. They would like to be apprised of the latest
progress on this account.
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
17 December, 2008 Chairman,
26 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Urban Development.

56
ANNEXURE I
ACTIONS POINTS OF THE VARIOUS MINISTRIES INVOLVED
IN IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE TASK FORCE
Ministries Action to be initiated
involved
12
Ministry of Agriculture Transport subsidy on sale of finished compost,
massive awareness generation as extension
activity, guidelines for effective and efficient use
of city garbage based compost for agriculture
and horticultural crops and formulation of
specifications and regulatory mechanisms for
ensuring quality of compost.
The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
of the Ministry should promote the use of
Integrated Nutrient Management through
various projects and schemes being partly
financed by the Government of India by using
quality city compost. The quality control
mechanism of fertilizer, in vogue, should be used
for the verification and qualifying the city
compost as per the standards laid down. The
inoculum required by the compost plants should
be made available by the Government of India
laboratories/ICAR/Agricultural Universities
located in the area for multiplication and use
by the composts at a very reasonable cost.
The ICAR should institute special projects as
“Lab to Land”, National Demonstration
Experiment on Integrated Nutrient Management
on various crops using quality city compost.
“Seeing is believing,” all these demonstrations
should be on farmer’s field and that too
preferably on small and marginal farmer’s field.
It should be made mandatory for both

57
12
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and
ICAR to extend all required financial support,
scientific help and guidance (through extension
agencies) to promote the use of quality city
compost as Integrated Nutrient Management
practice by the farmers. The involvement of State
Agriculture Department(s) and State Agricultural
Universities is a must in this programme for
demonstrating the integrated nutrient
management approach at farmer’s field. If
required, new projects and schemes should be
introduced for this purpose on priority basis.
Ministry of Environment Use of Compost for Rehabilitation of Degraded
& Forests Land, Mining Spoil Dumps, Abandoned Mining
areas should be undertaken while afforestation
programme is being executed on a large scale.
Integrated nutrient application approach for
reclamation of degraded and denudated lands
during afforestion process would be a rewarding
mechanisms for better soil health and greening
of these abandoned lands. Guidelines for the
same should be promoted and be a part and
parcel of various schemes.
Ministry of Finance As the composting sector is directly related to
waste management/ health of the citizens, soil
fertility and food production/food security, the
Ministry of Finance, Government of India,
should provide following fiscal incentives to the
composting sector; 8, Entrepreneurs setting up
of compost plant in Joint Venture or private
sector should be considered for tax holiday for
10 to 11 years and exemption of customs duty ,
excise duty, sales tax and other local taxes on
equipment, machinery, processing plant etc. to
promote private sector participation to promote
production of compost from city garbage and
provide India soils with much needed humus
material/Carbon content and other soil nutrients
for retaining soil fertility.

58
12
The private composter/ULB (in case of joint
venture) be allowed to raise loans from
Commercial Banks, NABARD, HUDCO and
others by jointly mortgaging the land if required.
Funds to the extent of Rs. 800/- crore (which is
hardly 5% of Rs. 16,000.0 crore annual subsidy
to chemical fertilizer) should be provided by
Ministry of Finance, Government of India
for pr oviding capital & interest subsidy of
Rs. 700.0 crore for setting up of 1000 compost
plants, Rs. 60.0 crore as transport subsidy and
Rs. 40.0 crore as promotional subsidy.
(a) Capital Subsidy & Interest Subsidy
Enterpreneurs/Composters should be considered
for back-ended capital subsidy of 50% of cost
of plant (if ULB owns the plant) and 30% of
cost of plant (if joint venture) and interest
subsidy for the entire loan repayment period
with discount rate of 12%. Funds to the extent
of Rs. 700.0 crore should be considered by the
Ministry of Finance, Government of India for
setting up about 1000 compost plants in different
cities of the country in order to produce compost
from city garbage.
(b) Transport Subsidy of Rs. 60.0 crore
(v) Transport subsidy of Rs. 100/- per Metric
Ton should be considered for transporting
compost (finished product) in bulk form
within 50 km radius of compost plant by
composters for direct selling to farmers to
ensure marketing of compost.
(vi) Transport subsidy of Rs. 150/- per Metric
Ton should also be considered for fertilizer
companies of their storage agents for
transporting and storage of compost
(finished product) within 100-150 km
radius of the compost plant for marketing
through “Basket Approach”.

59
12
(c) Promotional Subsidy of Rs. 40.0 crore for
popularizing the use of compost.
The total fund requirement would not exceed
Rs. 900.0 crore per annum which includes
Rs. 700.0 crore for capital subsidy and interest
subsidy for 1000 compost plants, about Rs. 60.0 crore
for transport subsidy, Rs. 40.0 crore as
promotional subsidy and around Rs. 100.0 crore
for extending subsidy to existing plants also. The
capital grant/subsidy should be monitored by
Ministry of Urban Development, Government of
India.
Back-ended capital and interest subsidy may
be provided through leading financial
institutions like NABARD, HUDCO etc. The
capitalization of interest subsidy could be
worked out with an annual discount rate of 12%
and shall be paid to Financial institutions on
the basis of actual loan disbursed. Regarding
subsidy on plant and machinery, the back-ended
subsidy should be provided through NABARD/
HUDCO/NCDC and other authorized
commercial bank(s).
The subsidy/capital grant should be monitored
by the Ministry of Urban Development upto the
production of compost and distribution level
through back-ended subsidy through NABARO/
HUDCO. The Ministry should be empowered
to use Rs. 700 crores each year as per the need
and requirement of the cities based upon the
evaluation report.
Commercial Banks, NABARD and other
financing institutions be directed to grant loan
at par to the farmers.
For all practical purposes, installation and
running of compost plants should be granted
the same status as is being availed by agro-
industries located in the rural areas or in the
suburbs of the cities.

60
12
Ministry of Chemicals & Until and unless a concept of integrated nutrient
Fertilizers management approach is adopted by us, it may
not be possible to break the plateau of crop
productivity achieved in various crops viz.
Wheat and paddy. For better Soil and increasing
the efficiency of added fertilizers, the use of
compost/organic manure is vital. In Order to
see that the farmers use organic manure/
compost along with fertilizers, the treatment to
this vital segment (compost) has to be par with
that of chemical fertilizer. The subsidy as is
being granted to chemical fertilizers has to be
extended for promoting the use of organic
manure/compost from city garbage. The
mechanism of the grant to be executed need to
be worked out by a high powered committee.
Co-marketing of organic manure along with
fertilizers should be the responsibility of this
Ministry.
Ministry of Mines Use of compost for rehabilitation of degraded
land, mining spoil dumps, abandoned mining
areas and for compensatory afforestation as per
$ 13 (qq) of the Mines & Minerals Act, 1987
and similar guidelines, particularly in such
places which are located in nearby areas of the
city.
Ministry of Railways Use city compost for plantation/afforestation on
minimum 1% of its lands annually within
50 km of a city or town should be effectively
performed.
Ministry of Surface Use of city compost for all road dividers,
Transport embankment stabilization, roadside greening etc.
should be mandatory. Other Ministries like
Tourism, Civil Aviation and others should use
city compost for greening of the area.

61
ANNEXURE II
SETTING UP OF LANDFILL FACILITIES
FOR WASTE DISPOSAL
Sl. States/UTs Landfill Initiatives taken No. of sites
No. constructed identified
 12 3 4 5
 1. Andaman & Nicobar Nil Port Blair 1
 2. Andhra Pradesh Vizianagaram Suryapet, 61 (ULBs)
Hyderabad,
Vijaywada,
Vizanagaram
 3. Arunachal Pradesh INR INR INR
 4. Bihar Nil Nil Nil
 5. Chandigarh Site under - -
construction
 6. Chhattisgarh Nil Nil 66
 7. Daman & Diu Nil Daman & DNH 01 (Dadra)
 8. Delhi Nil Nil Nil
 9. Goa Nil Nil 13
10. Gujarat Surat, Alang Common site for 142
12 ULBs of AUDA
11. Guwahati Nil Nil 1
12. Haryana Sirsa Faridabad, Hissar, 35
Ambala, Gurgaon
13. Himachal Pradesh None Shimla, Chowari, 52
Chamba, Nalagarh,
Palampur
14. Jharkhand INR INR INR
15. Jammu & Kashmir INR INR INR

62
12 3 4 5
16. Kerala Nil Kozhikode 53
17. Karnatka Bangalore, Sirsi, Dandeli, Remaining
Mangalore Bhatkal, Kundapur, 213 local
Karwar, Puttur, Udupi and bodies have
Ankola Chickmngalore identified the
sites
18. Lakshadweep Nil Nil Nil
19. Madhya Pradesh 22 130 305
20. Maharashtra Nasik, Sonpeth Jalna, Navapur, 241
Ambad Pune, Meurd-
Janjira, Pimpri
Chinchawad
21. Manipur Nil Imphal, Bishuper, One each (6)
Jin, Thoubal,
Kakching, March
22. Mizoram Nil Nil Nil
23. Meghalaya Nil Shillong 04
24. Nagaland Nil Kohima 01
25. Orissa Nil 03 51
26. Punjab Nil Nil Nil
27. Puducherry Nil Puducherry 1
28. Rajasthan Jodhpur Proposed in 152
14 towns
29. Sikkim Nil South-West 1
District of Sikkim
30. Tamil Nadu Nil Namakkal, 104
Tiruppur,
Udumalpet
31. Tripura Nil Agartala 8
32. Uttar Pradesh INR INR INR
33. Uttarakhand Nil Nil Nil
34. West Bengal Under construction 30 30
at ND&NB

63
ANNEXURE III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2007-08)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON THURSDAY, 24TH JANUARY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in the Committee
Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK S ABHA
2. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
3. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Anant Gudhe
6. Shri Sajjan Kumar
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri D. Vittal Rao
9. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
10. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
12. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
13. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
14. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
15. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
16. Shri Penumalli Madhu
17. Shri Mukul Roy
18. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa

64
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Sekar — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Saxena — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Harchain — Deputy Secretary-II
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(i) Dr. M.M. Kutty, Joint Secretary (D & L)
(ii) Shri S. Sethuraman, Adviser
(iii) Shri A.K. Mehta, Director
(iv) Shri J.B. Kshirsagar, Chief Planner
(v) Shri M. Sankarnarayanan, Deputy Adviser
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members
and the representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development to the
sitting of the Committee. The Chairman then asked the Joint Secretary
(D & L), Ministry of Urban Development to brief the Committee on
the subject “Solid Waste Management ”. He also drew the attention of
the representatives to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Joint Secretary (D & L), Ministry of Urban Development
briefly outlined various schemes pertaining to the subject “Solid Waste
Management”, such as Municpal Solid Waste (Management and
Handling) Rules, 2000, Integrated Plant Nutrient Management,
Technology Advisory Group on Solid Waste Management, Jawaharalal
Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), Urban
Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small & Medium Towns
(UIDSSMT), Public-Private partnerships, and issues such as recycling
of waste, absence of segregation of waste at source, unwillingness of
ULBs to introduce proper collection, segregation, transportation and
treatment/disposal systems, indifferent attitude of citizens towards
waste management due to lack of awareness, lack of community
participation towards waste management and hygienic conditions etc.,
The representatives of the Ministry also clarified the queries raised by
the Members pertaining to certain specific cities like Delhi, Ghaziabad,
Surat(Gujarat), Suryapet (Andhra Pradesh) and Vijayawada (Andhra
Pradesh) etc. on the subject and issues such as National Waste Policy,
sustainable waste management, e-waste management, demolition waste
management, plastic management etc.
4. The Hon’ble Chairman desired to have an oral evidence on the
subject, before the drafting of the Report on the subject is taken up.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

65
ANNEXURE IV
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2007-08)
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, 15TH JULY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1250 hrs. in the Committee
Room ‘D’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
3. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Anant Gudhe
6. Shri Pushp Jain
7. Shri Sajjan Kumar
8. Shri A.K. Moorthy
9. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
10. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
11. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimpur
13. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
14. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
15. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
16. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
17. Shri Manohar Joshi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Director
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Harchain — Deputy Secretary-II

66
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF URBAN
DEVELOPMENT
(i) Dr. M. Ramachandran, Secretary , Urban Development
(ii) Shri Arup Roy Choudhury, CMD, National Building
Construction Corporation (NBCC)
(iii) Shri A.K. Mehta, Joint Secretary
(iv) Shri P .K. Shrivastav, Joint Secretary
(v) Shri R. Sethuraman, Adviser
(vi) Shri Yogesh Sharma, DGM, (NBCC)
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
(i) Shri G.K. Pandey, Adviser, Ministry of Environment and Forests
(ii) Dr. A.B. Akolkar, Additional Director, Central Pollution Control
Board (CPCB)
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members
and the representatives of the Ministries of Urban Development and
Environment and Forests to the sitting of the Committee and drew the
attention of the representatives of the Ministries to the provision of
Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Secretary , Ministry of Urban Development then briefly
outlined the issues regarding the subject ‘Solid Waste Management’.
He explained the initiatives taken by them to augment, operate and
maintain the Solid Waste Management system in a sustainable manner,
for instance, introduction of cost effective technologies, Public-Private
Partnerships (PPP) mode, encouragement to adopt proper waste
management practice by the Urban Local Bodies, standardization of
compost generated from solid waste for its marketability, etc.
Representatives of both the Ministries and the Central Pollution Control
Board (CPCB) responded to the queries raised by the Members on the
subject.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned

67
ANNEXURE V
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2008-09)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 17TH DECEMBER, 2008
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in the Committee
Room ‘C’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
3. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
6. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Rajya Sabha
7. Dr. Prabha Thakur
8. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
9. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
10. Shri Penumalli Madhu
11. Shri Manohar Joshi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. Ravinder Kumar Chadha — Joint Secreatary
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary-I
4. Shri Arvind Sharma — Under Secretary

68
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee took up for consideration
draft Report on the subject ‘Solid Waste Management’ of the Ministry
of Urban Development. After some deliberations, the Committee
adopted the draft Report with minor modifications.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the
Report in the light of the suggested modifications and consequential
changes, if any, arising out of factual verification of the Report by the
Ministry of Urban Development, and present it to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.