 
  
 
29 
STANDING  COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
 
 
                 FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
 
DIRECTORATE OF ESTATES   
  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Third Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha] 
  
 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT  
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 


 2 
 
 
 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT  
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
URBAN DEVELOPMENT  
(2007-08) 
 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT  
 
DIRECTORATE OF ESTATES  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third  
Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development] 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  20.03.2008 
                                            Laid in Rajya Sabha on  20.03.2008 
 
 
 
     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
March, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) 


 3 
 
 
C.U.D. No.: 32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C) 2008 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Eleventh Edition) and Printed by ………… 
 

 4 
 
 
CONTENTS  
 
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………            (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..               (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I Report …………………………………………………………            1 
 
 
@CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government  … 
 
 
@CHAPTER III  Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in  
   view of the Government’s replies ……………………………………… 
 
 
@CHAPTER IV  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government  
                           have not been accepted by the Committee …………………………… 
 
 
@CHAPTER V  Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
                          are still awaited…………………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES  
 
1. Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Committee held on 11.3.2008 …………… 
 
2. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
 contained in Twenty Third Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ………….. 
 
 
@ Not appended with the cyclostyled draft Report 
 
 

 5 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008) 
 
Mohd. Salim         -        Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
3. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
5. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal 
6. Shri Anant Gudhe 
7. Shri Pushp Jain 
8. Shri Kailash Joshi 
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar 
10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra 
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
12. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
13. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
14. Shri L. Rajagopal 
15. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Papu Yadav 
16. Shri D. Vittal Rao 
17. Shri Sudhangshu Seal 
18. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
19. Shri Jagdish Tytler 
20. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav 
21. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur 
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel 
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki 
27. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari 
28. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
29. Shri Mukul Roy 
30. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa 
31. Shri Manohar Joshi  
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri S.K. Sharma   - Additional Secretary  
 2. Shri. S. Balshekar   - Joint Secretary  
 3. Shri R. K. Saxena   - Director  
 4. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Deputy Secretary  
 5. Shri Manish Kumar Thakur -  Committee Assistant   
 

 6 
 
  
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2007 -08) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Twenty -
Ninth Report on the Action Taken by the G overnment on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty Third Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban 
Development on the subject “Directorate of Estates”. 
 
2. The Twenty Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 6 th September, 2007. Th e 
replies of the Government to 8 out of total 9 recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 6 th December, 2007. The Reply to the remaining 1 recommendation 
(recommendation number 6) was received on 21st February, 2008. 
 
3. The Replies of the G overnment were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 11th March, 2008. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2007-08) is 
given in Appendix  II.  
   
  
  
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
March, 2008 
Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) 
MOHD. SALIM,  
Chairman, 
Standing Committee on Urban 
Development. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 7 
CHAPTER I  
 
REPORT  
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee  on Urban Development (2007 -08) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 23 rd Report on “Directorate of Estates,” pertaining to the Ministry of Urban 
Development, which was presented to the Lok Sabha on 6th September, 2007.  
 
2. The Report contained 9 recommendations in total. Action taken notes in 
respect of all the recommendations were received from the Government, which have 
been categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
 Para Nos. 1.19, 2.35 and 3.10 
 
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government replies: 
 
 Para No. Nil  
 
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee  
 
 Para Nos. 2.32, 2.33, 3.9 and 3.11  
 
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited.  
 Para No. 1.21 and 2.34  
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapt er-I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of the Report may be furnished to 
them within three months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Governme nt on 
some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 

 8 
A. Functioning of the Directorate of Estates – Scope of improvement  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.19) 
 
5. The Committee had noted as under:-  
 
“The Directorate of Estates, an attached offic e of Ministry of Urban 
Development has been entrusted, among other functions, with the overall 
responsibility for the administration and Management of Government Estates which 
includes General Pool Office Accommodation (GPOA) as well as the General Pool 
Residential Accommodation (GPRA). At present, the Directorate of Estates provides 
office building and residential accommodation in four metropolitan cities of Delhi, 
Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai as well as 5 other cites in different parts of the 
country. The GPRA is also available in 24 other cities. In addition, the Directorate of 
Estates is responsible for administration of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of 
Immovable Property Act, 1952 and Public Premises Eviction Act, 1971.  The 
Committee note that the Directorate is responsible only for managing the Estates of 
the Government and has no role to play in the actual construction activity, which is 
normally done through the Central Public Works Department (CPWD).  As regard 
the unsatisfactory performance of CPWD in handling maintenance of residential as 
well as office accommodation in Delhi and at the Regional stations, the Committee 
have been made to understand that since the CPWD is responsible for reporting 
vacation of houses to the Directorate for further  allotment to the eligible employees,  
it is expected  that the CPWD would intimate the conditions of vacant houses/office 
accommodation also to them while reporting the vacancies, on which further action 
is taken by the Directorate as to whether to allot or defer the allotment. 
 
6. Further, the Committee had observed as under:-  
 
 “On the issue of the inspection done by the Directorate to carry out checks to 
ensure proper up-keeping and maintenance by the CPWD, the Committee note that 
the Directorate inspe cts only for checking up subletting or misuse of premises and 
that the maintenance part is to be done by the CPWD, which has a system of regular 
inspection by their field Engineers. In this scenario, the Committee are of the opinion 

 9 
that since the Director ate has been given the overall responsibility of providing 
accommodation to various Government organizations, dignitaries as well as the 
Central Government employees, the maintenance of the same cannot be construed 
as an altogether separate activity, with which the Directorate has nothing to do. They 
feel that there is a need to expand the scope of its activities further in order to 
ensure better maintenance and up -keep of the buildings/ office premises. Although 
the Ministry has sought to convince the Comm ittee that the CPWD is the only 
Agency responsible for construction and maintenance of the Government assets, the 
Committee consider it to be yet another instance of shirking of responsibility. They 
are of the view that in the wake of rather substandard maintenance of the official and 
residential buildings by concerned agency, it is time that the present scheme of 
things is reviewed and the Directorate develops a mechanism to ensure that the 
Agency responsible for maintenance of the Government assets is per forming its 
duties satisfactorily.  Besides, the Committee feel that there exists a serious lack of 
coordination at present between the CPWD and the Directorate in the matter of 
construction of residential/office accommodation and its maintenance, a fact w hich 
even the Directorate has acknowledged, that requires urgent attention. Therefore, 
they desire that the CPWD Wing dealing with the repair and maintenance of the 
Government residential Complexes/offices Buildings, should be made directly 
accountable to the Directorate of Estates. This  will not only prevent  the duplicity of 
agencies to look after the upkeep of the Government buildings but will also enable 
CPWD to devote more time towards its other activities. In case such an arrangement 
is not considere d feasible, the Committee urge the Ministry to urgently devise  a 
mechanism which ensures better coordination between CPWD and the Directorate. 
They are of the opinion that with advance computer technology, ensuring a 
synchronization of operations between the Directorate and the CPWD is definitely 
possible. The Committee therefore recommend that the Government should initiate 
appropriate steps in the matter urgently so as to fill the existing communication gap 
between the two Departments.” 
 
 
 

 10 
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Government have submitted as under: 
 
(i) “The work of the Directorate of Estates and the CPWD  are under the co -
ordination of the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development.  The repair 
and maintenance wing of the CPWD being made directly accountable to the 
Directorate of Estates is not advised. Directorate of Estates and CPWD having 
separate and distinct mandates of their own, the supervision of one over the other 
may  result in functional difficulties. However, as has been s uggested  by the 
Committee, coordination between  the Directorate of Estates and the CPWD being 
essential and inevitable coordination and cooperation between the Directorate of 
Estates and the CPWD under the overall supervision of Additional Secretary, 
Ministry of Urban Development would be the ideal way to achieve the aim of the 
Committee. 
 
(ii). Action has also been initiated  for evolving an effective mechanism for the 
users of the  Govt. premises  to make direct complaints even to the Directorate of 
Estates pertaining to their grievances  relating to repairs/maintenance of the public 
premises. These would, in turn, be passed on to the Director(Works)/CPWD for 
immediate redressal and would be monitored on regular basis at the level of Addl. 
Secretary for ensuring effective and expeditious solutions. 
 
(iii). With a view to facilitate the Allottees to see the quality of the house with 
necessary inventories available therein, one house in each category of Types I to V  
(Type I to IV in Sadiq Nagar and Type V in Kidwai Nagar ) have been placed at the 
disposal of the CPWD to make as model houses. One Type VI house at Mahadev 
Road which houses the ‘H’ Division of CPWD is also proposed to be made a model 
house. 
 
(iv). In order to completely do away with paper Vaca ncy and Occupation Reports 
being generated by CPWD Service Centres, a link between EAWAS website and 
CPWDSEWA website has also been created to facilitate online transfer of Vacation 
and Occupation Reports in real time into the Government Accommodation 

 11 
Management (GAMS). This work is expected to be operational by November, 2007. 
The provision to communicate the time required to make the house habitable 
depending upon the physical condition of the vacant house has also been in -built 
into this facility so that  the allotment can be made only after necessary 
repairs/renovations.” 
 
 
8. The Committee had desired that the Directorate of Estates should 
develop a mechanism to ensure that the agency responsible for the 
maintenance of the Government assets performs its duties satisfactorily. The 
Committee had also urged the Ministry to urgently devise a mechanism  
ensuring better coordination between the CPWD and the Directorate of Estates 
by taking the advantage of information technology . Towards this end, the 
Committee have been made to understand that the Government has initiated 
action for evolving an effective mechanism for users of Government premises 
to make direct complaints even to the Directorate of Estates, which would, in 
turn be passed on to Director (Work) /  CPWD. The Committee also appreciate  
the creation of a link between EAWAS website and CPWDSEWA website to 
facilitate online transfer of Vacation and Occupation reports  in real time into 
Government Accommodation Management System (GAMS). As per the 
Ministry, this link was to be operational by November, 2007. The Committee 
would like to be apprised whether the same has been made operational. 
Nonetheless, the Committee find it a positive step to enable allottees file civil / 
electrical complaints online. Fur ther, they are of the opinion that the allottees 
would feel more assured of a prompt action from the agencies involved if time 
slabs are given to attend a complaint, for instance, 24 hours to fix minor 
problems, etc. Once monitored and followed up, this wo uld add credibility to 
the functioning of the Directorate. Regarding better coordination, the 
Committee have been informed that both the Directorate of Estates and CPWD 
work under one Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Urban Development. 
The Committee are surprised at this and feel that if two Departments under a 
single head have problems in coordination, it implies that there is a serious 

 12 
gap which requires attention. Hence, the Committee desire that sincere efforts 
should be made from the top most le vel to ensure that instead of shirking of 
responsibility by the CPWD and the Directorate of Estates, both the agencies 
work in tandem so that the management of GPOA and GPRA remains free 
from severe criticism.    
 
B. Provision of residential accommodation by the Directorate- problems of 
shortage  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.32) 
 
9. The Committee had noted as under:-  
 
“The shortage of residential accommodation for Government employees has 
engaged the attention of the Committee for  quite some time. The Comm ittee 
note that at present there is a shortage of 32,000 (approximately) residential units in 
various types in Delhi alone in the General Pool. The availability of housing stock 
with the Directorate is 63216 units in Delhi and 34534 units in 32 other regio nal 
stations, which is insufficient keeping in view the huge demand.  The Ministry have 
also  admitted during the examination of the subject that in view of the gross 
inadequacy of the available units several Govt. officers/ employees are waiting for 
allotment of entitled type of accommodation in  Delhi and at regional stations and 
that there definitely exists a need to add more houses. In addition, the examination 
by the Committee had further revealed that in Delhi, the overall satisfaction level is 
67 per  cent with 31188 applicants waiting for allotment from Type -I to Type -VIII 
including that for hostel accommodation. From this, the Committee are inclined to 
conclude that the situation in regional stations could be no better. During the 
evidence, the Secre tary of the Ministry sought to assure the Committee that given 
the total resources, the Directorate would definitely  try to achieve Hundred per cent 
satisfaction level. As part of the Ministry’s efforts to fulfill the shortage of GPRAs in 
Delhi, the Committee have been made to understand that it is proposed to construct 
2036 more units, which has already been sanctioned ; and 1588 more units, which is 
awaiting sanction in Delhi, which according to rough estimates may  take about 2 to 
3 years. The Committee  have also been apprised of the Ministry’s proposal to add 
1030 dwelling units upto 31.3.2007 and also to construct 2289 houses, during 11 th 

 13 
Plan, at other regional stations. The Committee further note that with effect from the 
year 2006 -07, a Plan Head ha s been allocated to the Directorate thus making 
available funds to meet shortage of housing stock. Besides, during the current 
Financial Year, a sum of Rs.685.53 lakhs has been received by the Directorate as 
Budgetary allocation for the construction of the  requisite dwelling units. In addition, 
the regulations for discretionary allotments have been notified in November, 1997 
which has fixed an overall ceiling of 5 per cent of vacancies occurring in a particular 
type in a particular calendar year. The Commit tee feel that although the proposal of 
the Directorate to construct more units in Delhi as well as regulate the discretionary 
allotments is in the right direction, they are not sure as to whether the Ministry  have 
carried out  a similar exercise to fulfil l the financial requirements of the proposed 
houses to be constructed in the 11 th Plan, in the regional stations too and whether 
appropriate budgetary support is available for constructing the same.” 
  
10. Further, they observed as under:-  
“The Committee are also of the view that due to lack of Govt. accommodation 
in certain North-Eastern cities like Gangtok, Guwahati, Shillong, Agartala etc., many 
Govt. employees feel constrained to join their duty in these stations. Therefore, the 
Committee desire that t he Ministry should speed up their efforts to work out the 
exact requirement in terms of the General Pool Residential Accommodation in other 
regional stations, including the North East and initiate  efforts to fulfill the 
requirement suitably. In this conte xt, the Committee feel that the Ministry may think 
in terms of devising a separate component plan for creating GPRAs in the selected 
North-East cities so that adequate Budgetary  allocations  could be ensured for the 
same. They desire to be apprised about the same in due course.” 
11. In their Action Taken Reply, the Government have stated as under: 
“For the regional stations, the Prioritisation Committee had laid down a 
targeted satisfaction level of 50% of the demand.   At present, the General Pool 

 14 
accommodation is available in 34 cities (other than Delhi).    Of these, in 32 cities, 
the target of 50% satisfaction has already been achieved.   In fact, in 15 of these 
cities, the Estate Managers are grappling with the situation of surplus residential 
accommodation.    
 
 It has been observed that in cities where land costs are not so high, the Govt. 
employees prefer to construct their own residential accommodation.    In many cities 
(e.g., Jodhpur, Bareilley, Ghaziabad etc.) it was observed that by the time, th e 
General Pool residential projects are completed, the demand for houses disappears 
because during the gestation period of the Housing Project (which is generally 8 -10 
years), the employees make their private arrangements. Therefore, it has been 
decided th at the residential accommodation shall be constructed on priority basis 
first in metropolitan cities (where the Central Govt. has to shell out HRA @ 30% and 
which have marked density of Central Govt employees) where the target of 50% 
satisfaction level has not been achieved.    In cities (like Jodhpur, Kanpur, etc) where 
the density of Central Govt employees is around 1,000, the construction of General 
Pool residential shall not be a priority. Such cities will be taken up after achieving the 
target levels in metropolitan cities.” 
  
12. While appreciating the proposal of the Directorate to construct more 
dwelling units and houses in Delhi and regulate the discretionary allotments, 
the Committee had wondered as to whether the Ministry had carried out a 
similar exercise in the regional stations too. They had also desired the 
Ministry to initiate efforts to fulfill the requirement of GPRAs in certain North -
Eastern cities and had advised them to devise a separate component plan for 
the same. The Committee have now  been apprised about the availability of 
GPRAs in 34 cities (other than Delhi) out of which 32 cities show 50% 
satisfaction level. Nevertheless, the Committee feel that the satisfaction level 
of 50% of the demand is a case of moderate success only. Besides , 
satisfaction level in different types of flats is bound to be different for different 
categories of flats. Hence, the Committee recommend the Ministry to aspire 
for achieving a better  satisfaction level. Further, it has been brought to the 

 15 
notice of the  Committee that in cities where land costs are not so high, the 
Government employees prefer to construct their own residential 
accommodation, thus making the demand for houses disappear by the time 
the General Pool Residential Projects are completed. Howev er, the Committee 
are of the opinion that this cannot be taken as a general trend because such 
cases mostly happen  where the employee is either a native belonging to that 
particular State or when he wishes to settle in a metropolitan/big city. Besides, 
a person in a transferable job is in no position to construct a house in every 
city of his posting.  The Committee are further dismayed at the failure of the 
Ministry to clarify on the Committee’s recommendation regarding fulfillment of 
requirement of GPRAs in North-Eastern cities. Hence, the Committee cannot 
but reiterate their earlier recommendation on this matter and desire the 
Ministry to assess the actual requirements of GPRAs in those areas, which 
may, perhaps, make such areas attractive for the Governm ent employees for 
postings and transfers. The Committee would also like to be apprised about 
the financial requirements of the proposed houses to be constructed during 
the 11 th Plan period in Delhi and other regional cities and efforts being made 
by the Ministry for appropriate budgetary support for constructing the same.   
 
C. Unauthorised Subletting of Government Residential Accommodation   
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33) 
 
13. The Committee had noted as under: 
 
“The Committee observe that one rampant mal practice, which has 
aggravated the already acute shortage of Government accommodation, has been 
the unauthorized sub -letting of quarters, resorted to by certain unscrupulous 
allottees. They note that during the period of April to December, 2005, sub -letting 
was suspected in 378 cases by the Directorate of Estates. Between January to 
November, 2006, around 461 similar cases were suspected. Regarding identification 
of cases of sub -letting, the Committee have been made to understand that sub -
letting is reported mainly by way of a complaint and not as a result of the inspections 

 16 
conducted by the Directorate on their own to detect the unauthorized sub -letting. 
The Committee are of the definite opinion that if inspections are carried out regularly, 
it would be a continuous threat to those who resort to unauthorized sub -letting of the 
Government accommodation. Though the Committee appreciate the steps already 
taken by the Government to detect such cases and levy penalty on the persons 
responsible for it, they would further advise the Ministry to carry out effective 
inspections regularly and extensively to detect the maximum possible number of 
cases of unauthorized sub -letting. Besides, strong action needs to be initiated 
against such unscrupulous employees, both serv ing and retired who misuse the 
Government facilities for monetary gains, as a deterrent measure, which would not 
only discourage such aberrations but also mitigate the hardships faced by the 
genuinely needy employees, by making available to them the Govern ment 
accommodation without unnecessary delay.” 
 
14. The Government have replied as under: 
“Subletting section is receiving on an average of 200 complaints per month 
from various sources and the same are investigated by four inspecting teams 
consisting of o ne Gazetted officer( Section Officer level)  in the pay scale of Rs 
8000-12000 and a non  Gazetted officer ( Assistant/UDC)  in the pay scale of Rs. 
6500-10500 or Rs. 4000 - 6000  as the case may be for conducting on the spot 
inspection of each and every re sidential accommodation. The Section Officer of 
inspecting team is the overall in -charge dealing with Public and spot inspections. 
Given the acute staff constraints for carrying out inspection of subletting in addition 
to his regular full time job, there i s always a backlog.  With the result, only a handfull 
of inspection reports from four inspecting teams deployed for inspection purpose 
during the two month prescribed period are being received.”   
           
15. The reply further stated as under:- 
 
“Deployment of adequate additional manpower to the extent of at least Two 
Inspection teams is, therefore, of utmost necessity for inspections of not only the 

 17 
complaints received but also for undertaking suo motu door to door inspections of 
each and every locality at regular intervals.  
 
  Accordingly, to cope with the enhanced work -load,  the Subletting Section 
needs to be enhanced as under : 
 
1 Two Asstt. Directors 
2 Four Assistants 
3 Eight UDC’s 
4 Four LDC’s 
5 2 Daftries 
6 2 Peons 
 
  The work of subletting section is suppos ed to be done in a prescribed and 
time bound procedure. As such, at least 15 days’ time is given  in a show cause 
notice and 15  days time for personnel hearing followed by 30 days time for Appeal 
etc. Besides, many of the complainants are seeking status o f their complaint under 
RTI Act -2005 for which  requisite information is required to be given within the 
stipulated period of 30 days for which also an effective mechanism with additional 
manpower is of utmost requirement.” 
 
  
16. The Committee had express ed their concern over the rampant 
malpractice of subletting of Government accommodation. In this connection, 
they had advised the Ministry to carry out effective inspections regularly and 
extensively to detect the maximum possible number of cases of unauth orized 
subletting. Besides, they had recommended that strong action must be 
initiated against such unscrupulous employees. In this regard, the Committee 
have been informed by the Government that they fall short of desired 
thorough inspection owing to acute  staff constraints for carrying out 

 18 
inspection. The Ministry have specified requirement of 22 additional officers/ 
staff, which obviously would need creation of more posts.   Though the 
Committee feel that the Ministry of Urban Development should pursue wi th the 
Ministry of Finance for additional posts for the purpose, the solution to such 
problems could be found in better human resource management. Besides, the 
Committee find it unnecessary for the inspection team to visit every 
household to detect sub -letting. Generally, the place under subletting is an 
open secret and adopting an intelligent approach, while interacting  with the 
residents, residential associations, etc., can detect such cases.   Therefore, 
the Committee would like to urge the Ministry to continue with their inspection 
work and manage it properly so as to check subletting of Government 
accommodation, and penalize the errant employees. Besides, they hope that 
the Ministry would take strict and effective measures to identify and weed out  
malpractices in the system leading to subletting of Government 
accommodation. This will go a long way in meeting the goal of judicious 
allocation of Government accommodation to the genuinely needy employees.    
 
D.  Availability of Office Accommodation – Problems of shortage and 
shifting of Offices from Delhi  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.9) 
 
17. The Committee had noted as under:-  
 
“The Committee note that in so far as the available space for office 
accommodation is concerned, there is a net shortage of 25.90 lakhs  sq.feet in Delhi 
alone and 20.12 lakh sq.feet in other regional stations as on 31 st December, 2005. 
They also note that at present, there is leased office space of 59.96 lakh sq.feet, 
which needs to be released by the Directorate of Estates to minim ize the rental 

 19 
liability of the Government. The Committee also note that in most of the major cites, 
the actual availability of Office Accommodation with the Directorate of Estates is 
almost 50% of the overall demand of Office Accommodation for Government 
Departments / Ministries etc. To cite two instances, in Kolkata, the demand for Office 
Accommodation is 20,74,653 sq.ft. but the availability is only 13,79,402 sq.ft. 
Similarly, at Bangalore the demand for Office Accommodation is 5,31,802 sq.ft but 
the ava ilability is 1,71,697 sq.ft. Apart from these cities, there is also shortage of 
Office Accommodation at Mumbai, Chennai, Shimla, Chandigarh, Nagpur, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Bhopal and Indore. As per the Ministry, 
the allocation of funds in the Budget for the purpose of payment of rent is around 
Rs.15.5 crore during the current Financial Year. Although the Committee have been 
made to  understand that no new buildings have been acquired or hired during the 
current Financial Year in order to en courage direct tenancy, the  Committee  feel 
that the problem of shortage of office space is as serious as that of Residential 
Accommodation. With regard to steps taken by the Government to overcome this 
shortage, the Committee note that there are four new  GPOA Projects currently 
under Planning/construction stage totalling approximately 9.28 lakh sq. ft. which may 
be available within three years from now on in Delhi. However, the Ministry have 
already admitted that even after completion of the same, the sho rtage of office 
space in Delhi will continue to exist to some extent. As regards the construction of 
new GPOA in various regional areas, the Committee note that additional GPOA has 
been proposed and sanctioned in three cities and in 25 other cities, furthe r GPOA 
has been proposed to be constructed. While the Committee feel that the Ministry is 
making efforts to meet the demands for Office Accommodation in Delhi  and  other 
areas, at the same time they are also of the view that the location of new offices in  
Delhi requires a policy shift, in the sense that Government offices having their 
Headquarters outside Delhi should not be given office space in Delhi. The 
Committee agree with the Ministry that  it  indeed is an uphill task to convince a 
Department about not having their offices in Delhi. Nonetheless, they feel that the 
Ministry must think twice  before agreeing to provide office space to such 
departments in future. Besides, the Committee are also aware that although some 
offices were identified for shifti ng out of Delhi, yet those have not shifted so far. 

 20 
Moreover, the Committee note that although the Ministries have also been asked by 
the Government to assess their requirements of space, the response in some cases 
is either too slow or not forthcoming at all. The Committee recommend that all such 
cases must be followed up vigorously so as to bring them to a logical and without 
further delay. Further, the Committee are of the opinion that in order to ease the 
pressure on Delhi for office space, the Governme nt should make prudent use of the 
already available land by demolishing old and dilapidated structures and construct  
vertical structures. In addition, the Government may also explore the possibility of 
establishing a `Satellite Office City’ in the NCR reg ion which may either be 
integrated with the existing metro transport link of the Central Secretariat office 
Complex in Delhi or may have separate corridors for rapid transport system to 
ensure a safe, smooth and efficient travel for the potential office -goers coming from 
Delhi.” 
 
18. The Government have replied as under: 
 
“With a view to combat the existing shortage of GPOA in Delhi, the following 
steps/suggestions are offered:- 
 
(i) As per existing policy no new office of Central Govt./ Public Sector 
Undertakings Statutory or Corporate Body owned or controlled by Central Govt. is to 
be set up in Delhi without prior approval of Cabinet Committee on Accommodation 
(CCA).  The Govt. has noted the valuable suggestions of the Committee that the 
offices having the ir headquarters outside Delhi should not be given office space in 
Delhi.  This policy should be reiterated and emphasized while commenting upon the 
proposals of all ministries seeking location of new offices in Delhi. It should be 
clearly specified in the proposals that even if it is decided by the CCA to locate the 
office in Delhi, such office should be given space either in the satellite towns of 
Delhi, viz., Ghaziabad, Faridabad, Gurgaon etc. or they should make their own 
arrangement for GPOA. 
 
(ii) In s pite of efforts made from time to time, the Ministries/Deptt.  have not 
furnished their consolidated up -to-date requirement of GPOA.  All Secretaries are 

 21 
requested to arrange for submission of this information immediately in a time bound 
manner.  
 
(iii) A number of offices have been identified for shifting outside Delhi with a view 
to de-congest the Capital which is one of the objectives of National Capital Region 
Plan.  The respective ministries, it has been observed, approach the Cabinet 
Committee on Accommodation seeking its permission to continue to remain in Delhi. 
Similarly Commissions and Tribunals may be re-located in the NCR Region. 
 
(iv) The existing space in the hutments/barracks, which is presently being used 
as GPOA, have been identified for re -development as full -fledged modernized 
GPOA complexes.”  
 
  
19.  Concerned about the net shortage of available space for office 
accommodation, the Committee in their original recommendation had 
suggested that Government offices having their headquarters ou tside Delhi 
should not be given office space in Delhi. They had also urged the 
Government to vigorously follow the shifting of already identified offices 
outside Delhi and convince the Ministries to assess their requirements for 
space early. Further, the Committee had desired the Ministry to get the old and 
dilapidated structures demolished and construct vertical structures. They 
were also advised to explore the possibility of establishing a satellite office 
city in the NCR region to ease the pressure on De lhi. The Committee 
appreciate the Government’s willingness to follow their suggestions for 
discouraging the use of office space in Delhi by such Government Offices, 
which have their headquarters outside Delhi. However, they still await 
information regarding any concrete initiative from the Ministry on this matter. 

 22 
The Committee feel that the Government should be very strict on these 
aspects, when negotiating with the new proposals regarding office space in 
Delhi as well as in other Metropolitan cities, wher e the land use has reached 
the saturation point. In this regard, the Committee are very dissatisfied with 
the failure of the Ministries / Departments in furnishing their consolidated up 
to date requirement of GPOA. They desire that their concern should als o be 
conveyed to the Cabinet Committee On Accommodation to which the affected 
parties approach for relief. With regard to their recommendation on exploring 
the possibility of establishing a satellite office city with appropriate transport 
links, the Minist ry have not submitted a reply. The Committee would like to 
know the Government’s response on the matter. 
 Further, while reiterating their earlier recommendation urging the 
Government to get the old structures demolished and replace those with  
vertical st ructures, the Committee counsel the Ministry  to take appropriate 
care to ensure that the environment and aesthetics of the area is not 
disturbed.  Besides, it is also pertinent to keep the  heritage factor in mind.       
  
E. Need to provide GOPA in Regional Areas   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.11) 
 
20. The Committee had noted as under:  
 
 
“From the information made available to the Committee, they note that 
additional GPOA has been proposed and sanctioned in three cities namely Calicut 
(now Kozhikode), Bareilly and Nasik.  Also there are proposals for additional GPOA 
in 25 other cities including Chennai, Bangalore, Allahabad, Bhubaneswar, Port Blair, 
Varanasi and Guwahati etc.  The Committee hope that the already sanctioned 

 23 
construction projects have alread y commenced and that the Government is taking 
requisite action to ensure the completion of these projects within a specific 
timeframe.  As regards the proposals in 25 other cities, the Committee would urge 
the Government to give priority to the constructio n proposals in those cities where 
huge amount is currently being spent on rent or lease of hired buildings.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the progress regarding their sanction, 
timeframe for completion etc. within three months of the presentation of this report.” 
 
21. The Government has replied as under:  
 
“The demand for Office Accommodation in many regional stations, as 
observed by the Committee, is pressing because many  Central Departments are 
incurring huge amounts on rentals or leased  accommodations.  However, the 
Directorate of Estates is not directly involved in the process of working out the 
demand of Office accommodation for such Central Departments in regional areas. 
The demand figures are compiled by the regional  offices of the CPWD who have 
been authorized to furnish Fair Rent Certificate (FRC) to such Central Government 
departments, to enable them to hire private accommodation for official purposes.  
After  compilation of data relating to demand by the Regional offices of the C PWD,  
the DG(W) submits the same to the Directorate of Estates for ratification of the 
demand on the basis of entitlements ,eligibility, etc. of the offices concerned.   The 
other aspects regarding allocation of funds, availability of land, clearances from  local 
bodies, sanctions, change in land -use, etc. are monitored and executed  by the, 
CPWD under the supervision of respective Chief Engineers.  The time frames for 
completion of construction of these projects are fixed, approved and monitored by 
the Mini stry of Urban Development through CPWD Management Committee, 
created in the Ministry of UD for this purpose.  After completion of the buildings, 
these are handed over to the Directorate of Estates for issue of formal allotment 
letters to the respective departments after vetting actual demand. 
 
22. The reply further states as under:- 
  

 24 
“However, it has been noticed on many occasions that Central Government 
departments who have been allotted office space by the Directorate of Estates, 
refuse to move to the ne wly constructed buildings, primarily because such buildings 
are generally located on the outskirts of the city, whereas the Government 
departments, having hired accommodation in primary central location, dislike to 
move to the far -away locations where the Central Government is able to acquire 
land for construction of office buildings.  
 
 For example, the office space measuring 1140 sq.ft allotted to the Directorate 
of Marketing and 744 sq.ft, allotted to National Service Scheme in Pune in April 2007 
has not  been occupied. Finally the Directorate was constrained to cancel this 
allotment as the office space created for them has not been utilized for the desired 
purpose.  Similarly, after completion of GPOA Complex in Trivandrum, 5 out of the 
18 Central Government offices, that  had earlier conveyed their willingness to shift to 
GPOA, opted out on grounds like acquiring their own accommodation or remoteness 
of GPOA from the city. Office. This cause a loss of about 15.54 lakhs to the 
exchequer.  In Jaipur also, t his trend has been noticed. These experiences make it 
necessary for the Directorate to go for future construction of GPOA in regional cities 
very carefully so as to minimize the possibility of loss of revenue on account of  
refusal of these Central offices to shift to the new locations. 
 
 The large Central Government offices like Income Tax Department, Central 
Excise, Para-military forces, etc. invariably try to construct their own office buildings 
in regional areas.  Therefore, the liability of the Directo rate of Estates is restricted to 
provision of office space to only such small departments who are not in a position to 
construct office buildings of their own.  Therefore, the necessity of construction of 
very large sized CGO complexes in Regional areas do es not appear to be a 
necessity.” 
 
  
23. The Committee had desired that the sanctioned additional GPOA in 3 
cities of Calicut (now Kozhikode), Bareilly and Nasik must be completed within 

 25 
a specific timeframe. As regards the proposed additional GPOAs in 25 other 
cities, the Committee had urged the Government to give priority to the 
construction proposals in those cities where huge amount was being spent on 
rent or lease of hired buildings. The Committee have now been given to 
understand that the Directorate of Estates is not directly involved in the 
process of working out the demand of office accommodation for central 
departments in regional areas, for which CPWD is the designated body as it’s 
regional offices are authorized to furnish the Fair Rent Certifica te to enable 
such offices hire private accommodation.  All other related aspects are 
monitored by the CPWD Management Committee and only when the buildings 
are completed, those are handed over to the Directorate of Estates. The 
Committee agree that both th e CPWD and the Directorate have separate 
mandates, still they feel that the problem is not as acute as it is made out to 
be, because both the said offices function under the  single administrative 
control of an Additional Secretary in the Ministry and thus , cooperation 
between the two under his overall supervision would be the ideal way to 
achieve the aim of the Committee. Further, the Committee have been made to 
understand that due to several reasons, on many occasions, the Central 
Government Departments r efuse to move to newly constructed buildings. To 
cite two examples, the office space measuring 1140 sq.ft allotted to the 
Directorate of Marketing and 744 sq.ft, allotted to National Service Scheme in 
Pune in April 2007 have not been occupied. Similarly, a fter completion of 
GPOA complex in Trivandrum, 5 out of the 18 Central Government offices, that  
had earlier conveyed their willingness to shift to GPOA, opted out on grounds 

 26 
like acquiring their own accommodation or remoteness of GPOA from the city. 
The Committee are at loss to comprehend as to why it so happened which has 
led to a huge loss to the Government exchequer. The Committee feel that the 
Ministry must take  a lesson from such instances and find out a way to avoid 
such occurrences  in future. They   would like to know as to how these 
buildings are being used at present.  The Committee further feel that the 
Directorate of Estates must be prudent and cautious while going for future 
constructions of GPOA in regional cities to minimize the possibility of  loss of 
revenue on account of refusal of these Central Offices to shift to new 
locations. They opine that if the refusal has no valid grounds, the case can 
also be thoroughly assessed to take penal action against such offices. It 
should be made mandatory for the offices to shift before deciding on the 
location and such offices, once they agree to the proposal, should be 
informed well in advance that in case of non -compliance, penal action can be 
taken against them in the shape of recovery costs, etc.  The Committee would 
like the Ministry to take action on these lines and  apprise them of the steps 
taken on this front.  The Committee also find that the Government have not 
furnished details  of the progress regarding the sanction, time frame for 
completion, etc. of additional regional GPOAs, both big and small, in 25 cities, 
despite their recommendation to this affect. The Committee deplore the casual 
response of the Ministry and urge them to send complete information while 
furnishing their Action Taken replies.     

 27 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
TUESDAY, 18TH MARCH, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in the Hon'ble Chairman's 
Chamber (Room No. 119), 1st Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Mohd. Salim - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
3. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal 
4. Shri Anant M. Gudhe 
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
6. Shri Sudhangshu Seal 
7. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav 
8. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare 
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
10. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel 
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari 
12. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.   Shri S. Bal Shekar  - Joint Secretary (SB) 
2. Shri R.K. Saxena  - Director (S&U) 
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Deputy Secretary (UD) 
4. Shri Harchain  - Deputy Secretary-II (UD) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee. The Committee first took up for consideration the draft report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Third Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject "Directorate of 

 28 
Estates" of the Ministry of Urban Development. After some deliberations, the 
Committee adopted the draft action taken report with slight modifications. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration another draft Report on action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth 
Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subj ect "Integrated Low Cost 
Sanitation Scheme (ILCS)" of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
The Committee adopted the draft action taken report without any modifications. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Repor ts and 
present the same to Parliament. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
********** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 29 
APPENDIX  II 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY THIRD   
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN  
DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations       09 
 
 
II. Recommendations which have been accepted by the  
 Government          03 
 
Para Nos. 1.19, 2.35 and 3.10        
  
 
Percentage of total recommendations       (33.33%) 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not  
 Desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
 Replies  
Nil          Nil  
 
Percentage to total recommendations      (0%) 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of  
 the Government have not been accepted by the  
 Committee: 
 
 Para No. 2.32, 2.33, 3.9 and 3.11      4  
 
Percentage to total recommendations     (44.4%) 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final  
 Replies of the Government are still awaited: 
   
Para No. 1.21 and 2.34        2 
 
Percentage to total recommendations        (22.2%) 
  
 
    
 
 