18
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
EIGHTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

EIGHTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ……………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ……………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
January, 2007/Magha, 1928 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 18
Price : Rs. 39.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government .................................................. 9
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 23
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 25
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 29
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Committee
held on 22.1.2007. ..................................................... 30
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in Fourteenth
Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ...... 32
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Anant Gudhe
6. Shri Pushp Jain
7. Shri Kailash Joshi
8. Shri Sajjan Kumar
9. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
10. Shri A.K. Moorthy
11. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
12. Shri L. Rajagopal
13. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
14. Shri D. Vittal Rao
15. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
##16. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
17. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
18. Shri Jagdish Tytler
**19. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
20. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
$$21. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
(iii)
## Ceased to be the member of the Committee  w.e.f. 4.12.2006 consequent upon resignation
from Lok Sabha.
**Nominated w.e.f. 25.9.2006 vice Shri Ravi Prakash Verma, M.P . ceased to be the member
of the Committee w.e.f. 25.9.2006.
$$ Nominated w.e.f. 2nd January, 2007.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
27. Shri Penumalli Madhu
28. Shri Mukul Roy
#29. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
30. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
*31. Shri Manohar Joshi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S. Balshekar — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Saxena — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
5. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Committee Officer
(iv)
*Nominated w.e.f. 1st September, 2006.
#Ceased to be the member of the Committee w.e.f. 30.11.2006.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2006-2007) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Eighteenth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Fourteenth Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry
of Urban Development.
2. The Fourteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
22nd May, 2006. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 18th August, 2006.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
22nd January, 2007.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2006-2007) is given in Appendix II .
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
25 January, 2007 Chairman,
5 Magha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Urban Development (2006-2007)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Fourteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-2007) of Ministry of Urban Development which was presented
to Lok Sabha on 22 May, 2006.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 19 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.9, 2.20, 2.21, 2.22, 3.10, 3.22, 3.23, 3.27, 3.38,
3.39, 3.40, 3.41, 3.52, 3.61 and 4.9.
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para No. 4.19.
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.6, 3.65 and 4.13.
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para No. Nil
3. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Budgetary allocation for DMRC
Recommendation (Para No. 2.6)
4. The Committee had noted as below:—
The Committee are not in agreement with the point of view of the
Government that ‘though adequate allocations to DMRC are not made
at BE stage, taking recourse to RE for requirement of funds for DMRC

2
is a happy arrangement as they are getting this money without any
difficulty’. All the more, the Committee are perplexed to learn that
recourse to Supplementary Grants for DMRC is made in a routine
manner. The Committee are of the firm view that such routine practice
of placing Supplementary Grants instead of advancing an adequate
allocation at B.E. Stage, itself, jeopardizes the constitutional obligation
of the accountability of the executive to Parliament in financial matters.
They therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that taking
recourse to supplementary grants of substantial amount to DMRC
project indicates lack of financial acumen on the part of Government
and the DMRC budget allocation should be made at BE stage itself.
5. The Government have replied as below:
The funds have been and are being provided to DMRC as per
need and the progress of the Project has not been affected due to
inadequacy of funds.
DMRC has requested for providing Rs. 270.00 crore as equity,
Rs. 58.00 crore as Sub-ordinate Debt (SD) and Rs. 495.00 crore as Pass
Through Assistance (PTA) for the Financial year 2006-07. The amount
provided in the Budget of MOUD is Rs. 250.00 crore, Rs. 58.00 crore
and Rs. 424.00 crore respectively towards equity, SD and Pass Through
Assistance (PTA).
6. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of Ministry
of Urban Development that funds are being provided to DMRC as
per need. The projects of DMRC are taken up after giving due
consideration to the detailed project reports and financial
requirements thereto. Therefore, the practice of taking recourse to
Supplementary Grants to finance its projects on frequent basis does
not set a good financial precedent. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
their earlier recommendation that sufficient allocations for DMRC
projects should be made in the BE stage itself, in conformity with
the practice followed by other Departments/Ministries of the
Government of India.
Enactment of Model Legislation
Recommendation (Para No. 3.40)
7. The Committee had noted as below:
On the question of planned development in urban areas, as assured
by Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development during the course of
oral evidence that a model legislation would be placed before

3
Parliament, the Committee hope that a model legislation would
soon be brought to ensure that consumers are not cheated by
developers or builders so as to contain the growth of unauthorized,
unplanned colonies and housing, which lack all the basic amenities of
good living.
8. The Government have replied as under:
Land is a state subject. Framing a legislation for Delhi, which can
also serve a model for other State Governments, is under consideration.
9. The Committee desire that the Government should
expeditiously frame a legislation for Delhi to ensure that consumers
are not cheated by the developers or private builders and the growth
of unauthorized and unplanned colonies or housing units could be
checked effectively. For the planned development in urban areas,
the proposed legislation would act as a role model for other States/
UTs too.
Implementation of Report of Technology Advisory Group (TAG)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.41)
10. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee note with satisfaction that Twelfth Finance
Commission has accepted the devolution of Rs. 5000 crore for urban
local bodies only for solid waste management. The Committee expect
that the much needed priority is given to the solid waste management
projects by the States and urban local bodies by releasing of timely
and adequate funds for the purpose. The Committee recommend that
scientific and technical methodologies must be adopted for disposal of
the solid wastes with the help of expert organization of compost
development. The Committee also recommend that mass awareness
programme should be taken up to generate proper public awareness
about the utility of modern compost methods and efforts be made to
keep the environment clean and healthy with effective coordination
with the Ministry of Environment and Forests. At the same time, the
Committee recommend that project must be taken up to dispose and
manage solid plastic and other non-degradable wastes in the cities/
towns. The Committee also desire that Vermi Compost Plants should
be set up in all the Municipalities and steps taken for effective
marketing of the manure produced through Vermi Composting.
They hope that Government would put all these measures under
JNNURM or UIDSSMT so that solid waste management can be
fruitfully utilized.

4
11. The Government have replied as under:
The Twelfth Finance Commission has devolved grants to the tune
of Rs. 2500.00 crore upon ULBs exclusively for Solid Waste Management
in urban areas.
This Ministry has circulated guidelines for development of
appropriate Solid Waste Management System using the aforesaid grant.
Manual on Solid Waste Management published by the Ministry,
Report of the Technology Advisory Group (TAG) published in May
2005 and Report of the Inter-Ministerial Task Force on Integrated Plant
Nutrient Management also recommended Vermi-composting from city
garbage in the towns having garbage generation up to 50 M tons per
day keeping in view the higher land area required.
Guidelines circulated to ULBs/State Governments also recommend
the use of Vermi-composting in the cities having garbage generated
limited to 50 M tons per day.
In all the projects approved for Solid Waste Management and
Drainage in 10 (ten) selected towns having airfields of Indian Air
Force, launched by this Ministry, awareness generation is an integral
part and funds have been earmarked for the purpose. In the projects
being considered under JNNURM and UIDSSMT for solid Waste
Management, funds are being provided for awareness generation.
In order to market compost, inter-ministerial Task Force for
Integrated Plant Nutrient Management using city compost has
recommended measures for effective marketing of compost.
12. The Committee desire that recommendations made by the
Technology Advisory Group (TAG) and Inter-Ministerial Task Force
in their reports on Solid Waste Management and marketing of vermi
compost respectively should be implemented in letter and spirit.
States/UTs should be impressed upon to implement the
recommendations of the said reports in a time bound manner. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken in this
regard.
e-Governance in Municipalities
Recommendation (Para No. 3.52)
13. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee express their anguish over the casual way of
announcing the Schemes viz. (i) Pooled Financed Development Fund

5
(ii) Mission Mode on IT and (iii) National Urban Infrastructure Fund
and accordingly making the budgetary provisions in them without
finalizing them. They are of the view that monies get blocked in such
schemes, which could have been utilized for other purposes. The
Committee therefore, desire that Government to do all the homework
and finalise the scheme before making budgetary allocations. They
recommend that the aforesaid schemes must be finalized and
implemented without any further delay. The Committee would like to
be apprised about the latest position in the matter.
14. The Government have replied as under.
Esteemed views of the Committee regarding doing all the
homework and finalizing the schemes before making budgetary
allocations have been noted for future compliance. As regards
finalization of the schemes, it is stated that the National Mission Mode
Project on e-Governance in Municipalities is on the verge of being
finalized. The scheme was considered by Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) on March 10, 2006 and based on the recommendations
of EFC, a draft note for the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA) has been prepared and circulated to all the concerned Ministries
for comments/views on May 23, 2006. Based on the comments/views
of the concerned Ministries/Departments, particularly, the Planning
Commission and the Department of Information Technology, the note
for CCEA would be finalized and submitted for consideration of CCEA.
The scheme will be launched in 35 cities with population of one million
and above after having the approval of CCEA.
15. The Committee desire that note for Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (CCEA) on the National Mission Mode Project on
e-Governance in Municipalities should be finalized and be submitted
for the consideration of CCEA at the earliest and the Committee
may be apprised about the steps taken in this direction.
Hospital Waste Management
Recommendation (Para No. 3.65)
16. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee fail to understand as to why the Scheme of Hospital
Waste Management had been transferred from Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare to Ministry of Urban Development and that too with
a very meagre amount of Rs. 1.00 crore. On the other hand, the
Committee are perturbed to note that funds have been surrendered by

6
the Ministry of Urban Development as no viable proposals under
Hospital Waste Management were received from State Governments.
The Committee take a serious note of the non-implementation of the
Hospital Waste Management Scheme. Had concerted and effective
efforts been made by the Ministry to persuade the State Governments
to come forward with technically viable Hospital Waste Management
Scheme, this scheme would have definitely been taken up/made
functional. The Committee, therefore, recommend that effective
measures are taken to launch Hospital Waste Management Projects in
States/UTs without any further delay.
17. The Government have replied as under:
Pilot projects/Demonstration projects under Hospital Waste
Management for creation of demonstrative effect for implementation
of Bio-Medical Waste Management in Health Care Establishments in
the States had been transferred to this Ministry by the Planning
Commission during 2005-06 and the files were transferred by the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to this Ministry in October, 2005
with a budget allocation of Rs. 1.00 crore.
Immediately, thereafter, the Ministry wrote to the States seeking
proposals for releasing funds under the scheme. However, no viable
proposal was received. Therefore, funds could not be released. Since,
availability of fund was Rs. 1.00 crore which is even less than the
eligibility of Rs. 1.50 crore per State, even if viable proposals would
have been received, it would not have been possible to release funds
to 1 (one) State.
This Ministry is not aware as to why this Pilot Scheme of Hospital
Waste Management has been transferred to the Ministry of Urban
Development in spite of the fact that Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare deals with Government Hospitals/Healthcare establishments
at National Level. However, the Ministry had taken up the matter
with the Planning Commission during last financial year.
Planning Commission has again been requested to transfer the
scheme to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare during current year
which is the Nodal Ministry for dealing with hospitals and healthcare
establishments.
18. The Committee are not convinced with reply of the Ministry
of Urban Development regarding transfer of the Scheme of Hospital
Waste Management to the Ministry of Urban Development from
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Being a nodal Ministry for

7
monitoring of programmes in Urban areas relating to sanitation and
solid waste management, the Ministry of Urban Development cannot
absolve itself from its duty and mandate. The Committee reiterate
their recommendation that the Ministry of Urban Development
persuade the State Governments/UTs to come forward with
environment friendly and technically viable hospital waste
management scheme and effective measures should be taken to
launch Hospital Waste Management Projects in States/UTs without
any further delay. The Ministry of Urban Development should
impress upon the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance to
allocate adequate funds for this Scheme.
Nomination of Nodal officer of ULBs to liaise with CPWD
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13)
19. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee gather that despite the recommendations made by
them in their 2nd and 7th Report (14th Lok Sabha), and pursuant to
the Ministry of Urban Development instruction to NDMC, DJB and
MCD to nominate ‘Nodal Officers’ to liaise with CPWD area-wise,
such, ‘Nodal Officers’ are still to be nominated by the aforesaid local
bodies. The Committee are concerned as to how without proper liaison
with ULBs and CPWD, the basic amenities could be effectively provided
to Government colonies. They therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendations and direct the Government to inform the Committee
about the action taken in the matter. The Committee also recommend
that one liaison officer of CPWD in each area should be appointed
with a view to coordinate various civil, electrical, horticultural works
within CPWD complexes and also to liase with NDMC/MCD, and the
RWAs wherever necessary. Here, it would be pertinent on the part of
CPWD to display the names of such officials on the display boards of
all the Enquiry Offices maintained by CPWD and NDMC/MCD. The
Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this regard.
20. The Government have replied as under:
The local bodies, i.e., New Delhi Municipal Corporation, Municipal
Corporation of Delhi, Delhi Jal Board were instructed to nominate
Nodal Officers who shall be responsible for the defined geographical
areas and shall coordinate with the CPWD officers for maintenance
etc. The same have not been appointed by them so far. The local
bodies have again been asked to appoint nodal officers without any
further delay.

8
Regarding appointment of nodal officers by CPWD, instructions
were issued to Chief Engineers to appoint single nodal officers for
each colony to interact with RWAs and to become a single window
for getting the grievances of the RWA/Residents redressed by
contacting concerned officer of the required discipline in the
department. In compliance to these instructions nodal officers were
appointed by the Chief Engineers for each colonies and the names of
such nodal officers have also been displayed on the notice boards of
service centres. The instructions are again being retreated to Chief
Engineers that nodal officers be asked to take up the common issues
of colonies as raised by RWAs/residents with concerned officers of
local bodies of respective colonies.
21. The Committee take a very serious view of the fact that
inspite of their repeated recommendations, the ULBs in GNCT of
Delhi i.e. NDMC, MCD and Delhi Jal Board have not appointed
‘Nodal Officers’ to liaison with CPWD in each area for maintenance
and upkeep of infrastructural facilities of roads, bye-lanes, water
supply etc. in CPWD developed localities. The Committee therefore,
firmly recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development impress
upon the NDMC, MCD and Delhi Jal Board to nominate Nodal
Officers to liaise with CPWD area-wise without any further delay.
The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this
regard.

9
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.9)
The Committee are happy to note that a substantial increase has
been made under Demand No. 100 for public works. They hope that
CPWD would now be able to take up repairing and maintenance of
both residential and non-residential buildings, which were hitherto
languishing due to financial crunch. As accepted by the Director
General, CPWD during evidence, certain building need some retrofitting
as they have become quite old and require face lifting. The Committee,
therefore, expect that CPWD would prioritise the work, do the proper
spadework in coordination with other service providing agencies, and
carry out the needful so as to utilize the amount judiciously to the
satisfaction of occupants of the CPWD constructed/maintained dwelling
units and office complexes. The Committee recommend that the
maintenance works pending for a long time must be initiated and
completed in a time bound manner by involving efficient work
contractors and artisans.
Reply of the Government
There has been an increase in the allotment of funds in the capital
heads under Demand No. 100 for Public Works. As against Rs. 100
crore allocated under 4216 UD (P) during 2005-06, an allocation of
Rs. 184.48 crore has been made during 2006-07. Action Plan has been
prepared for taking up besides original works, the works of
upgradation, retrofitting and aesthetic improvement of residential
accommodation. Separate budget allocation of Rs. 76.63 crore out of
Rs. 184.48 crore has been made to various zones for the works of
upgradation, retrofitting and aesthetic improvement only to ensure that
the earmarked funds are utilized for taking up such works only.
There has also been an increase in the allotment of funds in the
capital heads under Demand No. 101 for Public Works. As against
Rs. 27 crore allocated under 4059 UD (P) during 2005-06, an allocation
of Rs. 46 crore has been made during 2006-07. The additional funds
shall be utilized for upgradation and aesthetic improvement of
Government Office Buildings.

10
There has also been increase in the allocation under maintenance
heads. Under the head 2216, an allocation of 272.50 crore has been
made during 2006-07 as against 200.09 crore during 2005-06 and under
the head 2059, an allocation of 292.78 crore has been made during
2006-07 as against 247.46 crore during 2005-06. Annual Action Plans
have been prepared and priorities have been fixed for items finalized
based on consultations held with the RWAs and the works are being
taken up as per these Annual Action Plan.
With the additional funds allotted under capital heads for works
of upgradation, retrofitting and aesthetic improvement and also
allotment of additional funds under ordinary repairs and special repairs
in maintenance head 2216 and allotment of additional funds under
maintenance and repairs under maintenance head 2059 and with
judicious use of funds as explained in above, CPWD would be able to
raise substantially the level of satisfaction of occupants of CPWD
constructed/maintained residential and non-residential accommodation.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.20)
The Committee note that the process of modernization of Printing
Presses, Staff redeployment, their skill development and rehabilitation
have been positively dealt with after a long span of time. The
Committee are however, concerned to note that due to the lack of
skill upgradation, the workers are unable to use new machines on
account of which, a huge loss is incurred every year. They therefore,
recommend that skill development should be given top most priority
so that new machines do not remain idle. They also recommend that
all-out-efforts should be made for improvement of quality of printing
so as to make them proficient for facing the competitive market and
attract client organizations like Railways to accept their printing
services.
Reply of the Government
The Cabinet has decided creation of new posts in the modernized
setup of the Presses to be finalized in consultation with Ministry of
Finance. accordingly, a detailed proposal of staff strength of various
Government of India Presses to be retained after modernization has
been submitted for approval of the Ministry of Finance. The
Government has also decided that surplus employees or employees
who are not willing to continue in service may be given option either

11
for special voluntary retirement or for transfer/redeployment in nearby
Government of India Presses wherever possible.
2. Further, following action has been taken:
(i) Employees working in Government of India Presses with
offset printing technology have been deployed on newly
procured machines.
(ii) In order to upgrade skill, manufacturing firms of machines
and equipment have imparted training to the existing
employees deployed on new machines to enable them to
work more efficiently.
(iii) For operating machines of new technology , proposal for
creation of posts (to be filled by redeployment from existing
old technology staff) has already been sent to Ministry of
Finance. The matter is being pursued vigorously. After
receipt of sanction for new posts for modernized setup,
willing employees will be redeployed and imparted in-house
training enabling them to work proficiently on new
machines.
(iv) Production cum training centre at Government Press, Shimla
is being established for training of redeployed employees.
(v) After installation of new machineries in Government of India
Presses under modernization programme, quality of printing
has improved considerably. However, in order to make the
Government of India Presses more proficient in facing
competitive market and attract more clients, computerization
and restructuring of Government of India Presses are under
process. The Managers of the Government of India Presses
have also been instructed to improve quality of printing to
the satisfaction of indenters and maintain rigid time schedule
for delivery of material.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.21)
As regards the privatisation of Presses, the Committee recommend
that the original workers employed in the Government Printing Presses
must be given salaries allowance and other benefits accrued to them
by restoring their services in the event of privatisation of these Printing
Press and imparting proper training for safeguarding their interests.

12
Reply of the Government
Government has decided that the Government of India Text Books
Presses at Mysore, Chandigarh and Bhubaneswar be privatised with
condition that employees will continue to be in-service till
superannuation. The Government has also decided that surplus
employees or employees who are not willing to continue in service,
be given option for special voluntary retirement or transfer/
redeployment to other nearby Government of India Presses wherever
possible. Thus, interest of the employees of the Presses to be privatised,
has been fully safeguarded/protected by the Government. Employees
redeployed in other Presses will be imparted training for working on
new technology.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.22)
As admitted by Secretary during oral evidence that there had been
a delay in procurement of machineries, the Committee, therefore, expect
that the process of modernization be expedited. The Committee also
desire that the Ministry of Urban Development must impress upon
Union Cabinet to finalize its decision for filling up vacant posts in the
Government Printing Presses by direct recruitment or by redeployment
of workers from other Government of India Presses and imparting
State-of-the-art training so that modernization process in 11 Government
Printing Presses is not hampered due to insufficient manpower.
Reply of the Government
Orders for procurement of machinery and equipment worth
Rs. 15.07 crore have already been placed. Most of the machines have
been received and installed and are in operation with available existing
staff. Procurement of remaining machines is under process. Action for
filling up of existing vacancies by redeployment as well as posts for
direct recruitment will be taken up after receipt of requisite sanction
of staff from Ministry of Finance. The matter is being pursued
vigorously. Training will also be imparted to redeployed employees
for working on the new machines.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]

13
Scheme-wise analysis of Demands for Grants 2006-2007
Recommendation (Para No. 3.10)
Infrastructure Development in Mega Cities
The Committee note that all the ongoing projects will be covered
under the existing scheme of infrastructure Development of Mega Cities
and the new projects, which are yet to be started, will be covered
under JNNURM, among other things. While expressing their concern
that only Rs. 120.00 crore has been earmarked against the requirement
of Rs. 310.00 crore, the Committee recommend to enhance the amount
at the time of supplementary Demands for Grants in the perspective
of physical progress. They therefore, recommend to complete all the
171 on-going projects in the current financial year so that no such on-
going projects remain pending during the 11th Five Year Plan. The
Committee recommend that concerted efforts must be made to obviate
any overlapping of projects in the two schemes viz. (i) JNNURM and
(ii) Mega City Scheme. The Committee also recommend that adequate
budgetary allocation is made for these 171 on-going projects and the
State Government persuaded to release timely and adequate share of
their funds for the purpose. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the latest position in this regard.
Reply of the Government
All concerned nodal agencies/State Governments vide this Ministry’s
letter No. K-14011/30/05-UD-II dated 9th May, 2005 were requested to
ensure completion of all on-going projects under Infrastructure
Development of Mega Cities scheme by the end of 31st March, 2006
due to launching of Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
(JNNURM) on 3rd December, 2005. However, due to non-completion
of all the ongoing projects during 2005-06, all concerned nodal
agencies/State Governments have once again been requested vide this
Ministry’s letter No.K-14011/54/06-UD-II dated 16th May, 2006 that
all necessary steps may kindly be taken to ensure completion of all
the on-going projects as early as possible but not later than 31st March,
2007 and intimate immediately expected date of completion in respect
of each project. Keeping in view the recommendation of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Urban Development in its 14th
Report for completion of all the on-going projects in the current
financial year so that no such on-going projects remain pending during
the 11th Five Year Plan, the matter has also been taken up with the
concerned State Governments at the Chief Secretary level. Thus, utmost
efforts are being made for completion of all the on-going projects under
the scheme during 2006-07.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]

14
Recommendation (Para No. 3.22)
Integrated Development of Small and Medium Towns (IDSMT)
The Committee note that 275 on-going project towns under IDSMT
are to be completed during the year 2006-07 with the meagre sum of
Rs. 110 crore. The Committee are given to understand that on an
average, Rs. 40 lakhh had been released for 290 on-going projects
during 2005-06 i.e. till 30th March, 2006. Therefore, on the same ratio
an amount of Rs. 110 crore has been allocated for the 275 on-going
projects during the year 2006-07. In the circumstances, the Committee
cannot but express their dissatisfaction over the fact that in 2005-06,
only Rs. 40 lakh could be released for 290 on-going project towns,
which is a very meagre sum. The Committee strongly deprecate the
slow pace of work in these 290 projected towns and delay in the
releases of funds. The Committee recommend that the 275 project towns
in 2006-07 must be adequately funded for the completion of the on-
going projects and extensions of the benefits of UIDSSMT Scheme to
these 275 project towns.
Reply of the Government
As stated earlier, on an average Rs. 40.00 lakh Central assistance
was released in 2005-06 to each of the on-going town projects which
is their actual eligibility as per the funding pattern approved in the
existing guidelines of the IDSMT Scheme. Since the first instalment of
central assistance has already been released to these on-going projects,
second instalment (final) only is targeted for release to 275 projects in
2006-07. The Ministry would endeavour to meet the full requirement
(Central assistance) of the on-going project towns based on the
proposals received and as per the funding pattern of the IDSMT
guidelines. To expedite implementation of the projects and to submit
utilization certificates and completion reports of the on-going projects,
the Town and Country Planning Organisation (TCPO) has written two
letters in April and May this year to all the States and UTs.
All the urban local bodies including the 275 project towns which
will be assisted during 2006-07 under IDSMT Scheme are eligible for
availing the benefits of UIDSSMT Scheme provided the towns submit
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) through the respective State
Governments. The State Governments are aware of the provision in
the UIDSSMT Guidelines.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]

15
Recommendation (Para No. 3.23)
The Committee are of the view that the Government faces
‘Herculean’ task to take up and complete developmental projects in
almost of 2963 towns under UIDSSMT is a span of seven years give
the slow pace of work in the preceding years. They feel that projected
figures have been inflated as the scheme is still to be understood by
States and project Reports from many States/towns are yet to be
received by the Ministry. They therefore, recommend that in order to
achieve the projected figure and to cover all the towns in the stipulated
time of seven years, as mentioned in their outcome budget, the Ministry
would have to work hard and guide the State Governments/towns to
prepare their DPRs etc. expeditiously. Nevertheless proper monitoring
is absolutely essential to make the scheme UIDSSMT a success.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is of the view that all the eligible towns as per the
2001 Census can be assisted under UIDSSMT Scheme in a span of
7 years subject to allocation of adequate funds by the Planning
Commission/Finance Ministry and submission of project proposals by
the State Level Nodal Agencies as per the Scheme guidelines. This
Ministry is in regular correspondence with State Governments to submit
adequate number of project proposals for assistance under it. After the
launching of the JNNURM/UIDSSMT, seven workshops have been
organized in different parts of the country to guide the States and
implementing agencies in the preparation of the Detailed Project Reports
(DPRs), City Development Plans (CDPs) and the related matters of the
new scheme. The guidelines provide for training and capacity building
of the implementing agencies to upgrade the skills of the personnel
responsible for the projects. Also the State Governments will organize
suitable training as well as capacity building programmes on continuous
basis. A detailed data base management of the projects of UIDSSMT
Scheme is being developed to facilitate proper monitoring of the
scheme.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.27)
Accelerated Urban Water Supply Programme (AUWSP)
The Committee express their concern over the fact that the Ministry
had not started any project under AUWSP during the first eight months

16
of preceding financial year. The Ministry of Urban Development were
simply waiting for the new scheme i.e. UIDSSMT to be finalized for
which an announcement was already made but the same was actually
launched on 3rd December, 2005. They are, therefore, of the view that
till the finalization of UIDSSMT scheme, Ministry of Urban
Development should have sanctioned at least a few projects of water
supply so that the actual beneficiaries and the public at large did not
suffer. The Committee deprecates the lackadaisical manner of the
Government in taking up and completing water supply projects, as
nothing appears to have been done till 2nd December, 2005. The
Committee note that the Government has diverted its focus from giving
the much needed infrastructural facilities to the people in the urban
areas of the country, while launching new mission mode schemes. The
Committee are of the view that the Government should have a problem
solving attitude. The Government should strive towards achieving real
goals with proper liaison with the State level bodies for giving
infrastructure facilities to the country’s urban population.
Reply of the Government
Keeping in view the fact that AUWSP was being subsumed in the
new scheme of UIDSSMT, Planning Commission restricted budget
provision for 2005-06 for implementation of on going AUWSP projects.
No new project under AUWSP was approved during 2005-06 in
pursuance of the decision conveyed by the Planning Commission. As
the gestation period for completion of AUWSP projects ranges from
two to three years, it was felt that the State Governments should
concentrate on completion of the ongoing projects instead of launching
new projects. Focus was, therefore, shifted to expeditious completion
of the on-going/pending projects, some of which were behind schedule.
The projects which had not been commissioned/operationalised earlier
were completed/commissioned during 2005-06 due to the concerted
efforts of this Ministry.
After launch of JNNURM & UIDSSMT, adequate priority is being
given to water supply projects therein. However, spirit behind the
observations of the Committee is appreciated and noted for future
guidance.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.38)
Solid Waste Management
The Committee note the new schemes viz. JNNURM and UIDSSMT
envisage to take care of water supply and sanitation, solid waste

17
management, infrastructure development of all the cities and towns
for their integrated development. While noting that the Ministry would
like to give 25 to 40 per cent of JNNURM fund for water supply and
sanitation based on the priority fixed under City Development Plan
(CDP), the Committee recommend that ever care should be taken to
evaluate CDP to ensure that the proposed projects are objective, need
based and accordingly prioritised. It is also recommended that time
bound evaluations must be made of the CDPs so that proficient projects
are sanctioned and launched by State Level Bodies at the earliest
possible.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has fixed definite time-frame for evaluation of the
City Development Plans (CDPs) and the State/Local bodies have been
asked to directly forward their CDPs to the appraisal agency assigned
for a particular city under intimation to the Ministry of Urban
Development for speedy appraisal. It has been emphasized upon all
the bodies concerned to adopt interactive process for evaluation with
maximum use of the electronic mode of communication.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.39)
Regarding rain water harvesting and coordination with Ministry
of Water Resources, the Committee hope that Ministry of Urban
Development would work in tandem with Ministry of Water Resources
for the promotion of rain water harvesting, recharging of water table
and disseminating of technical know-how among individuals and use-
groups for achieving the ultimate objective of meeting the water
requirement both for drinking and non-drinking purpose and also for
avoiding the wastage, pilferage or misuse of water.
Reply of the Government
Regarding Rain Water Harvesting, the newly constructed residential
and office accommodations being constructed by CPWD have provisions
of Rain Water Harvesting. It has also been made mandatory to provide
rain water harvesting provisions in all future constructions b CPWD.
The Rain Water Harvesting is also being provided in existing non-
residential buildings in a phased manner.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]

18
Recommendation (Para No. 3.40)
On the question of planned development in urban areas, as assured
by Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development during the course of
oral evidence that a model legislation would be placed before
Parliament the Committee hope that a model legislation would soon
be brought to ensure that consumers are not cheated by developers or
builders so as to contain the growth of unauthorized, unplanned
colonies and housing, which lack all the basic amenities of good living.
Reply of the Government
Land is a state subject. Framing a legislation for Delhi, which can
also serve a model for other State Governments, is under consideration.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.41)
The Committee note with satisfaction that Twelfth Finance
Commission has accepted the devolution of Rs. 5000 crore for urban
local bodies only for solid waste management. The Committee expect
that the much needed priority is given to the solid waste management
projects by the States and urban local bodies by releasing of timely
and adequate funds for the purpose. The Committee recommend that
scientific and technical methodologies must be adopted for disposal of
the solid wastes with the help of expert organization of compost
development. The Committee also recommend that mass awareness
programme should be taken up to generate proper public awareness
about the utility of modern compost methods and efforts be made to
keep the environment clean and healthy with effective coordination
with the Ministry of Environment and Forests. At the same time, the
Committee recommend that projects must be taken up to dispose and
manage solid plastic and other non-degradable wastes in the cities/
towns. The Committee also desire that Vermi Compost Plants should
be set up in all the Municipalities and steps taken for effective
marketing of the manure produced through Vermi Composting.
They hope that Government would put all these measures under
JNNURM or UIDSSMT so that solid waste management can be
fruitfully utilized.

19
Reply of the Government
The Twelfth Finance Commission has developed grants to the tune
of Rs. 2500.00 crore upon ULBs exclusively for Solid Waste Management
in urban areas.
This Ministry has circulated guidelines for development of
appropriate Solid Waste Management System using the aforesaid grant.
Manual on Solid Waste Management published by the Ministry,
Report of the Technology Advisory Group (TAG) published in May
2005 and Report of the Inter-Ministerial Task Force on Integrated Plant
Nutrient Management also recommended Vermi-composting from city
garbage in the towns having garbage generation up to 50 M tons per
day keeping in view the higher land area required.
Guidelines circulated to ULBs/State Governments also recommend
the use of Vermi-composting in the cities having garbage generated
limited to 50 M tons per day.
In all the projects approved for Solid Waste Management and
Drainage in 10 (ten) selected towns having airfields of Indian Air
Force, launched by this Ministry, awareness generation is an integral
part and funds have been earmarked for the purpose. In the projects
being considered under JNNURM and UIDSSMT for solid Waste
Management, funds are being provided for awareness generation.
In order to market compost, inter-ministerial Task Force for
Integrated Plant Nutrient Management using city compost has
recommended measures for effective marketing of compost.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 12 of Chapter I of the Report)
Other Schemes/Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 3.52)
The Committee express their anguish over the casual way of
announcing the Schemes viz. (i) Pooled Financed Development Fund
(ii) Mission Mode on IT and (iii) National Urban Infrastructure Fund
and accordingly making the budgetary provisions in them without

20
finalizing them. They are of the view that monies get blocked in such
schemes, which could have been utilized for other purpose. The
Committee therefore, desire that Government to do all the homework
and finalise the scheme before making budgetary allocations. They
recommend that the aforesaid schemes must be finalized and
implemented without any further delay. The Committee would like to
be apprised about the latest position in the matter.
Reply of the Government
Esteemed views of the Committee regarding doing all the
homework and finalizing the schemes before making budgetary
allocations have been noted for future compliance. As regards
finalization of the schemes, it is stated that the National Mission Mode
Project on e-Governance in Municipalities is on the verge of being
finalized. The scheme was considered by Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) on March 10, 2006 and based on the recommendations
of EFC, a draft note for the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA) has been prepared and circulated to all the concerned Ministries
for comments/views on May 23, 2006. Based on the comments/views
of the concerned Ministries/Departments, particularly, the Planning
Commission and the Department of Information Technology, the note
for CCEA would be finalized and submitted for consideration of CCEA.
The scheme will be launched in 35 cities with population of one million
and above after having the approval of CCEA.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.61)
National Urban Information System
While appreciating the aims and objectives of NUIS, the Committee
express their concern over the non-utilisation of 2nd and 3rd
installments of the Budgetary allocations under the scheme which are
to the tune of Rs. 5.00 crore and Rs. 25.00 crore, respectively, as per
Revised Estimates. The Committee are of the firm view that the budget
allocations could have been fruitfully utilized, had the work relating
to the mapping and generation of GIS database been completed by
Survey of India and the National Mapping Agency in time. They,

21
therefore, recommend to impress upon the Survey of India and National
Mapping Agency to expedite work so that the fund allocated under
NUIS does not remain unutilised for want of GIS database and maps.
Since Town and Country Planning Organisation (TCPO) is the nodal
agency for implementing and review of this scheme, the Committee
recommend that TCPO to take concrete measures to develop proper
urban database in all the 137 towns in a specific time frame. The
Committee feel that proper database and maps are the prerequisites
for carrying out the systematic and holistic development of urban areas.
Hence it should be given top priority. They hope that during the
current financial year, the allocation made under the scheme will be
utilized.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Urban Development is completely in agreement with
the views expressed by the esteemed Committee. As per the
Memorandum of Understanding signed between the Survey of India
and Ministry of Urban Development on March 13, 2006, development
of GIS database for 137 towns/cities/urban-agglomeration and utility
mapping in respect of 24 towns should be completed within 15 months
from the date of signing of the agreement. However, first lot of maps
would start rolling in after six months to initiate value addition and
attribute data linking. Nevertheless, as recommended by the Committee,
the Survey of India, the National Mapping Agency and the town and
Country Planning Organisation (TCPO) has been requested vide this
Ministry’s letter No. G-20011/1/2006-UCD dated June 12, 2006, to take
concrete steps for developing GIS database and maps, and also proper
urban database in time so that budget allocation made under the NUIS
scheme in the current financial year, 2006-07, could be fully utilized.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.9)
Public Works
The Committee note that Delhi Urban Art Commission is the body
which is responsible for awarding its advice on proposals received
through the local bodies, and also taking up of macro level proposals
on a suo-motto basis for aesthetic development of Delhi. They also
note that there is acute shortage of GPRA in Delhi and CPWD is
engaged in the construction of 2377 units by March, 2008. While
appreciating the move of the Government for establishing such a body,

22
the Committee recommend that various projects of CPWD and Housing
including Cooperative Group Housing should be cleared by DUAC on
top priority basis without taking undue time. The Committee also
recommend that local bodies in Delhi viz. NDMC, MCD and DDA
should also clear the pending maintenance and infrastructural projects
under CPWD and other Group Housing Societies at the earliest and
provide them with all the basic amenities like water, electricity, drainage
etc. in a time bound manner so that such housing units do not remain
unoccupied due to the lack of such amenities. Ministry of Urban
Development should take up this matter at the highest level with all
the concerned agencies so as to avoid unnecessary dilly dallying at
bureaucratic level.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Urban Development is taking up the matter with
Chairman, Delhi Urban Art Commission for early clearance of all
General Pool Residential Accommodation Projects in Delhi. The Ministry
is also taking up the matter with Vice Chairman, Delhi Development
Authority, Chairperson, New Delhi Municipal Council and
Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Delhi asking them for early
clearance of such projects pending with them.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]

23
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 4.19)
Directorate of Estate
The Committee note that while there is shortage of GPRA in most
of the cities, a substantial number of residential units in some of the
cities are lying vacant. They also note that there is a shortage of
General Pool Office Accommodation (GPOA) in Delhi and Indore.
While noting that as per rules, GPRA cannot be utilized for GPOA,
the Committee feel that it should not be a water-tight compartment
and rules should be flexible enough to convert GPRA to GPOA and
vice-versa, as per demand and availability. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that suitable procedural amendments be made to fruitfully
utilize vacant premises and provide accommodation to Government
servants on demand.
Reply of the Government
Government servants, who are eligible for Government residential
accommodation, are entitled to draw House Rent Allowance if they
have applied for such accommodation in accordance with the procedure
and have not been provided housing. At places where due to
availability of surplus accommodation, special orders are issued by
the Ministry of Urban Development for making it obligatory for the
employees posted to such places to obtain a ‘No Accommodation
Certificate’ in respect of Government residential accommodation at their
place of posting. In all other places no such certificate is necessary.
At present the demand for residential accommodation is computed
on the basis of the applications received in the Directorate of Estates.
However, this does not indicate the true position about the demand of
residential accommodation. In cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata,
Shimla, Chennai, Nagpur, Chandigarh, Indore, Bangalore, etc., a number
of Central Government employees do not apply for accommodation
because they have been exempted from the requirement of obtaining
‘No Accommodation Certificate’ (NAC), before drawal of House Rent
Allowance. Those Government employees, who have made their own

24
arrangement of accommodation, do not apply for residential
accommodation and choose to draw House Rent Allowance at these
stations. This results in reduction in demand of Government
accommodation at these stations.
As regards utilization of the residential accommodation into office
accommodation, it is stated that conversion of residential
accommodation into office accommodation would involve structural
changes requiring substantial expenditure. Besides, the accommodation,
after such alternation, may not remain suitable for residential use is
future. Its re-conversion into a residential accommodation on rise of
demand, would again involve in fructuous expenditure. Further,
running of Government offices from the residential colonies would
create other problems to the residents of such localities as well as
contravene zonal land use laws of urban local bodies.
The demand of residential accommodation is not a constant feature
and it undergoes change on month to month basis. It cannot be stated
with certainty, that a particularly type of accommodation would be
scarce or surplus at a station at a future date. Conversion of the
residential accommodation for office purpose may lead to a shortage
of residences in future, necessitating construction of additional houses
at that station.
In view of this position, the recommendation of the
Standing Committee to make amendment to the Allotment of
Government Residences (General Pool in Delhi) Rules, 1963 to facilitate
conversion of the residential accommodation into office accommodation
may not be feasible to be implemented.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]

25
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.6)
Overall Assessment of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Urban Development for the Year 2006-2007
The Committee are not in agreement with the point of view of the
Government that ‘though adequate allocations to DMRC are not made
at BE stage, taking recourse to RE for requirement of funds for DMRC
is a happy arrangement as they are getting this money without any
difficulty’. All the more, the Committee are perplexed to learn that
recourse to Supplementary Grants for DMRC is made in a routine
manner. The Committee are of the firm view that such routine practice
of placing Supplementary Grants instead of advancing an adequate
allocation of the accountability of the executive to Parliament in
financial matters. They therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation
that taking recourse to supplementary grants of substantial amount to
DMRC project indicates lack of financial acumen of the part of
Government and the DMRC budget allocation should be made at BE
stage itself.
Reply of the Government
The funds have been and are being provided to DMRC as per
need and the progress of the Project has not been affected due to
inadequacy of funds.
DMRC has requested for providing Rs. 270.00 crore as equity,
Rs. 58.00 crore as Sub-ordinate Debt (SD) and Rs. 495.00 crore as PTA
for the Financial Year 2006-07. The amount provided in the Budget of
MOUD is Rs. 250.00 crore, Rs. 58.00 crore and Rs. 424.00 crore
respectively towards equity, SD and PTA.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 6 of Chapter I of the Report)

26
Recommendation (Para No. 3.65)
Hospital Waste Management
The Committee fail to understand as to why the Scheme of Hospital
Waste Management had been transferred from Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare to Ministry of Urban Development and that too with
a very meagre amount of Rs. 1.00 crore. On the other hand, the
Committee are perturbed to note that funds have been surrendered by
the Ministry of Urban Development as no viable proposals under
Hospital Waste Management were received from State Governments.
The Committee take a serious note of the non-implementation of the
Hospital Waste Management Scheme. Had concerted and effective
efforts been made by the Ministry to persuade the State Governments
to come forward with technically viable hospital waste management
Scheme, this scheme would have definitely been taken up/made
functional. The Committee, therefore, recommend that effective
measures are taken to launch Hospital Waste Management Projects in
States/UTs without any further delay.
Reply of the Government
Pilot projects/Demonstration projects under Hospital Waste
Management for creation of demonstrative effect for implementation
of Bio-Medical Waste Management in Health Care Establishments in
the States had been transferred to this Ministry by the Planning
Commission during 2005-06 and the files were transferred by the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to this Ministry in October, 2005
with a budget allocation of Rs. 1.00 crore.
Immediately, thereafter, the Ministry wrote to the States seeking
proposals for releasing funds under the scheme. However, no viable
proposal was received. Therefore, funds could not be released. Since,
availability of fund was Rs. 1.00 crore which is even less than the
eligibility of Rs. 1.50 crore per state, even if viable proposals would
have been received, it would not have been possible to release funds
to 1 (one) State.
This Ministry is not aware as to why this Pilot Scheme of Hospital
Waste Management has been transferred to the Ministry of
Urban Development in spite of the fact that Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare deals with Government Hospitals/Healthcare
establishments at National Level. However, the Ministry had taken up
the matter with the Planning Commission during last financial year.

27
Planning Commission has again been requested to transfer the
scheme to Ministry of Health & Family Welfare during current year
which is the Nodal Ministry for dealing with hospitals and healthcare
establishments.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13)
Coordination with Urban Local Bodies
The Committee gather that despite the recommendations made by
them in their 2nd and 7th Report (14th Lok Sabha), and pursuant to
the Ministry of Urban Development instruction to NDMC, DJB and
MCD to nominate ‘Nodal Officers’ to liaise with CPWD area-wise,
such, ‘Nodal Officers’ are still to be nominated by the aforesaid local
bodies. The Committee are concerned as to how without proper liaison
with ULBs and CPWD, the basic amenities could be effectively provided
to Government colonies. They therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendations and direct the Government to inform the Committee
about the action taken in the matter. The Committee also recommend
that one liaison officer of CPWD in each area should be appointed
with a view to coordinate various civil, electrical, horticultural works
within CPWD complexes and also to liae with NDMC/MCD, and the
RWAs wherever necessary. Here, it would be pertinent on the part of
CPWD to display the names of such officials on the display boards of
all the Enquiry Offices maintained by CPWD and NDMC/MCD. The
Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The local bodies, i.e., New Delhi Municipal Corporation, Municipal
Corporation of Delhi, Delhi Jal Board were instructed to nominate
Nodal Officers who shall be responsible for the defined geographical
areas and shall coordinate with the CPWD officers for maintenance
etc. The same have not been appointed by them so far. The local
bodies have again been asked to appoint nodal officers without any
further delay.
Regarding appointment of nodal officers by CPWD, instructions
were issued to Chief Engineers to appoint single nodal officers for

28
each colony to interact with RWAs and to become a single window
for getting the grievances of the RWA/Residents redressed by
contacting concerned officer of the required discipline in the
department. In compliance to these instructions nodal officers were
appointed by the Chief Engineers for each colonies and the names of
such nodal officers have also been displayed on the notice boards of
service centres. The instructions are again being retreated to Chief
Engineers that nodal officers be asked to take up the common issues
of colonies as raised by RWAs/residents with concerned officers of
local bodies of respective colonies.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/4/2006-Bt. (UD)
Date: 14th August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 21 of Chapter I of the Report)

29
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
  N EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
25 January, 2007 Chairman,
5 Magha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Urban Development.

30
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 22ND JANUARY, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
3. Shri Anant Gudhe
4. Shri Sajjan Kumar
5. Shri A.K. Moorthy
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri L. Rajagopal
8. Shri D. Vittal Rao
9. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
10. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
11. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
12. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
13. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
15. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
16. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
17. Shri Penumalli Madhu
18. Shri Mukul Roy
19. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa

31
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members and also
newly nominated member Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi, MP , Lok Sabha
to the sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee took up for consideration Memorandum No. 2
regarding draft Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth
Report of the Committee on Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of Urban
Development. The Committee adopted the draft action taken report
with slight modification.
4. The Committee then took up for consideration Memorandum
No. 3 regarding draft Report of the Committee on Action Taken by
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth
Report of the Committee on Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of Housing
and Urban Poverty Alleviation. After some deliberations Committee
adopted the draft action taken report with slight modifications.
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise both
the Reports and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned

32
APPENDIX II
[vide para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTEENTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN
DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 19
II. Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government: 15
Para Nos. 2.9, 2.20, 2.21, 2.22, 3.10, 3.22, 3.23,
3.27, 3.38, 3.39, 3.40, 3.41, 3.52, 3.61 and 4.9
Percentage to total recommendations (78.94%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies: 01
Para No. 4.19
Percentage to total recommendations (5.27%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee. 03
Para Nos. 2.6, 3.65 and 4.13
Percentage to total recommendations (15.79%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited. Nil
Percentage to total recommendations (0%)