8
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
‘THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY’
EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
‘THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY’
Presented to Lok Sabha on 2.8.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 2.8.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2005/Sravana, 1927 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 08
Price : Rs. 62.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2004-2005) ...................................... (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ON U RBAN AND R URAL D EVELOPMENT
(2004) ........................................................................................................ (vii)
C
OMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ON U RBAN AND R URAL D EVELOPMENT
(2003) ........................................................................................................ (ix)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (xi)
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTORY ....................................................... 1
— Objective and Functions ................................... 1
— Formulation of Master Plan ............................ 3
— Role of private sector in public housing
projects .................................................................. 12
CHAPTER II DEVELOPMENT ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL
OF LAND ..................................................................... 16
— Development Areas demarcated by DDA ... 16
— Acquisition for development of land by
DDA ....................................................................... 17
— Compensation to land losers .......................... 21
CHAPTER III LANDSCAPING, HORTICULTURAL AND
SPORTS ACTIVITIES ................................................. 28
— Landscaping and Horticultural work ............ 28
— Expenditure on development of Green areas
in Delhi ................................................................. 31
— Sports Complexes ............................................... 32
— Commonwealth Games 2010 and arrangement
of DDA ................................................................. 34

CHAPTER IV HOUSING ..................................................................... 35
—T argets and Achievement ................................. 35
— House for Economical Weaker Sections ....... 39
—P roblems of Slums in Delhi ............................ 42
— Lack of basic Amenities in DDA Flats/
Colonies................................................................. 46
— Misuse of DDA Flats and unauthorized
construction .......................................................... 49
CHAPTER V TRANSFER OF FUNCTIONS OF DDA COLONY
TO MCD AND DJB ................................................... 58
— Coordination between DDA, MCD and Delhi
Jal Board ............................................................... 58
— Maintenance in Commercial Areas ................ 62
CHAPTER VI MISCELLANEOUS ..................................................... 66
— Allotment of Land to Private Hospitals ...... 66
— Allotment of Land to Schools ........................ 69
— Cooperative Group Housing Society ............. 69
— Conversion of Heritage ..................................... 74
— E-Governance and upgradation of Technology .. 77
— Functions of various offices of DDA ............ 79
— Disposal of Public Grievances ........................ 81
— Disciplinary action against DDA officials .... 82
— Conversion of land from leasehold to free-
hold ........................................................................ 84
— Nexus between Officials and property
dealers ................................................................... 85
— Complaints regarding Change in Land use
Policy ..................................................................... 86
APPENDICES
I. List of Housing schemes launched by DDA since
1966-67 ........................................................................................ 87
II. Minutes of Eighteenth sitting of the Committee on Urban
and Rural Development (2003) held on 26 May 2003 .. 89
PAGE
(ii)

III. Extracts of the Minutes of Twenty-Fifth sitting of the
Committee on Urban and Rural (2003) Development held
on 9 October 2003 ................................................................... 92
IV. Minutes of Eighth sitting of the Committee on
Urban Development (2004-2005) held on 21 December
2004 .............................................................................................. 94
V. Minutes of Seventeenth sitting of the Committee on
Urban Development (2004-05) held on 30 May 2005 ....... 96
VI. Minutes of Eighteenth sitting of the Committee on
Urban Development (2004-2005) held on 20 June 2005 ... 100
VII. Minutes of Nineteenth sitting of the Committee on
Urban Development (2004-2005) held on 30 June 2005 ... 103
VIII. Minutes of Twentieth sitting of the Committee on Urban
Development (2004-2005) held on 27 July 2005 ............... 105
IX. Statement of observations/recommendations .................... 107
P
AGE
(iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Pushp Jain
*6. Shri P . Mohan
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Amitava Nandy
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
11. Shri L. Rajgopal
12. Shri D. Vittal Rao
13. Shri Sajjan Kumar
14. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Sugrib Singh
17. Shri K. Subbarayan
18. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
19. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
20. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
21. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
*Nominated w.e.f. 27 October 2004.
(v)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
**23. Shri Virender Singh Bajwa
24. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
25. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
26. Shri Jayantilal Barot
27. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
28. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
29. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
30. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
31. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
4. Shrimati Neera Singh — Under Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Assistant Director
6. Shri G.C. Prasad — Committee Officer
**Nominated w.e.f. 24 March 2005.
(vi)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004)
Shri Chandrakant Khaire —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Yogi aditya Nath
3. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
4. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar
5. Shri Ranen Barman
6. Shri Padmanava Behera
7. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
8. Shri Haribhai Chaudhary
9. Shri Shriram Chauhan
10. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo
11. Shrimati Hema Gamang
12. Shri G. Putta Swamy Gowda
13. Shri Jaiprakash
14. Shri Hassan Khan
15. Shri Basavanagoud Kolur
16. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
17. Shri Savshibhai Makwana
18. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
19. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
20. Shri Mahendra Singh Pal
21. Shri Chandresh Patel
22. Prof. (Shrimati) A.K. Premajam
23. Shri Nawal Kishore Rai
24. Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy
25. Shri Pyare Lal Sankhwar
26. Shri Maheshwar Singh
27. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
28. Shri V .M. Sudheeran
29. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
30. Shri Paradeep Yadav
(vii)

Rajya Sabha
31. Shri S. Agniraj
32. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
33. Shrimati Prema Cariappa
34. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
35. Shri N.R. Dasari
36. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap
37. Shrimati Gurcharan Kaur
38. Shri Vidya Nivas Misra
39. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
40. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
41. Shri Harish Rawat
42. Shri Man Mohan Samal
43. Shri G.K. Vasan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Sapra — Joint Secretary
3. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
4. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Under Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director
6. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Committee Officer
(viii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2003)
Shri Chandrakant Khaire —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
*2. Shri Yogi Aditya Nath
3. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
4. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar
5. Shri Ranen Barman
6. Shri Padmanava Behera
7. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
8. Shri Haribhai Chaudhary
9. Shri Shriram Chauhan
10. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo
11. Shrimati Hema Gamang
12. Shri G. Putta Swamy Gowda
13. Shri Jaiprakash
14. Shri Hassan Khan
15. Shri Basavanagoud Kolur
16. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
17. Shri Savshibhai Makwana
18. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
19. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
20. Shri Mahendra Singh Pal
21. Shri Chandresh Patel
22. Prof. (Shrimati) A.K. Premajam
23. Shri Nawal Kishore Rai
24. Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy
25. Shri Pyare Lal Sankhwar
26. Shri Maheshwar Singh
27. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
28. Shri V .M. Sudheeran
29. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
30. Shri Paradeep Yadav
**Nominated w.e.f. 17.7.2003 vice Shri Chinmayanand Swami.
(ix)

Rajya Sabha
31. Shri S. Agniraj
32. Shrimati Prema Cariappa
33. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
34. Shri N.R. Dasari
35. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap
36. Shrimati Gurcharan Kaur
37. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
38. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
39. Shri Harish Rawat
40. Shri Man Mohan Samal
41. Shri G.K. Vasan
42. Vacant
43. Vacant
44. Vacant
45. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Sapra — Joint Secretary
3. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
4. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Under Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director
6. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Committee Officer
(x)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Eighth Report on the subject ‘Delhi
Development Authority (DDA)’ of the Ministry of Urban Development.
2. The erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural Development
(2003) had selected ‘DDA’ as a subject for examination and report. As
DDA’s functioning affects large number of people of Delhi, it was
decided to invite views of the public on various aspects of its
functioning. Accordingly, a Press Communique was released in
electronic and print media. Two hundred and one memoranda were
received by the Committee in response to Press Communique. Experts’
views were also invited separately. All the memoranda received from
the public were categorised viz. (i) individual complaints; (ii) general
complaints; and (iii) suggestions. General complaints were further
categorised under different categories covering various subjects. All
the memoranda were sent to the Ministry of Urban Development/
DDA for their comments. The erstwhile Committee on Urban and
Rural Development (2003) were also briefed by the representatives of
Ministry of Urban Development and DDA. The tenure of the Committee
on Urban and Rural Development (2003) expired on 31st December,
2003 and the examination of the subject remained inconclusive.
3. The Committee on Urban and Rural Development (2004) was
reconstituted on 1st January 2004 and the Committee selected this
subject again for examination and report. The tenure of the Committee
on Urban and Rural Development (2004) lapsed on 6th February 2004
due to dissolution of Thirteenth Lok Sabha. However, during their
short tenure they also undertook a study visit to Dwarka on 28.1.2004.
The Committee on Urban and Rural Development (2004) had received
comments from Ministry of Urban Development and DDA on the
Memoranda sent to them by earlier Committee.
4. The Fourteenth Lok Sabha was constituted on 17 May 2004 and
consequent thereafter, the Committee on Urban and Rural Development
was bifurcated into two separate Committees viz. (i) Committees on
Urban Development and (ii) Committee on Rural Development. The
new Committee on Urban Development (2004-05) was constituted on
5th August, 2004 and they again selected the subject for examination
(xi)

and report. The Committee further invited views of the public at large
and Resident’s Welfare Association through Press Communique released
in electronic and print media on 10 December 2004. The Committee
received about 150 memoranda this time. These memoranda were
categorised and sent to the Ministry of Urban Development for their
comments. They were also briefed by the representatives of Ministry
of Urban Development and DDA on 21st December, 2004 on the
functioning of various aspects of DDA. The replies of aforesaid
memoranda were received by the Committee in May/June, 2005.
During the intervening period, the Committee undertook two study
visits to different parts of Delhi to inspect the various projects of DDA
and to know the actual problems faced by the residents of DDA
colonies. The area covered were (i) Vasant Kunj (ii) Rohini and
(iii) Janak Puri on 5 Janaury, 2005 and Mayur Vihar and Dilshad Garden
on 27 January, 2005. The Committee were immensely benefited by the
inputs given by the actual users of DDA Flats and feedback received
from the aforesaid two visits and one earlier visit to Dwarka. The
inputs received from the study visits have been suitably incorporated
in the report in connection with the examination of the subject. They
also convey their thanks to various individuals/experts and
representatives of Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs) who had
enlightened the Committee by their views and suggestions.
10. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them
by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
 N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
29 July, 2005 Chairman,
7 Sravana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
(xii)

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
A. Objectives and Functions
1.1 India’s Independence in 1947 and resultant migration of lakhs
of people to Delhi, substantially increased the population of the City.
The two local bodies at that time, namely, the Delhi Improvement
Trust and Municipal Body were not adequately equipped to meet the
housing requirement of the growing population in the City. The Union
Government then appointed a Committee under the chairmanship of
Shri G.D. Birla in 1950 to look into the matter. The Committee
recommended a Single Planning & Controlling Authority for all the
urban areas of Delhi. Consequently, the Delhi Development
(Provisional) Authority—DDPA—was constituted by promulgating the
Delhi (Control of Building Operations) Ordinance, 1955 with the
primary objective of ensuring the development of Delhi in accordance
with a plan. The Ordinance was replaced by the Delhi Development
Act, 1957 on 30
th December, 1957. Delhi Development Authority was
then created under the provisions of the Delhi Development Act so as
to promote and secure the development of Delhi according to Plan.
The Master Plans and Zonal Plans formulated by Delhi Development
Authority (DDA) as approved by the Union Government serve as the
basic pattern of framework for development of Delhi. In simple words,
the Charter of DDA, as ratified by Section 6 of the Delhi Development
Act, 1957, lists the objectives of the Authority as:
•T o formulate a Master Plan for covering the present and
future growth of Delhi and to promote and secure the
development of Delhi according to the plan covering all the
possible activities.
•T o acquire, hold, manage and dispose of land and other
property .
•T o carry out building, engineering, mining and other
operations, and
• To provide services and amenities incidental to the above.
1.2 The Delhi Development Authority (DDA) is a body corporate
constituted under the Section 3 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957.

2
It has a legal status with common seal and succession. The status of
DDA is that it happens to be an instrumentality of the State, which
can sue and be sued in its own name. As per Section 3 (3) of the
Delhi Development Act, 1957, the ‘Authority’ consists of :—
•A  Chairman who shall be the Administrator of the Union
Territory of Delhi, ex-officio;
•A  Vice-Chairman to be appointed by the Central
Government;
•A  Finance and Accounts member to be appointed by the
Central Government;
• An Engineer member to be appointed by the Central
Government;
• As and when the Municipal Corporation of Delhi is
established , two representatives of that Corporation to be
elected by the Councilors and alderman of the Corporation
from amongst themselves;
• As and when the Metropolitan Council for the Union
Territory of Delhi is constituted, three representatives of that
Council to be elected by the members of the Council from
amongst themselves and until that Council is constituted,
three representatives of the Interim Metropolitan Council to
be elected by the members of the Interim Metropolitan
Council from amongst themselves;
• Three other persons to be nominated by the Central
Government of whom one shall be a person with experience
of town planning or architecture; and
• The Commissioner of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi,
ex-officio.
1.3 The total members nominated by the Central Government in
the Delhi Development Authority (DDA) comprise of Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Urban Development; Member Secretary, NCR Planning
Board; Chief Planner of Town & Country Planning Organization
(TCPO) and Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD).
1.4 With the enactment of the Constitutional (Sixty-ninth
Amendment) Act, 1991, the Union Territory of Delhi stood to be called
the National Capital Territory of Delhi. Under article 239 of the
Constitution of India, the Administrator of the National Capital

3
Territory of Delhi became the Lieutenant Governor. A Legislative
Assembly of Delhi with a Council of Ministers under Articles 239 AA
& 239 AB of the Constitution of India was created. Presently,
3 members of Delhi Legislative Assembly and 2 members of Municipal
Corporation of Delhi are appointed as Board members of DDA. The
Legislative Assembly of Delhi has powers to make laws in respect of
all the 68 matters in the State list excepting public sector, police and
land.
1.5 In accordance with the provisions made in Section 12 of the
Delhi Development Act, 1957 no development of land shall be
undertaken or carried out in any area by any person or body (including
a Department of Government) unless that area is a development area
and permission for such development has been obtained in writing
from the Delhi Development Authority (DDA). Further, after the
coming into operation of any of the Plans in any area, no development
shall be undertaken or carried out in that area unless such development
is also in accordance with such Plans i.e. the Plans of DDA. As per
Sections 7and 8 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, Master Plans and
Zonal Plans shall be prepared for development of Delhi. The Act
requires the DDA to carry out a civic survey and prepare a Master
Plan for Delhi.
B. Formulation of Master Plan
1.6 With the preparation of the First Master Plan, which came
into force in 1962 i.e MPD-1962, Delhi became the first city in the
country to have a comprehensive urban plan with metropolitan and
regional development proposals. This Master Plan dealt with four
distinguishable but closely built areas up to the year 1981. The Master
Plan of 1962 went beyond the geographical boundaries of the Union
Territory on the premise that there is an increasing intensity of
interaction between the central city and the surrounding towns and
countryside. It recommended an area about 45000 hectors for
urbanization to accommodate the projected population of 5.3 million
by the year 1981. It also recommended for the setting up of a Statutory
National Capital Planning Board and development of the region in
accordance with a Regional Plan. In the coming years, the bill on
National Capital Region Planning Board was adopted by Parliament
and assented to by the President on 9
th February, 1985. The National
Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985 provided for constitution of
the National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) for coordinating
and monitoring the implementation of Plans and evolving harmonized
policies for the control of land-uses and development of infrastructure
in the National Capital Region of Delhi.

4
According to the ‘Task Forces On Housing and Urban
Development’ set up by the Planning Commission in September 1983,
the main objectives of the Urban Land Policy underscored by
Government were:—
(a) to achieve an optimum social use of urban land;
(b) to make land available in adequate quantity at the right
time and for reasonable prices to both public authorities as
well as individuals;
(c) to encourage cooperative community efforts and bona fide
individual builders in the field of land development, housing
and construction;
(d) to encourage the socially and economically efficient allocation
of urban land so that development is done in a resource
conserving manner and that the magnitude of land use is
optimal;
(e) to widen the base of land ownership in order to specially
safeguard the interests of the poor and under privileged
section of urban society; and
(f) to promote flexibility in land in response to changes
resulting from a growing city.
1.7 The MPD-1962 was revised in 1990 with perspective Plan of
2001. It envisaged the development of 18000 to 24000 hectors of
additional urban areas so as to accommodate a projected population
of 12.8 million by the year 2001, besides increasing the holding capacity
of the existing urban areas in Delhi. The main tenets of MPD-2001 for
harmonized planning of the National Capitol Territory of Delhi were
that: (i) Delhi be an integral part of its Region,(ii) the ecological balance
be maintained, (iii) the central city area be the special area, (iv) the
urban heritage of Delhi be conserved, (v) the city center be
decentralized, (vi) mass transport system be multi-modal, (vii) the
development be ‘Low Rise High Density’ with restructuring of physical
infrastructure so as to accommodate additional population up to
3 million by 2001 and up to 4 million, ultimately; and (viii) the urban
development must be hierarchical and the same contain essential
facilities and services at different levels in five tiers. The MPD-2001 is
presently under implementation.
1.8 Apart from the routine planning aspects, the Planning
Department of DDA is also engaged in the modifications of the Master
Plan level policy under the DD Act in order to meet the challenges of

5
urban dynamism. As per DDA, according to Gazette Notification
amending Master Plan of Delhi (2001), mixed use of land was allowed
in the residential areas in the following manner:—
• Retail shops (except hazardous, nuisance causing) allowed
in residential premises up to maximum 25 percent of the
ground floor coverage, or 50 square meters of floor area,
whichever is less, only on ground floor.
•P rofessional offices up to 25 percent of FAR or 100 square
meters, whichever is less, on any floor.
• Nursing homes, guest houses and banks had been permitted
in residential plots of the given size and area through an
amendment of MPD 2021 vide Gazetttee Notification dated
7.5.1999, followed by DDa Regulation, dated 11.3.2003.
• Non-polluting household industries allowed in residential
plots to the extent of 25 percent of floor space, or 30 square
meters, whichever is less.
1.9 As regards, the Non-Permissible Mixed Land Use with a view
to ensure security, safety and environmental quality of residential areas,
the following activities were not allowed:—
• Retail shops—building materials, timber, building products,
marble, iron, steel and sand, firewood, coal.
• Repair shops—automobile repair and workshops, cycle
rickshaw repairs, tyre resorting and retreading, battery
charging.
• Service shops—flour mills, (more than 3 KW power load),
fabrication and welding.
• Storage, godown and warehousing
• Manufacturing units (excluding household industry)
1.10 As per information given by DDA, the guiding principle are
to demarcate, effectively develop the National Capital Region, to contain
the rapid population growth; to permit restricted mixed use of land,
selective densification of urban areas except Lutyens Bungalow Zone,
detailed industrial policy and parameters prescribed keeping in view
the NCR framework.
1.11 On 28
th July, 2003, Government issued guidelines to DDA
for the preparation of the Master Plan with perspective up to 2021 i.e.

6
MPD—2021. As per the provisions of the Delhi Development Act,
1957, opportunity for consultations with the public/user groups is given
and the following stages are involved in the finalization of the MPD—
2021:—
•A  draft report after satisfactory completion of all exercise
will be submitted to the DDA for its consideration.
• After the DDA approves it, draft MPD—2021 will be
forwarded to the Ministry of Urban Development for
approval and inviting objectives/suggestions from the public.
• All the objections/suggestions are to be heard by a Steering
Board, specially constituted for this purpose. The
recommendations of the Steering Board are to be
incorporated in the Master Plan and submitted to the DDA
for its consideration.
• After considering all the above aspects and completion
process required under Delhi Development Act, 1957, the
MPD—2021 would be sent to the Government for final
notification.
1.12 The Annual Administration Report 2003-2004 of DDA
indicated that the guidelines received from the Ministry of Urban
Development & Poverty Alleviation for the preparation of MPD—2021
were widely publicized through ‘Website’ and number of booklets
were circulated to around 3500 Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs),
as well as Shopper’s Associations and eminent citizens, professionals,
elected public representatives, etc. Around 76, E-mails and 1427 letters
in the form of observations/suggestions from the public were received.
DDA is currently engaged in extensive modification of the Master
Plan of Delhi - 2001 and is preparing MPD with a perspective up to
2021 to cater to the increasing population and the changing
requirements of the city. DDA informed that as a prelude to
preparation of MPD—2021, twelve subgroups have been constituted
comprising of Experts and Professionals, Eminent Persons, Public
Representatives, Concerned Departments, Sectoral Studies with holding
of series of Seminars inviting politicians, administrators, local bodies
& RWA’s etc. About 200 Experts have been deliberating on different
aspects. These Sub-Groups are on Demographic Profile, Regional and
Sub-Regional, Shelter, Trade and Commerce, Industry, Physical
infrastructure, Traffic and Transportation, Social Infrastructure, Mixed
Land Use, Conservation and Urban Renewal, Environment and
Pollution, and Development Controls.

7
1.13 As regards, the latest position on the finalization of MPD—
2021, the Ministry of Urban Development have informed in a written
note to the Committee that the draft MPD—2021 has been approved
by the DDA in its meeting held on 10 th January, 2005. Thereafter, the
Ministry vide its letter dated 22.02.2005 had conveyed permission to
notify the Draft MPD—2021 for inviting objections/suggestion from
the public. Accordingly, a Gazette Notification was issued on 16 th
March 2005 and also Public Notice was issued in the newspapers
dated 8 th April 2005. The Master Plan had also been on the ‘Website’
on DDA. So far, DDA had received about 7000 objections/suggestions
in response to the Public Notice, for which a Screening Board has
been constituted. The ‘Bord of Enquiry and Hearing’ comprises of
Vice Chairman, DDA, Engineer Member of DDA, Commissioner of
MCD, Chief Planner of TCPO and Commissioner (Planning), DDA as
the Convenor.
1.14 In their written note, the Ministry f urnished the salient
features of the Draft Master Plan—2021 as follows:-
“The vision—2021 is to make Delhi a global metropolis and a
world class city, where all the people are engaged in productive
work with a decent standard of living and quality of life in a
sustainable environment. This will inter-alia, necessitate planning
and action to meet the challenge of population growth and in
migration into Delhi and even measures to restrict it to the extent
possible, particularly:—
- for weaker sections of the society,
- addressing the problems of small enterprises;
- the unorganized informal sector;
- dealing with issues of slums, both as an issue pertaining to
shelter and cityscape;
- up-gradation of old and dilapidated areas of the city;
- provision of adequate infrastructure services;
- conservation of the environment;
- preservation of Delhi’s heritage and blending it with the new
and complex modern patterns of development; and
- doing all this new within a framework of sustainable
development , public-private and community participation and
spirit of ownership and belonging for its citizens.”
1.15 The Ministry have informed that the Draft MPD—2021 has
suggested norms for redevelopment of clusters of industrial

8
concentration in non-conforming areas keeping in view the existing as
well as imperatives of planned development.
1.16 The erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural Development
sought public opinion on the various aspects of functioning of DDA
in their ‘Press Communique’ on 13
th June, 2003. The present Committee
on Urban Development also in their ‘Press Communique’ on 22 nd
December, 2004, invited representations/suggestions of the public at
large on the various aspects of functioning of the DDA. In response
to the above Communique, a large number of representations/
suggestions were received by the Committee. The representations/
suggestions received so far were complied in three volumes and sent
to Ministry of Urban Development for comments and appropriate
necessary action. After obtaining the comments of the Ministry of Urban
Development in writing on the points submitted in these
representations as received from the public, the Committee invited
certain selected persons whose representations were received by the
Committee and experts on town planning and development to tender
their oral evidence before the Committee on 30
th May, 2005.
1.17 While explaining about the need for development of the Delhi
territory, during the course of evidence, the Chief Town Planner ( an
expert) submitted as follows:—
“The Master Plan period has witnessed in the last 40 years large-
scale development of infrastructure in Delhi, which has triggered
unprecedented migration from the rural areas and also from small
towns on account of employment opportunities to the Capital.
Despite the best efforts of DDA, the population of Delhi has grown
to 230 lakh for which existing infrastructure is under severe
pressure. Urbanization has increased rapidly since 1911 and
particularly, the pace of urbanization accelerated during 1941 to
1951 with the growth rate of 90% during the last decade. By 2001,
95% of the population of NCT of Delhi is living in urban areas.
With the rapid urbanization of the rural areas, the area of rural
Delhi has shrunk from 1157 square kilometers to 782 square
kilometers. That means, the balance area has been urbanized by
way of population growth where slums or squattered settlements
have come up.”
1.18 On being asked about the area urbanized in hazard manner
and planned manner in Delhi, the Chief Town Planner indicated to
the Committee that:—
“Of the 1486 square kilometers area, nearly 50 % of the total area
has been urbanized. Then the outgrowth, where these unauthorized

9
colonies, squatter settlements have taken place, is in the area
beyond planning.”
1.19 On being asked about the extent of the problems being faced
in Delhi in accommodating the ever-increasing population of the city,
the Chief Town Planner stated that it is not only the problem of
housing but also urban infrastructure such as water supply, treatment
of sewers etc.
He added:—
“At present, growth is taking place not only in the urban area but
beyond the urban areas, particularly in the rural settlements and
also in the urban villages which are within the Plan. The growth
rate in these settlements has witnessed more that 10% per annum
whereas the urban growth rate as per census 2001 is above 4.5%
per annum. In the past four decades, the growth rate of Delhi has
been more that 5% per annum. That has now pressurized the
requirement and fulfillment of the urban infrastructure not only in
Delhi but in rural Delhi as well as urban villages also. That has
not been made because the pace of population has not been
maintained with the development of infrastructure, which is
required to cater to the requirements. Delhi Master Plan has
projected these requirements. What has been visualized for Delhi
in the 2001 Master Plan is that yearly additional drinking water of
1000 MGD, if projected population of 230 lakh is to be supported.
Similarly, besides the existing, 8000 to 10,000 additional MW is
required. More that 1,00,000 houses are required to be built every
year. On daily basis, 10,000 tonnes of Solid Waste has to be treated.
100 metric gallon of sewerage has to be treated. These projected
requirements have to be met, if at all Delhi has to be developed
as a world class city. This is what the master plan document has
said.”
1.20 When the Committee enquired about the role of DDA in
handling the influx of population into Delhi , the Chief Town Planner
stated that:—
“There has to be restriction of employment generating activities,
which are labour intensive, because the DDA has been developing
commercial sites and also other economic areas which encourage
the employment opportunities for the projected population. The
purpose of the Delhi Master Plan is to create those jobs which are
high tech and labour intensive and which are outside Delhi. To
make it practical, a multi-model transport network is required to

10
be developed not only for Delhi but beyond Delhi area within the
NCR so that people have access and move outside Delhi.
Interconnectivity is also to be developed. For this purpose, suitable
amendments in the Delhi Development Authority Act may be
required to restrict the role of DDA in regulating the land use
planning. At present, the DDA is not only preparing land use
plan but has many other activities under Section 6 of the Act to
develop other economic activities.”
He then added the following points:—
• DDA should have the role to provide city level
infrastructure.
• In the last 20 years, not a single LIG or EWS house has
been constructed whereas One lakh houses are required to
be constructed every year.
• Housing is the most important activity of DDA. There are
urban Slums. Had there been a massive housing programme
for the urban poor, the picture (of Delhi) would have been
quite different.
• There is dire need of setting up of a Housing Authority,
particularly to take care of two-third population of Delhi,
which is under Low Income Group.
1.21 During the course of evidence, one of the representatives
from public stated that we are looking at the Master Plan revision. It
was put to public notice in 2005. She urged the Committee that the
Government should not rush into reforms so that reforms become
condoning of violations.
1.22 The Committee, thereafter, heard the oral evidence of the
representatives of DDA , Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Registrar
Cooperative Societies at their sitting held on 20
th June, 2005. The
Committee desired to know the steps taken to deal with the villages
falling in the urban expansion areas of Delhi in MPD-2021. To this ,
the Vice- Chairman of DDA explained that:—
“In the Master Plan 2021, there would be two issues relating to
this. Unless and until an area is excluded from land acquisition,
we would be making efforts, perhaps non-profitable efforts or
unsuccessful efforts to acquire that (the land). If this notion is
agreed than there is a limit on the extended abadi, then we do not
acquire it. In the Master Plan proposals for 2021, we have clearly

11
indicated that all these villages (in Delhi), which will come into
the urban expansion areas which will be developed should also be
redeveloped and amenities and other facilities provided with the
maximum extent of planning that is possible. Presently, a decision
has been taken by the Ministry of Urban Development that MCD
will be developing redevelopment plans for 25 villages. We are
working on redevelopment plans for villages. The whole idea is to
see how we can redevelop them so that they are integrated into
the total process of planned development.”
1.23 When the Committee enquired about the steps taken to meet
the requirements of housing the projected population of Delhi in MPD-
2021; the Vice Chairman of DDA stated during evidence that:—
“According to population projections, 2.4 million (dwelling units)
is required, that is about at least 20 to 30% of this (dwelling units)
mostly come in the NCR. The housing requirement for Delhi cannot
be provided within Delhi itself. It has also been projected that
30 to 40% should come in the form of redevelopment and
densification of existing areas, which would also include things
like higher density for slum rehabilitation. The balance of
1.2 million (dwelling units) would further come up in the areas,
which have to be urbanized in the course of the Master Plan
Period. This obviously leads to a very large target.”
1.24 When the Committee asked about the actual number of
dwelling units to be constructed by DDA so as to meet the demands
given in the MPD-2021; the Vice-Chairman of DDA stated that:—
“The DDA at the moment has about 23,000 dwelling units under
construction. Through our Housing Projects Approval Committee,
we have cleared another 8,000 housing units for construction. This
does not include very large programme that we hope to develop
on Slum Re-housing. As per the Master Plan projections, 50 to
55% of the housing has to come in the form of less than two
bedroom units. Now, that we are trying to work internally on the
slum housing side, we would develop this Pilot Project for
particular site having 4,000 units…. The guidelines issued by the
Ministry of Urban Development also say that we should examine
as to how the private sector can also be involved in this whole
process so that the pace and quantum of developments are such
that they match these projections.”
1.25 The Committee then heard the oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development at their sitting

12
held on 30 th June, 2005. During evidence, the Committee desired to
know about the steps taken to remove the shortcomings, if any, in
earlier Master Plans in the MPD-2021. In response, the Secretary of
Ministry of Urban Development stated as follows:—
“As far as the urbanized villages are concerned, I have held a
meeting with Vice-Chairman, DDA and Commissioner of Municipal
Corporation. The guidelines have been prepared. We have kept a
provision in the MPD-2021 that space be left for the urbanized
villages and maximum facilities be provided and they may be
upgraded and assimilated in the rest of Delhi and they should not
remain outside the process of development.…… In the MPD-
2021the provisions are being made to provide shopping area for
the informal sector. We have also tried that for EWS people like
vegetable vendor, domestic helpers, ironing persons, mandatory
additional provisions be kept by cooperative societies, builders,
DDA or private developers so that do not have difficulty in
travelling. We have tried to remove all the deficiencies noticed in
the planning in the past 3-4 decades in the MPD-2021.”
C. Role of private sector in public housing projects
1.26 It has been reported in various ‘Print Media’ on 21
st July,
2005 that Delhi Development Authority (DDA) has opened doors to
builders for mega projects with fresh terms and conditions for builders.
DDA has approved in principle the participation of private sector in
mega housing projects across the city. It has also been learnt that it
has been thought that the private builders would to construct 35 per
cent of the total units in sizes of two rooms or less as measuring
between 25 and 40 square meters and these would be allotted by
DDA. They would also maintain the services, like DDA does, till the
area is handed over to the local authority.
Recommendations/Observations
1.27 The Committee note that according to the provisions of
Section 6 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the Delhi Development
Authority (DDA) is entrusted with aims and objectives to formulate
a Master Plan for covering the present and future growth of Delhi
and to promote and secure the development of Delhi according to
the Plan covering all the possible activities. It is entrusted to acquire,
hold, manage and dispose of land and other property and carry out
building, engineering, mining and other operations. Also, the DDA
is required to provide services and amenities incidental to the above.
While the Master Plans and the Zonal Plans as approved by the

13
Central Government serve as the basic framework for development
of Delhi, the DDA has to effectively complete the arduous task of
providing ‘Housing’ facilities to the ever-growing population of
Delhi. The MPD-1962 had recommended an area about 45000 hectors
for urbanization so as to accommodate a projected population of
5.3 million by the year 1981. Further, the MPD-2001, which is
presently under implementation has recommended to develop 18000
to 24000 hectares of additional urban area so as to accommodate a
projected population of 12.8 million by the year 2001. The MPD-
2001 also recommended for urban structuring to be ‘Low Rise High
Density’ with re-structuring of physical infrastructure so as to also
accommodate an additional population of 3 to 4 million. The
Committee are, however, concerned to note that despite the efforts
of DDA to meet the requirements of ‘Housing’ and accommodating
the influx of people into Delhi for livelihood, there is apparently a
significant growth of unauthorized colonies, JJ clusters and squatter
settlements in the metropolitan city of Delhi, which is the capital
city of India. The Committee finds that Delhi is under severe
pressure to house the rapidly increasing population of the city. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that DDA should make earnest
efforts to provide adequate ‘Housing’ for the people of Delhi in
coordination with the Government of Delhi and other local bodies
so that at least further growth of unauthorized colonies and squatter
settlements are stopped forthwith.
1.28 The Committee are informed that according to population
projections, 20 to 30% of the required 2.4 million dwelling units are
to be provided in the National Capital Region of Delhi but the
augumented housing requirement for Delhi cannot be provided
within Delhi itself. It has been projected that 30 to 40% of the
dwelling units should come in the form of re-development and
densification of existing areas, which would also include things like
higher density for slum rehabilitation. Also, about 1.5 million
dwelling units may have to come up in the areas, which would be
urbanized during the MPD-2021. The Committee are also informed
that at present about 23,000 dwelling units are under construction
by DDA and the ‘Housing Projects Approval Committee’ of DDA
has approved another 8000 housing units for construction. While the
Committee appreciate the efforts made by DDA in providing
dwelling units and planning housing projects in Delhi, they are of
the firm view that a lot is yet to be carried out so as to house the
populace of NCT of Delhi. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that intense and well-timed hard work is done so as to accommodate
the ever-present population in squatter settlements, JJ clusters, etc.
as per the Master Plans. The Committee also desire that the
developmental works of DDA should be toned-up to contain a clean
Delhi and a planned Delhi.

14
1.29 The Committee needs hardly mention that the problems
faced in Delhi in accommodating the migratory population from
rural/small towns and townships are manifold. The city is not only
required to provide ‘Housing’ to the incoming population, but also
water supply, sanitation, sewerage, treatment of sewers, electricity,
garbage disposal and environmental management. While the
Committee appreciates that the draft MPD-2021 envisions to make
Delhi a global metropolis and a world class city, they are however
of the firm view that unless coordinated efforts are made by DDA,
the NDMC, Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi Jal Board and
urban bodies to ensure proper garbage disposal and curtail open-
defecation in the squatter settlements, this objective would be very
difficult to be achieved. The Committee recommend that DDA should
develop suitable housing structures for the urban poor with proper
sanitation facilities and re-locate people living in squatters and slum
tenements in appropriate areas.
1.30 The Committee are informed that specific provisions for
Mixed Land Use had been made by Government in the residential
areas alongwith Non-permissible Mixed Land Use in MPD-2001. In
this regard, the Committee desire that proper and earnest steps are
taken by the concerned governmental authorities to ensure that non-
permissible limits of Mixed Land Use are adhered to in the urban
areas of Delhi so as to ensure security, safety and environmental
quality of residential areas. The Committee also desire that the
provisions/limits of permissible and non-permissible Mixed Land Use
be reviewed in the light of latest developments and necessary
amendments be made in these limits, if found necessary. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.
1.31 As regards urbanized villages in Delhi are concerned, the
Committee are informed that in MPD-2021, all these villages will
come into urban expansion areas, which will be developed/re-
developed. During the course of evidence before the Committee, the
Vice-Chairman, DDA assured that all amenities and facilities would
be provided in the urban expansion areas with the maximum extent
of planning that is possible. The Committee feel that in order to
upgrade, assimilate and integrate these villages with the rest of the
urban areas, it is extremely necessary that the amenities, services
and facilities provided to these villages should not be less than
those provided to their counter-part urban localities and efforts
should be made to take care of their livelihood. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that as proposed in MPD-2021, effective steps

15
within a specific time frame be taken by DDA to provide the
maximum civic amenities and facilities in the aforesaid urban
expansions and the urbanized villages falling in Delhi region.
1.32 Regarding the MPD-2021, the Committee note that the draft
MPD-2021 has been approved by DDA in their meeting held on
10th January, 2005. Thereafter, the Ministry of Urban Development
permitted to notify the Draft MPD-2021 for inviting objections/
suggestions from the public and accordingly a Gazette Notification
has been issued on 16
th March, 2005 alongwith a Public Notice on
8th April, 2005. The Committee recommend that the Draft MPD-2021
should be well contained with the suggestions from the public, who
are the actual recipients of the benefits of MPD-2021. The Committee
also desire that the Draft MPD-2021 is finalized and launched,
expeditiously.
1.33 The Committee note from ‘Print Media’ reports that DDA
has, recently, approved in principle the participation of private sector
in mega housing projects across the Delhi city. It envisages to engage
the private sector in constructions in a minimum areas of 10 hectares
or 50,000 square meters of built-up areas and above. Keeping in
view of the repeated complaints about the alleged nexus between
DDA officials and the private builders, the Committee contain their
apprehension as to whether the construction of dwelling units by
these private builders would be in accordance with the Zonal and
Master Plan. The Committee are of the firm view that the DDA
must be primarily responsible for the residential housing
development in Delhi. Participation of private builders in a large
scale would lead to cost escalation of the dwelling units and such
dwelling units will be beyond the purchasing power of the common
urban population in Delhi. The Committee, therefore, desire that
the DDA and the GNCT of Delhi should give a fresh look towards
their decision of inviting private builders in a large scale in taking
up mega projects in Delhi.

16
CHAPTER II
DEVELOPMENT, ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF LAND
A. Development Areas demarcated by DDA
2.1 DDA carries out the work of declaration of development areas
and the development of lands in those areas and other areas in the
NCT of Delhi in accordance with the provisions of Section 12 of the
Delhi Development Act, 1957. The Central Government by way of a
Notification in the Official Gazette declares any area in Delhi to be a
development area for the purposes of this Act. No such declaration
shall be made unless a proposal for such declaration has been referred
by the Central Government to the DDA and the MCD for expressing
their views thereon within thirty days from the date of receipt of the
reference or within such further period as the Central Government
may allow and the period so specified or allowed has expired. The
DDA shall not undertake or carry out any development of land in
any area, which is not a development area. Sections 12 (3), 12(4) and
12(5) of Delhi Development Act, 1957 further enumerate the provisions
for development of lands according to Plans. Section 14 of the Act
provide that after coming into operation of any of the plans in a zone,
no person shall use or permit to be used any land or building in that
zone otherwise than in conformity with such plan.
2.2 The Committee asked about the demarcation between the
‘Notified and De-notified’ areas in Delhi. In their written reply, the
Ministry informed that the declaration of ‘Development Area’ is done
under Section 12 of the DD Act. The ‘Notification’ is issued under the
Land & Building Department of GNCT of Delhi. So far about
181 Notifications have been issued since the year 1967. Sometimes
there is a gap in the information regarding ‘Notification’ and ‘De-
notification’ of the ‘Development Areas’. An exercise has been
commenced to streamline the information and procedure in respect of
notification of development areas and their de-notification. Further,
exercise has also been initiated to denotify some of the development
areas, which have already been developed. Such information is
presently not available on the Website of DDA.
2.3 As per the governing law/rules; there are certain areas, which
are called ‘Notified’ areas being looked after DDA and rest of the
areas are ‘De-notified’ areas looked after by MCD. Since in response

17
to the ‘Press Communique’ of the Committee a number of
representations were received, which highlighted non-conforming use
of lands with the Plan development in Delhi, the Committee desired
to know the steps taken in this regard. The Ministry of Urban
Development in their written reply stated that action against non-
confirming use is being taken under Section 29(ii) of DD Act, 1957.
The year-wise number of actions taken upto 15
th June, 2005 as
submitted by the Ministry is as follows:—
Year No. of actions taken under
Section 29(ii)
2003 140
2004 144
2005 332
B. Acquisition for development of land by DDA
2.4 DDA is a body corporate having perpetual successor and
common seal with powers to acquire, hold and dispose of property,
both movable and immovable properties and have also acquired lands
some of which were given to it as a successor body of erstwhile Delhi
Development Trust. The Central Government has also placed lands at
the disposal of DDA, for management as well as disposal. This is
done under Section 22(1) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 by the
Lt. Governor of Delhi to whom the powers have been delegated by
the Central Government. These lands in turn are acquired by
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) for
planned development of Delhi under the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894. The Delhi Development Act, 1957 in itself has
no provisions for acquisition and requisition of immovable properties.
Sections 15 to 20 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 deal with the
procedure to acquire land for development purposes by DDA. As per
Section 15 of the Act, the Central Government may acquire land under
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and after it has taken
possession of the land, transfer the land to the DDA or any local
authority for the purpose for which the land has been acquired on
payment by the Authority or the local authority of the compensation
awarded under that Act and of the charges incurred by the Government
in connection with the acquisition. The Land & Building Department
of the Government of Delhi has two broad wings i.e. Land & PWD.
Land wing is responsible for the large scale acquisition of land for the
DDA (plan development) and other Govt. Deptts./Agencies for
undertaking various development projects.

18
2.5 In a written note, the Ministry of Urban Development have
informed the Committee that Land Disputes, if any, are settled by the
Land Acquisition Collector, Government of Delhi at the time of
acquisition of land as the land is acquired by him. Once the land is
transferred to DDA after the Land Acquisition Collector has taken
over the possession, it becomes Government land without any
encumbrances and thereafter there are no disputes about the title of
the land.
2.6 As per information given by DDA, till March, 2003, the DDA
has taken over possession of 67354.88 acres of acquired land in Delhi
and the website of DDA ‘ www.ddadelhi.com ’ depicts that it has
developed the acquired lands for residential, recreational, industrial,
commercial and institutional purposes. DDA has constructed, or
facilitated construction of more than 10.50 lakh dwelling units thereby
ensuring shelter for more than half of the population of Delhi. DDA
had planned and created the infrastructure for the IX Asian Games
including a shooting range, a stadium of international standards and
the integrated Asian Games Village containing 853 dwelling units. DDA
has given to Delhi city modern, well-laid-out shopping-office complexes
that have been created in 7 district centers, 27 community centers,
125 local shopping centers and 429 convenient shopping centers all
over Delhi.
2.7 In reply to an Unstarred Questions No. 5743 and 5635 in
Lok Sabha on 3
rd May, 2005, the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and
Urban Development stated that the DDA has reported that a provision
of Rs. 700 crore has been made in the budget estimates for 2005-2006
for acquisition of lands for Narela, Rohini and Dwarka Subcity Projects.
The total area of the land involved is 33769 Bigha and 9 Biswa i.e.
7035 acres. So far, the possession of lands by DDA is approximately
69890 acres of land handed over to DDA by the Land Acquisition
Collector of Delhi upto March, 2005.
2.8 In reply to the aforesaid question, the Minister of Parliamentary
Affairs and Urban Development further clarified that acquisition of
land for planned development is an ongoing process under the MPD-
2001. After the land is handed over to DDA by the GNCTD, DDA
undertakes planning and execution of developmental works and
thereafter allots the developed lands for various purposes such as
residential, commercial, institutional etc. However, about 1472 acres of
DDA lands is under encroachment of various kinds including the JJ
clusters. As a result, this land is not available for development and
allotment. Action would be taken to deal with the encroached land
under the relevant provisions of law.

19
2.9 When the Committee asked about the area of DDA lands which
have been encroached upon by slum dwellers, JJ clusters etc.; the
Ministry of Urban Development in a written note submitted the location
wise encroached DDA lands as follows:—
1. East Zone 493.00 acres.
2. West Zone 149 acres.
3. Rohini Zone 92.97 acres.
4. North Zone 343.00 acres.
5. S.W. Zone 59.20 acres.
6. S.E. Zone 338.00 acres.
Total: 1475.87 acres
2.10 Further, the Ministry informed that Land Management Wing
of DDA has been created to manage and protect the DDA lands and
has been divided into the above mentioned six zones. Constant and
regular watch is kept on DDA’S land by security guards, who are
deployed and assigned specific beat areas. Regular demolition
operations are planned and are got carried out by the Revenue Staff
of the DDA with the help of Police. The Revenue staff maintains daily
diaries and prepares inventory of the land under the supervision of a
senior officer of the rank of Deputy Director. 115 cases of corruption
have been registered by the Central Bureau of Investigation, Anti-
corruption Branch and Economic Offences Wing of the GNCT of Delhi
and Delhi Police. Out of these 115 cases, 105 cases are under trial in
courts and in 2 cases prosecution sanction is under process and
8 cases are under investigation.
2.11 In reply to Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 4158 dated
May 2, 2005, it has been stated by the Government that Central
Vigilance Commission has asked DDA to take specific steps to curb
illegal structures and encroachments. The steps that are being taken
by DDA in this regard are as follows:—
(i) Up-keeping of inventories of lands belonging to DDA.
(ii) Videographing encroached/vacant land belonging to DDA
for records.
(iii) Fencing of vacant land after removal of encroachment.
(iv) Fixing of responsibility of the officials at different levels for
safeguarding DDA land.

20
(v) List of officers/officials responsible for protection of land
has been sent to Chief Secretary, GNCTD and CVC.
2.12 Further, fixing of accountability and responsibility of the
officials who have failed or fail to check encroachment and
unauthorized structure is taken from time to time by DDA in specific
cases after due inquiry and in consultation with CVC.
2.13 The Committee on Urban Development (2004-2005) during
their visit to Mayur Vihar on 27 January 2005 were also informed by
the representatives of Resident Welfare Association of Pocket V of
Mayur Vihar that a portion of DDA land had been encroached upon
by Slum dwellers in front of Pocket V which is causing lot of
inconvenience to the residents of Mayur Vihar Phase I. It was stated
by them that slum dwellers have encroached upon the area for a
decade, but no action has been taken by MCD or DDA to evict them.
2.14 Since, in response to the ‘Press Communiqué’ representations
were received showing instances of encroachments on DDA lands by
the growing slum dwellers in the city, the Committee asked as to the
role of DDA in controlling the growth of slum/JJ clusters by making
alternate arrangements for these slum dwellers. To this, the Ministry
informed in their written note that DDA is making alternative
allotments of plots to Jhuggi dwellers in accordance with the approved
policy of the GNCT of Delhi. The strategy adopted by the GNCT of
Delhi provides for allotment of plots to eligible slum dwellers where
their land is urgently required for public purpose. DDA has also
decided to construct multi-storeyed tenements for relocation of slum
dwellers at Tehkhand, as a pilot project.
2.15 The Committee, thereafter, heard the oral evidence of the
representatives of DDA , Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Registrar,
Cooperative Societies at their sitting held on 20
th June, 2005. The
Committee desired to know the steps taken to deal with the
unauthorized colonies in the urban expansions and the laldora areas.
To this, the Vice-Chairman of DDA explained that originally 871
unauthorized colonies were identified and this number has now gone
up to 1432 as per the applications invited by the Government of Delhi.
2.16 He added that:—
“Laldora was the abadi which was defined in 1908. Thereafter, there
was no definition of an extended laldora. Now people say that
over a period of 90 years or 92 years, the abadi of a village has
extended. Now, when we go in for land acquisition, the designated
laldora is left out and the remaining is notified for acquisition. So,
there is an in-built problem for DDA subsequently.”

21
2.17 The Committee pointed out to the witnesses that since almost
92 years have elapsed, the population of laldora areas must have
increased and they might have moved outside laldora areas and asked,
if any, survey had been conducted to identify structures within and
outside the laldora lands. In response, the Vice-Chairman of DDA stated
that laldora and all matters related to it are under the jurisdiction of
the Government of Delhi. We have made a suggestion to the Delhi
Government. We have suggested to the Government of Delhi that a
survey may be done to see what this laldora limit should be so that
subsequently, whenever any land acquisition has to be done, it can be
done in cognizance of that.
2.18 In response to a Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2147
dated 21 March 2005, Minister of Urban Development replied that
approximately 1400 acres of land is under encroachment/Unauthorised
occupation by Jhuggi Jhopri Clusters, Unauthorised colonies etc. and
out of that the DDA has reclaimed 433.98 acres of land.
C. Compensation to land losers
2.19 According to DDA’s information, alternative plots are allotted
to the recommended farmers whose land has been acquired under the
large scale Acquisition & Development of Land in Delhi. Such
allotments are made on the specific recommendations as received from
the Land & Building Department of the GNCT of Delhi.
2.20 In response to the ‘Press Communiqué’, the Committee
received certain complaints of low rate of compensation to the farmers
whose lands had been acquired by the Land Acquisition Collector(LAC)
of Delhi for developing and handing over of the land to DDA for the
Rohini area and non-allotment of alternate lands by DDA to the affected
farmers. One of the representation was from the Badli village in Rohini
area. On the question of rate of land, the Ministry stated that the
Acquisition Rate for land is given by the LAC based on the market
value as per provisions of the Land Acquisition Act. It has nothing to
do with the land disposal rate because DDA has to ensure overall
development, which includes provision of roads, street lights, sewerage,
parks and also land for re-location of slums squatters. All this has to
be taken into account while working out the disposal cost.
Compensation to the ex-land owners is paid by the LAC because land
is acquired by him on behalf of the Government. As regards alternative
allotment of plots, the Ministry stated that alternate allotment of plots
to the ex-land owners is not always possible in the same area. These
allotments are made on the recommendations of the Land and Building
Department of GNCT of Delhi.

22
2.21 In another representation received by the Committee one of
the complainants stated that the lands acquired in Wazirpur village
by LAC of about 20 Bigha and 03 Biswa (Khasra No. 532/2/1) had
not been completely handed over to DDA for development. 19 Bighas
had been taken over by DDA and transferred to the Horticulture
Department to maintain it as Green area. The possession of land was
not handed over to DDA by LAC due to built up area as there existed
godowns, rooms and dairy etc.
2.22 In a particular set of representations, the complainants
aggrieved about Land Acquisition cases in Courts of law, which dealt
with the LAC of the GNCT of Delhi.
Disposal of land
2.23 The disposal of lands by DDA is carried out under the
provisions of Section 21 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957. As per
information given by the Ministry, the Land Disposal Department of
DDA disposes land meant for various uses such as residential,
industrial, institutional and commercial purposes. For residential
purposes, the DDA disposes residential plots by way of allotment and
public auction. In case of Group Housing Societies, lands are allotted
by DDA on the basis of the recommendations received from the
Registrar (CS), Govt. of Delhi. The list of the members of the particular
Society is verified by the Registrar (CS) and sent to DDA for allotment
of land. DDA disposes commercial properties as commercial plots or
as built up shops. Normally the method of disposal is through auction/
tender. Built up shops are sold through by calling for sealed tenders
along with EMD of 25%. Commercial plots are auctioned through
process of open auction.
2.24 However, 43% of built shops are allotted to special category
of persons as per following break up once every year by way of a
computerized draw:—
SC/ST 25%
LAC (Land acquisition cases) 10%
Physically Handicapped 5%
Ex-Servicemen 1% by allotment
1% by tender
Freedom Fighter 1%
Total 43%

23
2.25 As regards the industrial lands, it is informed through the
website of DDA that DDA has 23 Industrial Estates. The allotment of
industrial plots are made under different schemes mainly shifting of
industries from non-conforming to conforming areas up to 1976 and
also by way of auction. However, no auction of industrial plots has
been held during the last 5 years and this was mainly due to a
Supreme Court Judgment in which the available industrial plots are
being asked by the Delhi Government for re-location of industries
from non-conforming areas. DDA has 613 plots available for disposal.
2.26 As regards the Institutional lands, the said website depicts
that these allotments are made as per Rule No. 5 & 20 of Delhi
Development Authority (Developed Land) Nazul Rules 1981 which
provide for allotment of institutional land for various purposes like
social, cultural, religious, education activities etc. The allotment of
institutional land has been divided into 4 broad categories—for the
educational, general institutions, socio-cultural institutions and Govt.
departments. Only Societies, which are registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 are eligible for allotment of institutional land.
2.27 When the Committee asked about the steps taken to ensure
that disposal of plots/lands and houses are made devoid of
malpractices etc., the Ministry in their written reply stated that there
have been some complaints regarding irregularities in allotment of
plots and houses. In such cases, the role of DDA officials is examined
by the Vigilance Department. As far as the role of real estate dealers
is concerned, the internal vigilance is not empowered to take action
against private persons. Therefore, such cases are required to be referred
to the Crime Branch and CBI. To check the malpractices relating to
allotments of plots and houses, DDA has taken steps to bring
transparency in the system. For this, information regarding draws held
is published in National Dailies immediately after allotment. The
information is also put on the website of DDA. All correspondences
relating to allotment of plots and houses are being sent by Speed
Post/Registered Post to allotees.
Recommendation/Observation
2.28 In accordance with the provisions of Section 12 of the Delhi
Development Act, 1957, the Central Government by way of a
Notification in the Official Gazette declares any area in Delhi to be
a development area for the purposes of this Act. The Notified areas
are being looked after by DDA and the rest of the areas as
‘Denotified’ are looked after by MCD. The Committee are informed
that about 181 Notifications have been issued since the year 1967 by

24
the Land and Building Department of Government of Delhi. The
Committee express their concern that many a time there is a gap in
the information regarding ‘Notification’ and ‘Denotification’ of the
‘Development Areas’. The Committee are informed that an exercise
has been initiated to streamline the information and procedure in
respect of Notification of ‘Development Areas’ and their
‘Denotification’. Further, action has been initiated to denotify the
areas, which have already been developed. The Committee
recommend that the process of ‘Notification’ and ‘Denotification’ of
DDA lands must be streamlined by amending and adopting suitable
procedures required to be followed by the Government in
consultation with the Land and Building Department of the
Government of Delhi so as to ensure that the aforesaid process is
expeditious and timely. The Committee consider it imperative that
the ‘Land Records’ of Delhi are maintained and updated regularly
for better land management.
2.29 As regards, non-conforming use of the DDA lands, the
Committee note that DDA has initiated counteractive action under
the provisions of Section 29(ii) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957
in 140 cases in 2003, 144 cases in 2004 and 332 cases in 2005. While
the Committee note with satisfaction that DDA has taken certain
remedial actions in cases of non-conforming use of their lands, with
the Master Plans, they desire that DDA should devise suitable in-
built mechanism to check misuse of their lands and ensure the
developed areas remain intact with the Master Plan.
2.30 The Committee note that DDA has taken over possession
of 67354.88 acres of land acquired through the Land Acquisition
Collector of Delhi, till March, 2003. Till March, 2005, DDA has
acquired land totaling upto 69890 acres. The Committee note that
land acquired for DDA are to be developed for residential,
recreational, industrial, commercial and institutional purposes. The
Committee appreciate that DDA has developed/provided for 27
community centers, 125 local shopping centers, 429 convenient
shopping centers and a number of dwelling units in the lands
acquired for DDA. The Committee trust that DDA moves ahead by
providing adequate number of dwelling units and other facilities to
the urban population of Delhi so that the city can boast of being a
world-class city by 2021. The Committee also desire that the
upcoming dwelling units, shopping complexes, institutions etc. as
well as the existing constructions by DDA are adequately maintained
and upholstered with an aesthetic sense to ensure that these dwelling
units/flats, shopping complexes etc. give a neat and modern look.

25
Since private players have been encouraged by DDA in building up
the ‘Shopping Malls’ in Delhi, which have come up lately, the
Committee urge the Government to ensure that all the required
safeguards—such as fire fighting arrangements, emergency exits,
proper lifts in high rise buildings and constructions of earthquake
proof structures are adhered to strictly both by the private builders
and DDA.
2.31 While the Committee note that acquisition of land for
planned development is an ongoing process, the Committee are
concerned to note that about 1475.85 acres of DDA lands are under
encroachment by JJ clusters, etc. The Committee are perturbed to
learn that the DDA lands, which have been encroached upon by
squatter settlements, slums etc. in various parts of Delhi including
the Yamuna Pushta areas are not available for development. The
Committee would like to know as to how these encroachments were
allowed to happen when they were detected and what remedial
measures were contemplated to thwart such encroachments. The
Committee recommend that timely remedial actions are undertaken
by DDA to remove such encroachments from DDA lands as per
governing laws and rules. The Committee also recommend that
coordinative efforts be made by DDA with the Police authorities,
GNCT of Delhi and local bodies so as to deal with this persistent
problem of encroachments on DDA lands by JJ clusters. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.
2.32 So far as the laldora areas of Delhi are concerned, the
Committee note that laldora areas were signified as village areas
and defined way back in 1908. However, there is no definition of an
‘extended laldora’ as the population of such areas has increased in
the past decades. The Committee are also informed that all matters
related to laldora area fall under the jurisdiction of the GNCT of
Delhi. Eventually, in the process of acquisition of land, all areas
except the designated laldora areas are notified by the Government.
In this regard, the Vice-Chairman of DDA during the course of
evidence before the Committee has expressed that there is an in-
built problem for DDA in taking possession of such lands. He has
also informed that a suggestion has been made to the Delhi
Government that a ‘Survey’ may be undertaken for ascertaining the
laldora limits. The Committee desire that concerted efforts be made
by DDA with the local authorities concerned so as to demarcate
clearly and finally the extended limits of laldora lands in Delhi for
a planned development taking into consideration the natural growth
of population.

26
2.33 The Committee note that the Land Acquisition Collector
acquires lands in Delhi from farmers and villagers and hands over
such acquired lands to DDA for development. At the time of
acquisition of these lands, the LAC fixes the acquisition rate to be
paid as compensation to the land losers. The Committee also note
that alternative plots are allotted to the recommended farmers whose
land has been acquired under large scale acquisition and
development of land in Delhi. The Committee, however, would like
to point out that a number of complaints have been received from
such land losers by the Committee in response to their ‘Press
Communiques’. These complaints pertain to fixation of low rate of
compensation to the land losers, and denial of allotment of alternative
plots to certain land losers, specifically in Rohini and Wazirpur areas.
Apart from these, a number of cases are pending in courts of law
by complainants or land losers for suitable compensation. The
Committee recommend that keeping in mind the needs of the
farmers/villagers who have lost their lands, which were their means
of livelihood, the DDA as well as the concerned Government
authorities must take substantial steps so as to give adequate
monetary compensation and alternate lands to such land losers with
a positive perspective. The Committee strongly feel that whenever
any land is acquired by DDA from anyone, the process should be
so simplified that the land loser without any hassle and delay, is
able to get compensation on alternative land/flat/shop within a
specific time frame and is not made to wait for years together as is
the case now. The Committee also recommend that whenever any
land is acquired, the landless labourers working on the same land
should be suitably rehabilitated, as they get deprived of their means
of livelihood.
2.34 Under Section 21 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the
DDA’s Land Disposal Department disposes land meant for various
uses such as residential, industrial, institutional and commercial
purposes. The Committee are informed that for residential purposes,
the DDA disposes plots by way of allotment and auction. In case of
Group Housing Societies, the DDA allots lands on the basis of the
recommendations received from the Registrar Cooperative Societies
(RCS) of Government of Delhi. The RCS verifies the lists of members
and the Group Housing Societies and sends them to DDA for
allotment of lands. DDA disposes commercial properties as
commercial plots or as built-up shops by way of auction and tender.
The built-up shops are sold by calling of sealed tenders alongwith
EMD of 25%. The commercial plots are disposed by way of open
auction. About 43% of the built-up shops are allotted to the special

27
categories of SC/ST/ LAC, physically handicapped, ex-Servicemen and
freedom fighters. While the Committee note that DDA has taken
steps to curb malpractices relating to allotment of plots and houses,
the Committee urge that a high level body comprising of senior
officials of DDA, RCS, Ministry of Urban Development and NCRPB
may be formed so as to devise suitable mechanism to check
malpractices in allotment of plots and flats to individuals and Group
Housing Societies and ensure transparency in the working of DDA.
The Committee also recommend that the 43% allotments are made
to the special category persons as per rules and the ‘built-up shops’
are allotted in a time bound manner.
2.35 The Committee note that ‘Institutional Lands’ are allotted
following the Delhi Development Authority (Developed Land) Nazul
Rules, 1981 for social, cultural, religious, educational activities etc.
Broadly, these allotments are divided into four categories viz.
educational, general Institutions, socio-cultural Institutes and
Government Departments. The Committee recommend that DDA
should devise an in-built mechanism so as to ascertain that allotments
to the ‘Institutions’ are strictly made in accordance with the governing
Nazul rules and disciplinary actions should be taken in any kind of
malpractice. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard.
2.36 The Committee are concerned to note that out of a large
area of about 1400 acres of DDA lands encroached upon by
unauthorised colonies, DDA has been able to reclaim only 433.98
acres of land which means that less than one third of the encroached
land could only be reclaimed by DDA. This is because unauthorised
colonies have come up on the remaining areas. The Committee feels
that a clear cut policy needs to be evolved by the Central Government
with regard to the treatment of unauthorised colonies. The Committee
note that though DDA has been vested with powers of demolition,
stopping and sealing powers, but not much has been achieved in
reclaiming encroached lands. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that DDA and the Ministry of Urban Development must take concrete
measures in consultation with local bodies, so as to reclaim all the
encroached lands of DDA, expeditiously. The Committee also
recommend that a suitable policy – framework be adopted so as to
curb cropping up of new unauthorized colonies. Regularization of
unauthorised colonies in course of time provides an incentive to
such acts and legitimizes a step which was considered illegal and
was in violation of the law.

28
CHAPTER III
LANDSCAPING, HORTICULTURAL AND SPORTS ACTIVITIES
A. Landscaping and Horticultural work
3.1 The Landscape and Environmental Planning Unit of Delhi
Development Authority (DDA) is responsible for taking up landscaping
projects and environmental planning in Delhi as per Master Plan. The
MPD 2001 included the ‘Recreational Chapter’ and requirement of open
spaces with sports needs which has been assessed in details by DDA.
As per decided policy of the Government, the lands under Recreational
Activities i.e. green areas at Master Plan level remain under possession,
maintenance and care of DDA although rest of the development
services are transferred to civic agencies.
3.2 DDA is entrusted with the responsibility to build the city and
ensure quality life to its citizens. In this endeavour DDA had been
promoting the development of Green belts. The Projects of DDA include
designing and policy decisions related to regional parks as per norms
laid down in the Master Plan. The Designing of all the District Parks
is under the jurisdiction of DDA. The sports facilities are provided in
DDA ‘Green Areas’ for making healthy environment and improving
quality of life. In the Landscape Unit, designing work of neighbourhood
parks, play fields, children park and other small parks in residential
areas is done. Theme Parks, Urban-Woodlands, Bio-diversify Parks etc.,
which are being designed in-house by the Landscape Unit in DDA.
Special projects like Bio-diversity parks, Golf Course, reclaiming sanitary
landfill site (Indraprastha Park), Aastha Kunj and Heritage projects
like Tughlakabad had also been taken up in the Landscape Unit.
3.3 According to the Annual Administrative Report (2003-2004) of
DDA, some of the projects undertaken by Landscaping unit during
the year 2003-2004 are as follows:
1. Indraprastha Park
2. Jheel Park
3. Aastha Kunj
4. District Park – Kanti Nagar
5. Yamuna Bio-diversity Park

29
6. Tughalkabad Recreational Park
7. Aravali Bio-diversity Park
8. District Park B-3 Block at Paschim Vihar
9. Vijay Park at EE Block Janakpuri
3.4 Even as the ‘Green Areas’ in Delhi are managed by different
agencies, DDA has the largest role to play with 5050 hectare (approx.)
of land under its jurisdiction. The green covered area in the capital is
19% of total area which is much larger than other cities and makes
Delhi one of the greenest cities. The ‘Green Areas’ in a few cities are
as indicated in the statement given below:-
Cities % of green area*
Bangalore 13.57
Hyderabad 9.21
Bikaner 2.63
Kanpur 16.80
Allahabad  2.98
Kolkata 7.00
Delhi 19.00
*Source: Land assembly in the Indian Metropolis (TCPO)
3.5 The area-wise utilization of the total 1,48,639 hectares area of
Delhi is indicated below :-
Area in hectares
Urban area as per Master Plan 44,777
Recreational Use 8,722
Total Green Area under the
Jurisdiction of DDA 5,050
3.6 As per background material on DDA submitted to the
Committee, DDA has developed approximately 1600 acres of green,
which includes city forests, woodland, green belts, districts parks,

30
neigbhourhood parks and tot lots in residential colonies. The Breakup
of Green area is as follows:-
Total Green area with DDA 5050.97 Ha.
Area so far developed by DDA 4587.14 Ha.
Area being developed by DDA 463.89 Ha.
Parks No.
District Parks 111
City Forests 25
Neighbourhood Parks 255
Regional Parks (Ridge) 4
Master Plan Green/Zonal Green 605
3.7 The Committee undertook local on the spot visits to certain
‘Green Areas’ in Delhi in January 2005 and held discussions with the
local residents and certain points, which came to the fore are summed
up in the succeeding paragraphs.
3.8 During the visits on 27 January 2005, Sanjay Lake Park, Mayur
Vihar, New Delhi they were informed by the residents of Pocket ‘E’,
Mayur Vihar Phase II that ‘Sanjay Lake’ has not been cleaned for a
long time, as the water was very dirty. At this, DDA Officials informed
that the matter related to Ministry of Environment and Forests.
However, the Committee observed that the area around the Lake had
been developed into a Park and maintained by DDA. The DDA officials
present their informed the Committee that earlier the area was not
worth habitable, but after the development of Sanjay Lake, the area
has become a picnic spot as well as health resort.
3.9 During another visit on 5 January, 2005 to Swaranjayanti Park
at Rohini and Astha Park in Vasant Kunj, the Committee observed
that these green areas had been developed as recreational Parks by
DDA. Although, these Parks were well maintained by DDA, the
Committee also noticed that one of the entrance of Swaranjayanti Park
i.e. Rithala to Rohini Sector 11 was not provided with public toilets
and water facilities. The Committee also noticed that the adjoining
areas around the Swaranjayanti Park were used by people for dumping
waste materials. At their visit to Astha Park, Vasant Kunj, the residents
at Vasant Kunj suggested that Park should have some food-outlet so
that people can spend quality time there. They also demanded that

31
(i)proper boundary walls around the Park be built-up by DDA for
security of Children, (ii)Public convenience facilities be provided near
the or in the parks. (iii)Samriti Van be built in the shape in of trees
in the memory of the martyrs.
3.10 The Committee also visited Dilshad Garden area of East Delhi
on 27 January 2005. The Committee, however, found that the condition
of Deer Park was in a dilapidated state and the park had turned into
a playground. One of the residents complained that as the names of
the park suggested it to be ‘Deer Park’, there were no ‘Deer’ in this
Park and the maintenance of this Park had been totally neglected by
the concerned authorities. There was no boundary wall around the
park. Moreover, the open Nallahas of the area around the Park, caused
health and civic problems.
B. Expenditure on development of ‘Green Areas’ in Delhi.
3.11 As per information given, DDA spends about Rs.40 crore
(linked to Budget) every-year for developing new green areas and for
maintaining the already developed greens. No taxes or grants are
received for this.
3.12 As regards the expenses on green areas in 2004-2005, in reply
to Unstarred Question No.3851 dated 19 April, 2005 in Lok Sabha, the
Ministry of Urban Development has informed that a provision of
Rs.114.19 crore has been made by DDA for maintenance of Parks
during the year 2004-2005.
Recommendation/Observation
3.13 The Committee note that DDA has extensively developed
green areas in Delhi and has helped Delhi to grow as one of the
greenest cities in the country. While appreciating the achievements
made by DDA in developing the forests, woodland, green belts,
district parks, zonal parks, neighbourhood parks and Children parks
etc., the Committee desire that maintenance of such green areas and
water bodies etc. should be carried out from time to time and all
the basic facilities viz. toilet, drinking water, eateries, etc. should be
provided for the welfare of public at large. The Committee are also
of view that co-ordinated efforts be made by the Ministry of Urban
Development with the Ministry of Environment and Forests so as to
maintain the water-bodies clean. The Committee desire that all public
places especially parks should have ‘Pay and Use’ toilets facilities
as for instance the ‘Sulabh’ toilets. Such toilet facilities would help
in the maintenance of environment. The Committee further

32
recommend that the viability for opening up food counters/eateries
be examined by DDA in or around the ‘public parks’. The Committee
also recommend that demands of the local residents for development
of the already existing Parks be met by DDA with a positive
perspective in mind.
3.14 The Committee note that DDA spends about Rs.40 crore
every year for developing new green areas and for maintaining the
areas already developed. Moreover, in 2004-2005 a provision of
Rs.114.19 crore has been made by DDA for maintenance of parks.
The Committee recommend that all the funds yearly earmarked for
maintenance of Parks be utilised prudently for improving the
conditions of the existing Parks/green areas in Delhi. Also, new green
areas, be developed in a time bound manner.
C. Sports Complexes
3.15 The Asian Games created an awareness of the lack of sporting
facilities for common men in the city, as the few Stadia which came
up during the Asian Games were inadequate. A few private clubs that
existed were expensive and inaccessible. Therefore, sports and sporting
facilities were planned and taken to every door of the citizens of the
Delhi by constructing massive sports complexes, Play fields, Multigyms
and Fitness Trails by the DDA. So far 15 sports Complexes have been
developed at Siri Fort, Saket, Hari Nagar, Paschim Vihar, Rohini, Ashok
Vihar, East Delhi, Yamuna Sports Complex, Pitam Pura, Jasola, Chilla
and Dwarka Sports Complex in all the zones of Delhi. 26 Play Fields
where one can play without paying any charges have been developed
in different parts of city. 27 Multigyms like at Hauz Khas, Vikas Puri,
Mandwali Fazalpur, Gulabi Bagh, Rohini, Lawrence Road, Kanti Nagar,
Sarita Vihar and Saket have become the centres of attraction for health
conscious people. Through, these Sports Complexes, play-fields and
multigyms, DDA is reaching the facilities to the common people. These
myriad greens have created a sporting culture by mass participation
at all levels and have thus helped promote sports talent. The first Golf
Course, which is called Qutub Golf Course and Mini Golf Course,
which is known as Pitch and Putt Course in Siri Fort Sports, have
been developed by DDA. Apart from this, one sports Complex and 2
multigyms are in progress/under construction by DDA.
3.16 DDA is also playing a vital role not just in creating a huge
network of sports facilities in Delhi it is also actively identifying and
training budding sports talent in the city. The Sports Complexes, Play
Fields, Fitness Trails and Golf Courses that DDA has created all over
the city have given to professional sportsmen and to amateurs the
right infrastructure to hone their sporting talents. The national and

33
State level tournaments that DDA conducts in various games provide
a platform to the sports-persons to showcase their talents and to gain
competitive experience. DDA is utilizing the services of India’s top
sportsmen to train and guide the talented youngsters and also
providing facilities, kits and stipend to the selected bright boys and
girls.
3.17 As per Annual Administrative Report of DDA (2003-2004),
the following Sports activities are in progress:
(i) Sports Complex at Sec. D between Pkt. 2&3, Vasant Kunj:
Tennis Court
(ii) Multi-gym at Salvage Park, Mayapuri
(iii) Upgradation of Swimming Pool at Siri Fort.
(iv) Conversion of concrete surface Lawn Tennis courts into
synthetic surface courts at Siri Fort.
(v) Sports Complex at Pitam Pura : Swimming Pool
(vi) Sports Complex at Saket: Covered Badminton Hall,
Conversion of concrete surface tennis courts into synthetic
courts.
(vii) Swimming Pool at Dwarka Sports Complex.
3.18 The earlier Committee on Urban and Rural Development 2004
had the opportunity to visit a Sports Complex at Dwarka on 28 January
2004 and they had expressed satisfaction at the development of Sports
Complex in Dwarka.
3.19 According to information on website of DDA, the following
development for sports activities are stated in future:-
• Completion of Bhalaswa Golf course.
• Inauguration of Vasant Kunj Sports Complex.
•5  more Sports Complexes at Narela, Rajender Nagar, Rohini,
Phase III, Raj Ghat and Dwarka Phase-II.
• Mini Sports Complexes at Kanti Nagar, Partap Nagar and
Vikas Puri.
• 07 Swimming Pools.
• Adopting 8 Play Fields.

34
Recommendation/Observation
3.20 The Committee are happy to note of the efforts made by
DDA in the construction and development of Sports Complexes,
play fields, swimming pools, golf courses etc. for the purpose of
sports activities for the inhabitants of Delhi. They also note that
some sports activities are in progress. The Committee trust that such
activities would be continued and completed in a stipulated time
frame.
3.21 As regards the training aspect of sportsmen/women, the
Committee also recommend that DDA should propagate its sports
and coaching facilities, fellowship facilities etc. for the knowledge
of common sports-loving persons so that people are encouraged to
indulge in sports activities. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the action taken in this regard.
D. Commonwealth Games 2010 and arrangements of DDA
3.22 India is hosting Commonwealth Games 2010 and Delhi has
been chosen its venue. DDA has been entrusted to undertake the
construction of sports village for Commonwealth Games at
Akshardham, Delhi as a special project. The Annual Project (2003-
2004) of DDA shows that the panels, graphic signages, Brochures, films
have been got prepared for the delegates.
3.23 In response to a Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No.2771
dated 18
th April 2005, the Minister for Urban Development stated that
construction work of Games village for the Commonwealth Games
has not commenced. However, it had been stated that the site for the
Games village is available except for a small portion, which belong to
Government of Uttar Pradesh and the matter has been taken up by
DDA with the Government of Uttar Pradesh in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
3.24 The Committee express their concern over the fact that only
five years are left for the commencement of Commonwealth Games
2010 and the construction of the Commonwealth Games village at
Akshardham is yet to begin. They also note that a small portion of
site belongs to Government of Uttar Pradesh for which negotiations
are going on with the State Government of Uttar Pradesh. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that matter should be sorted out
expeditiously and the construction of the ‘Games village’ should
commence without any delay. The Committee desire that prudent
and scientific techniques be adopted in development of
‘Commonwealth Games Village’ at Akshardham in line with the
international standards of sports facilities. In the beginning itself it
should be kept in mind that the facilities to be created should be
such that even after the Commonwealth games 2010 are over, these
can be made use of subsequently also.

35
CHAPTER IV
HOUSING
A. Targets and Achievement
4.1 Housing activities had been undertaken by DDA since 1967-68
and from time to time, it has announced various schemes for different
categories of flats. So far 41 housing Schemes have been announced
by the DDA out of which 36 have been closed while 5 are still alive.
The details of the schemes are at Appendix I .
4.2 Essentially, the DDA constructs houses of various categories
viz. SFS/HIG/ MIG/LIG/Janta/EWS etc. for a large number of
registrants/non-registrants. The brief details of houses in progress as
on 1.4.2003, new houses started during 2003-2004 and completed by
DDA during the year 2003-2004 are given as under :
Sl. No. Description HIG MIG LIG EWS/ TOTAL
JANTA
1. Houses in progress as on 1.4.2003 4895 3233 12032 544 20704
2. New Houses targeted to be taken up 1707 2520 8092 2192 14511
during 2003-2004
3. Houses taken up during 2003-2004 216 120 3652 Nil 3988
4. Houses targetted to be completed 1577 1076 2722 544 5919
during 2003-2004
5. Houses completed during 2003-2004 416 492 704 64 1676
6. Houses in progress as on 1.4.2004 4695 2861 14980 480 23016
4.3 As per Action Taken Reply furnished by the Government on
the recommendations contained in 49 th Report of Committee on
Urban and Rural Development there is a total backlog of 24,631
in three categories of flats viz. MIG, LIG and Janta Categories

36
the category-wise and scheme-wise pendency is as follows as on
28.2.2003):
Category MIG LIG Janta Total
NPRS 498 10,843 NIL 11,341
AAY-1989 599 3,618 NIL 4,217
JHRS — — 7,404 7,404
Total 1,097 14,461 7,404 22,962
4.4 During the course of briefing of the Committee on 21 st
December 2004, Vice-Chairman DDA submitted as under :
“Sir, very broadly speaking, a number of the grievances related to
two important areas of activity. One area of activity pertains to
the Rohini Registration Scheme which was started in 1981. This
was basically for allotment of plots. Approximately, 84,000 people
had been registered. We still have a sizeable backlog out of that.
That has been a matter of concern. We have been continuing to
receive a lot of public reactions and requests and things of that
nature in regard to that Scheme. I have to inform the Committee
that a backlog of about 27,000 in different categories of plots under
the Rohini Registration Scheme is still there. We are in the process
of acquiring land for, what is called, the Phase IV and Phase V of
the Rohini Scheme, which would entail an acquisition of 3,000
hecatres of land. In order that this whole process may not be
delayed very much, we have set ourselves a target that by 2005-
2006, we would try to complete this backlog. We are trying to
work in close collaboration with the Land and Building Department
of the Delhi Government so that at a parallel level we can do
things like taking the land, its planning and development by the
Engineering side. Normally, these things happen in some kind of
the chronological fashion. So, we are trying to avoid that and do
this in a time bound manner.”
4.5 The Committee had also received a large number of
memoranda from public at large regarding delay in Rohini Registration
Scheme which speak volume of irregularities under the Schemes. Some
of them are related to harassment, excessive delay in getting the plot
and out of turn allotment etc.
4.6 When asked to comment on above complaints, DDA in their
written reply have stated that allotment of plot is being made strictly

37
as per priority number to individual registrations and DDA has recently
disposed off more than 3000 plots to wait-listed registrants.
4.7 Subsequently, in reply furnished to Rajya Sabha Unstarred
Question No.1353 dated March, 14, 2005, the Minister of Urban
Development furnished the details of three schemes, launched by Delhi
Development Authority (DDA) fifteen years or more for allotment of
plots and flats, indicating the total number of registrants and the
present back-log as under:
Category Scheme Total No. of Back-log
registrants
Plots 1. Rohini Residential 82,384 27,043
Scheme, 1981
Flats 2. New Pattern Regist-  1,71,272 8,668
ration Scheme, 1979
3. Ambedkar Awas 20,000 2,883
Yojana, 1989
4.8 The Minister of Urban Development in his reply to the
aforesaid question also stated that allotment of plot/flats could not be
made to all the registrants because the schemes were open ended and
there was heavy registration. The pace of allotment depended upon
various factors such as acquisition and development of land, planning
and provision of infrastructure and services. He added that DDA had
prepared an action plan for liquidation of the backlog of flats by
December 2005 and of plots by the end of 2006. The DDA has reported
that plots are allotted expeditiously, on completion of the process of
planning and development and the flats are allotted, immediately, on
receipt of information of completed flats from Engineering Wing. He
assured that steps have been taken to ensure, expeditious allotment of
developed plots/flats and this is closely monitored along with regular
follow up and monitoring of the process of land acquisition, its
planning and development.
4.9 In a press report in ‘The Hindu’ dated 30 March, 2005, it had
also been indicated that the Delhi Development Authority Budget for
2005-2006 has laid a lot of emphasis on housing and a sum of Rs.466.42
crore has been earmarked for the purpose. Also, during the coming
financial year, DDA plans to clear its entire backlog of housing
applications by allotting nearly 14,000 flats. Pointing out that at the
beginning of this financial year, 23,016 houses were under construction,
DDA said around 9,900 houses have been completed or are nearing

38
completion. Further, 3,356 houses have been approved for construction
and with this the entire backlog of houses is expected to be covered
by December 2005. At a press conference, the Principal Commissioner
informed that this would cover about 8,000 applicants of NPRS 1979
schemes, 3,000-odd applicants of Ambedkar Awas Yojana 1989 and
about 2,500 applicants of Janata Housing 1996. Besides, DDA has also
come up with a major plan to clear the registrants of the Rohini 1981
scheme and the DDA had acquired 3,000 acres of land for Phase IV
and V of Rohini through which the 24,000 applicants of the 1981
scheme would be allotted plots.
4.10 The Committee, thereafter, took the oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development at their sitting
held on 30
th June, 2005. During the course of oral evidence, the
Committee pointed out to the witnesses that in Ambedkar Awaas
Yojana, 1989 thousands of people had registered themselves and most
of them belonged to the EWS category but this Yojana has not
accomplished the targets. The Slum Department took money from
people, but had not handed over possession of the dwelling units to
the ‘Registrants’. To this, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development
assured the Committee that he would take up the matter with the
Commissioner concerned regarding Ambedkar Awas Yojana. He
added:—
“As far as DDA is concerned, the registration was done in 1979.
It is an open-ended scheme. May be it is hindsight, may be it is
afterthought, but the fact remains, it was not a very happily
planned scheme.”
4.11 At this point, the Vice-Chairman of DDA added :-
“It is called a New Pattern Registration Scheme. A subsidiary
scheme was launched when it ended. For example Ambedkar Awas
Yojana was launched in 1989, Janata Housing Registration Scheme
was launched in 1996. These three schemes together are considered
‘New Pattern Registration Scheme’. It’s backlog is about 14,440.
We have given assurance that we will clear this backlog by the
end of this year (i.e. 2005).”
Recommendation/Observation
4.12 The Committee strongly deprecates that a tangible number
of backlog of 8668 and 2,883 in respect of the New Pattern
Registration Scheme still exists with the DDA. Although more than
two and half decades have elapsed when the New Pattern
Registration Scheme (NPRS) was launched in 1979 but the bonafide

39
registrants of this scheme are still waiting for the allotments. The
Committee need hardly emphasise that as the New Pattern
Registration Scheme, 1979 (NPRS) had been open-ended, it was
imperative that such a scheme is cleared in time and with no backlog.
The Committee, therefore, express dissatisfaction that timely, honest
and pragmatic measures have not been taken by DDA in making
the NPR Scheme a model and a successful one.
4.13 As regards the Rohini Registration Scheme, 1981 the
Committee are further distressed to learn that a backlog of 27,043
still exists. The Committee need hardly emphasise that such a
situation hampers the credibility of DDA and sullies its public image.
4.14 The Committee are informed that an action plan has been
chalked out by DDA for liquidation of the backlog of flats by
December 2005 and of Plots by 2006. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that as assured to them, the backlog of the
New Pattern Registration Scheme, 1979 must be cleared expeditiously.
The Committee also recommend that the backlog in the Rohini
Registration Scheme, 1981 is cleared by taking concerted action for
acquisition of land by LAC of Government of Delhi in a time bound
manner. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.
B. Houses for economically weaker Section
4.15 As indicated in the 5
th Report of the Committee on Urban
Development 2004-2005 (14 th Lok Sabha), the Delhi Development
Authority has been giving emphasis on construction of houses catering
to the need of Economically Weaker Sections and Lower Income Group
categories. Out of the 2.90 lakh dwelling units constructed by it, 1.71
lakh dwelling units belong to Low Income Group and Economically
Weaker Sections. The houses constructed for LIG and EWS thus
constitute nearly 60% of the total units constructed by DDA. Further,
a total of 16,444 flats have been constructed under Janta Housing
Category and the 3,124 flats have been constructed under LIG Housing
Category (i.e. nearly 69%). In the beginning of the year 2004-2005,
23,106 flats were under construction, out of which 15,460 flats are
LIG/EWS. In addition, 8,106 new houses will be taken up for
construction before 31.3.2005, out of which 5,477 flats are of LIG/EWS
categories. DDA also provides for 25% quota under its schemes for
allotment of flats and shops for the SC/ST and 1% for physically
disabled persons.
4.16 The Committee took the oral evidence of certain selected
people, at their sitting held on 30
th May, 2005 in pursuance of their

40
written complaints. During the sitting, one of the witnesses representing
the EWS section pointed out the shortcomings of DDA in allotment of
plots to the JJ Clusters and EWS persons. He specifically indicated
that DDA did not follow the rules and regulations as mentioned in
the ‘Registration Application’ for land. Till date, whatever allotment
have been made to the EWS section or JJ Cluster, the Identity Cards
given by Delhi Government or Ration Cards are identified by DDA
but no ‘Affidavit’ is taken by DDA. They do not have an effective
method of checking to obviate operations by the land mafias involved
in lands acquired by DDA.
4.17 The Committee during their visit to Mayur Vihar on 27
th
January, 2005 had the opportunity to even see the Private Property
Dealers shops opened-up in DDA constructed dwelling units. They
observed that most of the actual allottees of the units resell their
dwelling units through the private dealers and the needy people i.e.
the EWS persons are not benefitted.
4.18 The Committee, thereafter, took oral evidence of the officials
of the Ministry of Urban Development and DDA on 30
th June 2005.
The Committee enquired whether the benefits of ‘housing’ were flowing
to the targetted EWS people. To this, Vice-Chairman of DDA
submitted:-
“Let me just mention for the kind information of the Committee
that even in the Master Plan we have said that 50 per cent plus
accommodation will have to come in the category of two-rooms
and below. When we are referring to EWS, in this Master Plan we
have tried to make a distinction in order to sharpen focus. Hitherto
we would talk of EWS as economic weaker sections. So, it can
very conveniently be stated that LIG is also economically weaker
section, one-room is also economically weaker section, and two-
room is also economically weaker section. Now we have tried to
distinguish, among the urban poor, as to who is economically
weaker section. This 50 per cent that I am saying relates to this.”
He further added “That the whole idea is to concentrate on
Economically Weaker Section Housing which is a very specific
category so that we cannot mix it up with LIG and other things.”
4.19 During the course of oral evidence, Secretary, Ministry of
Urban Development submitted as under:-
“At the policy level, I can only say that the master plan has so far
only been talking in terms of percentages, namely, such and such

41
a percentage must be provide in the overall framework of the
plan. I would like to mention here that we are now making it
mandatory that the Occupancy Certificate will not be given to any
cluster of housing before the prescribed number of housing – for
the EWS in that cluster—has not been completed. In the case of
housing—whether it is cooperative group housing societies or
private builder—the occupation of other will be permitted only
after EWS has been made and handed over to DDA. In case of
DDA, of course, they will have to put it within the cluster. We
are not leaving in vague, namely, in the whole of Delhi it can be
put anywhere. It should be in the neighbourhood, and such and
such a facility for EWS has to be provided there. It is a class
difference that we are making in the next plan. As a matter of fact
we are not waiting for the next plan, and this is going to be
implemented with immediate effect.”
He further added that “They are taking precautions that EWS
housing do not change hands and they are not passed hands to
other. As such these tenements will be given on licence basis and
not on lease basis hence any change would ipso facto imply
cancellation.”
4.20 In a press report in ‘The Hindu’ dated 30
th March, 2005, it
has also been indicated that for DDA priority would be housing for
the ‘Economical Weaker Sections’ (EWS).
4.21 In reply to Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No.1889 dated
15
th March 2005 the Minister of Urban Development informed that
0.60 lakh out of 0.85 lakh dwelling units are to be allotted under
Rohini Residential Scheme, 1981 for economically weaker sections and
in the draft Master Plan 2021, 50-55% of the housing has been
recommended for economically weaker sections in the form of dwelling
units of two rooms and below.
Recommendation/Observation
4.22 The Committee observe that a vast number of marginalized
poor in the urban centers, particularly in the metropolitan cities live
without shelter, facilities and amenities for bare existence, deprived
of basic needs and means of livelihood. Such marginalized people
could be found either in slums or in other illegal and unauthorized
habitations with no semblance of civic amenities. They are mainly
unorganized daily wage earners, construction workers, vendors and
hawkers, rickshaw and cart-pullers, porters and loaders, street and
working children or simply the vagrants and homeless. The

42
Committee also note that the Delhi Master Plan defines ‘shelter’ as
an essential need of a family, including components like water,
electricity, waste disposal, education, health, recreational and other
facilities’. It also mentions about vendors and hawkers, reported to
be 200,000 in Delhi. The Committee are, therefore, of the firm view
that ‘Housing’ for the EWS including the JJ clusters should be one
of the primary concerns of DDA. The Committee recommend that
clearcut and specific planned measures be taken by DDA by making
suitable provisions in MPD – 2021 for providing dwelling units at
an affordable price to the actual EWS and JJ cluster population in
the DDA housing Scheme.
4.23 The Committee note that in the draft Master Plan 2021;
50-55% dwelling units have been proposed for Economically Weaker
Sections. They also note that in the Rohini Residential Scheme 0.60
lakh dwelling units are to be allotted to Economically Weaker
Sections. While appreciating the steps taken to provide houses to
the EW Sections of population in Delhi by the Government, the
Committee recommend that proper scrutiny is carried out by DDA
in coordination with the State level authorities to identify the genuine
EWS beneficiaries under the Residential schemes of DDA. The
Committee recommend that proper measures be taken to ensure that
only the actual EWS beneficiary occupies such dwelling units. They
also recommend that DDA should enhance their vigilance and
monitoring system so that dwelling units allotted to identified EWS
persons are not sold/re-sold through property dealers. During the
course of oral evidence Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development
informed that such allotments may be made on license basis and
not on lease basis. The Committee, therefore, desire that steps be
taken so as to give dwelling units to EWS people on licence basis
in ‘Pilot Project’ and thereby applied uniformly to the Housing
Schemes, appropriately. The Committee recommend that community
based structures and cooperative bodies/NGOs be involved in the
allotment of dwelling units to the EWS people who will ensure that
land/flats earmarked for poor population is utilized by them. Direct
allotment of houses to EWS should be avoided and there should be
a mandatory condition that resale of such flats shall not be allowed.
C. Problem of slums in Delhi
4.24 According to Economic Survey of Delhi, 2003-2004 because
of the lack of adequate developed land at affordable prices to different
categories of residents, various types of unplanned settlements have
come up in Delhi. As such, following types of settlements have come

43
up in Delhi with distinctive features of each type in terms of level of
civic amenities and the status of residents.
Sl. No. Type of Settlement Estimated % of
population Population
in lakh in
2000
1. JJ Clusters 20.72 14.8
2. Slum Designated Areas 26.64 19.1
3. Unauthorised Colonies 7.40 5.3
4. JJ Resettlement Colonies 17.76 12.7
5. Rural Villages 7.40 5.3
6. Regularised Unauthorised Colonies 17.76 12.7
7. Urban Villages 8.88 6.4
8. Planned Colonies 33.08 23.7
Total 139.64 100.00
Source : DUEIIP-2021
4.25 The above stated Economic Survey depicts that the scheme
for resettlement of JJ Cluster households was started in 1961 in Delhi.
The commencement of the scheme was made with the allotment of
two room tenements to 3560 JJ Cluster households. Subsequently, 80
sq. yard plots were allotted to JJ Cluster households for resettlement.
The size of the plot was reduced to 40 sq. metre and further reduced
to 25 sq. metre. During 1975-77 a massive programme for resettlement
of about 1.97 lakh JJ Cluster households was undertaken by DDA
with the development of 26 new JJ Resettlement Colonies. A plan
scheme was initiated in 1979-80 to provide and improve basic civic
amenities in all these 44 Resettlement Colonies in which about 2.4
lakh JJ Cluster households were resettled. These JJ Resettlement
Colonies were transferred from DDA to MCD in 1988-89 with the
assurance that Government of Delhi will provide maintenance
expenditure to MCD under non-plan. Since 1979-80 upto March, 2004,
an amount of Rs.510.17 crore (plan funds released) under plan and an
amount of Rs.637.34 crore under non-plan for maintenance has been
released by Delhi Government.
4.26 In reply to Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No. 3012 dated
22 March 2005, the Minister of Urban Development stated that there

44
are 1080 Jhuggi Clusters existing on the government/semi government
lands scattered all over Delhi. It has also been decided to explore
possibilities of relocating slum dwellers in multi storeyed tenements
and DDA has been asked to prepare models for such relocations.
4.27 Further, in reply to a Lok Sabha Unstarred Question
No. 3013 dated 22 March 2005, it has been stated that MPD–2021
prepared by DDA envisages amelioration of existing slums and Jhuggi
Clusters through a judicious mix of relocation and in situ development.
4.28 As per Planning Commission about 174 hectors, against about
2000 hectors for EWS plots had been set aside in MPD-2001 and had
been invested in the solution for the slum problem. The Census 2001
shows slum population consistent with backlog on MPD-2001 EWS
targets.
4.29 In response to the ‘Press Communique’ of the Committee
certain representatives highlighted that Resettlement Scheme; are grossly
sub-standard, with facilities and plot sizes short of minimum norms,
densities that amount to crowding, locations that are remote and
segregated.
4.30 During the course of oral evidence, Vice Chairman DDA,
submitted as under:-
“We are thinking of in situ  relocation because earlier on when you
were looking at plotted development of 12.5 sq. m. and 18 sq. m.
Plots, the density that we were being able to achieve amounted to
a gross under-utilisation of the potential of the land. Now in this
Master Plan 2021, we have provided for density norms which
would vary according to the plinth area of the type of
accommodation that you are going to have. In Mumbai, for slum
programme, they work on a density of 500-600 DUs per hectare.
We are also looking at working on 500-600 DUs per hectare. If
five hectares of my land is presently occupied by 1,000 people, I
would be able to settle many more people on that and I would be
able to secure land which I can utilise for a development which
will partly help me to meet the costs of this. That is the kind of
direction that we are trying to move in. It will obviously take
some time to ground a large programme of, say, 10,000 to 20,000
constructions. The Courts are also seized of it and we are
requesting the courts to give us time because we are trying to
work on a planned basis to do away with some of the problems
which are being faced.”

45
Recommendation/Observation
4.31 The Committee are informed that the MPD-1962 required
EWS housing to be integrated into all residential development and
MPD-2001 explicates provisions for integration (25% EWS plots and
20% LIG units in every residential area for 100,000 persons) and
minimum standards (25 sq. m. Plot, etc.). The Committee also note
that DDA in their Master Plan 2021 envisage amelioration of existing
Jhuggi Clusters through a judicious mix of relocation and in situ
development. They also note that a large number of flats have been
constructed/being constructed for Economically Weaker Sections by
DDA. The Committee recommend that proper measures be taken to
ensure that the occupancy certificates are given to any cluster of
housing only with the prescribed number of dwelling units for the
EWS persons. The Committee, also, recommend that earnest efforts
be made by DDA for constructing EWS dwelling units in the new
housing colonies so that accumulation of new slums/clusters is
discouraged to a great extent. The Committee, would like to be
apprised of the progress in the matter in due course.
4.32 The Committee recommend that annual targets may be fixed
for providing housing/dwelling units to the JJ clusters in line with
the slum population so that slum dwellers are accommodated in
lands/units developed by DDA. The Committee also desire that the
dwelling units developed to remove slum clusters are planned and
allotted to JJ clusters in a phased manner. Further, it would be
appropriate if the slum dwellers could be suitably relocated in
multistoreyed tenements on DDA lands.
4.33 The Committee note with concern that in many
‘Resettlement Colonies’ for the slum dwellers, the dwelling units
constructed are grossly sub-standard and these units appear to be in
a dilapidated condition. This is because the material used is sub-
standard and there is hardly any quality control. The Committee
would like to know, as to why it is so and what remedial steps are
proposed to repair these houses. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that thorough checks be carried out at construction stage
itself. The inspection team should see to it that contractors assigned
the job are adhering to the requisite standards. This is extremely
desirable so as to ensure that the dwelling units for relocating the
JJ clusters are of firm and livable standards.

46
D. Lack of Basic Amenities in DDA Flats/Colonies
4.34 Section 6 of Delhi Development Act, 1957 state that the objects
of the Authority shall be to promote and secure the development of
Delhi according to plan and for that purpose the Authority shall have
the power to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of land and other
property, to carry out building, engineering, mining and other
operations, to execute works in connection with supply of water and
electricity, disposal of sewage and other services, and amenities and
generally to do anything necessary or expedient for purpose of such
development and for purposes incidental thereto.
4.35 Location-wise details of dwelling units not allotted due to
electricity and absence of water supply as furnished by the Ministry
to then Committee on Urban and Rural Development (1999-2000) as
on 3
rd quarter of the year 1999 is given below:—
Not allotted due absence of Electricity
Sl.No. Location SFS MIG LIG Janata Total
1. Dwaraka 1167 1694 2560 272 5693
2. Rohini Phase-III - 946 2654 - 3600
3. Narela - - - 792 792
4. Shalimar Bagh,
Plot A, Blk D.
Phase-I 200 - - - 200
5. 748, Janata Houses
at Shivaji Enclave - - - 340 340
Total  10625
Not allocated due to absence of Water Supply
1. Narela 140 1984 1652 1732 5508
4.36 In regard to the measures for provision of water and power
in Dwarka flats of DDA, the ‘Press Information Bureau’ had published
that DDA is taking steps for provision of water and power in its
Dwarka flats in South–West Delhi, where 15,743 flats are lying vacant
for want of power and water. Regular coordination meetings are being
held at various levels with all concerned for provision of basic amenities
in these flats. Delhi Jal Board is pursuing supply of raw waters from
neighbouring States. Meanwhile, interim arrangements have been made
through tube wells for water supply. As for supply of power, there
have been slippage’s in the targets by erstwhile Delhi Vidyut Board

47
due to constraints of shortage of power, non-clearance of the line routes,
non-establishment of sub-stations due to site not being clear, contractual
problem and technical material shortage. In Dwarka, water services
are to be provided by Delhi Jal Board and electricity by erstwhile
Delhi Yidyut Board.
4.37 In regard to the provision for basic amenities in DDA
constructed flats however, few representations had been received by
the Committee regarding insufficient water supply in Dwarka Area of
Delhi. The erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural Development
2004 during their visit to Dwarka on 28.10.2004 were informed by the
residents about the acute water shortage in the area. Moreover the
ground water there was saline also.
4.38 During the course of oral evidence of the representatives of
DDA held on 20 June 2005, the Committee enquired about the
corrective action taken in lack of water supply specially in Sector 1 of
Dwarka. To this, Vice-Chairman, DDA stated that:—
“This matter has been brought to my notice. I have told our
Engineer Member to look into this matter. When we do planning,
we take into account all these things. We take water from Delhi
Jal Board. We do not take into account underground water for
planning things. In the case of Dwarka, there is a lot of problem.
With the help of the Central Ground Water Board, we have seen
which areas we can drill the tube wells where the salinity is either
not there or less. We have found out near Najafgarh the salinity
is very less. We have planned to drill about 30 tube wells of
which about 15 are in progress. So, we expect about 1 MGD water
will be available from these tube wells to augment the water
supply. What we are trying to do is, wherever the water supply
is short, for example in Dwarka now the Delhi Jal Board is
supplying water to only one command tank. For the entire area
they are supplying water only at one place from where we are
boosting it. The area which is at tail end, availability is very less.
The Government of India has gone ahead with rain water
harvesting. In Dwarka about 72 structures have been made. Another
73 structures are to be made for rain water harvesting. It will be
done over a period of time. We have started it only last year.
Tube wells are only for augmentation and we do not take them
into account while planning. We just cannot do anything about
salinity. In Dwarka itself, certain tube wells are giving absolutely
good water but some tube wells the water is fit for all other
things except drinking. We have consulted the Central Groundwater
Board for salinity. Certain strata which are shallow are saline. We

48
have put up Reverse Osmosis (RO) plants at certain places. They
produce water at about 3000 litre per hour. At some locations, we
have provided these plants to treat the water but that water is
available only for drinking purposes. Almost 50 per cent of the
water goes waste. Therefore, wherever RO plant is there, water is
used only for drinking purposes, that too at the ground level.”
4.39 Regarding, other areas of Delhi based on complaints received
from public, the Committee on Urban Development (2004-2005) paid
a visit to Dilshad Garden and Indraprastha Society (IPEX) on 27
January 2005. During these visits, the Committee were informed by
local residents about acute water problem in the Dilshad Garden and
lack of ‘Sewerage Tank.’
4.40 They were also informed by the Secretary of the RWA of the
colony that an open Air Theatre was inaugurated about two years
back, but due to lack of electric connection and other infrastructure, it
cannot be used.
Recommendation/Observation
4.41 The Committee are concerned to note that upto the end of
3
rd quarter of the year 1999, 10625 houses could not be allotted due
to absence of electricity and 5508 houses could not be allotted due
to absence of water supply. The Committee are of the view that
before construction of houses is taken up, DDA should satisfy itself
about the availability of water and power as per requirement. The
Committee would like to know whether proper assessment of the
aforesaid requirements were done before the construction was taken
up. The Committee recommend that sincere efforts be made by DDA,
DJB and the Electricity authorities to take corrective action,
expeditiously, so that the bonafide owners of these flats can be
allotted the dwelling units. The Committee may be apprised about
the action taken in the matter.
4.42 The Committee are also of the firm view that before
allotting a flat, DDA should ensure that all the basic facilities such
as water, sewage and electricity connections etc. have been provided
in the flats and for this purpose, they should take up the matter
with the concerned agencies viz. Delhi Jal Board and private
electricity companies. The Committee recommend that DDA should
open up proper service counters in the residential complexes itself
so that the allottees don’t have to run from pillar to post for getting
such connections.
4.43 As regards the water supply problem in Dwarka Area, the
Committee urge that suitable measures be taken to distribute water
supply equitably in the area with the help of DJB so that occupants
of DDA flats do not suffer due to lack of water supply.

49
4.44 As regards, the Dilshad Garden area of Delhi, the
Committee are perturbed to learn about the poor standard of
maintenance of sewerage tanks and the inadequacy of sewage system.
The Committee urge that corrective measures be taken in this regard,
expeditiously.
E. Misuse of DDA Flats and unauthorised construction
4.45 According to the information obtained from DDA, the
Ministry of Urban Development have allowed certain addition(s)/
alteration(s) in DDA flats. These are applicable to all flats built and
allotted by DDA irrespective of whether these are located in notified
and denotified areas. The addition/alteration(s) allowed are categorized
in three categories:
• Condonable: These are minor additions/alteration(s)which
do not require structural changes and can be carried out by
the owner(s) without any prior intimation/permission of
DDA/MCD.
• Permitted with intimation/permission: These addition(s)/
alteration(s) are of major nature which may require structural
changes, changes in the service lines and additional
coverage.
• Additional coverage permitted with prior permission.
4.46 The details of all the categories of addition/alterations which
have been approved by Ministry of Urban Development & Poverty
Alleviation by various orders are given below:
CONDONABLE ITEMS:
•T o convert existing barsati into room provided the wall is
made of only 115 mm thick.
• Grills and glazing in verandah with proper fixing
arrangement.
• Raising height of front and rear courtyard wall upto 7 ’
height by putting up jali/fencing.
•P roviding door in courtyard wherever not provided.
•P roviding sunshades on doors and windows wherever not
provided with proper fixing arrangements.
• Closing the door.

50
• If the bathroom or WC are not having roof, these may be
treated as open urinals and allowed 8’. Raising the wall of
balcony/terrace parapet with grill or glazing upto 5' height.
• Construction of open staircase (cat ladder) where no staircase
has been provided for approach to the terrace.
•T o provide additional PVC water tank at ground floor area
without disturbing the common passage.
•T o provide an additional PVC water tank in the scooter/car
garrage at the surface level.
•T o provide loft/shelf in the rooms without change in the
walls.
•T o change the flooring with water proofing treatment.
•T o remove half (4 1/2) brick wall.
•T o make a ramp at front gate without disturbing the
common passage/storm water drain.
•T o provide sunshades or the outer windows upto 2' wide
projection.
•T o provide false ceiling in rooms.
•T o make an opening of maximum size of 2’6"x1’9" for
exhaust fan or air-conditioner in existing walls.
• Fixing of door in back and front courtyard.
• Converting of window into Almirah subject to availability
of light and ventilation as per building byelaws provided
that no structural elements are disturbed and there is no
projection extending beyond the external wall.
• Shifting of water storage tank/raising of parapet wall upto
5' height and putting additional water storage tank.
Wherever the existing water storage tank capacity is less
than 500 ltrs in a flat, a 500 ltrs tank can either replace the
existing water storage tank or if possible the additional tank
can be added so as to make the total storage capacity upto
550 ltrs. However, such replacement/provision of additional
tank will be done only on the locations specified for such
tanks and the supporting beams will be required to be
strengthened suitably. Parapet wall around terrace can be
increased to a height of 5'.

51
• To shift the front glazing, rooms/windows upto existing
chajja.
ADDITION/ALTERATION(S) PERMITTED WITH PRIOR
INTIMATION/ PERMISSION:
4.47 Following addition(s)/alteration(s) can be carried out with
prior intimation/ permission of the concerned agency  i.e. DDA/MCD
as per the prescribed procedure:
• Interchange the position of kitchen, bathroom & WC with
proper connections subject to structure safety. To carryout
this interchange, all the allottees of one vertical stack will
have to apply jointly to the concerned agency.
• Construction of bath room and WC in the rear courtyard.
• Covering of open terrace with sloping roofs upto 9' height
with light weight material e.g. fibre glass/AC sheets/GI
sheets with pipes and standard angle iron section etc. and
enclosing with glazing.
• Removal of original structure and reconstruction with due
permission in the case of single storeyed built up flats only
subject to the satisfaction of building bye-laws and prior
approval of the local authority.
ADDITIONAL COVERAGE PERMITTED WITH PRIOR PERMISSION:
• Covering of courtyard and floor level terraces is allowed
subject to fulfillment of building byelaws and structural
safety. In three or four storeyed flats the owners at upper
floor shall have the right to cover the area available as a
result of coverage of courtyard /terrace of floor below. In
such cases the residents of DDA flats in a vertical stack
served by the same staircase should give their consent and
jointly apply for permission.
• In two storeyed flats the allottee at first floor will have no
right of construction above the courtyard built by ground
floor allottee. The upper floor allottee of two storeyed flat
can use the roof terrace for extra coverage as permissible.
•A  barsati on the roof terrace of the top floor in addition to
mumty is allowed. This barsati should preferably be
adjoining to the mumty and equivalent to the size of the
room below so that construction of wall over is ensured at

52
terrace level. This will be subject to the provision of access
to the residents of the block for maintenance of water tank,
plumbing system, fixing of TV/Cable antennas etc.
4.48 According to DDA, all the addition/alteration(s) and
additional coverage will be governed by following five basic principals
as follows:—
• There is no encroachment on the public land.
• Structural stability of the building is ensured.
• Light and ventilation of the habitable rooms is ensured as
per the building byelaws.
• There is no infringement of other’s rights.
• The service elements such as manhole, rainwater fittings,
sanitary fittings etc. are not disturbed and remain exposed
for periodical inspection and maintenance.
4.49 Further, it has been gathered by the Committee that the
owner(s) will be allowed to cover additional space with prior
permission of the concerned agency i.e. DDA/MCD as per the
prescribed procedure. The existing additional covered area and
addition(s)/alteration(s) can also be get regularized by the owner(s) of
DDA flats if the same are within the prescribed norms following the
same procedure.
4.50 The Committee have received several representations
regarding unauthorised construction and misuse of DDA Flats. Several
news-items have appeared in print media in this regard.
4.51 When asked about the corrective measures taken to obviate
misuse of DDA flats, the Ministry in their written reply stated as
under:—
“DDA are deciding the cases of misuse in the residential properties
as per policy. DDA has also provided that conversion of the
property will be allowed on payment of misuse charges for use
violation by the allottee and this is within the Govt.’s policy issued
from time to time. As such there is no violation of Ministry’s
orders/instructions. Rather DDA is recovering the misuse charges
upto date of filing the complete application in all respect for
conversion from lease hold to free hold even when the misuse is
still continuing in the premises”.

53
4.52 When asked whether such a policy, apparently, legalizes
violation by allottees thereby causing discomfort to others, the Ministry
in their reply stated as under:—
“No, sir, the policy does not legalizes such misuse. In fact, it
imposes a deterrent financial penalty for such misuse by allottees
without in any way legalizing such violations. The penal action
under the DD Act (in the form of prosecution under Section 29(2)
of the DD Act) as well as under the enactment of local bodies, is
specifically ensured on a parallel basis while levying such misuse
charges.”
4.53 When asked to elaborate on the mechanism adopted by DDA
to check unauthorized construction, the DDA in their written reply
stated as under:—
“The Enforcement Branch takes action for unauthorised/ additions/
encroachment on receipt of information from concerned Engineering
Zone, through complaints and inspections. The responsibility for
these violations rests with the concerned Zonal Engineer and JE.
On receipt of complaint/information, the action against the same
is taken through issue of show cause notices, demolition notices
under the relevant provisions of law/rules. No Joint team has
been constituted since local bodies take action in their respective
jurisdictional areas.”
4.54 During the course of oral evidence of the representatives of
DDA, MCD and RCS held on 20
th June, 2005; the Vice Chairman,
DDA stated as under:—
“If a person is doing something which is within the list of
condonable items, then there is no problem. What is happening in
a number of cases is that the structural wall has been removed or
an extension has been made on the public land outside, or
somebody made some structure on the terrace, etc. I am just giving
examples. For all practical purposes, it is extension of house. You
have the terrace rights, but the land has not been allotted to you
to build two rooms there. They are not in the list of condonable
items and so, we are constrained to take action.”
4.55 The Committee enquired as to whether timely action is taken
to seal the unauthorised development activities the moment these are
initiated in DDA areas/ flats as per the governing law i.e. Delhi
Development Act, 1957. To this, the Vice-Chairman of DDA replied
that they did not have staff to deal in this direction. Their staff was
primarily connected to development and construction.

54
4.56 He also remarked that :—
“I do not know how to monitor it. Even MCD cannot do it.”
4.57 At this point, MCD Commissioner, informed the Committee
that :—
“As far as unauthorised construction is concerned, certainly in most
cases in the walled City, particularly, they start construction on
Friday evening; Saturday and Sundays are holidays and by
Monday; the construction is over, within 48 hours, they finish it
and they are very efficient in that.”
4.58 Commissioner, MCD also stated that :—
“What we do is that we have now issued instructions; wherever
there is gross violation of the Master Plan, we should immediately
take demolition action. If a person in a DDA flat has extended a
balcony, then we get into a problem. There are 10 lakh houses in
Delhi. By the time one complains and by the time we hire and the
person goes, it takes a lot of time. Particularly, these are happening
in areas like Vasant Kunj and Vasant Vihar where plots are being
converted into flats. It is actually a process of re-development that
is taking place unfortunately. We have not been able to create an
institutional mechanism to be able to regulate it properly. For that
what we are doing now is that, having addressed all these issues,
we are, in the last 1
1/2 years working very closely with the DDA
to re-write our bye-laws for Delhi. These bye-laws were made in
1983 and are very old. Today, 1432 colonies are unauthorised. If
even today, the Government takes a position to regularise them, I
do not think, more than 20-30 per cent would come within the
framework of these bye-laws for regularisation and the rest will
continue to remain unauthorised. In order to address this whole
issue, we are re-writing the bye-laws; we have got a team. First of
July, we would have completed them; some amendments to the
Act are required which we will be doing.
One very important thing that we are doing this in the context of
new Master Plan. One of the problems is that we have a Master
Plan, but then how it is implemented at the local level is the
problem.”
4.59 The Commissioner, MCD also added that:
“As far as DDA flats are concerned, Vijay Kumar Malhotra Report
had allowed certain relaxations. They (DDA) are working on those

55
norms. In case of 45 Rehabilitation and Ministerial colonies
constructed after partition (partition of India); there is a problem
that as the families such as in Lajpat Nagar have extended they
have carried extensions in houses. We have decided to form a
Committee for this. Colony – by Colony, we are taking up re-
development potential for each of these colonies. This will come
under Local area plan. We have to consider the things in this
aspect. Firstly, that space will have to be given for fire as in few
cases fire brigades could not enter the premises as many people
had constructed contrivers. Secondly, the road width for letting in
the fire tenders and maintenance of such roads would have to be
taken, when we insert these provisions in bye-laws then they shall
be regulated.”
4.60 At this point Vice-Chairman DDA, stated that “We will review
the list of condonable items.”
Penalties imposed by DDA
4.61 Under section 29 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957
“Any person who whether at his own instance or at the instance
of any other person or any body (including a department of
Government) undertakes or carries out development of any land
in contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan or
without the permission, approval or sanction referred to in
section 12 or in contravention of any condition subject to which
such permission, approval or sanction has been granted, shall be
punishable:
(a) with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to three
years, if such development relates to utilising, selling or
otherwise dealing with any land with a view to the setting
up of a colony without a layout plan; and
(b) with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months,
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or
with both, in any case, other than those referred to in clause
(a).
(2) Any person who uses any land or building in contravention of
the provisions of section 14 or in contravention of any terms and
conditions prescribed by regulations under the provisos to that
section shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees [and in the case of a continuing offence, with

56
further fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees
for every day during which such offence continues after conviction
for the first commission of the offence].
(3) Any person who obstructs the entry of a person authorised
under section 28 to enter into or upon any land or building or
molests such person after such entry shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.”
4.62 In regard to the misuse charges/fine of Rs.5000/- imposed
by DDA on persons. Carrying out development of Land/DDA flats in
contravention of the Master Plan; the Secretary of Ministry of Urban
Development during the course of oral evidence held on 30
th June,
2005 stated that:—
“A similar provision has also been made in the Municipal byelaws
and NDMC laws because we follow uniform byelaws and the
enforcement is also similar. This is the only power for misuse
purposes that is available to the DDA. The quantum of fine
prescribed is too meagre in the present day context, particularly
since the malady of misuse is fairly intensive and that deterrence
does not exist.
We had carried out an exercise for enhancement of the punishment,
not only in terms of monetary value but also at least the
recommendation at our level, the level of administrative
functionaries at the bureaucratic level, was that we could even
think in terms of imprisonment if it goes beyond a particular period
of time or if the extent of misuse is much more than a certain
prescribed limits.
I am given to understand that the amendment to the Municipal
Building Byelaws is currently under the consideration of the Delhi
Legislature. So, once that happens, accordingly, we would also
like to fall in line with what is prescribed for the Delhi Municipal
Corporation and make an amendment to the DD Act. In its present
shape and form, of course, it is totally inadequate. We have to
have a deterrent effect. Otherwise, the very purpose of even
mention of misuse as an offence loses its significance. Section 14
(Delhi Development Act, 1957) loses its relevance if the punishment
is not deterrent enough. That is the point I am trying to make.”

57
Recommendation/Observation
4.63 The Committee are informed that DDA publicised a list of
‘Condonable Items’ in connection with alteration/addition in DDA
Flats. The Committee however express their concern about the
inconveniences, if any, caused to co-residents/neighbours where
additions/alterations have been carried out in DDA flats by occupants.
During the course of oral evidence the Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Development has stated that the list of ‘Condonable Items’ would
be expanded and revised. The Committee, recommend that the list
of ‘condonable items’ be revised by an ‘expert body’ in a scientific
and technical manner. The Committee are of the firm view that
while checking the list of ‘condonable items’, adequate steps be
taken to ensure proper width of service lanes; sun-light; ventilation
and safety requirements of the colony. The Committee recommend
that particular attention be given towards ‘fire safety’ and rescue
operations in event of fire in DDA colonies. The Committee would
like to be apprised about the action taken in this regard in due
course.
4.64 The Committee are of the view that after the flats have
been constructed, scope for addition/alterations should be minimal
as it causes inconvenience to the co-residents/neighbours and opens
up scope for misuse.
4.65 As regards levy of misuse charges, the Committee note that
under Section 29(2) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, any person,
who uses any land or building in contravention of the provision of
Section 14 or regulations under the proviso to that Section shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
The Committee are, however, of the firm view that keeping in view
of the present day price indices, an amount of Rs. 5000/- as fine is
too meagre. The Committee, therefore, recommend carrying out
suitable amendments in the governing rules and regulations so as to
substantially raise the amount of fine limit imposed upon persons
for violation of the Delhi Master Plan norms.

58
CHAPTER V
TRANSFER OF FUNCTIONS OF DDA COLONY
TO MCD AND DJB
A. Coordination between DDA, MCD and Delhi Jal Board
5.1 Delhi Development Authority is a planning and development
agency. It develops an area, provide infrastructural facilities and build
houses etc. Under Section 6 of Delhi Development Act, 1957, it is
primarily responsible for the peripheral and internal development
within the areas declared as the Development Areas in Delhi. The
various services like water supply, sewerage and storm water drains
to be provided in the DDA colonies are designated by DDA’s Engineers
and submitted to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) for their
approval to ensure that the same fits in the overall system. The
construction of water supply pipes, sewerage tanks and drains are
executed by DDA as per approved designs.
5.2 According to the provisions contained in Section 36 of the DD
Act, where any area has been developed by the Authority (DDA), the
Authority may require the local authority within whose local limits
the areas so developed is situated, to assume responsibility for the
maintenance of the amenities, which have been provided in the area
by the Authority. For the provision of the amenities, which have not
been provided by the Authority, but which in its opinion should be
provided in the area, the terms and conditions agreed upon between
the Authority and the local authority would be the basis of transfer of
the developed area to the local authority by DDA.
5.3 After developing and completing constructions, DDA transfers
the functions of maintenance of developed areas and giving of water
supply to MCD and Delhi Jal Board, respectively, as per governing
rules. MCD and DJB may be paid deficiency charges, in case, of any
deficiency of that particular service and only after getting deficiency
charges, the area is transferred to MCD/DJB completely or partly.
5.4 However, the Committee, during the course of their study
visits, and evidence tendered by experts, individuals and associations
on 30 May 2005, found that there were certain grey areas, which needed
to be looked into by the DDA as well as the Urban Local Bodies like
MCD and DJB for providing proper services of sewerage solid waste

59
management, water supply etc. to the residents of the DDA developed
areas in Delhi. During the course of the evidence, the representatives
of Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs) placed before the Committee
that after handing over areas to MCD, no adequate response had been
received from MCD. There were instances where both DDA and MCD
were not sure of their specific field of operations.
5.5 The Committee, thereafter undertook the oral evidence of the
representatives of DDA, MCD and RCS at their sitting held on
20
th June, 2005. During the evidence the Committee asked about the
views of Commissioner, MCD in regard to the role of MCD in
maintaining the DDA developed areas. To this, the Commissioner,
MCD replied that:
“By and large, all that I can say is that DDA takes up the
development of an area once it is declared as a development area.
Once it is fully developed and DDA feels that now maintenance
and management should be given to MCD, then they hand it over
to us part by part. There are five or six areas that we normally
take into consideration while taking over. They are roads, drains,
parks, electricity supply, and sanitation. As far as water supply
and sewerage are concerned, Delhi Jal Board takes it over. By and
large, of course, a majority of works which are civil in nature are
to be taken over by MCD.”
5.6 He added that MCD is currently in the process of taking over
almost 150 colonies from DDA over the past one or two years.
5.7 Regarding the deficiency charges paid by DDA to MCD at the
time of handing over their developed areas to MCD, Commissioner
MCD stated that:—
“There are different Departments, and we have a principle which
is called ‘calculating the deficiency’. The principle really is that if
there is a certain defect in the normal standard by which the
colony must be developed, we must take it over with costs other-
wise we would have to spend a lot of money from our own
resources which we normally do not have. So, we calculate the
deficiencies. The engineering department, horticulture department,
drainage department and sanitation department of the two agencies
sit down and work out the deficiencies. Sometimes there are
disputes in the way the deficiencies are to be calculated. So, there
is a delay in taking over the colony. That is one area.”

60
5.8 The Committee pointed out that the DDA Developed Areas
are at times taken over by MCD in a piece-meal manner as is the case
with Dwarka. In response, Commissioner, MCD stated that :—
“The other is that the works are handed over part by part, sector
by sector rather than fully. Now, for example, we have taken
sanitation works in Dwarka but still we have to take over the
parks, roads, horticulture and other things. When people find that
something has been taken over, they probably do not know the
intricacies of these problems and how the internal departments
function. So, they normally expect that once sanitation is taken
over, then they ask us, ‘why do not drains?’ So, the public has a
perception that everything has been taken over. But often it is not
the case.”
5.9 Regarding the transfer of services in the colonies, which have
been privately developed, the Commissioner, MCD stated that:—
“In some cases, the colonies have been privately developed. Where
the private colonizers have developed. there we have a problem
because the deficiency is that people do not want to pay because
the colony has not been maintained, the colonizer must have
developed the colony 15 to 20 years ago and he had gone away
from the scene. The people have been wanting that we should
take it over because once we have taken it over, then the entire
responsibility of investing in the colony’s maintenance comes on
the MCD. The principle is the same. Whether it is a private colony
or it is a DDA held colony, we normally take deficiency. Now, in
certain cases of private colonies, there is a long delay because of
the time delay in taking over the colony. There is a lot of discussion
that takes place with the colony people as to what can be done
within our normal development fund and what we cannot do
within our development. So, what we cannot do, we try and
segregate this out. What we cannot do within our development
fund, we ask the colony residents to collect and pay us.
5.10 On being pointed out as to whether the responsible
authorities/ULBs meet the need for fully developing the areas, the
Commissioner MCD indicated that:—
“Normally the decision is taken by the DDA and not by MCD as
they are Planning authority. The DDA decides when the colonies
are ready to be handed over we do not have much to say in the
matter. Once they issue an order saying that, MCD must take
over, then the whole process of calculating the deficiencies
(Deficiency Charges) starts.”

61
5.11 On being pointed out about the difference in calculating such
‘Deficiencies Charges’ if the ‘Developed Areas’ are taken over by MCD
only part by part; the Commissioner, MCD stated that:—
“That I agree. That is certainly a big issue. It is an administrative
problem because of the number of departments, which are involved.
They are vertical departments and they do not have integration
with each other. For example, the sanitation person will say, ‘I am
only dealing with sanitation and, therefore, I have nothing to do
with the roads people’. Similarly, the horticulture person is a
horticulturist and he cannot understand the language of the
engineer. So, he would normally look it, talk to his counterpart in
the horticulture department of the DDA. So, I agree. I think, this
part take over creates all the problems. We somehow have to
arrive at a holistic solution to the problem.”
5.12 At this point, the Vice-Chairman of DDA submitted as
follows:—
“Sir, that is precisely the efforts that is tried to be made. Of course,
there have been failures. We are now looking at this while issue
in a sense even historically because as was just mentioned, we
have more or less completed handing over of about 340 colonies
to the MCD which was a process which had been going on over
the last several years, and in we are now actively engaged in the
process of handing over around 142 colonies..”
5.13 He stated as follows:—
“The grey areas come about, broadly speaking, in three contexts.
One is that initially, under section 12 of the Delhi Development
Act, before, we develop any area, it is declared as a Development
Area. Declaration as a development area inter alia has an implication
that for purposes of the building control regulations and
development regulations, the DDA would be the local body
concerned and not the MCD. The second area, pertains to the
handing over of services to the MCD and the DJB as the case may
be. The grey areas that the people have been facing is in both
these contexts. We may have handed over the services of the
colony, i.e. the civic services, but the notification regarding de-
notification of that area under the DDA Act with reference to the
building control regulations may not have taken place. The third
element is about the transfer of services. Initially, there was only
MCD. Now, there are two agencies. For water supply, and sewage,
we have the DJB, and for the rest of the services, we have the
MCD.”

62
5.14 Further he stated that a large body of files and building
plans have to be send to MCD at the time of notification of the area.
5.15 When the Committee pointed out to the witness that certain
complaints had been received from people about unauthorized
construction at Nagin Lake Apartment, Paschim Vihar, New Delhi the
representatives of the DDA at the time of oral evidence expressed
their inability to do anything as the area was under the jurisdiction of
MCD.
5.16 In a subsequent written note, the DDA submitted as follows:—
“The matter has been re-examined and in view of the fact that the
process of transfer of services has not reached final conclusion
action against unauthorised construction and encroachment shall
be taken by DDA as well.”
B. Maintenance in Commercial Areas
5.17 DDA constructs and develops convenient and decentralised
commercial spaces and workplaces nearer to places of residence. It
has been informed that DDA has so far developed:—
•7  District Centers with spaces for shopping, commercial
offices, cinemas, hotels, guest houses, service industries, bus
terminals, telephone exchanges, post and telegraph offices
etc., each serving a population upto 10 lakh and above.
• 27 Community Centre with spaces for shopping, offices,
cinemas, hotels, service industries, post offices, dispensaries,
weekly markets, etc. catering to a population upto 5 lakh.
• 125 Convenient Shopping Centres with spaces for shopping,
informal shops, commercial offices, community halls and
libraries etc., catering to a population of about 50 thousand.
429 Local Shopping Centres with space for shopping (retail,
service, repair) and informal shopping serving a popualtion
upto 1 lakh.
5.18 Regarding the handing over of ‘Commercial areas and
shopping complexes to MCD for maintenance during the course of
oral evidence held on 20.6.2005 the Commissioner, MCD stated as
under:—
“Commercial complexes are slightly in differing footing than the
other colonies. As far as commercial complex is concerned, there

63
is a bit of a problem. If there is a commercial complex, then the
DDA has a right because they had spent all the money to develop
that entire colony – sewerage system, water supply and roads.
They claim and say that they have got a duty to recover all the
commercial value from that land. Plots and built shops are to be
auctioned. The problem really happens when the entire complex is
not ready for handing over. There are some plots which are still
not auctioned. Some shops which are not been developed. Only a
part of the commercial complex is fully developed. In such a
situation, it creates a problem. For example, there are a large
number of resettlement colonies where this resettlement have come
to us while the commercial areas are with the DDA. We have
recently initiated a discussion with the DDA. Since they are finding
it difficult to auction most of these areas because they are perhaps
more low income areas and the other reason is that probably they
are not able to extract the kind of value that they expect. We have
made a suggestion to them. They should hand-over to us. Then,
we will auction these properties and then whatever money we
get, we would then be able to do this. That process and discussion
is going on. But certainly the commercial complex is slightly on a
different footing than the others because of the nature of the
disposal of the commercial properties itself”.
5.19 With regard to the maintenance of Commercial Complexes
in I.P. Extension, East Delhi, the Committee during their visit at I.P.
Extension at East Delhi had received some complaints regarding
shopping complex built by DDA. The Committee were informed that
garbage disposal, cleanliness and sanitation are a problem there. MCD
says since the complex is with the DDA, it is not their business to
take care of those aspects. In its written reply, MCD has sated that
they have nothing to do with it since it is still with the DDA.
5.20 When asked to comment over this, Commissioner, MCD
during the course of oral evidence stated as under:—
“As far as I.P. Extension is concerned, in the whole area, we have
taken over all the residential areas and started it. This is one of
the most successful areas. I would say that I.P. Extension is really
a marvel of how the residents and the colony associations have
done segregation of garbage. In fact, all Dhaloas have been removed
in I.P. Extension. They are not there anymore. But there is a
problem in the market because market complexes have not been
handed over to us till today. This is an issue, which we need to
discuss with DDA and try to resolve that. I can only say that we

64
will give an assurance that we will resolve this very fast. In the
other residential areas, there is absolutely no problem.”
Recommendation/Observation
5.21 The Committee are concerned to note that colonies
developed for residential purposes by DDA are being handed over
to MCD for maintenance in a piece-meal manner. In many areas as
for instance Dwarka, the Delhi Jal Board (DJB) has not taken over
the area for regular supply of water supply. The Committee are of
the firm view that areas developed and houses constructed by DDA
should be de-notified and handed over to MCD in one go rather
than taking up the process of transfer part by part. In regard to
calculation of deficiency charges at the time of transfer of DDA
developed areas to MCD, the Commissioner, MCD has conceded
during evidence that there is an administrative problem in the matter
in view of a number of departments involved. He has stated that
there are vertical departments and they do not have proper integration
with each other. The Committee recommend that concerted efforts
should be made in consultation with the senior officials of MCD
and DJB so that the basic civic amenities of water supply, electricity
etc., are provided in dwelling units before handing over the
possession to the allottees. The Committee also recommend that DDA
should intervene in rectifying the complaints of allottees on this
count.
5.22 The Committee note that payment of deficiency charges to
the local bodies and concerned authorities are made in a routine
manner. The Committee are of the firm view that if the DDA areas
are developed in a wholesome manner, the question of payment of
‘deficiency charges’ to the urban local bodies should not arise. The
Committee therefore, recommend that purposeful steps be taken by
DDA so as to obviate deficiencies in the developed areas and the
consequent payment of the ‘deficiency charges’. The Committee also
recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should devise
suitable mechanism to ensure proper integration and coordination
between DDA, MCD, DJB and local bodies.
5.23 The Committee desire that the much needed civic amenities
of sewerage, water supply, electricity, storm drains, garbage disposal
and proper maintenance to all the DDA developed colonies/areas
should be provided hassle-free and within a given time frame. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken in this
regard.

65
5.24 Regarding taking over of private colonies by MCD, the
Committee recommend that in such cases, onus of payment of
deficiency charges should be on the private builders and not on the
residents of that colony. It is expedient that MCD should take over
the private colonies at the earliest so that private builders do not
get away from payment of deficiency charges. They also recommend
that it should be made obligatory on the part of private builders to
develop the private colony at par with DDA colonies and then MCD
should suo-moto take over the colony from the ‘private players’ after
recovering deficiency charges. The Committee hope that Ministry of
Urban Development would help evolve such a mechanism under
intimation to the Committee.
5.25 The Committee note that Section 36 of the Delhi
Development Act, 1957 empowers DDA to require the local authority
to assume the responsibility for extension of the amenities on the
terms and conditions agreed to between DDA and the local authority.
The Committee are however informed that in case of ‘commercial
and shopping complexes’ in many cases, the DDA does not hand
over the maintenance to the local authority or MCD for years
together. The case of ‘commercial complexes’ at IP Extension is one
such glaring example. These complexes are in a dilapidated and
dirty condition as they are neither maintained by DDA nor by the
MCD. The Committee are of the view that since both DDA and
MCD are governmental agencies, they must join hands for the
welfare of the public at large. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that DDA should immediately hand over all the fully developed
‘commercial areas’ in Delhi including IP Extension to MCD who
should look after sewerage, cleanliness etc. of such areas. The
Committee may be apprised about the action taken in the matter.

66
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
A. Allotment of Land to Private Hospitals
6.1 DDA allots lands to Hospitals and Charitable Institutions in
accordance with Rules 5 and 20 of the Nazul Rules and provision of
Section 22 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957. A statement indicating
the land allotted to schools, Colleges, Dharmshala and Hospitals during
the last three years is given below:—
PURPOSE YEAR 2002 YEAR 2003 YEAR 2004
Schools 82 38 3
Colleges/Vocational/ 12 - -
Management/Higher
Institutes
Dharamshalas 3  - -
Hospitals 1  - -
Hospitals (allotted 2 5 2
through auction).
6.2 It is informed that these allotments to hospitals were made
at concessional premium at ground rent fixed by the Ministry of Urban
Development from time to time upto 1995-96. Subsequent to July, 2002,
such allotments were made by DDA at rates fixed by DDA in
consultation with the Ministry. These allotments are made subject to
the condition that the institution shall serve as a general public hospital
with at least 25% of total indoor beds reserved for free treatment to
indigent patients and that it would provide free treatment to 40%
patients in the outdoor departments. The Parliamentary Public Accounts
Committee (PAC) in their 12
th Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) had
indicated that the objective of providing free treatment to the poor
patients had not been achieved even after lapse of a period ranging
from 4 to over 30 years from the date of allotment of land.
6.3 Further, in reply to a Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No.745
dated 7 th March 2005, it has also been reported that some of the
hospital to whom the land was provided by L&DO and DDA with

67
the conditions of providing free beds for economically weaker sections
had not adhered to the said conditions. In reply to another Lok Sabha
Unstarred Question No.2241, a list of 10 hospitals has been furnished,
who were reported to be violating the terms and conditions of
allotment and suitable actions are being taken against such hospitals.
6.4 The following facts have also been furnished in reply to a
Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No.2757 dated April 18.4.2005:
“DDA had made allotment of land for hospitals in 50 cases and
as per terms and conditions DDA allows two years for construction
from the date of possession and thereafter three years without any
composition fee. After five years, DDA gives extension on case to
case basis, examining the merits of the case, after charging
composition fee.
Although the Audit Report of the CAG had mentioned 23 hospitals
which were yet to be constructed, Delhi Development Authority
had, in 2004, drawn up a list of only 19 hospitals which were yet
to establish hospital on the land allotted. Of these 19 hospitals, in
one case the possession is yet to be given, in one other case, lease
has been cancelled, 4 hospitals have subsequently been constructed,
2 others are still in the 5 years grace period and in one case, lease
is yet to be executed pending change of land use. In the other
cases, Delhi Development Authority has reported that it is taking
action as per lease terms and in accordance with its policy which
includes charging composition fee, or cancellation of lease
depending on the merits of the case.”
6.5 When enquired as to whether Banquet Halls, Hotels and
Commercial centres have been constructed on the land allotted for
Dharmashala, the Ministry in their reply have stated as under:—
“Delhi Development Authority (DDA) has reported that a case of
construction of a hotel/guest house on land meant for temple &
dharamshala came to notice in 2003. DDA cancelled the lease and
sealed the building and eviction proceedings were started. The
eviction proceedings have been stayed by Hon`ble High Court
and the building de-sealed. DDA has gone in appeal against the
order of High Court. Further DDA has also reported that allotment
in respect of two community hall sites that were being used as
commercial banquet halls have been cancelled.”

68
6.6 During the course of oral evidence before the Committee,
Vice-Chairman DDA submitted as under:—
“Actually, for a long time, there does not seem to have been any
specific kind of order on this issue. The result was that out
approximately 50 hospitals for which land had been allotted over
a period of time from the 1970s onwards, there were one or two
isolated allotments of the 1950s, conditions of free treatment or
subsidized treatment were there only in 23 cases.”
6.7 Regarding adhering to 25% norms to treat patient free in
hospitals, Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development added during the
course of oral evidence that there is a problem here because people
who go to get the treatment from hospitals are not always permanent
residents of Delhi, and leave behind old addresses. It is going to be
extremely difficult to verify the identity of those who have really
received treatment.
6.8 He added that there is a Committee now set up with effect
from the month of March as regards fixing responsibility arising out
of the PAC report, whose recommendations have come to us.
6.9 He further added that if such hospitals are exempted from
the obligation of free treatment then it will be simultaneously
accompanied by a health insurance scheme from the money received
from these hospitals management’s for BPL people of Delhi who
already have photo identify cards issued by Government of Delhi,
which would entitle BPL people for the treatment upto the expense of
Rs. 30,000/-.
Recommendation/Observation
6.10 The Committee express their distress over the fact that some
hospitals have violated the norms for free treatment of 25 percent
patients belonging to BPL categories. Moreover, there have been
instances where the acutal BPL categories of people were unable to
get their treatment done in such hospitals and others have taken the
benefit of the same by misrepresentation. The Committee, therefore,
firmly recommend that a mechanism to identify BPL category by
Government of NCT Delhi and issue of certificates to such people
alongwith their photo identity cards needs to be devised so that
genuine BPL persons are able to avail of medical facilities in
hospitals. It should be ensured that the hospitals strictly provide
free treatment to the stipulated percentage under BPL category. The
Committee should be kept informed of the steps taken in this regard
as also the punitive action taken/proposed for violation thereof.

69
6.11 The Committee note that in one case, the land earmarked
for Dharmashala was used for Banquet Hall. The Committee take a
serious view of it and would like that the matter be thoroughly
probed. Here, they would also like to recommend that misuse of
land should be considered a criminal offence and necessary
provisions in this regard need to be incorporated in the law.
B. Allotment of Land to Schools
6.12 As earlier mentioned, DDA provide land for construction of
Schools to Societies at concessional rate i.e. at a pre-determined rate,
but it has been found that the societies misuse the land use which
defeat the very purpose of primary education at a reasonable price to
the local residents. During the course of oral evidence, Vice Chairman,
DDA, submitted that once societies get the plots, they would seek
formal approval from the Government which is against the policy of
DDA. It has also been found that such schools become commercial
and cater to the needs of only rich and affluent depriving the poor
people to avail educational facilities for their children. The Secretary,
Ministry of Urban Development submitted before the Committee that
plot for primary education should only be allotted to MCD and this
matter is under the consideration of DDA.
Recommendation/Observation
6.13 The Committee note that it is the general tendency that
plots allotted to Societies for constructing primary schools are
misused by subsequent upgradation of schools thereby making them
costlier and beyond the reach of common people. The Committee
feel that such a tendency defeats the very purpose of allotment of
land for a charitable purpose viz. imparting of primary education.
The Committee feel that while Government is fully geared in ‘Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan’ (Universal education), such type of misuse would
be detrimental to the society and would lead to commercialisation
of education. They feel that such tendency should be curbed at the
earliest in consultation with Government of NCT Delhi. Here, they
concur with the views of the Ministry that land for construction of
primary schools should be allotted only to MCD, so that there
remains no scope for any misutilisation of the land. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that necessary steps in this regard be initiated
by the Ministry and the Committee be kept informed about the
action taken.
C. Cooperative Group Housing Society
6.14 As per Preliminary material, DDA allotted plot to the
cooperative house building societies for plotted developments. However

70
the same has been closed in 1972 due to the paucity of land. Thereafter
the plots are allotted to the cooperative group housing societies for
construction of flats on group housing pattern. The plots are allotted
to both categories on perpetual lease basis with certain terms and
conditions. Any violation of terms of lease will invite the cancellation
of lease and possession of the property thereafter vests with the lessor.
All the group housing societies have to construct the flats within the
prescribed period, otherwise a penalty in the form of composition
charges is levied. After the completion of the construction, the allotment
of specific flats is made after the receipt of the list of the members
duly approved by the Registrar, Cooperative societies, Govt. of Delhi
by holding a draw in which the officials from both the DDA and RCS
shall be present so as to bring the transparency in the draw.
6.15 DDA also has a Group Housing Society Cell. The following
item of work were done by Group Housing Society all during the
year 2003-2004:
1. Allotment of Plots 14
2. Amount Recovered as premium 29,03,36,150
3. Amount Recovered as Composition fee 42,69,587
4. Conversion Cases Finalized 2422
5. Possession letter 1
6. Lease Deeds 10
7. Mutation/Transfers 122
8. NOC for construction 2
9. Mortgage Permissions 70
10. Show Cause Notices —
11. Conveyance Deed Executed 2953
6.16 When asked regarding the action taken against such
cooperative housing societies whose office bearers have duped the
money of members of the society or did not complete the requisite
work, the DDA in their written reply stated as under:—
“The conduct of the cooperative society is governed by the Delhi
Cooperative Societies Act and the rules framed thereunder. As
such the Registrar Cooperative Societies, Govt. of Delhi has powers
to take action on the misconduct of such societies. However, the
DDA as a lessor will take action on violation of terms and

71
conditions of lease. The details of the defaulting societies who
have duped the money of their members and did not complete
the requisite work may be available with the Registrar Cooperative
Societies, Govt. of Delhi”.
6.17 In response to a Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No. 5635
dated 3 May, 2005, regarding the complaints of mismanagement and
misappropriation of societies and the number of cooperative societies
awaiting completion certificates for over 15 years and more, the
Government have stated as under:—
“The DDA is not directly connected with issues pertaining to the
management of Cooperative Group Housing Societies. Whenever
any complaint in respect of any issues pertaining to allotment of
flats etc. which relate to DDA is received, action is taken as per
the facts of each case. Wherever necessary, the Registrar
(Cooperative Societies), GNCTD is also consulted.
The DDA has reported that 21 Cooperative Group Housing
Societies (Chilla-4, Paschim Vihar-16 & Vikas Puri-1) in the
Development Areas of DDA are awaiting Completion Certificates
for 15 years or more due to incomplete development work, non-
completion of documents or unauthorized constructions etc.
Whenever complaints of unauthorized construction are received,
action is taken under the rules. In addition, Completion Certificate
has been rejected in the case of 9 Cooperative Group Housing
Societies. Further, 62 Cooperative Group Housing Societies have
not applied for Completion Certificate”.
6.18 It has also been mentioned in the aforesaid reply that
approximately 1900 acres of land has been allotted by DDA to 877
Cooperative Group Housing Societies, and around 1.16 lakh dwelling
unit, have been constructed by such societies.
6.19 During the course of oral evidence, the Registrar, Cooperative
Societies submitted that most of the Group Housing Societies have
flouted Rule 24(2) of Delhi Cooperative Societies Rule, 1973 or Section
92(7) of Cooperative Societies Act, 2003. The Rule 24(2) reads as under:—
“In case of vacancy in a housing society including group housing
society the same shall be filled by the committee by notifying it in
leading daily newspaper of Delhi in Hindi and English. In case
the number of applications are more than the notified vacancies
the membership shall be finalized through draw of a lot in the
presence of authorized representative of the Registrar”.

72
6.20 Section 92(7) reads as under:—
“It shall be the responsibility of the committee to ensure quality
and structure stability of the project and the availability of all
facilities including electricity, water, lifts, sewage, roads, mandatory
green and landscape, etc. before allotment”.
6.21 Office of Registrar Cooperative Societies also furnished the
various punitive measures against erring Cooperative Societies.
6.22 During the course of oral evidence, Vice Chairman, DDA
informed the Committee that they had found some discrepancies/
manipulation in respect of 135 societies which were sent to them by
RCS office and those were not allotted land. He further added as
under:—
“As regards this list of 135 societies that we are talking about, we
had received some complaints about some manipulations having
been made. We examined those and we found out that in the case
of a number of societies there was some truth in some of the
allegations. Therefore, we have requested the RCS to re-verify that,
not only the membership but also the linkages that there might be
between the managing societies of one society and another. It is
because we also found that there was the same management
committees in more than one societies. It was a clear indication of
the fact that the societies have changed hands. Therefore, with all
these stringent provisions, which they are making in the cooperative
rules and Acts, our role would then be to make allotments and
draw amongst the members only after the list of membership has
been properly verified by them. The other thing that we are trying
to do is completely at a different level. It is to see how the margin
of the gap between the market price and the land price at which
we are giving land to them is reduced. Once that is reduced then
the tendency to manipulate and buy and sell societies would also
reduce. That tendency is going to be more if the gap between the
market price and the rate at which they are getting the land is
very high.”
6.23 On being asked regarding the number of Cooperative Group
Housing Societies whose draw of lots are pending and period of their
waiting, the RCS office in their written reply stated as under:-
“There are 68 cases of Cooperative Group Housing Societies
pending in this office for clearance of membership for holding of
draw of lots by the DDA. Out of these 68 societies 25 are fresh

73
proposals wherein the conduct of draw of lots is to be done for
the first time by the DDA on the recommendation of the RCS
office. 43 societies have submitted their proposals for clearance of
only left out cases which are generally very few in number. In
these cases (28 societies) this department has already cleared the
list of most of the members and recommended the same to the
DDA for conduct of draw of lots”.
Recommendation/Observation
6.24 The Committee feel that even though the office of the
Registrar, Cooperative Societies does not come under the jurisdiction
and control of Ministry of Urban Development however, the
cooperative group housing being linked to housing sector, it is very
much related to the Ministry of Urban Development. They note that
in Delhi, allotment of land to Cooperative Group Housing Societies
is done by DDA. A large area of land i.e. approximately 1900 acres
of land has been allotted to 877 Housing Societies. The Committee,
therefore feel that DDA cannot wash off their hands if some misuse
or misappropriation in Cooperative Group Housing Societies takes
place. While admitting that Cooperative Group Housing Societies
are regulated by RCS office under Cooperative Societies Act and
Rules, the Committee feel that DDA has a major role to play and
to oversee that the land allotted to Cooperative Group Housing
Societies is actually utilised in the interest of society members, who
mainly consist of middle and service class people and who had
invested all their earnings and borrowings for getting a house of
their own. While appreciating the move taken by DDA and RCS to
ward-off any misappropriation and to ensure that Societies do not
become the fiefdom of a selected few, the Committee recommend
that interests of bulk of society members should not be neglected.
The Committee understand that management of Society should not
flout any of the provisions enshrined in Cooperative Societies Act
and Rules. At the same time, they recommend that RCS office should
not be too rigid in such matters and should keep in mind the
interests of genuine members. The Committee note that there are
several Societies, whose members are waiting for a long time for
their draw of lots, but due to the mistake of their management and
rigidity of RCS office, most of them are suffering. They, therefore,
recommend that an institutional mechanism should be devised which
is people’s friendly, less time consuming and at the same time
deterrent to law breakers.
6.25 The Committee also note that the Cooperative Group
Housing Societies while constructing the dwelling units do not

74
provide adequate space for housing the daily service providers to
the residents of such dwelling units. The Committee, therefore, feel
that at the planning stage itself, it should be kept in mind that
arrangements should exist for service providers such as dhobi, mali,
maidservant, safiwala etc. in these CGH Socieities. Possibility of
such an arrangement should be explored.
D. Conservation of Heritage
6.26 Since times immemorial, Delhi has been the epitome of a
rich heritage, being the domain of seven kingdoms, built and rebuilt
a number of time. Every kingdom, an inspired creation of an individual
dynasty, has left behind treasured remnants of the times, making it a
multi-faceted city with divergent citizens, ethos and cultures.
6.27 Many of the monuments or built heritage of the city are
protected by the Archaeological Survey of India and are all listed
monuments. There are a number of other historical landmarks, which
are relatively unknown, in spite of being attuned with the art and
culture of the times in which they were built. DDA, as part of its
endeavors to protect this built and unknown heritage, has instituted
an Urban Heritage Award known as DDA URBAN HERITAGE
AWARD in December, 1993.
6.28 To further safeguard the built and natural heritage of the
city via collaborative efforts, DDA constituted the Delhi Urban Heritage
Foundation in September, 1999. This foundation aims to frame and
implement policies for conservation of the built and natural heritage
in the capital city and promote conservation as integral to the city’s
development process. The foundation comprises Lt. Governor, Delhi
as Chairman, Vice-Chairman, DDA as Vice-Chairman, Chief Secretary,
NCTD, Finance Member, DDA, Engineer Member, DDA and
Commissioner (Plg.) DDA, as members, in addition to a maximum of
10 co-opted members. The Chief Architect, DDA is the Member-
Secretary of the foundation.
6.29 Since inception in September, 1999, the foundation has taken
up the following conservation projects:
1. Integrated Conservation and Urban Design Plan for
Sultangarhi Tomb & Precincts.
2. Cultural Resource Management Plan for Archaeological Park
at Mehrauli.
3. Restoration/Conservation of old St. Stephens College
Building at Kashmere Gate.

75
4. Restoration/Conservation of Anglo Arabic School at Ajmeri
Gate.
5. Landscape Conservation of Tomb at Lado Sarai.
6. Conservation of Satya Narayan Bhawan, Roshanara Road.
7. Revival of landscaped garden, Jharna.
8. Revitalization of old Choupal at Masudpur.
9. Development of Ashokan Rock Edict, East of Kailash.
10. Restoration/conservation of Vice Regal Lodge, Delhi
University.
11. Restoration of Indraprastha Hindu Girls Sr. Secondary School
behind Jama Masjid.
Role of INTACH in Conservation of Heritage
6.30 On being asked regarding the steps taken or proposed to be
taken by DDA in Collaboration with Indian National Trust for Art
and Cultural Heritage (INTACH) for the protection of natural heritage
viz. Water harvesting and protection of lakes, the DDA in their written
reply stated as under:—
“DDA is looking after with the green areas under its jurisdiction
and the water bodies/lakes in the green areas are all being
maintained. The areas where earlier historically lakes are existing
are also being planned and developed as Sunken Lawns even if
there is no water so that subsequently charged the ground water,
proper care is taken to protect these. INTACH has been involved
for their expertise for conservation of water in Hauz Khas lake
and in cleanliness of Sanjay lake in Trilok Puri. This has been
taken up by the concerned Chief Engineers.
INTACH is also doing studies on preservation & conservation of
monuments in Delhi. Their technical inputs are being utilized by
DDA in conservation the monuments within Mehrauli Complex.
The monuments are being preserved by the DDA in collaboration
with INTACH. Similarly one more monument (Gumti at Lado
Sarai) at Mehrauli has also been taken-up”.
6.31 As per the news-item captioned ‘Water Woe’s published in
Times of India dated July 10, 2005 there are 102 water bodies under
the jurisdiction of DDA, out of which 80 are dry and only 22 are wet.

76
The news-item also mentioned the clarification by Vice Chairman, DDA
which is as follows:—
“Many dried up and were replaced with other construction as it
was not possible to keep them wet. The city Master Plan caters to
the changed situation. We are trying to revive some of the dry
bodies while persevering the existing wet bodies.”
6.32 The Committee on Urban Development 2004-05 had heard
the news of Shri O.P. Jain, Convener, INTACH Delhi Chapter as an
expert. Shri Jain submitted his views before the Committee as under:—
“What we are suggesting is that DDA has done good work in
many ways, in the sense that lot of land has been saved because
of DDA’s intervention, and a lot of development schemes have
been made by DDA. But one thing on which we have reservation
about DDA’s role is that instead of developing a heritage city like
Delhi around the heritage, they have built it over the heritage.
With the result the heritage has been in danger for quite some
time. There are no specific rules, and no specific synerge between
various agencies, which are controlling Delhi. We feel that DDA
has functions like the owner of the land, but they do not function
as, what I should say, a development agency which has to see all
the aspects which I have mentioned, plus many other aspects which
are very crucial for a metropolitan city in this country”
6.33 He further added as under:—
“My contention is that for a city like Delhi, one kind of law does
not help in the sense that I am talking of special areas. So,
Shahjahanabad has to be treated as Shahajahanabad as an old city.
Lutyens Zone should be treated as Lutyens Zone and Mehrauli
Zone should be treated as Mehrauli Zone. The development plans
should not look like the demolition plans, but it should sink with
the existing historical city of this country, which is very crucial”.
I do not think, DDA has been very sensitive to the heritage aspect
of Delhi since its inception. In the course of the last five years of
our working together, and since DDA has established the Heritage
Foundation, there has been an awareness and an agreement on
the subject. On the heritage issue, I think DDA is aware of the
feelings of the citizens, but efforts are required. At the philosophical
level I agree with it, but at the implementation level I still feel a
lot can be done and should be done. In my opinion, we should
have areas specified as the ‘Heritage Zones’, especially in the zonal

77
plans; take for example Chandni Chowk, Connaught Place, Lodhi
Garden, Central Vista, Qutab Archaeological Park. Those areas
should be exclusively designated. That has not been done. At the
same time, there is a growing awareness about this heritage aspect.
Another thing is that DDA should not work as ASI does. It should
not be an ivory tower institution. DDA should be an institution
where public feels that it is thinking good of them. There should
be more public participation and more public opportunities so that
everything is crystal clear and people know what they can do and
what they cannot do. Also, at the same time, just as you give
carrots, you also have to have a stick to ensure that—whatever
planning, whatever things you do—there should be some kind of
a punishment. Without that, things will never improve.”
6.34 On being asked as how to make the existing flats look
beautiful without demolishing them, Shri Jain suggested that 7 to
10 percent of money should be kept for maintaining the colony and
with this money and expert’s advice existing flats may look beautiful.
Recommendation/Observation
6.35 The Committee note that DDA had set up an Urban
Heritage foundation in September 1999 which is a welcome measure.
While appreciating DDA for taking up eleven conservation projects,
for inculcating awareness among masses to project our urban heritage
by instituting Urban Heritage Award, they feel that DDA should
have taken up such initiatives at the time of its inception, itself and
should have planned the city accordingly. Had it been so done, a
number of various water-bodies, which have become dry could have
been protected from drying. The Committee is fully in conformity
with the views expressed by convenor INTACH that some areas
such as Chandni Chowk, Connaught Place, Lodhi Garden, Central
Vista, Qutab Archaeological park, Luyten Zone, etc. should be
developed as specific heritage zones and all the governmental
agencies of the city viz. NDMC, MCD, CPWD, PWD ASI etc. should
work in complete harmony and with close coordination. Some
concerted efforts should also be made by Ministry of Urban
Development and DDA to retain urban heritage of Delhi for which
it is known all over the world.
E. E-Governance and upgradation of Technology
6.36 The Committee during their visit to Vikas Sadan (DDA’s
Headquarter) on 14 July, 2005 was taken round the various
computerised automation system. Some of these were viz. (i) Land
Records Automation which provide information, about acquired land

78
installed at the Ground floor over Felicitation counters; (ii) Legal case
Monitoring system; (iii) Receipt and dispatch system for issuing of
computer generated receipts for all letters received at counters; and
(iv) Personal Management Information System.
6.37 As per Annual Administration Report (2003-2004) of DDA, a
Computer Aided Drafting and Designing Cell (CADD Cell) is
functioning at Vikas Minar. The Committee during their visit to Vikas
Minar were informed by Member Enquiry of DDA that
Computerisation has not fully taken place at Vikas Minar which is the
centre of DDA’s activities pertaining to Engineering architector and
Design. The Committee also observed that R& D facilities are lacking
in DDA.
6.38 During the visit of the Committee at Dwarka, the Committee
were informed by the Chief Engineer, Dwarka that there were shortage
of Junior Engineers at Dwarka.
6.39 In the preliminary material furnished by DDA it has been
mentioned that DDA has not provided any solar power plant/gobar
gas plant in collaboration with Department of Non-Conventional
Energy.
6.40 During the Committee’s visit at Vikas Minar and discussion
with the officers of DDA, the Committee found that DDA has not
taken up any work pertaining to the use of Non-conventional source
of energy/Alternate source of energy.
Recommendation/Observation
6.41 While appreciating various measures taken by DDA for
e-governance and computerized public utility system at Vikas Sadan,
the Committee take a serious note of lack of computerized facilities
at Vikas Minar, which is the main centre of engineering, designing
and architectural activity. They feel that computerisation and its full
utilisation in respect of drafting, design and architectural work is
pre-requisite for the development and upgradation of technology and
skill. They therefore recommend that DDA should utilize state-of-
art software, hardware and other infrastructure in engineering and
architecture. The Committee also note that there is shortage of Junior
Engineers at field level. Since recruitment has stopped for several
years, there is a need for recruiting fresh engineers who are abreast
with the latest technology in the field. Also the Engineering and
Architectural staff, presently working in DDA, must be imparted
‘Refresher Courses’ and training with the latest state-of-art,

79
periodically. They therefore recommend for filling up of all vacancies
without any further delay. They also note that DDA has not taken
up work pertaining to the use of non-conventional source of energy/
alternate source of energy. They, therefore recommend that DDA
should take up other activities viz. alternate source of energy like
solar energy and solid waste management, which is expedient for
development as enumerated in its object.
F. Functions of various offices of DDA
6.42 In the Memoranda received by the Committee (2004-05) from
the General Public, it has been stated that “Enforcement Department
of DDA even after receiving information on encroachment,
unauthorized additions etc. fail to act in time which encourages
violators. Further the Recovery Department of DDA does not bother
at all to recover dues for even 10-20 years running into crores of
rupees from dishonest defaulters causing great loss to the exchequer.
Defaulters grease the palms of Recovery and Enforcement Department
officials and virtually live free at the cost of honest people. Further, a
complainant has submitted that a meeting was held on 7.6.04 in the
Chamber of the Principal Commissioner(H), DDA in Vikas Sadan on
the instructions of the Vice Chairman, DDA in which about 8-10 officers
of various departments of DDA and representatives of National Forum
of Senior Citizens for Bhagidari were present. The meeting which lasted
for 1
1/2 hours took decisions to initiate necessary action for recovery
of dues of DDA running into crores of rupees on various counts. It
was decided that the recoveries would start from MIG(DDA) Flats of
Pkt. C, Phase-II, Jhilmil, Delhi(known as Shivam Enclave, Delhi-32)
and opposite LIG Flats Colony on immediate basis. This decision could
not be implemented so far because of the apathy of Engineers/Recovery
Deptt. of DDA.
6.43 The Committee has received a representation from a member
of Advisory Council of DDA. The following points have been suggested
by him:—
(i) DDA should be professionally strengthened as the urban
management in DDA is being executed by those officials
who hardly have any practical/direct work experience as
urban managers.
(ii) DDA should be provided full autonomy and its Vice-
Chairman should be of the rank of the Secretary,
Government of India like all other Schedule-A PSUs of the
Govt. of India so that there is least bureaucratic interference
apart from political interference.

80
(iii) The Chief Vigilance Officer of the DDA should be of the
rank of Addl. Secretary, Govt. of India directly reporting to
the Chairman, DDA so that an eye could be kept on the
activities of the Board members of the DDA also. Since the
complexity of transactions in DDA is not easily understood
by the officials serving as CVO on deputation, the post of
the CVO should be given to the departmental cadres and
the incumbent can be appointed by a Committee specially
constituted for the purpose so that DDA can be really
cleansed.
(iv) DDA needs a full time Member Personnel as the staff
strength of DDA as increased manifolds since its inception.
Recommendation/Observation
6.44 The Committee note that a large number of Memoranda
have been received alleging inaction by various departments of the
DDA. The Committee have their apprehensions that inaction on the
part of DDA encourages defaulters who think that they can get
away lightly. On the other hand, honest people feel let down if no
action is taken when they report such in actions to the DDA. Inaction
on part of DDA obviously makes people suspicious. DDA needs to
build its image by acting timely on the genuine complaints of
unauthorized constructions and encroachments received from the
common public. The Committee recommend that the functioning of
the enforcement and recovery Department of DDA should be
reviewed thoroughly so that suitable check and balance is maintained
by fixing time-frame for handling of jobs at each desk. Further,
officers delaying matters or not acting timely on issues brought to
their notice should be held accountable and stringent action taken
against them.
6.45 Since its inception several decades back, DDA has made
long strides and flowered into a vast organisation with manifold
functions and responsibilities and with vast area of operation. Over
the years, DDA’s function has focused mainly on building activities
which has become highly professional now a days. As such, it will
be in the fitness of things that the officers and staff of DDA should
be highly professional with more and more autonomy. As such, it is
imperative that top posts in DDA i.e. Vice-Chairman etc. should be
manned by the professionals who might be absorbed in the
organisation itself so that they can concentrate more and contribute
more towards its upliftment and efficiency. It is high time to see
whether DDA can be given the status of navratna  with more
functional autonomy. The Committee desire that the feasibility in
this regard may be explored and if necessary, amendment in rules/
enactment may be carried out.

81
6.46 The reported mal-practices and alleged corruption prevailing
in DDA’s offices lead to some serious thinking about the functioning
of vigilance there and cast a sinister shadow on it. It seems that the
vigilance is not that effective as it should be or it has functional
hindrances due to one reason or the other as a consequence of which
they are not able to play their expected role. Any organisation has
to be corruption free and to that effect effective deterrence to mal-
practices is a must. The Committee feel perhaps there is a gap here.
There is a need to strengthen the vigilance machinery substantially
and to acquaint them with the latest strides made in this area.
Restructuring and proper orientation have become more essential in
view of the irregularities reported from time to time. The Committee
feel that the officers heading the vigilance wing should be
sufficiently senior in hierarchy and should be permitted to work
independently without any interference. The entire vigilance wing
should have functional autonomy and the head of this wing should
be made accountable to the Lt. Governor only who is the ex-officio
Chairman, DDA. The feasibility in this regard may be explored and
if found necessary, amendment may be made in the rules or act.
6.47 The Committee observe that the staff strength of DDA has
increased manifold after its inception in 1957. They therefore,
recommend that in order to manage huge staff of DDA, DDA needs
a full time Member(Personnel) and for this purpose suitable
amendment should also be made in section 3(3) of DD Act, 1957.
G. Disposal of Public Grievances
6.48 According to DDA, all grievances received through press or
published in the form of letters to editors etc. are studied and replied.
During the year 2002-03, 136 grievances were published, 95 rebuttals
were given upto 31.3.2003. Grievances received through the Directorate
of Public Grievances are monitored regularly and the number of
grievances have gone down as compared to earlier years. For example,
total grievances received during 2003 were 106 out of which 71 have
already been settled.
6.49 When asked as to what steps are being undertaken to ensure
public participation in the functioning of DDA, the DDA have
submitted to the Committee as under:—
“Delhi Development Authority ensures involvement of public in
its development activities by conducting seminars, discussions and
interactions with public, inviting public objections/suggestions for
Master Plan/Zonal Plan Modifications, organising Garden Festival,

82
arranging regular public hearing and providing of social services
to residents welfare associations in the community halls built by
DDA. DDA facilitates indoor games, library, gym and other
recreational areas in these community centres.”
Recommendation/Observation
6.50 The Committee note with satisfaction the various steps are
being taken by DDA to ensure public participation in their
functioning. The Committee, however, are concerned to note that a
large number of grievances against DDA and their officials are
published in ‘Print Media’ and people are constrained to take the
help of Press to get their problems redressed or to go to the Courts
of law. This shows that the DDA does not give proper and adequate
response on a given complaint. The Committee firmly recommend
that an effective and responsive mechanism for monitoring the
complaints be devised by DDA with a positive perspective in mind
for timely and quick redressal of public grievances and the written
complaints received in DDA offices should be monitored and
disposed on a regular basis.
H. Disciplinary action against DDA officials
6.51 The Annual Administration Report 2003-04 of DDA depicts
that disciplinary proceedings were finalised in 174 cases, which resulted
in imposition of penalty on 140 officials. 53 officials were proceeded
against for major penalties and 87 for minor penalties under DDA
Conduct, Disciplinary & Appeal Regulations, 1999. In 34 cases officials
were exonerated of the charges. Further, investigations of some major
cases such as Watch & Ward Scam, Medical Scam & Housing Refund
cases have already been completed and disciplinary proceedings have
been initiated against the defaulting officials after obtaining CVC advice.
6.52  In response to Lok Sabha Question No. 3896 answered on
19.4.2005 regarding corruption cases pending against officials of DDA,
the DDA have reported that at present 115 cases of corruption
registered by CBI, ACB and EOW, GNCT and DP are pending against
officials out of which 105 cases are under trial in Courts. In 2 cases,
sanction for prosecution was under process and the remaining 8 cases
were under investigation.
6.53 It has been informed that to study the structure and functions
of the Vigilance Organisation in DDA, it has been decided to constitute
a Committee in consultation with CBI and CVC. CBI has nominated
Jt. Director, CBI, ACB(HQ) and CVC has nominated one Dy. Secretary
for the purpose of conducting the study. The said Committee is likely

83
to submit its report in two months. Also, a management study of
systems, processes and policy aimed at re-engineering for simplification,
speedier transaction and transparency is being conducted by ICRA.
The study will help in further improving of the Organisation for better
satisfaction levels among the public.
6.54 In response to Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No. 6633
answered on 10.05.05, regarding corruption in Building Department of
Delhi the DDA have reported that 48 complaints have been received
against officials of its building department. DDA prescribes specific
architectural/building development controls in commercial centres to
facilitate preparation and early approval of plans. DDA has also
approved a proposal for simplification of building permits for
residential plots up to 500 sq. mts, which can be sanctioned on the
basis of certification by the Architect/Structural Engineer. DDA has
also initiated action to further simplify and streamline the procedures
with a view to reduce delays and increase accountability.
Recommendation/Observation
6.55 The Committee are distressed to learn  that a large number
of corruption cases have been registered and as many as  115 cases
of corruption against DDA officials registered by various agencies
are pending disciplinary action. Moreover, out of the 174 disciplinary
cases processed in 2003-04,  about 34 officials have been exonerated
of the charges. The Committee, therefore recommend that the internal
vigilance administration be further strengthened to make it more
accountable, transparent and reliable in the eyes of people.  Further,
DDA should take timely disciplinary action against officials, who
are found to be involved in cases of bribery and in malpractices in
allotment of lands/flats etc. The Committee recommend that the
structure and functioning of the vigilance organization of DDA be
effectively and comprehensively reviewed by forming an internal
‘Working Committee.’
6.56 The Committee note with concern that 48 complaints have
been reported against officials of its Building Departments. The
Committee strongly recommend that disciplinary action be taken
against the officials of the Building Department (DDA) who are
involved in corruption, malpractices and any kind of irregularities.
The Committee also find that procedures for approval of building
plans are lengthy and cumbersome. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that simple procedures be laid down to eliminate delay
and unnecessary harassment to people.

84
I. Conversion from Leasehold to Freehold
6.57 Regarding the steps taken to make the process of conversion
of leasehold to freehold time bound, the DDA has stated in a written
note that in order to expedite the process, various improvements in
procedures and policies that impinge on this have been carried out or
are in the pipeline. Thus in the past year, various policy decisions
such as on the issue on charging of misuse for certain categories of
users, calculation of UEI etc. have been taken to simplify this process.
Process improvements such as computerisation of the conversion
process are in the pipeline and holding of camps at the door steps of
the allottee are also being done. As a result, Lands Deptt. processed/
completed a total of over 12,000 conversion applications in the last
financial year as compared to about 6000 in the previous year whereas
for Housing, the comparable figures were 5000 and 1200. Also, an
Analysis of policy related issues that come in the way of certain
category of conversion has been done and a policy proposal in this
regard has been made to MOUD by DDA.
6.58 When asked about the action taken to eradicate the menace
of middleman in conversion of lease hold property into free hold and
making the procedure more transparent so that the applicant need not
visit DDA office frequently, DDA has stated that the procedure of
conversion is made available on DDA’s information counter in the
form of a brochure to enable the allottees to apply for conversion
themselves without relying on any middlemen. In addition, DDA has
provided for public hearing in the afternoons of Monday and Thursday
to enable applicants to meet the officers of the rank of Dy. Director
and above in order to follow up their cases personally without having
to use the services of middleman. Also, DDA’s website and DDA’s
tele-counselling services are available for the purpose of offering advise
to such applicants.
6.59 In response to their ‘Press Communiqués’ however the
Committee received a number of complaints wherein it had been stated
that the procedures applicable for conversion to free-hold were
cumbersome and difficult as production of irrelevant documents was
insisted upon by DDA such as proof of Residence, Lease-Deed, No-
Objection Certificate regarding mortgage, No-Objection Certificate from
Society, Plinth Area Certificate, Photocopy of Ground Rent Receipt,
Letter of Possession, Proof of Physical Possession, Affidavit, Indeminity
Bond etc., despite the fact that most of these particulars were readily
available in the records with the DDA. In such event the general
public have to wait months together for conversion of their property
from lease hold to free hold and submitting the documents again and
again.

85
Recommendation/Observation
6.60 The Committee are perturbed to note that a number of
complaints have been received by the general public on the
cumbersome and lengthy procedure adopted for conversion of
property from lease hold to free-hold. The Committee fail to
understand as to why the DDA does not bother to look into its own
records and expects people to submit and re-submit the same
documents on several occasions for getting their final approval for
conversion from lease to free hold of property. The Committee
observe that certain documents like photocopy of lease-deed, Plinth
Area Certificate, Possession Certificate and Proof of Physical
Possessions should be available in DDA records. Such a situation
speaks volume of lack of coordination between different ‘wings’ of
same organization. The Committee therefore, firmly recommend that
the procedure for conversion of property from lease hold to free
hold be simplified by minimizing the number of documents to be
submitted as well as by fixing a time-frame for completion of the
whole procedure by DDA. DDA should also computerize this system
and hold periodical camps in the DDA colonies itself, for easy access
to the public and to mitigate their grievances on this count.
J. Nexus between Officials and Property Dealers
6.61 During the course of oral evidence of RWA’s/individuals,
the Committee observed that in case of Mayur Vihar, the flats have
not yet been allotted, but boards/hoardings of property dealers have
already come up for sale/transfer of property at higher prices.
Moreover, most applicants acquire property on wrong grounds and
DDA is incapable to check the same. When asked what action has
been taken by DDA in case of Mayur Vihar, the DDA have replied
that the boards of the property dealers put up in Pocket V, Mayur
Vihar, Phase-I, which was inspected by Committee, have since been
removed and it has been verified by the field staff that no Boards
have been re-installed by any property dealer.
Recommendation/Observation
6.62 The Committee have received a number of Memoranda from
the General Public about the menace of property dealers who work
in DDA lands in connivance with DDA officials. Even before
allotments are made of the DDA’s dwelling units, boards and
hoardings of property dealers come up in the area. The Committee
feel that such commercialization of the DDA’s Units shall defeat the
main purpose of giving cost effective housing to the weaker sections
of the society. They therefore, recommend that strict action be taken
against the field staff and officers of DDA, who operate hand-in-
glove with private property dealers and encourage sale of dwelling
units on ‘Power of Attorney’ at higher prices thereby, earning
unwarranted profits and periodical inspection is done in this regard.

86
K. Complaints regarding change in Land Use
6.63 The erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural Development
had received four memoranda complaining against DDA for their
change in ‘Land Use’. These memoranda were from (i)Libaspur small
scale industries Association; (ii) Dr. Prashamnaku Patasani, MP
regarding Samaipur Badli Extn. Industrial Area; (iii)Delhi Science
Forum; and (iv)Federation of Rohini Traders Associations. The
memoranda mainly complained about the following issues pertaining
to change in Land Use:-
(i) Sealing of some industries showing industrial area as
residential;
(ii) Construction of HIG Flats in the area earmarked as Green
Belts result into depletion of water table in Vasant Kunj
and Mahipal pur area; and
(iii) Permitting of some commercial activities pertaining to basic
needs in residential areas in Rohini and Pitampura.
6.64 In response to the above complaints/memoranda the DDA
did not give any categorical reply. They have either referred to Ministry
of Urban Development or GNCTD for all the activities. In some cases,
the decision was still to be taken.
6.65 In another case, the Committee during their visit to Mayur
Vihar were also informed by representatives of Indraprastha Extension
Society (IPEX) regarding the misuse of land earmarked for gardens.
They stated that earlier there were 33 gardens and these had now
come to 24. The land meant for development of gardens in the area
land had been occupied by private schools or utilised for other
purposes.
Recommendation/Observation
6.66 The Committee note with concern that the land use
earmarked in Zonal Master Plan has been changed by DDA after a
passage of time in certain areas of Delhi. The Committee are of the
firm view that such change in land use of an area should be made
only in case of compelling circumstances and for the facility/benefit
of the residential population of such area. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that prior to change in land use of an area, the RWAs
etc. must be consulted and such change should be avoided in cases
where the area had been earmarked ‘Green’ area in Zonal Plans.
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM
29 July, 2005 Chairman,
7 Sravana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

87
APPENDIX I
LIST OF HOUSING SCHEMES LAUNCHED BY
DDA SINCE 1966-67
Sl.No. Name of Scheme Present Status
 12 3
 1. General Housing Registration Scheme—1969 Closed
 2. General Housing Registration Scheme—1971-72 Closed
 3. General Housing Registration Scheme—1972 Closed
 4. General Housing Registration (SC/ST) Scheme—1973 Closed
 5. General Housing Registration Scheme—1976 Closed
 6. Self Financing Housing Registration Scheme-1—1977 Closed
 7. Self Financing Housing Registration Scheme-II—1978 Closed
 8. Self Financing Housing Registration Scheme-III—1979 Closed
 9. Self Financing Housing Registration Scheme-IV—1981 Closed
10. Spl. Rtd./Retiring Persons Regn. (SFS)-1981 Closed
11. Spl. Rtd./Retiring Persons Regn. (SFS)-1983 Closed
12. General Housing Registration Scheme for RPS-1982 Closed
13. General Housing Registration Scheme for RPS-1985 Closed
14. Self Financing Housing Registration Scheme for RPS-V-1985 Closed
15. Self Financing Housing Registration Scheme-VI-1985 Closed
16. Self Financing Housing Registration Scheme-VII-1994 Closed
17. Expandable Housing Scheme-1995 Closed
18. Self Financing Housing Scheme-VIII-1995 Closed
19. New Pattern Registration Scheme-1979 Live
20. Ambedkar Awas Yojana for SC/ST-1989 Live
21. Janta Housing Registration Scheme-1996 Live

88
12 3
22. Self Financing Scheme-9-1996 Closed
23. Expandable Housing Scheme-1996 Closed
24. Vijay Veer Awas Yojana-1999 Closed
25. Housing Scheme for Rehabilitation of Punjab Migrants Live
26. Housin Scheme for Rehabilitation of Kashmir Migrants Live
(Reopened)
27. Retiring Persons Schemes-2001 Close
28. Narela Housing Scheme-2002 Closed
29. Vasant Kunj HIG Scheme-2002 Closed
30. Dwarka & Sarita Vihar HIG Scheme-2002 Closed
31. EWS HS-MKJD-2001 Closed
32. Narela Housing Scheme-2003 Closed
33. HIG Scheme for Govt. Deptt. Etc. Closed
34. HIG Rohini Housing Scheme-2003 Closed
35. Jasola Janta Housing Scheme-2003 Closed
36. J&K Migrants Retd/.Retiring Central Govt. Employees Closed
37. Jasola Janta Tenemants Scheme-2003-04 Closed
38. Dwarka HIG Housing Scheme-2003-04 Closed
39. Narela Housing Scheme-2004 Closed
40. Two Bedrooms Housing Scheme-2004 Closed
41. Festival Housing Scheme 2004 Closed

89
APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON URBAN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 26 MAY 2003
The Committee sat from 1120 hrs. to 1320 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Chandrakant Khaire — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ranen Barman
3. Shri Shriram Chauhan
4. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo
5. Shri Jaiprakash
6. Shri Mahendra Singh Pal
7. Prof. (Shrimati) A.K. Premajam
8. Shri Nawal Kishore Rai
9. Shri Gutha Sukender Reddy
10. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
11. Shri V.M. Sudheeran
Rajya Sabha
12. Shrimati Prema Cariappa
13. Shri N.R. Dasari
14. Shrimati Gurcharan Kaur
15. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
16. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
17. Shri Harish Rawat
18. Shri Man Mohan Samal

90
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Sapra — Joint Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Urban Development
and Poverty Alleviation
(Department of Urban Development and from Delhi
Development Authority)
Representatives from Department of Urban Development
1. Shri P.K. Hota, Additional Secretary (UD)
2. Shri P.K. Pradhan, Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Nisha Singh, Director
4. Shri U.S. Pant, Chief Controller of Accounts
Representatives from DDA
1. Shri Anil Baijal, Vice Chairman, DDA
2. Shri C. Banerjee, Engineer Member, DDA
3. Shri A.K. Patnaik, Finance Member, DDA
4. Shri V.M. Bansal, Commissioner-cum-Secretary, DDA
5. Smt. Ameeta Saini, Chief Vigilance Officer, DDA
6. Shri D.B. Gupta, Commissioner (Housing), DDA
7. Shri Dharmendra, Commissioner (LD), DDA
8. Shri U.S. Jolly, Commissioner (LM), DDA
9. Shri Sunil Sharma, Commissioner (Per.), DDA
10. Shri A.K. Jain, Commissioner (Planning) DDA
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their views on further examination of
the subject, ‘Delhi Development Authority’ (DDA). The Commitee, after
considering the fact that DDA was serving the general public by its
various activities like housing etc., decided that the opinion/views of
the public on the subject should be sought through electronic and
print media. They were of the view that the memorandum from the
experts on the working of the DDA should be invited in the first
instance, and threafter, if required, the views of the selected experts/
public could be heard by the Committee. Besides, the Committee also

91
decided that on-the-spot inspection of various sites like DDA flats and
flyovers etc., should be undertaken to have an objective view of the
working of DDA and also to know about the various problems being
faced by the public. The Committee also decided to have on-the-spot
inspection of the various Offices of DDA to know about their
functioning and the difficulties encountered.
[The representatives of the Ministry of UEPA and DDA were
thereafter called in].
3. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of Ministy of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation (Department of Urban
Development) and Delhi Development Authority. He also drew the
attention of the representatives to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of
the Directions by the Speaker.
4. The representatives of the Ministry and DDA then gave an
audio-visual presentation on the functioning of DDA. After that, the
officers of the Ministry and the DDA replied to the queries raised by
several members.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

92
APPENDIX III
COMMITTEE ON URBAN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2003)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2003
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1145 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Chandrakant Khaire — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ranen Barman
3. Shri Padmanava Behera
4. Shri Shriram Chauhan
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo
6. Shri G. Putta Swamy Gowda
7. Shri Basavanagoud Kolur
8. Shri Savshibhai Makwana
9. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri S. Agniraj
11. Shri N.R. Dasari
12. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
13. Shri Man Mohan Samal
14. Shri Harish Rawat
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Sapra — Joint Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director

93
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee convened to decide about the future course of action
on the subject ‘Delhi Development Authority’ (DDA). The Chairman
informed the Committee about the status of examination of the subject.
The Committee were apprised that in response to Press communique
issued by the Secretariat about 200 representations from public were
received. The Committee were also informed that these have been
forwarded to the Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty
Alleviation for their comments. The Committee thereafter decided that
in order to have an on-the-spot assessment of the functioning of DDA,
there should be four Study Groups, zone-wise, to undertake local visits
in different areas of Delhi. The composition of each group would be
finalized in due course.
3. ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.*Relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

94
APPENDIX IV
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 21ST DECEMBER 2004
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
3. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
4. Shri L. Rajgopal
5. Shri Sajjan Kumar
6. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
7. Shri Sugrib Singh
8. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
9. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Jayantilal Barot
11. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
14. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
2. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary

95
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development and DDA
1. Shri Anil Baijal, Secretary (UD)
2. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Vice Chairman
3. Shri P.K. Pradhan, Joint Secretary (D&L)
4. Shri A.K. Patnaik, Finance Member
5. Shri Prabhash Singh, Engineer Member
6. Smt. Nisha Singh, Director (DD)
7. Smt. Ameeta Saini, Chief Vigilance Officer
8. Shri V.M. Bansal, Principal Commissioner-cum-Secretary
9. Shri D.B. Gupta, Principal Commissioner
10. Shri R.K. Vats, Commissioner (LM)
11. Shri R.K. Singh, Commissioner (LD)
12. Smt. Asma Manzer, Commissioner (Housing)
13. Shri A.K. Jain, Commissioner (Planning)
14. Shri Sunil Sharma, Commissioner (Personnel).
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee and briefed them about the work done by
the erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural Development regarding
examination of the subject Delhi Development Authority.
[The representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development and
DDA were thereafter called in].
3. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of Ministry of
Urban Development and Delhi Development Authority. He also drew
the attention of the representatives to the provisions of Direction 55(1)
of the Directions by the Speaker.
4. The representatives of the Ministry and DDA then briefed the
Committee, about the functioning of DDA. After that, the officers of
the Ministry and the DDA replied to the queries raised by several
members.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

96
APPENDIX V
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, 30 MAY 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. and from 1430 hrs.
to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Pushp Jain
4. Shri P. Mohan
5. Shri Amitava Nandy
6. Shri D. Vittal Rao
7. Shri Sajjan Kumar
8. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
9. Shri K. Subbarayan
10. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Syeda Anwara Taimur
12. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
13. Shri Jayantilal Barot
14. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
15. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
16. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Assistant Director

97
Representatives from Ministry of Urban Development and DDA
1. Shri P.K. Pradhan, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Development
2. Shri V.M. Bansal, Principal Commissioner cum Secretary,
Delhi Development Authority
3. Shri V.K. Sadhu, Principal Commissioner, Delhi Development
Authority
4. Shri A.K. Jain, Commissioner (Planning), Delhi Development
Authority
5. Mrs. Asma Manzer, Commissioner (Housing), Delhi
Development Authority
6. Shri A.K. Singh, Commissioner (Land Disposal), Delhi
Development Authority
Experts, Interest Groups and Associations etc.
1. Shri K.T. Gurumukhi, Chief Planner, Town & Country
Planning Organization
2. Shri O.P. Jain, Convenor, Indian National Trust for Art and
Culture Heritage (Delhi Chapter)
3. Dr. Rakesh Raman Jha, President—Association of Social
Research and Action
4. Shri H.R. Suri, Former President, Institute of Town Planners
India
5. Shri M.N. Bhattacharjee, General Secretary, Federation of
Group Housing Societies, 58, Indraprastha Extension,
Patparganj, Delhi-110092
6. Shri Raj Kumar Bindal, Chartered Accountants, 21/51, Shakti
Nagar, Delhi-110007
7. Ms. Minoo Verma, Architect, 4115, D-4, Vasant Kunj, New
Delhi-110070
8. Dr. H.C. Gupta, President, Federation of Ashok Vihar
Residents Welfare Associations (Regd.), Regd. Office: 169,
Phase-I, Ashok Vihar, Delhi-110052
9. Shri R.M. Singal, 8-A/62, Western Ext. Area, Karol Bagh,
Delhi-110005
10. Shri R.K. Bhatnagar, Journalist, 6, Maitri Apartment, A-3,
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi-110063

98
11. Shri R.J. Thirwani, A4C/173 Janakpuri, New Delhi-110058
12. Ms. Geeta Devan Verma, 356, D-1, Vasant Kunj, New
Delhi-110070
13. Dr. B.K. Chakrabarty, Former Executive Director HUDCO,
A-10, Qutab Concalve, Phase-I, New Delhi-110016
14. Shri Mukulesh Mitra, United Towers India Private Limited
Pent House, DCM Building, 16, Barakhamba Road, New
Delhi-110001
15. Shri Sudhir Vohra, 28, Block 52, Chittranjan Park, New Delhi-
19
16. Shri R.M. Sinha, Advocate, 1st Floor, Surya Arcade Building,
U-110, Shakarpur, Vikas Marg, New Delhi-110092
17. Shri Arjun Singh, 71-B, Pocket A-3, Kalkaji Extn., New Delhi-
19
18. Shri R.N. Gujral, Hony. General Secretary, Federation of
Rohini Co-operative Group Housing Societies, Ahimsa Vihar,
Plot No. 27/1, Sector-9, Rohini, Delhi-110085
19. Shri Narayan Singh, General Secretary, Bijwasan Gram Vikash
Samiti, Near Railway Crossing, in front of Wawal Tent House,
Bijwasan, New Delhi-110045
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee and briefed them about the memoranda received
from public at large pertaining to the functioning of various aspects of
DDA in repsonse to the advertisement given in electronic and print
media. He informed the members that out of about 300 memoranda
received by the present Committee and erstwhile Committee on Urban
and Rural Development, twenty one memoranda were shortlisted for
personal hearing by the Committee. Besides this, two experts were
also invited to depose before the Committee.
3. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of Ministry of
Urban Development and Delhi Development Authority who were
invited to assist the Committee.
4. The Chairman also welcomed witnesses who were called in one
by one in groups to tender their evidence. He also drew the attention
of the witnesses to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of Directions by
the Speaker. The witnesses then gave their suggestions/views for the

99
improvement of the functioning of DDA. The Chairman and members
of the Committee raised some queries, which were duly replied to.
The representatives of the Ministry/DDA were asked to provide certain
clarifications, which were duly given.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

100
APPENDIX VI
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, 20 JUNE 2005
The above Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1730 hrs. on 20 June,
2005 in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi
to take the oral evidence of the representatives of the DDA, MCD,
and Registrar Cooperative Societies.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Pushp Jain
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
6. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
7. Shri D. Vittal Rao
8. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
9. Shri Sugrib Singh
10. Shri K. Subbarayan
11. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
12. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
14. Shri Jayantilal Barot
15. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
16. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
17. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma

101
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Assistant Director
WITNESSES
(i) Delhi Development Authority (DDA)
(i) Shri Madhukar Gupta, Vice Chairman, DDA
(ii) Shri Prabhash Singh, Engineer Member
(iii) Shri V.M. Bansal, Pr. Commissioner-cum-Secretary
(iv) Shri V.K. Sadhu, Principal Commissioner
(v) Shri R.K. Singh, Commissioner (LD)
(vi) Shri R.K. Vats, Commissioner (LM)
(vii) Smt. Asma Manzar, Commissioner (Housing)
(viii) Shri A.K. Jain, Commissioner (Planning)
(ii) Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD)
(i) Shri Rakesh Mehta, Commissioner, MCD
(ii) Shri H.B. Sharma, Addl. Commissioner (HQ)
(iii) Dr. M.M. Kutty, Addl. Commissioner (Engg.)
(iv) Ms. Chandra Y. Reddy, Financial Advisor (S&JJ)
(v) Sh. C.L. Munshi, Chief Engineer (Slum)
(iii) Office of the Registrar Cooperative Societies, Delhi
Shri Satya Gopal, Registrar
Coordinator
Ms. S. Aparna—Director, Ministry of Urban Development
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee and briefed them about the status of the examination
of the subject ‘Delhi Development Authority’.
3. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of DDA, MCD
and office of Registrar Cooperative Societies who were invited to tender

102
their oral evidence before the Committee. He also drew the attention
of the witnesses to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of Directions by
the Speaker.
4. Vice Chairman  DDA gave a brief account of the work done by
DDA in Delhi and the procedure of handing over DDA developed
colonies to MCD. Thereafter, Commissioner, MCD briefed the
Committee about the functioning of MCD and difficulties being faced
by MCD. Subsequently, Registrar, Cooperative Societies further briefed
about the functioning of RCS office. The Chairman and members of
the Committee raised certain queries, which were duly explained by
the representatives of the DDA, MCD and Registrar Cooperative
Societies.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

103
APPENDIX VII
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON THURSDAY THE 30 JUNE, 2005
The above Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1700 hrs. on 30 June,
2005 in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi
to take the oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Urban
Development.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Amitava Nandy
3. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
4. Shri D. Vittal Rao
5. Shri Sajjan Kumar
6. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
7. Shri Sugrib Singh
8. Shri K. Subbarayan
9. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
10. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
11. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
13. Shri Jayantilal Barot
14. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
15. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Assistant Director

104
WITNESSES
(i) Delhi Development Authority (DDA)
(i) Shri Anil Baijal, Secretary
(ii) Shri P.K. Pradhan, Joint Secretary
(iii) Ms. S. Aparna, Director
(ii) Delhi Development Authority (DDA)
Shri Madhukar Gupta, Vice Chairman, DDA
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee and briefed them about the status of the examination
of the subject ‘Delhi Development Authority.’ He said that the
examination of the subject DDA was coming to an end and before
finalising the Report it would be very important for the Committee to
go for a local inspection of the offices of DDA to have an insight into
its functioning.
[The representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development were
thereafter called in.]
3. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry
of Urban Development. Vice Chairman, DDA was also present. The
Chairman, then drew the attention of the representatives to the
provisions of Direction 55(1) of Directions by the Speaker.
4. The Secretary, Urban Development then briefed the Committee
on the subject DDA. The Chairman and Members then raised some
queries which were duly replied by the Secretary, Urban Development
and Vice Chairman, DDA.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

105
APPENDIX VIII
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-05)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 27 JULY, 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room
‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
1. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
2. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
3. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
4. Shri L. Rajgopal
5. Shri Sajjan Kumar
6. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
7. Shri Sugrib Singh
8. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
9. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
10. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
12. Shri Jayantilal Barot
13. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
14. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Assistant Director

106
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the
draft report on the subject ‘Delhi Development Authority’. After
deliberation, the Committee adopted the draft report with some
modifications.
3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
Report on the basis of factual verification from the concerned Ministry
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

107
APPENDIX IX
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Sl.No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations
12 3
1. 1.27 The Committee note that according to the
provisions of Section 6 of  the Delhi
Development Act, 1957, the Delhi
Development Authority (DDA) is entrusted
with aims and objectives to formulate a
Master Plan for covering the present and
future growth of Delhi and to promote and
secure the development of Delhi according
to the Plan covering all the possible
activities. It is entrusted to acquire, hold,
manage and dispose of land and other
property and carry out building,
engineering, mining and other operations.
Also, the DDA is required to provide
services and amenities incidental to the
above. While the Master Plans and the
Zonal Plans as approved by the Central
Government serve as the basic framework
for development of Delhi, the DDA has to
effectively complete the arduous task of
providing ‘Housing’ facilities to the ever-
growing population of Delhi. The MPD
1962 had recommended an area about
45000 hectors for urbanization so as to
accommodate a projected population of 5.3
million by the year 1981. Further, the MPD
2001, which is presently under
implementation has recommended to
develop 18000 to 24000 hectares of
additional urban area so as to accommodate
a projected population of 12.8 million by
the year 2001. The MPD 2001 also
recommended for urban structuring to be
‘Low Rise High Density’ with re-structuring

108
12 3
of physical infrastructure so as to also
accommodate an additional population of
3 to 4 million. The Committee are, however,
concerned to note that despite the efforts
of DDA to meet the requirements of
‘Housing’ and accommodating the influx of
people into Delhi for livelihood, there is
apparently a significant growth of
unauthorized colonies, JJ clusters and
Squatter settlements in the metropolitan city
of Delhi, which is the capital city of India.
The Committee finds that Delhi is under
severe pressure to house the rapidly
increasing population of the city. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that DDA
should make earnest efforts to provide
adequate ‘Housing’ for the people of Delhi
in coordination with the Government of
Delhi and other local bodies so that at least
further growth of unauthorized colonies
and squatter settlements are stopped
forthwith.
2. 1.28 The Committee are informed that according
to population projections, 20 to 30 % of
the required 2.4 million dwelling units are
to be provided in the National Capital
Region of Delhi but the augumented
housing requirement for Delhi cannot be
provided within Delhi itself. It has been
projected that 30 to 40 % of the dwelling
units should come in the form of re-
development and densification of existing
areas, which would also include things like
higher density for slum rehabilitation. Also,
about 1.5 million dwelling units may have
to come up in the areas, which would be
urbanized during the MPD 2021. The
Committee are also informed that at present
about 23,000 dwelling units are under
construction by DDA and the ‘Housing

109
12 3
Projects Approval Committee’ of DDA has
approved another 8000 housing units for
construction. While the Committee
appreciate the efforts made by DDA in
providing dwelling units and planning
housing projects in Delhi, they are of the
firm view that a lot is yet to be carried out
so as to house the populace of NCT of
Delhi. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that intense and well-timed
hard work is done so as to accommodate
the ever-present population in squatter
settlements, JJ clusters, etc. as per the
Master Plans. The Committee also desire
that the developmental works of DDA
should be toned-up to contain a clean Delhi
and a planned Delhi.
3. 1.29 The Committee needs hardly mention that
the problems faced in Delhi in
accommodating the migratory population
from rural/small towns and townships are
manifold. The city is not only required to
provide ‘Housing’ to the incoming
population, but also water supply,
sanitation, sewerage, treatment of sewers,
electricity, garbage disposal and
environmental management. While the
Committee appreciates that the draft MPD
2021 envisions to make Delhi a global
metropolis and a world class city, they are
however of the firm view that unless
coordinated efforts are made by DDA, the
NDMC, Municipal Corporation of Delhi,
Delhi Jal Board and urban bodies to ensure
proper garbage disposal and curtail open-
defecation in the squatter settlements, this
objective would be very difficult to be
achieved. The Committee recommend that
DDA should develop suitable housing
structures for the urban poor with proper

110
12 3
sanitation facilities and re-locate people
living in squatters and slum tenements in
appropriate areas.
4. 1.30 The Committee are informed that specific
provisions for Mixed Land Use had been
made by Government in the residential
areas alongwith Non-permissible Mixed
Land Use in MPD 2001. In this regard, the
Committee desire that proper and earnest
steps are taken by the concerned
governmental authorities to ensure that
non-permissible limits of Mixed Land Use
are adhered to in the urban areas of Delhi
so as to ensure security, safety and
environmental quality of residential areas.
The Committee also desire that the
provisions/limits of permissible and non-
permissible Mixed Land Use be reviewed
in the light of latest developments and
necessary amendments be made in these
limits, if found necessary. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard.
5. 1.31 As regards urbanized villages in Delhi are
concerned, the Committee are informed that
in MPD 2021, all these villages will come
into urban expansion areas, which will be
developed/re-developed. During the course
of evidence before the Committee, the Vice-
Chairman, DDA assured that all amenities
and facilities would be provided in the
urban expansion areas with the maximum
extent of planning that is possible. The
Committee feel that in order to upgrade,
assimilate and integrate these villages with
the rest of the urban areas, it is extremely
necessary that the amenities, services and
facilities provided to these villages should
not be less than those provided to their

111
12 3
counter-part urban localities and efforts
should be made to take care of their
livelihood. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that as proposed in MPD 2021,
effective steps within a specific time frame
be taken by DDA to provide the maximum
civic amenities and facilities in the aforesaid
urban expansions and the urbanized
villages falling in Delhi region.
6. 1.32 Regarding the MPD 2021, the Committee
note that the draft MPD 2021 has been
approved by DDA in their meeting held
on 10
th January, 2005. Thereafter, the
Ministry of Urban Development permitted
to notify the Draft MPD 2021 for inviting
objections/suggestions from the public and
accordingly a Gazette Notification has been
issued on 16
th March, 2005 alongwith a
Public Notice on 8 th April, 2005. The
Committee recommend that the Draft MPD
2021 should be well contained with the
suggestions from the public, who are the
actual recipients of the benefits of MPD
2021. The Committee also desire that the
Draft MPD 2021 is finalized and launched,
expeditiously.
7. 1.33 The Committee note from ‘Print Media’
reports that DDA has, recently, approved
in principle the participation of private
sector in mega housing projects across the
Delhi city. It envisages to engage the
private sector in constructions in a
minimum areas of 10 hectares or 50,000
square meters of built-up areas and above.
Keeping in view of the repeated complaints
about the alleged nexus between DDA
officials and the private builders, the
Committee contain their apprehension as to
whether the construction of dwelling units

112
12 3
by these private builders would be in
accordance with the Zonal and Master Plan.
The Committee are of the firm view that
the DDA must be primarily responsible for
the residential housing development in
Delhi. Participation of private builders in a
large scale would lead to cost escalation of
the dwelling units and such dwelling units
will be beyond the purchasing power of
the common urban population in Delhi. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the DDA
and the GNCT of Delhi should give a fresh
look towards their decision of inviting
private builders in a large scale in taking
up mega projects in Delhi.
8. 2.28 In accordance with the provisions of Section
12 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the
Central Government by way of a
Notification in the Official Gazette declares
any area in Delhi to be a development area
for the purposes of this Act. The Notified
areas are being looked after by DDA and
the rest of the areas as ‘Denotified’ are
looked after by MCD. The Committee are
informed that about 181 Notifications have
been issued since the year 1967 by the Land
and Building Department of Government
of Delhi. The Committee express their
concern that many a time there is a gap in
the information regarding ‘Notification’ and
‘Denotification’ of the ‘Development Areas’.
The Committee are informed that an
exercise has been initiated to streamline the
information and procedure in respect of
Notification of ‘Development Areas’ and
their ‘Denotification’. Further, action has
been initiated to denotify the areas, which
have already been developed. The
Committee recommend that the process of
‘Notification’ and ‘Denotification’ of DDA

113
12 3
lands must be streamlined by amending
and adopting suitable procedures required
to be followed by the Government in
consultation with the Land and Building
Department of the Government of Delhi so
as to ensure that the aforesaid process is
expeditious and timely. The Committee
consider it imperative that the ‘Land
Records’ of Delhi are maintained and
updated regularly for better land
management.
9. 2.29 As regards, non-conforming use of the
DDA lands, the Committee note that DDA
has initiated counteractive action under the
provisions of Section 29(ii) of the Delhi
Development Act, 1957 in 140 cases in 2003,
144 cases in 2004 and 332 cases in 2005.
While the Committee note with satisfaction
that DDA has taken certain remedial actions
in cases of non-conforming use of their
lands, with the Master Plans, they desire
that DDA should devise suitable in-built
mechanism to check misuse of their lands
and ensure the developed areas remain
intact with the Master Plan.
10. 2.30 The Committee note that DDA has taken
over possession of 67354.88 acres of land
acquired through the Land Acquisition
Collector of Delhi, till March, 2003. Till
March, 2005, DDA has acquired land
totalling upto 69890 acres. The Committee
note that land acquired for DDA are to be
developed for residential, recreational,
industrial, commercial and institutional
purposes. The Committee appreciate that
DDA has developed/provided for 27
community centers, 125 local shopping
centers, 429 convenient shopping centers
and a number of dwelling units in the

114
12 3
lands acquired for DDA. The Committee
trust that DDA moves ahead by providing
adequate number of dwelling units and
other facilities to the urban population of
Delhi so that the city can boast of being a
world-class city by 2021. The Committee
also desire that the upcoming dwelling
units, shopping complexes, institutions etc.
as well as the existing constructions by
DDA are adequately maintained and
upholstered with an aesthetic sense to
ensure that these dwelling units/flats,
shopping complexes etc. give a neat and
modern look. Since private players have
been encouraged by DDA in building up
the ‘Shopping Malls’ in Delhi, which have
come up lately, the Committee urge the
Government to ensure that all the required
safeguards—such as fire fighting
arrangements, emergency exits, proper lifts
in high rise buildings and constructions of
earthquake proof structures are adhered to
strictly both by the private builders and
DDA.
11. 2.31 While the Committee note that acquisition
of land for planned development is an
ongoing process, the Committee are
concerned to note that about 1475.85 acres
of DDA lands are under encroachment by
JJ clusters, etc. The Committee are
perturbed to learn that the DDA lands,
which have been encroached upon by
squatter settlements, slums etc. in various
parts of Delhi including the Yamuna Pushta
areas are not available for development.
The Committee would like to know as to
how these encroachments were allowed to
happen when they were detected and what
remedial measures were contemplated to

115
12 3
thwart such encroachments. The Committee
recommend that timely remedial actions are
undertaken by DDA to remove such
encroachments from DDA lands as per
governing laws and rules. The Committee
also recommend that coordinative efforts be
made by DDA with the Police authorities,
GNCT of Delhi and local bodies so as to
deal with this persistent problem of
encroachments on DDA lands by JJ clusters.
The Committee would like to be apprised
of the action taken in this regard.
12. 2.32 So far as the laldora areas of Delhi are
concerned, the Committee note that laldora
areas were signified as village areas and
defined way back in 1908. However, there
is no definition of an ‘extended laldora’ as
the population of such areas has increased
in the past decades. The Committee are also
informed that all matters related to laldora
area fall under the jurisdiction of the GNCT
of Delhi. Eventually, in the process of
acquisition of land, all areas except the
designated laldora areas are notified by the
Government. In this regard, the Vice-
Chairman of DDA during the course of
evidence before the Committee has
expressed that there is an in-built problem
for DDA in taking possession of such lands.
He has also informed that a suggestion has
been made to the Delhi Government that a
‘Survey’ may be undertaken for ascertaining
the laldora limits. The Committee desire that
concerted efforts be made by DDA with
the local authorities concerned so as to
demarcate clearly and finally the extended
limits of laldora lands in Delhi for a planned
development taking into consideration the
natural growth of population.

116
12 3
13. 2.33 The Committee note that the Land
Acquisition Collector acquires lands in
Delhi from farmers and villagers and hands
over such acquired lands to DDA for
development. At the time of acquisition of
these lands, the LAC fixes the acquisition
rate to be paid as compensation to the land
losers. The Committee also note that
alternative plots are allotted to the
recommended farmers whose land has been
acquired under large scale acquisition and
development of land in Delhi. The
Committee, however, would like to point
out that a number of complaints have been
received from such land losers by the
Committee in response to their ‘Press
Communiqués’. These complaints pertain to
fixation of low rate of compensation to the
land losers, and denial of allotment of
alternative plots to certain land losers,
specifically in Rohini and Wazirpur areas.
Apart from these, a number of cases are
pending in courts of law by complainants
or land losers for suitable compensation.
The Committee recommend that keeping in
mind the needs of the farmers/villagers
who have lost their lands, which were their
means of livelihood, the DDA as well as
the concerned Government authorities must
take substantial steps so as to give adequate
monetary compensation and alternate lands
to such land losers with a positive
perspective. The Committee strongly feel
that whenever any land is acquired by
DDA from anyone, the process should be
so simplified that the land loser without
any hassle and delay, is able to get
compensation on alternative land/flat/shop
within a specific time frame and is not
made to wait for years together as is the

117
12 3
case now. The Committee also recommend
that whenever any land is acquired, the
landless labourers working on the same
land should be suitably rehabilitated, as
they get deprived of their means of
livelihood.
14. 2.34 Under Section 21 of the Delhi Development
Act, 1957, the DDA’s Land Disposal
Department disposes land meant for
various uses such as residential, industrial,
institutional and commercial purposes. The
Committee are informed that for residential
purposes, the DDA disposes plots by way
of allotment and auction. In case of Group
Housing Societies, the DDA allots lands on
the basis of the recommendations received
from the Registrar Cooperative Societies
(RCS) of Government of Delhi. The RCS
verifies the lists of members and the Group
Housing Societies and sends them to DDA
for allotment of lands. DDA disposes
commercial properties as commercial plots
or as built-up shops by way of auction and
tender. The built-up shops are sold by
calling of sealed tenders alongwith EMD
of 25%. The commercial plots are disposed
by way of open auction. About 43% of the
built-up shops are allotted to the special
categories of SC/ST/LAC, physically
handicapped, ex-Servicemen and freedom
fighters. While the Committee note that
DDA has taken steps to curb malpractices
relating to allotment of plots and houses,
the Committee urge that a high level body
comprising of senior officials of DDA, RCS,
Ministry of Urban Development and
NCRPB may be formed so as to devise
suitable mechanism to check malpractices
in allotment of plots and flats to individuals

118
12 3
and Group Housing Societies and ensure
transparency in the working of DDA. The
Committee also recommend that the 43%
allotments are made to the special category
persons as per rules and the ‘built-up
shops’ are allotted in a time bound manner.
15. 2.35 The Committee note that ‘Institutional
Lands’ are allotted following the Delhi
Development Authority (Developed Land)
Nazul Rules, 1981 for social, cultural,
religious, educational activities etc. Broadly,
these allotments are divided into four
categories viz.  educational, general
Institutions, socio-cultural Institutes and
Government Departments. The Committee
recommend that DDA should devise an in-
built mechanism so as to ascertain that
allotments to the ‘Institutions’ are strictly
made in accordance with the governing
Nazul rules and disciplinary actions should
be taken in any kind of malpractice. The
Committee would like to be apprised of
the action taken in this regard.
16. 2.36 The Committee are concerned to note that
out of a large area of about 1400 acres of
DDA lands encroached upon by
unauthorised colonies, DDA has been able
to reclaim only 433.98 acres of land which
means that less than one third of the
encroached land could only be reclaimed
by DDA. This is because unauthorised
colonies have come up on the remaining
areas. The Committee feels that a clear cut
policy needs to be evolved by the Central
Government with regard to the treatment
of unauthorised colonies. The Committee
note that though DDA has been vested
with powers of demolition, stopping and

119
12 3
sealing powers, but not much has been
achieved in reclaiming encroached lands.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that
DDA and the Ministry of Urban
Development must take concrete measures
in consultation with local bodies, so as to
reclaim all the encroached lands of DDA,
expeditiously. The Committee also
recommend that a suitable policy –
framework be adopted so as to curb
cropping up of new unauthorized colonies.
Regularization of unauthorised colonies in
course of time provides an incentive to such
acts and legitimizes a step which was
considered illegal and was in violation of
the law.
17. 3.13 The Committee note that DDA has
extensively developed green areas in Delhi
and has helped Delhi to grow as one of
the greenest cities in the country. While
appreciating the achievements made by
DDA in developing the forests, woodland,
green belts, district parks, zonal parks,
neighbourhood parks and Children parks
etc., the Committee desire that maintenance
of such green areas and water bodies etc.
should be carried out from time to time
and all the basic facilities viz . toilet,
drinking water, eateries, etc. should be
provided for the welfare of public at large.
The Committee are also of view that co-
ordinated efforts be made by the Ministry
of Urban Development with the Ministry
of Environment and Forests so as to
maintain the water-bodies clean. The
Committee desire that all public places
especially parks should have ‘Pay and Use’
toilets facilities as for instance the ‘Sulabh’
toilets. Such toilet facilities would help in

120
12 3
the maintenance of environment. The
Committee further recommend that the
viability for opening up food counters/
eateries be examined by DDA in or around
the ‘public parks’. The Committee also
recommend that demands of the local
residents for development of the already
existing Parks be met by DDA with a
positive perspective in mind.
18. 3.14 The Committee note that DDA spends
about Rs.40 crore every year for developing
new green areas and for maintaining the
areas already developed. Moreover, in
2004-2005 a provision of Rs. 114.19 crore has
been made by DDA for maintenance of
parks. The Committee recommend that all
the funds yearly earmarked for maintenance
of Parks be utilised prudently for improving
the conditions of the existing Parks/green
areas in Delhi. Also, new green areas, be
developed in a time bound manner.
19. 3.20 The Committee are happy to note of the
efforts made by DDA in the construction
and development of Sports Complexes, play
fields, swimming pools, golf courses etc. for
the purpose of sports activities for the
inhabitants of Delhi. They also note that
some sports activities are in progress. The
Committee trust that such activities would
be continued and completed in a stipulated
time frame.
20. 3.21 As regards the training aspect of
sportsmen/women, the Committee also
recommend that DDA should propagate its
sports and coaching facilities, fellowship
facilities etc. for the knowledge of common
sports-loving persons so that people are
encouraged to indulge in sports activities.

121
12 3
The Committee would like to be apprised
of the action taken in this regard.
21. 3.24 The Committee express their concern over
the fact that only five years are left for the
commencement of Commonwealth Games
2010 and the construction of the
Commonwealth Games village at
Akshardham is yet to begin. They also note
that a small portion of site belongs to
Government of Uttar Pradesh for which
negotiations are going on with the State
Government of Uttar Pradesh. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that
matter should be sorted out expeditiously
and the construction of the ‘Games village’
should commence without any delay. The
Committee desire that prudent and
scientific techniques be adopted in
development of ‘Commonwealth Games
Village’ at Akshardham in line with the
international standards of sports facilities.
In the beginning itself it should be kept in
mind that the facilities to be created should
be such that even after the Commonwealth
games 2010 are over, these can be made
use of subsequently also.
22. 4.12 The Committee strongly deprecates that a
tangible number of backlog of 8668 and
2,883 in respect of the New Pattern
Registration Scheme still exists with the
DDA. Although more than two and half
decades have elapsed when the New
Pattern Registration Scheme (NPRS) was
launched in 1979 but the bonafide
registrants of this scheme are still waiting
for the allotments. The Committee need
hardly emphasise that as the New Pattern
Registration Scheme, 1979 (NPRS) had been
open-ended, it was imperative that such a

122
12 3
scheme is cleared in time and with no
backlog. The Committee, therefore, express
dissatisfaction that timely, honest and
pragmatic measures have not been taken
by DDA in making the NPR Scheme a
model and a successful one.
23. 4.13 As regards the Rohini Registration Scheme,
1981 the Committee are  further distressed
to learn that a backlog of 27,043 still exists.
The Committee need hardly emphasise that
such a situation hampers the credibility of
DDA and sullies its public image.
24. 4.14 The Committee are informed that an action
plan has been chalked out by DDA for
liquidation of the backlog of flats by
December, 2005 and of Plots by 2006. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that as assured to them, the backlog of the
New Pattern Registration Scheme, 1979
must be cleared expeditiously. The
Committee also recommend that the
backlog in the Rohini Registration Scheme,
1981 is cleared by taking concerted action
for acquisition of land by LAC of
Government of Delhi in a time bound
manner. The Committee may be apprised
of the action taken in this regard.
25. 4.22 The Committee observe that a vast number
of marginalized poor in the urban centres,
particularly in the metropolitan cities live
without shelter, facilities and amenities for
bare existence, deprived of basic needs and
means of livelihood. Such marginalized
people could be found either in slums or
in other illegal and unauthorized
habitations with no semblance of civic
amenities. They are mainly unorganized
daily wage earners, construction workers,

123
12 3
vendors and hawkers, rickshaw and cart-
pullers, porters and loaders, street and
working children or simply the vagrants
and homeless. The Committee also note that
the Delhi Master Plan defines ‘shelter’ as
an essential need of a family, including
components like water, electricity, waste
disposal, education, health, recreational and
other facilities. It also mentions about
vendors and hawkers, reported to be
200,000 in Delhi. The Committee are,
therefore, of the firm view that ‘Housing’
for the EWS including the JJ clusters should
be one of the primary concerns of DDA.
The Committee recommend that clearcut
and specific planned measures be taken by
DDA by making suitable provisions in
MPD – 2021 for providing dwelling units
at an affordable price to the actual EWS
and JJ cluster population in the DDA
housing Scheme.
26. 4.23 The Committee note that in the draft
Master Plan 2021; 50-55% dwelling units
have been proposed for Economically
Weaker Sections. They also note that in the
Rohini Residential Scheme 0.60 lakh
dwelling units are to be allotted to
Economically Weaker Sections. While
appreciating the steps taken to provide
houses to the EW Sections of population
in Delhi by the Government, the Committee
recommend that proper scrutiny is carried
out by DDA in coordination with the State
level authorities to identify the genuine
EWS beneficiaries under the Residential
schemes of DDA. The Committee
recommend that proper measures be taken
to ensure that only the actual EWS
beneficiary occupies such dwelling units.

124
12 3
They also recommend that DDA should
enhance their vigilance and monitoring
system so that dwelling units allotted to
identified EWS persons are not sold/re-sold
through property dealers. During the course
of oral evidence Secretary, Ministry of
Urban Development informed that such
allotments may be made on license basis
and not on lease basis. The Committee,
therefore, desire that steps be taken so as
to give dwelling units to EWS people on
license basis in ‘Pilot Project’ and thereby
applied uniformly to the Housing Schemes,
appropriately. The Committee recommend
that community based structures and
cooperative bodies/NGOs be involved in
the allotment of dwelling units to the EWS
people who will ensure that land/flats
earmarked for poor population is utilized
by them. Direct allotment of houses to EWS
should be avoided and there should be a
mandatory condition that resale of such
flats shall not be allowed.
27. 4.31 The Committee are informed that the MPD-
1962 required EWS housing to be integrated
into all residential development and MPD-
2001 explicates provisions for integration
(25% EWS plots and 20% LIG units in every
residential area for 100,000 persons) and
minimum standards (25 sq. m. Plot, etc.).
The Committee also note that DDA in their
Master Plan 2021 envisage amelioration of
existing Jhuggi Clusters through a judicious
mix of relocation and in situ  development.
They also note that a large number of flats
have been constructed/being constructed
for Economically Weaker Sections by DDA.
The Committee recommend that proper
measures be taken to ensure that the
occupancy certificates are given to any

125
12 3
cluster of housing only with the prescribed
number of dwelling units for the EWS
persons. The Committee, also, recommend
that earnest efforts be made by DDA for
constructing EWS dwelling units in the new
housing colonies so that accumulation of
new slums/clusters is discouraged to a
great extent. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the progress in the matter
in due course.
28. 4.32 The Committee recommend that annual
targets may be fixed for providing
housing/dwelling units to the JJ clusters in
line with the slum population so that slum
dwellers are accommodated in lands/units
developed by DDA. The Committee also
desire that the dwelling units developed to
remove slum clusters are planned and
allotted to JJ clusters in a phased manner.
Further, it would be appropriate if the slum
dwellers could be suitably relocated in
multistoryed tenements on DDA lands.
29. 4.33 The Committee note with concern that in
many ‘Resettlement Colonies’ for the slum
dwellers, the dwelling units constructed are
grossly sub-standard and these units appear
to be in a dilapidated condition. This is
because the material used is sub-standard
and there is hardly any quality control. The
Committee would like to know, as to why
it is so and what remedial steps are
proposed to repair these houses. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that
thorough checks be carried out at
construction stage itself. The inspection
team should see to it that contractors
assigned the job are adhering to the
requisite standards. This is extremely
desirable so as to ensure that the dwelling

126
12 3
units for relocating the JJ clusters are of
firm and livable standards.
30. 4.41 The Committee are concerned to note that
upto the end of 3 rd quarter of the year 1999,
10625 houses could not be allotted due to
absence of electricity and 5508 houses could
not be allotted due to absence of water
supply. The Committee are of the view that
before construction of houses is taken up,
DDA should satisfy itself about the
availability of water and power as per
requirement. The Committee would like to
know whether proper assessment of the
aforesaid requirements were done before
the construction was taken up. The
Committee recommend that sincere efforts
be made by DDA, DJB and the Electricity
authorities to take corrective action,
expeditiously, so that the bonafide owners
of these flats can be allotted the dwelling
units. The Committee may be apprised
about the action taken in the matter.
31. 4.42 The Committee are also of the firm view
that before allotting a flat, DDA should
ensure that all the basic facilities such as
water, sewage and electricity connections
etc. have been provided in the flats and
for this purpose, they should take up the
matter with the concerned agencies viz.
Delhi Jal Board and private electricity
companies. The Committee recommend that
DDA should open up proper service
counters in the residential complexes itself
so that the allottees don’t have to run from
pillar to post for getting such connections.
32. 4.43 As regards the water supply problem in
Dwarka Area, the Committee urge that
suitable measures be taken to distribute

127
12 3
water supply equitably in the area with the
help of DJB so that occupants of DDA flats
do not suffer due to lack of water supply.
33. 4.44 As regards, the Dilshad Garden area of
Delhi, the Committee are perturbed to learn
about the poor standard of maintenance of
sewerage tanks and the inadequacy of
sewage system. The Committee urge that
corrective measures be taken in this regard,
expeditiously.
34. 4.63 The Committee are informed that DDA
publicised a list of ‘Condonable Items’ in
connection with alteration/addition in DDA
Flats. The Committee however express their
concern about the inconveniences, if any,
caused to co-residents/neighbours where
additions/alterations have been carried out
in DDA flats by occupants. During the
course of oral evidence the Secretary,
Ministry of Urban Development has stated
that the list of ‘Condonable Items’ would
be expanded and revised. The Committee,
recommend that the list of ‘condonable
items’ be revised by an ‘expert body’ in a
scientific and technical manner. The
Committee are of the firm view that while
checking the list of ‘condonable items’,
adequate steps be taken to ensure proper
width of service lanes; sun-light; ventilation
and safety requirements of the colony. The
Committee recommend that particular
attention be given towards ‘fire safety’ and
rescue operations in event of fire in DDA
colonies. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the action taken in this
regard in due course.
35. 4.64 The Committee are of the view that after
the flats have been constructed, scope for

128
12 3
addition/alterations should be minimal as
it causes inconvenience to the co-residents/
neighbours and opens up scope for misuse.
36. 4.65 As regards levy of misuse charges, the
Committee note that under Section 29(2) of
the Delhi Development Act, 1957, any
person, who uses any land or building in
contravention of the provision of Section
14 or regulations under the proviso to that
Section shall be punishable with fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees. The
Committee are, however, of the firm view
that keeping in view of the present day
price indices, an amount of Rs. 5000/- as
fine is too meagre. The Committee,
therefore, recommend carrying out suitable
amendments in the governing rules and
regulations so as to substantially raise the
amount of fine limit imposed upon persons
for violation of the Delhi Master Plan
norms.
37. 5.21 The Committee are concerned to note that
colonies developed for residential purposes
by DDA are being handed over to MCD
for maintenance in a piece meal manner.
In many areas as for instance Dwarka, the
Delhi Jal Board (DJB) has not taken over
the area for regular supply of water supply.
The Committee are of the firm view that
areas developed and houses constructed by
DDA should be de-notified and handed
over to MCD in one go rather than taking
up the process of transfer part by part. In
regard to calculation of deficiency charges
at the time of transfer of DDA developed
areas to MCD, the Commissioner, MCD has
conceded during evidence that there is an
administrative problem in the matter in
view of a number of departments involved.

129
12 3
He has stated that there are vertical
departments and they do not have proper
integration with each other. The Committee
recommend that concerted efforts should be
made in consultation with the senior
officials of MCD and DJB so that the basic
civic amenities of water supply, electricity
etc., are provided in dwelling units before
handing over the possession to the allottees.
The Committee also recommend that DDA
should intervene in rectifying the
complaints of allottees on this count.
38. 5.22 The Committee note that payment of
deficiency charges to the local bodies and
concerned authorities are made in a routine
manner. The Committee are of the firm
view that if the DDA areas are developed
in a wholesome manner, the question of
payment of ‘deficiency charges’ to the
urban local bodies should not arise. The
Committee therefore, recommend that
purposeful steps be taken by DDA so as
to obviate deficiencies in the developed
areas and the consequent payment of the
‘deficiency charges’. The Committee also
recommend that the Ministry of Urban
Development should devise suitable
mechanism to ensure proper integration
and coordination between DDA, MCD, DJB
and local bodies.
39. 5.23 The Committee desire that the much
needed civic amenities of sewerage, water
supply, electricity, storm drains, garbage
disposal and proper maintenance to all the
DDA developed colonies/areas should be
provided hassle-free and within a given
time frame. The Committee would like to
be apprised about the action taken in this
regard.

130
12 3
40. 5.24 Regarding taking over of private colonies
by MCD, the Committee recommend that
in such cases, onus of payment of
deficiency charges should be on the private
builders and not on the residents of that
colony. It is expedient that MCD should
take over the private colonies at the earliest
so that private builders do not get away
from payment of deficiency charges. They
also recommend that it should be made
obligatory on the part of private builders
to develop the private colony at par with
DDA colonies and then MCD should suo-
moto take over the colony from the ‘private
players’ after recovering deficiency charges.
The Committee hope that Ministry of Urban
Development would help evolve such a
mechanism under intimation to the
Committee.
41. 5.25 The Committee note that Section 36 of the
Delhi Development Act, 1957 empowers
DDA to require the local authority to
assume the responsibility for extension of
the amenities on the terms and conditions
agreed to between DDA and the local
authority. The Committee are however
informed that in case of ‘commercial and
shopping complexes’ in many cases, the
DDA does not hand over the maintenance
to the local authority or MCD for years
together. The case of ‘commercial
complexes’ at IP Extension is one such
glaring example. These complexes are in a
dilapidated and dirty condition as they are
neither maintained by DDA nor by the
MCD. The Committee are of the view that
since both DDA and MCD are
governmental agencies, they must join
hands for the welfare of the public at large.

131
12 3
The Committee, therefore, recommend that
DDA should immediately hand over all the
fully developed ‘commercial areas’ in Delhi
including IP Extension to MCD who should
look after sewerage, cleanliness etc. of such
areas. The Committee may be apprised
about the action taken in the matter.
42. 6.10 The Committee express their distress over
the fact that some hospitals have violated
the norms for free treatment of 25 percent
patients belonging to BPL categories.
Moreover, there have been instances where
the acutal BPL categories of people were
unable to get their treatment done in such
hospitals and others have taken the benefit
of the same by misrepresentation. The
Committee, therefore, firmly recommend
that a mechanism to identify BPL category
by Government of NCT Delhi and issue of
certificates to such people alongwith their
photo identity cards needs to be devised
so that genuine BPL persons are able to
avail of medical facilities in hospitals. It
should be ensured that the hospitals strictly
provide free treatment to the stipulated
percentage under BPL category. The
Committee should be kept informed of the
steps taken in this regard as also the
punitive action taken/proposed for
violation thereof.
43. 6.11 The Committee note that in one case, the
land earmarked for Dharmashala was used
for Banquet Hall. The Committee take a
serious view of it and would like that the
matter be thoroughly probed. Here, they
would also like to recommend that misuse
of land should be considered a criminal
offence and necessary provisions in this
regard need to be incorporated in the law.

132
12 3
44. 6.13 The Committee note that it is the general
tendency that plots allotted to Societies for
constructing primary schools are misused
by subsequent upgradation of schools
thereby making them costlier and beyond
the reach of common people. The
Committee feel that such a tendency defeats
the very purpose of allotment of land for a
charitable purpose viz. imparting of primary
education. The Committee feel that while
Government is fully geared in ‘Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan’ (Universal education),
such type of misuse would be detrimental
to the society and would lead to
commercialisation of education. They feel
that such tendency should be curbed at the
earliest in consultation with Government of
NCT Delhi. Here, they concur with the
views of the Ministry that land for
construction of primary schools should be
allotted only to MCD, so that there remains
no scope for any misutilisation of the land.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that
necessary steps in this regard be initiated
by the Ministry and the Committee be kept
informed about the action taken.
45. 6.24 The Committee feel that even though the
office of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies
does not come under the jurisdiction and
control of Ministry of Urban Development
however, the cooperative group housing
being linked to housing sector, it is very
much related to the Ministry of Urban
Development. They note that in Delhi,
allotment of land to Cooperative Group
Housing Societies is done by DDA. A large
area of land i.e. approximately 1900 acres
of land has been allotted to 877 Housing
Societies. The Committee, therefore feel that

133
12 3
DDA cannot wash off their hands if some
misuse or misappropriation in Cooperative
Group Housing Societies takes place. While
admitting that Cooperative Group Housing
Societies are regulated by RCS office under
Cooperative Societies Act and Rules, the
Committee feel that DDA has a major role
to play and to oversee that the land allotted
to Cooperative Group Housing Societies is
actually utilised in the interest of society
members, who mainly consist of middle
and service class people and who had
invested all their earnings and borrowings
for getting a house of their own. While
appreciating the move taken by DDA and
RCS to ward-off any misappropriation and
to ensure that Societies do not become the
fiefdom of a selected few, the Committee
recommend that interests of bulk of society
members should not be neglected. The
Committee understand that management of
Society should not flout any of the
provisions enshrined in Cooperative
Societies Act and Rules. At the sametime,
they recommend that RCS office should not
be too rigid in such matters and should
keep in mind the interests of genuine
members. The Committee note that there
are several Societies, whose members are
waiting for a long time for their draw of
lots, but due to the mistake of their
management and rigidity of RCS office,
most of them are suffering. They, therefore,
recommend that an institutional mechanism
should be devised which is people’s
friendly, less time consuming and at the
sametime deterrent to law breakers.
46. 6.25 The Committee also note that the
Cooperative Group Housing Societies while
constructing the dwelling units do not

134
12 3
provide adequate space for housing the
daily service providers to the residents of
such dwelling units. The Committee,
therefore, feel that at the planning stage
itself, it should be kept in mind that
arrangements should exist for service
providers such as dhobi, mali, maidservant,
safiwala etc. in these CGH Socieities.
Possibility of such an arrangement should
be explored.
47. 6.35 The Committee note that DDA had set up
an Urban heritage foundation in September
1999 which is a welcome measure. While
appreciating DDA for taking up eleven
conservation projects, for inculcating
awareness among masses to project our
urban heritage by instituting Urban
Heritage Award, they feel that DDA should
have taken up such initiatives at the time
of its inception, itself and should have
planned the city accordingly. Had it been
so done, a number of various water-bodies,
which have become dry could have been
protected from drying. The Committee is
fully in conformity with the views
expressed by convenor INTACH that some
areas such as Chandni Chowk, Connaught
Place, Lodhi Garden, Central Vista, Qutab
Archaeological Park, Lutyen Zone, etc.
should be developed as specific heritage
zones and all the governmental agencies of
the city viz. NDMC, MCD, CPWD, PWD
ASI etc. should work in complete harmony
and with close coordination. Some
concerted efforts should also be made by
Ministry of Urban Development and DDA
to retain urban heritage of Delhi for which
it is known all over the world.

135
12 3
48. 6.41 While appreciating various measures taken
by DDA for e-governance and
computerized public utility system at Vikas
Sadan, the Committee take a serious note
of lack of computerized facilities at Vikas
Minar, which is the main centre of
engineering, designing and architectural
activity. They feel that computerisation and
its full utilisation in respect of drafting,
design and architectural work is pre-
requisite for the development and
upgradation of technology and skill. They
therefore recommend that DDA should
utilize state-of-art software, hardware and
other infrastructure in engineering and
architecture. The Committee also note that
there is shortage of Junior Engineers at field
level. Since recruitment has stopped for
several years, there is a need for recruiting
fresh engineers who are abreast with the
latest technology in the field. Also the
Engineering and Architectural staff,
presently working in DDA, must be
imparted ‘Refresher Courses’ and training
with the latest state-of-art, periodically.
They therefore recommend for filling up of
all vacancies without any further delay.
They also note that DDA has not taken up
work pertaining to the use of non-
conventional source of energy/alternate
source of energy. They, therefore
recommend that DDA should take up other
activities viz. alternate source of energy like
solar energy and solid waste management,
which is expedient for development as
enumerated in its object.
49. 6.44 The Committee note that a large number
of Memoranda have been received alleging
inaction by various departments of the

136
12 3
DDA. The Committee have their
apprehensions that inaction on the part of
DDA encourages defaulters who think that
they can get away lightly. On the other
hand, honest people feel let down if no
action is taken when they report such in
actions to the DDA. Inaction on part of
DDA obviously makes people suspicious.
DDA needs to build its image by acting
timely on the genuine complaints of
unauthorized constructions and
encroachments received from the common
public. The Committee recommend that the
functioning of the enforcement and
recovery Department of DDA should be
reviewed thoroughly so that suitable check
and balance is maintained by fixing time-
frame for handling of jobs at each desk.
Further, officers delaying matters or not
acting timely on issues brought to their
notice should be held accountable and
stringent action taken against them.
50. 6.45 Since its inception several decades back,
DDA has made long strides and flowered
into a vast organisation with manifold
functions and responsibilities and with vast
area of operation. Over the years, DDA’s
function has focused mainly on building
activities which has become highly
professional now a days. As such, it will
be in the fitness of things that the officers
and staff of DDA should be highly
professional with more and more
autonomy. As such, it is imperative that
top posts in DDA  i.e. Vice-Chairman etc.
should be manned by the professionals who
might be absorbed in the organisation itself
so that they can concentrate more and
contribute more towards its upliftment and
efficiency. It is high time to see whether

137
12 3
DDA can be given the status of navratna
with more functional autonomy. The
Committee desire that the feasibility in this
regard may be explored and if necessary,
amendment in rules/enactment may be
carried out.
51. 6.46 The reported mal-practices and alleged
corruption prevailing in DDA’s offices lead
to some serious thinking about the
functioning of vigilance there and cast a
sinister shadow on it. It seems that the
vigilance is not that effective as it should
be or it has functional hindrances due to
one reason or the other as a consequence
of which they are not able to play their
expected role. Any organisation has to be
corruption free and to that effect effective
deterrence to mal-practices is a must. The
Committee feel perhaps there is a gap here.
There is a need to strengthen the vigilance
machinery substantially and to acquaint
them with the latest strides made in this
area. Restructuring and proper orientation
have become more essential in view of the
irregularites reported from time to time.
The Committee feel that the officers
heading the vigilance wing should be
sufficiently senior in hierarchy and should
be permitted to work independently
without any interference. The entire
vigilance wing should have functional
autonomy and the head of this wing should
be made accountable to the Lt. Governor
only who is the ex-officio Chairman, DDA.
The feasibility in this regard may be
explored and if found necessary,
amendment may be made in the rules or
act.

138
12 3
52. 6.47 The Committee observe that the staff
strength of DDA has increased manifold
after its inception in 1957. They therefore,
recommend that in order to manage huge
staff of DDA, DDA needs a full time
Member(Personnel) and for this purpose
suitable amendment should also be made
in section 3 (3) of DD Act, 1957.
53. 6.50 The Committee note with satisfaction the
various steps are being taken by DDA to
ensure public participation in their
functioning. The Committee, however, are
concerned to note that a large number of
grievances against DDA and their officials
are published in ‘Print Media’ and people
are constrained to take the help of Press to
get their problems redressed or to go to
the Courts of law. This shows that the DDA
does not give proper and adequate
response on a given complaint. The
Committee firmly recommend that an
effective and responsive mechanism for
monitoring the complaints be devised by
DDA with a positive perspective in mind
for timely and quick redressal of public
grievances and the written complaints
received in DDA offices should be
monitored and disposed on a regular basis.
54. 6.55 The Committee are distressed to learn that
a large number of corruption cases have
been registered and as many as 115 cases
of corruption against DDA officials
registered by various agencies are pending
disciplinary action. Moreover, out of the
174 disciplinary cases processed in 2003-04,
about 34 officials have been exonerated of
the charges. The Committee, therefore
recommend that the internal vigilance

139
administration be further strengthened to
make it more accountable, transparent and
reliable in the eyes of people. Further, DDA
should take timely disciplinary action
against officials, who are found to be
involved in cases of bribery and in
malpractices in allotment of lands/flats etc.
The Committee recommend that the
structure and functioning of the vigilance
organization of DDA be effectively and
comprehensively reviewed by forming an
internal ‘Working Committee.’
55. 6.56 The Committee note with concern that
48 complaints have been reported against
officials of its Building Departments. The
Committee strongly recommend that
disciplinary action be taken against the
officials of the Building Department (DDA)
who are involved in corruption,
malpractices and any kind of irregularities.
The Committee also find that procedures
for approval of building plans are lengthy
and cumbersome. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that simple procedures be laid
down to eliminate delay and unnecessary
harassment to people.
56. 6.60 The Committee are perturbed to note that
a number of complaints have been received
by the general public on the cumbersome
and lengthy procedure adopted for
conversion of property from lease-hold to
free-hold. The Committee fail to understand
as to why the DDA does not bother to look
into its own records and expects people to
submit and re-submit the same documents
on several occasions for getting their final
approval for conversion from lease to free
hold of property. The Committee observe
that certain documents like photocopy of
12 3

140
12 3
lease-deed, Plinth Area Certificate,
Possession Certificate and Poof of Physical
Possessions should be available in DDA
records. Such a situation speaks volume of
lack of coordination between different
‘wings’ of same organization. The
Committee therefore, firmly recommend
that the procedure for conversion of
property from lease-hold to free-hold be
simplified by minimizing the number of
documents to be submitted as well as by
fixing a time-frame for completion of the
whole procedure by DDA. DDA should
also computerize this system and hold
periodical camps in the DDA colonies itself,
for easy access to the public and to mitigate
their grievances on this count.
57. 6.62 The Committee have received a number of
Memoranda from the General Public about
the menace of property dealers who work
in DDA lands in connivance with DDA
officials. Even before allotments are made
of the DDA’s dwelling units, boards and
hoardings of property dealers come up in
the area. The Committee feel that such
commercialization of the DDA’s Units shall
defeat the main purpose of giving cost
effective housing to the weaker sections of
the society. They therefore, recommend that
strict action be taken against the field staff
and officers of DDA, who operate hand-in-
glove with private property dealers and
encourage sale of dwelling units on ‘Power
of Attorney’ at higher prices thereby,
earning unwarranted profits and periodical
inspection is done in this regard.
58. 6.66 The Committee note with concern that the
land use earmarked in Zonal Master Plan
has been changed by DDA after a passage

141
12 3
of time in certain areas of Delhi. The
Committee are of the firm view that such
change in land use of an area should be
made only in case of compelling
circumstances and for the facility/benefit of
the residential population of such area. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that prior
to change in land use of an area, the RWAs
etc. must be consulted and such change
should be avoided in cases where the area
had been earmarked ‘Green’ area in Zonal
Plans.