16
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Eighth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Delhi Development
Authority (DDA)’ of the Ministry of Urban Development]
SIXTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


SIXTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Eighth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Delhi Development
Authority (DDA)’ of the Ministry of Urban Development]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ……………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ……………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2006/Asadha, 1928 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 16
Price : Rs. 106.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER-I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER-II Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government .................................................. 31
CHAPTER-III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 54
CHAPTER-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 62
CHAPTER-V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 77
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the 12th sitting of the Committee
held on 23.6.2006. ..................................................... 97
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained
in Eighth Report of the Committee. ................... 99
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
*2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Pushp Jain
6. Shri P . Mohan
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Amitava Nandy
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
11. Shri L. Rajgopal
12. Shri D. Vittal Rao
13. Shri Sajjan Kumar
14. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Sugrib Singh
17. Shri K. Subbarayan
18. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
19. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
20. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
21. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
(iii)
*Ceased to be the member of the Committee consequent upon his becoming Minister
w.e.f. 29.1.2006.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
25. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
26. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
**27. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
28. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
29. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
30. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
31. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
2. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Assistant Director
(iv)
**Ceased to be the member of the Committee consequent upon his retirement from
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2.4.2006.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2005-2006) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Sixteenth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Eighth Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban
Development on the subject ‘Delhi Development Authority (DDA)’ of
the Ministry of Urban Development.
2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 August,
2005. The Replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 21 November, 2005.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
23rd June, 2006.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) of the Committee (2005-06) is given in Appendix-II.
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
27 June, 2006 Chairman,
6 Asadha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Urban Development (2005-2006)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Eighth Report on the Delhi Development Authority
(DDA) of Ministry of Urban Development, which was presented to
Lok Sabha on 2 August, 2005.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 58 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos.: 1.31, 1.32, 1.33, 2.34, 3.13, 3.14, 3.20, 3.21, 4.12,
4.13, 4.14, 4.33, 4.43, 4.63, 4.64, 5.25, 6.11, 6.44, 6.45, 6.46,
6.47, 6.50, 6.60, 6.62 and 6.66.
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 1.27, 1.28, 2.30, 4.22, 4.41
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 1.29, 1.30, 2.29, 2.33, 2.36, 3.24, 5.21, 5.22, 5.23,
6.10 and 6.24
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.28, 2.31, 2.32, 2.35, 4.23, 4.31, 4.32, 4.42, 4.44,
4.65, 5.24, 6.13, 6.25, 6.35, 6.41, 6.55 and 6.56
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations for which only interim replies have been given by
the Government should be furnished to the Committee within three
months of the presentation of the Report. They observe that final
replies in respect of most of the recommendations categorised under
Chapter V depend upon the finalisation of MPD-2021. They, therefore
recommend that MPD-2021 should be finalised at the earliest and

2
action as suggested by the Committee, should be taken without any
further delay. The Committee, would like to be informed in this
regard.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Basic Amenities in Resettlement Colonies
Recommendation (Para No. 1.29)
5. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee needs hardly mention that the problems faced in
Delhi in accommodating the migratory population from rural/small
towns and townships are manifold. The city is not only required
to provide ‘Housing’ to the incoming population, but also water
supply, sanitation, sewerage, treatment of sewers, electricity, garbage
disposal and environmental management. While the Committee
appreciates that the draft MPD 2021 envisions to make Delhi a
global metropolis and a world class city, they are however of the
firm view that unless coordinated efforts are made by DDA, the
NDMC, Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi Jal Board and urban
bodies to ensure proper garbage disposal and curtail open-
defecation in the squatter settlements, this objective would be very
difficult to be achieved. The Committee recommends that DDA
should develop suitable housing structures for the urban poors
with proper sanitation facilities and re-locate people living in
squatters and slum tenements in appropriate areas.
6. The Government have replied as under:
The provision of the basic amenities in relocation sites is the
responsibility of the relocating agency, mainly the Slum and JJ
Wing of MCD. However services such as water supply, roads and
drains etc., are to be provided by DJB, MCD etc. However, as
observed by the Committee, there is often a backlog of sanitation
and other services in the Resettlement Schemes. This is mainly
due to delay in the provision of the services by the concerned
agencies namely DJB, MCD etc. However as far as possible, while
relocating squatters to different relocation colonies, both DDA and
the Slum and JJ Deptt. of MCD provide basic facilities like roads,
electricity, water schools, dispensaries, toilet complexes etc. In
addition, Slum and JJ Deptt. also provides Basti Vikas Kendras,
Community Halls and Shishu Vatikas in the resettlement pockets

3
developed by them. Moreover, in order to plan for better
provisioning for basic amenities, Draft MPD-2021 proposes the
following for Resettlement Colonies:
“The immediate need is of individual services i.e. water, sewerage
and electricity. Regular sewerage network provision may not be
possible immediately in many areas because of non-availability of
connecting lines and financial constraints. In such cases, the low
cost sanitation on individual or collective basis should be adopted.
To ensure healthy and better environment, the construction of
houses needs to be based on approved/standard building plans.
Co-operative societies/private developers/govt. agencies may come
forward for redevelopment based on the incentives as applicable
for the Squatter Rehabilitation Scheme.”
7. The Committee note that provision of basic amenities in
relocation sites is the responsibility of slum and JJ wing of MCD
and Delhi Jal Board. It has been argued by the Government in their
action taken reply that backlog of sanitation and other services in
the Resettlement colonies is mainly due to delay in the provision of
services by the concerned agencies i.e. MCD and DJB. However, the
Committee are not convinced by this reply of the Government.
Although the MPD-2021 proposes for basic amenities in Resettlement
colonies, the Committee are of the firm view that the urban local
bodies and DDA have a bounden duty/responsibility of providing
the basic amenities in all the urban areas including Resettlement
Colonies in Delhi. The Committee, therefore, desire that DDA should
make integrated efforts in coordination with MCD and DJB to
provide the much needed civic amenities, and also alleviate the
problems faced by the urban poor, who cannot afford to construct
toilets in their Resettlement Colonies. They also recommend that
before rehabilitating slum dwellers in resettlement colonies, all
infrastructural arrangements should be made so as to ensure public
health and hygiene beside providing them with electricity and water.
The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this
regard.
B. Deterrent laws for Non-Permissible Land use
Recommendation (Para No. 1.30)
8. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee are informed that specific provisions for Mixed
Land Use had been made by Government in the residential areas

4
along with Non-permissible Mixed Land use in MPD 2001. In this
regard, the Committee desire that proper and earnest steps are
taken by the concerned governmental authorities to ensure that
non-permissible limits of Mixed Land Use are adhered to in the
urban areas of Delhi so as to ensure security, safety and
environmental quality of residential areas. The Committee also
desire that the provisions/limits of permissible and non-permissible
Mixed Land Use be reviewed in the light of latest developments
and necessary amendments be made in these limits, if found
necessary. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard.
9. The Government have replied as under:
The provisions of mixed land use as given in Master Plan have
been worked out so as to maintain a balance between the ground
realities/provision of self-employment opportunities, with the need
to ensure security , safety and environmental quality of the
residential areas. DDA is responsible for administering the
provisions relating to mixed use in development areas and local
bodies namely NDMC and MCD are responsible for this function
in those development areas that have already been de-notified and
transferred to them by DDA. The relevant statutes namely, DD
Act and the MCD Act provide for prosecution and limited financial
penalty in cases of misuse or violation of provisions relating to
mixed use. There are no provisions for sealing the premises in
cases of misuse under the Master Plan. Therefore, there is no
effective deterrent to prevent and tackle the problem of misuse of
properties beyond the extent of mixed use provided for under the
Master Plan. It is proposed to undertake revision of these provisions
in the Act to provide for more stringent and effective deterrence
against misuse and violation of provisions relating to mixed land-
use.
However, within the statutory provisions available at present, DDA
has been undertaking action in cases of violation of mixed land-
use provisions. The year-wise number of prosecution cases launched
and fine imposed by MM court are as under:
Sl.No.  Year Prosecution Fine imposed
launched by MM Court
1. 2002-03 599 Rs. 4.21 Lakh
2. 2003-04 199 Rs. 13.69 Lakh
3. 2004-05 408 Rs. 17.31 Lakh

5
Further, the draft MPD-2021, which has been published for inviting
objections/suggestions from the public in April 2005 has proposed
the following with respect to Mixed Land Use:
1. Non-residential activity on residential premises should be
permitted selectively and carefully taking into consideration
community needs, environmental impact and provision for
safe and easy traffic circulation and adequate parking.
2. In case of new developments, planned mixed residential
and non-residential activity should be introduced right at
the time of preparation of layout plans along with planning
of Commercial Centres for which appropriate provision of
parking, circulation and services be kept in view. Norms
for parking and commercial use on different floors be
specified.
3. Notified provisions made in the earlier plan may be
continued within the overall framework of the approved
plan.
4. Mixed use may be permitted on residential plot facing
streets/roads of minimum 18.0m ROW in regular residential
plotted development with prescribed development norms,
such streets should be notified and given wide publicity.
5. The bungalow areas of Lutyens Delhi and Civil Lines,
Government housing institutional/staff housing and areas
of heritage and national importance shall not be covered
under the mixed use policy.
10. The Committee note that MPD-2021 proposes certain
provisions for mixed land use in residential areas subject to public
need, environmental impact and provision for safe and easy traffic
circulation and adequate parking. While keeping in view the needs
of residents and their safety and convenience, they are of the view
that mixed land use should be judiciously permitted with great
caution. Otherwise, the quality living of residents of Delhi may be
adversely affected. The Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire that the provision/limits of permissible
and non-permissible mixed land use must be reviewed in a
wholesome manner so as to clearly demarcate commercial and non-
commercial areas of a given land and the permissible limit of
commercial or non-commercial or other use of the land in residential
areas. The Committee also desire that appropriate action should be
taken against those, who do not abide by set limits of use of the

6
urban land. In this regard, the Committee feel that the feasibility of
providing suitable power to DDA and other Urban Local Bodies to
‘seal‘ a given premises may be explored in cases of infringement of
the limits in ‘Mixed Land Use’.
C. Participation of Private Sector in Mega Housing Project
Recommendation (Para No. 1.33)
11. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee note from ‘Print Media’ reports that DDA has,
recently, approved in principle the participation of private sector
in mega housing projects across the Delhi city. It envisages to
engage the private sector in constructions in a minimum area of
10 hectares or 50,000 square meters of built-up areas and above.
Keeping in view of the repeated complaints about the alleged nexus
between DDA officials and the private builders, the Committee
contain their apprehension as to whether the construction of
dwelling units by these private builders would be in accordance
with the Zonal and Master Plan. The Committee are of the firm
view that the DDA must be primarily responsible for the residential
housing development in Delhi. Participation of private builders in
a large scale would lead to cost escalation of the dwelling units
and such dwelling units will be beyond the purchasing power of
the common urban population in Delhi. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the DDA and the GNCT of Delhi should give a fresh
look towards their decision of inviting private builders in a large
scale in taking up mega projects in Delhi.
12. The Government have replied as under:
As envisaged under Delhi Development Act, DDA has been
discharging the primary responsibility of development of land in
Delhi. For undertaking such development, DDA has been acquiring
land under the Scheme of Large Scale Acquisition of Land. The
land is acquired through Land Acquisition Collector, GNCTD under
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. Experience
indicates that there is considerable delay in acquiring and taking
possession of land due to the elaborate procedures required to be
followed as also the litigation associated with the process. DDA
takes up construction of housing on acquired land and allots these
houses to the citizens for meeting the shelter needs of the
population of Delhi. However, due to delay in obtaining land, and
the growing pressure of population, it has not been possible to
keep pace to fully meet the housing needs in Delhi. The draft
MPD-2021 estimates a backlog of 4 lakh dwelling units and as
well as additional requirement of 20 lakh dwelling units by 2021.

7
In order to meet the requirement of housing units, and to overcome
the weaknesses in the procedure hitherto being followed by DDA
and GNCTD, it is proposed to permit participation of private sector
in land assembly and housing development. While permitting such
private participation, checks and balances will be introduced to
ensure compliance with provisions of Master Plan as well as
building Byelaws, the latter being administered by local bodies. At
the same time it is also proposed to make it mandatory for the
private developers to provide housing to EWS categories so that
the overall objectives of planned development are achieved. It is
also expected that private developers in the housing sector will
introduce an element of competitiveness and innovation in this
sector in Delhi, which will automatically counter any speculative
tendencies or profiteering at the expense of the citizen.
Procedural details in the matter and further fine-tuning of the
proposed models would however be worked out after detailed
deliberations and interaction with the stake holders so that the
new policy can be implemented in a transparent and realistic
manner.
13. The Committee are concerned to note the tedious and
cumbersome procedure involved in acquisition of land which leads
to delay in meeting the target fixed for housing. Noting that the
private participation is an outcome of this cumbersome procedure,
the Committee would like that DDA should address this aspect
whole heartedly and streamline and ease the procedure in close
coordination with the authorities concerned. They should find out a
solution instead of bypassing the malaise. So far as the involvement
of private sector in land assembly and housing, the Committee are
of the firm view that private sector should work under strict
supervision and control of DDA in order to restrain them from any
unauthorized construction and resort to the sole aim of profit making.
The Committee would like to be apprised about the procedural
details in this regard.
D. Non Confirming use of DDA Lands
Recommendation (Para No. 2.29)
14. The Committee had noted as below:
As regards, non-conforming use of the DDA lands, the Committee
note that DDA has initiated counteractive action under the
provisions of Section 29 (ii) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 in
140 cases in 2003, 144 cases in 2004 and 332 cases in 2005. While

8
the Committee note with satisfaction that DDA has taken certain
remedial actions in cases of non-conforming use of their lands,
with the Master Plans, they desire that DDA should devise suitable
in-built mechanism to check misuse of their lands and ensure the
developed areas remain intact with the Master Plan.
15. The Government have replied as under:
Regarding on-conforming use of DDA land, the provision of section
29 (2) of the DD Act 1957 has already been incorporated in the
lease deed (s) of properties. The violation of the terms and
conditions of the said provision in the lease deed attracts
termination of the lease deed and subsequent eviction proceedings
against defaulting lessee of the property. In addition, DDA has an
in-built mechanism to detect violations of section 29 (ii) of DD Act
through the Enforcement Branch and Survey Wing. These wings
of the DDA conduct periodical inspection of the sites under their
jurisdiction to ascertain the nature, quantum and period of non-
confirming use of DDA land, after which the action stipulated in
the lease deed follows.
The Enforcement Branch (Lands) of DDA takes action under section
14 read with Section 29 (2) of DD Act 1957 regarding detection of
misuse in residential areas in contravention of the provisions of
Master Plan and issues show cause notices to the misuser of the
premises. Simultaneously, other Govt. Departments such as House
Tax, Licensing and Health Deptt. of MCD, Sales Tax Deptt. and
ROC are approached for verification of the ownership of the
premises/constitution of the misuser companies. On receipt of
verification, prosecution is launched against the misuser of the
premises in the court of Metropolitan Magistrate, Patiala House,
New Delhi.
Moreover, DDA imposes misuse charges for non conforming use
of the property as and when conversion applications are received
in respect of such properties. In such cases, the past misuse charges
are also recovered and non payment of the misuse charges amounts
to termination of lease deed and subsequent eviction from the
property .
16. Despite the fact that sufficient penal provisions exist legally
to forestall or prevent the non-conforming use of DDA land, it is a
cause for concern that the cases of non-conforming in the use of
land is rising day by day. This shows that the enforcement
Department has to do much more than what is being done. Action
taken should be result oriented and not a compromise. Simple

9
penalty for misuse charges will encourage further violation as the
defaulter can escape by paying the penalty. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that strict monitoring and vigilance should be resorted
to thwart such attempt and exemplary action, as per law, should be
taken against the defaulters. The onus lies with the Enforcement
Department, and they should be made accountable for violation
undetected with proper disciplinary actions. The Committee also
recommend that DDA should make periodic and surprise check of
their colonies to prevent such misuse and the officers concerned
should be held responsible for any such misuse.
E. Compensation to the Land losers
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
17. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee note that the Land Acquisition Collector acquires
land in Delhi from farmers and villagers and hands over such
acquired lands to DDA for development. At the time of acquisition
of these lands, the LAC fixes the acquisition rate to be paid as
compensation to the land losers. The Committee also note that
alternative plots are allotted to the recommended farmers whose
land has been acquired under large scale acquisition and
development of land in Delhi. The Committee, however, would
like to point out that a number of complaints have been received
from such land losers by the Committee in response to their ‘Press
Communiques’. These complaints pertain to fixation of low rate of
compensation to the land losers, and denial of allotment of
alterative plots to certain land losers, specifically in Rohini and
Wazirpur areas. Apart from these, a number of cases are pending
in courts of law by complainants or land losers for suitable
compensation. The Committee recommend that keeping in mind
the needs of the farmers/villagers who have lost their lands, which
were their means of livelihood, the DDA as well as the concerned
Government authorities must take substantial steps so as to give
adequate monetary compensation and alternate lands to such land
losers with a positive perspective. The Committee strongly feel
that whenever any land is acquired by DDA from anyone, the
process should be so simplified that the land loser without any
hassle and delay, is able to get compensation on alternative land/
flat/shop within a specific time frame and is not made to wait for
years together as is the case now. The Committee also recommend
that whenever any land is acquired, the landless labourers working
on the same land should be suitably rehabilitated, as they get
deprived of their means of livelihood.

10
18. The Government have replied as under:
The Delhi Development Act envisages planned development of
Delhi through the agency of DDA. In order to undertake this
planned development DDA has been acquiring land in areas
earmarked under the Master Plan for urbanization. Acquisition of
land is undertaken by GNCTD on the basis of requisition given
by DDA. The Land Acquisition Collector (LAC), GNCTD carries
out the acquisition under the provisions of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894. Further to provide for the peculiar nature of acquisition
in Delhi for planned development, a scheme for Large Scale
Acquisition, Development and Disposal of Land, was also
formulated by the Govt. in 1961. While the Land Acquisition Act
provides for compensation to land owners at the rates approved
by the Govt. from time to time, the Scheme for large scale
acquisition provides for allotment of alternate residential plots to
land owners, by DDA, based on the certification of eligibility by
GNCTD. For the simplification of land acquisition process, a
standard operating procedure has been finalized between DDA
and Land & Building Department of GNCTD.
As far as monetary compensation is concerned, LAC/L&B Deptt./
Dy. Commissioner of GNCTD are competent to acquire land as
per the Land Acquisition Act. The compensation rate is fixed and
award is passed by the LAC. The award is also approved by the
Competent Authority in GNCTD, after which the amount of
compensation is released by DDA. Land owners who are aggrieved
by the rates fixed by LAC, can file references before the Court of
Addl. District Judge.
So far as the allotment of alternative land to the farmers whose
land has been acquired for the planned development of Delhi is
concerned, the role of DDA arises only after receipt of
recommendations from L&B Deptt. There is a clear cut policy for
allotment of alternative land which has been revised from time to
time, keeping in view the changes in land cost/market value and
also the availability of sufficient land. The policy for awarding
compensation to land owners and grant of alternate plots to them
does not cover agricultural labourers that may have been dependent
on the acquired agricultural land. Any such policy would have to
be evolved by the L&B Deptt. of Govt. of NCT of Delhi for
rehabilitation of the labourers working on the said land, after taking
into account various factors such as availability of land, nature of
employment, and avenues for employment in non-agricultural
sector of urbanization of the acquired land.

11
19. The Committee note that the Government provides
compensation to land losers, whose land are acquired by DDA for
planned development, either in the form of the monetary
compensation or allotment of alternative land to farmers. However,
the Committee are not convinced with the stand taken by the
Ministry in respect of compensation to labourers working in such
agricultural fields, as it has been stated that it is unto the Land and
Building Department of GNCT of Delhi to evolve a policy for
rehabilitation of the labourers who were working on the agricultural
land acquired for DDA. They recommend that Ministry of Urban
Development should take up the matter with GNCT Delhi and DDA
to review the compensation policy so as to benefit peasants and
workers who worked in the acquired agricultural land in and around
Delhi.
F. Reclamation of unauthorized land
Recommendation (Para No. 2.36)
20. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee are concerned to note that out of a large area of
about 1400 acres of DDA lands encroached upon by unauthorized
colonies, DDA has been able to reclaim only 433.98 acres of land
which means that less than one third of the encroached land could
only be reclaimed by DDA. This is because unauthorized colonies
have come up on the remaining areas. The Committee feels that
a clear cut policy needs to be evolved by the Central Government
with regard to the treatment of unauthorized colonies. The
Committee note that though DDA has been vested with powers of
demolition, stopping and sealing powers, but not much has been
achieved in reclaiming encroached lands. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that DDA and the Ministry of Urban Development
must take concrete measures in consultation with local bodies, so
as to reclaim all the encroached lands of DDA, expeditiously. The
Committee also recommend that a suitable policy-framework be
adopted so as to curb cropping up of new unauthorized colonies.
Regularization of unauthorized colonies in course of time provides
an incentive to such acts and legitimises a step which was
considered illegal and was in violation of the law.
21. The Government have replied as under:
The DDA is maintaining regular vigil in respect of its land with
a view to strengthen preventive and protection arrangements.
Specific responsibilities have been entrusted to field functionaries

12
in different areas. Action for removal of encroachments is
undertaken on a continuous basis. Videography of the vacant lands
belonging to DDA has been done. Periodical videography of the
DDA lands will help prevent unauthorized encroachments. Security
guards have been deployed for safeguard of the DDA land. They
are reporting to the concerned SHO for unauthorised encroachments
in the area as well as to the controlling officers of DDA.
As per the recent scrutiny of unauthorised colonies it has come to
notice that out of 1432 unauthorised colonies, 145 are partly or
fully on DDA acquired/awarded land and 228 unauthorised
colonies are on land notified as Development Area, which are under
control of DDA. The issue of regularization of the unauthorised
colonies is under consideration of Government of India.
22. The Committee note with concern that out of 1433
unauthorized colonies, 145 colonies are partly or fully on DDA
acquired/awarded land and 228 unauthorized colonies are on land
notified as Development Area. They feel though some measures have
been taken by DDA to reclaim the land from unauthorized
habitation, but a lot of work is required to be done. They, therefore,
recommend that at the time of taking over of land from GNCTD,
the land should be without any encroachment and after acquiring
the land, DDA should be responsible for any further encroachment/
unauthorized occupation. They also recommend that in case of any
unauthorized occupation, the responsibility should be fixed on the
officials of DDA. The Committee would also like to know how
such a large area could be allowed to be encroached upon in course
of time without being detected and taking further steps to reclaim
them at the right time.
G. Maintenance and Infrastructure Development of Green Areas and
Water Bodies
Recommendation (Para No. 3.13)
23. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee note that DDA has extensively developed green
areas in Delhi and has helped Delhi to grow as one of the greenest
cities in the country. While appreciating the achievements made
by DDA in developing the forests, woodland, green belts, district
parks, zonal parks, neighbourhood parks and children parks etc.,
the Committee desire that maintenance of such green areas and
water bodies etc., should be carried out from time to time and all

13
the basic facilities viz. toilet, drinking water, eateries, etc. should
be provided for the welfare of public at large. The Committee are
also of view that co-ordinated efforts be made by the Ministry of
Urban Development with the Ministry of Environment and Forests
so as to maintain the water-bodies clean. The Committee desire
that all public places especially parks should have ‘Pay and Use’
toilets facilities as for instance the ‘Sulabh’ toilets. Such toilet
facilities would help in the maintenance of environment. The
Committee further recommend that the viability for opening up
food counters/eateries be examined by DDA in or around the
‘public parks’. The Committee also recommend that demands of
the local residents for development of the already existing Parks
be met by DDA with a positive perspective in mind.
24. The Government have replied as under:
The maintenance and upkeep of green areas and water bodies is
an ongoing process being carried out regularly. The suggestion to
maintain clean water bodies has been noted for compliance.
Providing ‘Pay & Use’ toilet facility in public places, specially parks
is now being considered and in most of the popular green areas,
B.O.T. toilets have been provided/are being provided.
The list of parks where this facility has been provided is as under:
1. Indraprastha Park (2 nos. provided & 2 nos. more to be
provided)
2. Park opposite LSR College
3. Rose Garden, Hauz Khas
4. Park at Savitri Nagar
5. District Park, Paschim Vihar
The list of parks where this facility is being provided is as under:
(1) Ashoka Garden, Ashok Vihar
(2) District Park, Pitampura
(3) Tughlakabad Recreational Complex
(4) Green Area near Siri Fort on Joseph Broz Tito Marg
(5) District Park, Sarita Vihar
(6) Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial Park at Vinoba Puri

14
(7) District Park, Sector-14, Rohini
(8) Swarna Jayanti Park, Rohini
(9) District Park, Avantika, Sector-1, Rohini
(10) Green Area, Sector-14, Dwarka
(11) Vasant Vatika, Vasant Kunj
(12) District Park, Janakpuri
(13) Salvage Park, Mayapuri Phase-II
(14) Satya Park, Naraina Road
(15) Priyadarshini Vihar
In addition to above, the feasibility to provide such facilities at
other places is examined from time to time.
Regarding opening of food counters/eateries in and around Public
Parks—as per Master Plan norms, restaurant/food kiosks are
permitted in any park having an area of more than 40 Hectares
subject to other development control norms.
Parks in which Restaurants have been provided and are operational:
(i) Hauz Khas Recreational Complex
(ii) Mehrauli Archeological Complex
(iii) Swarn Jayanti Park, Rohini
(iv) Paschim Vihar G-17 (Not operational)
(v) Sanjay Lake Complex (Not operational)
Parks which have been provided with food kiosks/food courts:
(i) Indraprastha Park (Millennium Park)
(ii) District Park, Janakpuri
(iii) District Park, Pitampura
(iv) District Park, Gulabi Bagh
(v) Sector-VI, Dwarka
(vi) Sanjay Lake Complex

15
25. The Committee note that DDA has provided toilets and food
counters in the DDA parks. While appreciating these efforts of DDA,
they would like to be apprised regarding the steps taken by DDA
to clean and maintain the ‘Green Areas’ and parks and its
surrounding areas, so that the ‘Green areas’ etc., are not used for
dumping wastes of the food counters and ensure pleasant appearance
of the premises. They would also like to emphasize that steps be
taken by DDA in coordination with other Government Department
to maintain water bodies heat and clean in ‘Green Areas’ or Parks
keeping in view of the public health and hygiene. They feel that
such a move would give a facelift to DDA parks and people would
be able to use the parks endowed with a healthy and hygienic
environment for children and others.
H. Propagation of Sports Activities
Recommendation (Para No. 3.21)
 26. The Committee had noted as below:
As regards the training aspect of sportsmen/women, the Committee
also recommend that DDA should propagate its sports and
coaching facilities, fellowship facilities etc. for the knowledge of
common sports-loving persons so that people are encouraged to
indulge in sports activities. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken in this regard.
27. The Government have replied as under:
Information about all the activities of the DDA Sports Wing and
the facilities available at the various sports complexes are regularly
published in a Sports Newsletter on a quarterly basis. The Sports
Newsletter is widely circulated amongst the sports fraternity
including schools, colleges, sports persons, Sports Federations/
Associations, sports clubs, etc., to inform them about the available
facilities so that people are informed and encouraged to indulge
in sports activities.
28. The Committee note that information about all the activities
of DDA sports wings and the facilities available at the various sports
complexes are regularly published in sports newsletter on a quarterly
basis. While acknowledging this, the Committee feel that it is
inadequate. They recommend that sports activities of DDA sports
complexes and facilities thereto should be published in National
dailies and local newspapers so that common people would know

16
about such activities and more and more people are enabled to avail
of the aforesaid facilities. In this regard, it is also imperative that
such information should also be displayed on billboards at several
vantage points.
I. Acquisition and Development of Land for Commonwealth Games
Recommendation (Para No. 3.24)
29. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee express their concern over the fact that only five
years are left for the commencement of Commonwealth Games
2010 and the construction of the Commonwealth Games village at
Akshardham is yet to be begin. They also note that a small portion
of site belongs to Government of Uttar Pradesh for which
negotiations are going on with the State Government of Uttar
Pradesh. The Committee, therefore, recommend that matter should
be sorted out expeditiously and the construction of the “Games
village” should commence without any delay. The Committee desire
that prudent and scientific techniques be adopted in development
of ‘Commonwealth Games Village’ at Akshardham in line with
the international standards of sports facilities. In the beginning
itself it should be kept in mind that the facilities to be created
should be such that even after the Commonwealth games 2010 are
over, these can be made use of subsequently also.
30. The Government have replied as under:
Development work of the Games Village will be taken up by the
DDA after final decision of the Government is conveyed. DDA is
also pursuing with the Government of Uttar Pradesh for acquiring
a portion of the Games Village site which belongs to the
Government of Uttar Pradesh. Recommendations of the Committee
on developing the Games Village of international standards and
its future utilization would be incorporated while preparing final
plans for the Games Village.
The status of efforts made to acquire land from Government of
Uttar Pradesh for the Commonwealth Games Village is as follows:
•A  proposal was sent by the DDA to the Government of
Uttar Pradesh for providing 41.3 acre land in village Chiraga
Janobi for the purpose of Commonwealth Games Village.
The land which belongs to Irrigation Deptt. of UP Govt., is
bounded by Akshardham Temple on the South, Marginal
Bund (now a road) from Vikas Marg to Noida on the East,

17
New Railway line on the North and Road (adjoining
Yamuna River) on the West. This land was found to be
suitable for Commonwealth Games Villages.
• The first communication was sent to Chief Secretary Govt.
of UP by VC, DDA on 21st November, 2002. Several
meetings were held in the chamber of VC, DDA in which
Principal Secretary, Irrigation Deptt. of UP was also present.
The site inspection was also conducted by the Principal
Secretary, Irrigation Department in which Sr. officers of DDA
were present.
• Govt. of U.P . has proposed that the rate of land should be
par with the rate at which the agricultural lands are being
acquired by DDA. The L&B Deptt. of GNCTD was requested
to communicate the rate of this land proposed for Common
Wealth Games Village. In response the Land Acquisition
Collector (East) in his letter dtd. 7.12.2004 has informed
DDA that keeping in view the status of the required land,
the rate of Rs. 5,05,000/-per acre be fixed in accordance
with the letter dtd. 9.8.2001 of L&B Deptt., GNCTD, a copy
of which was sent to Irrigation Deptt. of UP Govt.
•A  meeting was held in the chamber of VC on 10th March,
2005 in which Secretary, Irrigation Deptt. Govt. of UP was
present. He requested DDA for market rates for allotment
of the required land.
• VC, DDA clarified that the land in the Akshardham Complex
was allotted at the Institutional zonal variant rates. He
further clarified that these rates for other categories of use
and allotment are based on the effect that various peripheral
infrastructure services and facilities like water supply,
sewerage, electrical sub-stations, roads, STP , etc. are provided
by the DDA and various elements of cross subsidization
for different uses are involved. Hence these rates could not
form the basis in deciding upon the issue of rates for
transfer of land by the U.P . Govt. to DDA for Common
Wealth Games Village. However normal acquisition rates
(Rs. 15.70 Lakh/acre) could be considered in view of possible
agricultural use of land due to construction of bundh by
DDA. Moreover, this land cannot be put to any use other
than permissible use under Master Plan, which is largely
green. The proposed land cannot be exploited commercially.
The minutes of the meeting were sent on 21st March, 2005
followed by reminders.

18
• Govt. of UP thereafter nominated the CEO of NOIDA for
further negotiations. In this regard another meeting was held
in the chamber of VC on 15th June, 2005 in which Chairman
& CEO, NOIDA and other officers were present. VC, DDA
has reiterated the whole issue once again in the meeting
and also informed that the normal acquisition rate fixed by
Govt. of Delhi which is around Rs. 15.70 lakh per acre
could be considered. The minutes were sent on 27.6.05. New
CEO of NOIDA met VC on 27.7.05 in this regard. The
position of DDA was reiterated.
• DDA is awaiting a positive response from UP Govt.
31. The Committee, while noting the efforts made by DDA with
the top officials of Government of Uttar Pradesh for acquiring land,
desire at the same time that the matter should be sorted out
expeditiously at the highest level due to time constraint and
importance of Commonwealth Games. The Committee have their
apprehension that if the land from the Government of Uttar Pradesh
is not acquired at the earliest, it would be very difficult to carry out
development work within a short span of five years. They, therefore,
are of the view that the Cabinet Secretary may intervene to sort out
the issue, or if found necessary, the matter could be sorted out at
the Ministerial level also. Here, they recommend that whatever the
land the DDA posses right now, should be developed without
waiting for the acquisition of land from the Government of Uttar
Pradesh.
J. Backlog in New Pattern Registration Scheme and Rohini
Registration Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 4.12)
32. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee strongly deprecates that a tangible number of
backlog of 8668 and 2,883 in respect of the New Pattern Registration
Scheme still exist with the DDA. Although more than two and
half decades have elapsed when the New Pattern Registration
Scheme (NPRS) was launched in 1979 but the bonafide registrants
of this scheme are still waiting for the allotments. The Committee
need hardly emphasize that as the New Pattern Registration
Schemer, 1979 (NPRS) had been open-ended, it was imperative
that such a scheme is cleared in time and with no backlog. The
Committee, therefore, express dissatisfaction that timely, honest and

19
pragmatic measures have not been taken by DDA in making the
NPR Scheme a model and a successful one.
33. The Government have replied as under:—
As on 30.9.2005, the backlog of 8668 under NPRS—79 and 2883
under Ambedkar Awas Yojana-89 has been brought down to 8327
under NPRS-79 and 2771 under Ambedkar Awas Yojana-89. It is
expected to clear the said backlog within a period of one year.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13)
34. The Committee had noted as below:—
As regards the Rohini Registration Scheme, 1981 the Committee
are further distressed to learn that a backlog of 27,043 still exists.
The Committee need hardly emphasize that such a situation
hampers the credibility of DDA and sullies its public image.
35. The Government have replied as under:—
It is stated that 1155 plots have already been allotted to the
registrants in the draw held on 21.9.2005. At present there are
25858 registrants in the waiting list under MIG/LIG/Janta category.
Action has been initiated for acquisition of land by the DDA on
priority basis so that the same may be developed/allotted to the
respective registrants by the end of 2006.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.14)
36. The Committee had noted as below:—
The Committee are informed that an action plan has been chalked
out by DDA for liquidation of the backlog of flats by December
2005 and of Plots by 2006. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that as assured to them, the backlog of the New Pattern
Registration Scheme, 1979 must be cleared expeditiously . The
Committee also recommend that the backlog in the Rohini
Registration Scheme, 1981 is cleared by taking concerted action for
acquisition of land by LAC of Government of Delhi in a time
bound manner. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken
in this regard.
37. The Government have replied as under:—
As informed in reply to para 4.13, so far as liquidation of backlog
of plots by 2006 is concerned, action is underway by DDA.

20
As on 30.9.2005, there is a backlog of 8327 Registrants under
NPRS—79 scheme and 2771 under Ambedkar Awas Yojna-89 as
against 8668 and 2883 shown in the recommendations/observations.
It is expected to clear the said backlog within a period of one
year.
38. While noting the assurance given by the Government to clear
the backlog in the Rohini Registration Scheme within a period of
one year, the Committee fail to understand as to why excess time
was taken by DDA since 1979 to clear the backlog. They, therefore,
express their displeasure over such a long delay and hope that DDA
would fulfil their promised to clear the backlog by the end of year
2006. They feel that this would help in safeguarding the image of
DDA. The Committee is of the opinion that DDA should have
anticipated the probable issues well in time and accordingly acquire
the land well in advance so as to avoid the suffering caused to
registrants. They feel that the DDA will be able to clear the backlog
expeditiously and take remedial steps to that the registrants do not
suffer in future because of lack of planning and anticipation of the
probable issues beforehand.
K. Quality Control and Maintenance of DDA Flats
Recommendation (Para No. 4.33)
39. The Committee had noted as below:—
The Committee note with concern that in many ‘Resettlement
Colonies’ for the slum dwellers, the selling units constructed are
grossly sub-standard and these units appear to be in a dilapidated
condition. This is because the material used is sub-standard and
there is hardly any quality control. The Committee would like to
know, as to why it is so and what remedial steps are proposed to
repair these houses. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
thorough checks be carried out at construction stage itself. The
inspection team should see to it that contractors assigned the job
are adhering to the requisite standards. This is extremely desirable
so as to ensure that the dwelling units for relocating the JJ clusters
are of firm and livable standard.
40. The Government have replied as under:—
The relocation of jhuggi dwellers is primarily done by Slum &
JJ Department of MCD. As per the represent relocation policy,
eligible jhuggi dwellers are allotted alternate plots. Earlier DDA
had constructed some dwelling units for the resettlement of slum
dwellers when the Slum Wing was under its control. These

21
dwelling units have since been transferred to Slum & JJ
Department, which is presently under the control of MCD. DDA
has very exhaustive quality control systems for ensuring proper
quality of the houses being constructed by DDA. In addition to
day to day supervision of construction of houses by the concerned
field staff right from the level of Junior Engineer to Chief Engineer,
there is an independent Quality Control Wing working under the
charge of a Chief Engineer on deputation from outside department,
who is directly reporting to Vice Chairman, DDA. Besides this,
DDA works also fall within the purview of checking/inspection
by CTE’s organization of C.V .C.
DDA has also decided to engage the services of reputed Institutions
like IIT, Delhi, CBRI, Roorkee and CRRI, New Delhi etc. for third
party quality assurance in r/o housing and other major works so
as to ensure quality construction.
41. The Committee note that the quality control of DDA housing
units is supervised at the level of Junior Engineer to Chief Engineer.
The Committee is also informed that DDA has also decided to engage
the services of reputed institutions like IIT Delhi, Central Building
Research Institute, Roorkee and Central Road Research Institute New
Delhi. While appreciating the steps taken by DDA to adhere to
quality control in their housing units, the Committee desire that in
addition to adhering to quality control, DDA should also provide
periodic maintenance in their housing units so as to avoid damage
due to inclement weather. The Committee here also recommend to
protect unoccupied flats of DDA from sabotage and anti social
elements. They feel that such a move would enhance the image of
DDA in the eyes of public.
L. Delay in Transfer Services to MCD, DJB and DISCOMS
Recommendation (Para No. 5.21)
42. The Committee had noted as below:—
The Committee are concerned to note that colonies developed for
residential purposes by DDA are being handed over to MCD for
maintenance in a piece meal manner. In many areas as for instance
Dwarka, the Delhi Jal Board (DJB) has not taken over the area for
regular supply of water supply. The Committee are of the firm
view that areas developed and houses constructed by DDA should
be de-notified and handed over to MCD in one go rather than
taking up the process of transfer part by part. In regard to
calculation of deficiency charges at the time of transfer of DDA

22
developed areas to MCD, the Commissioner, MCD has conceded
during evidence that there is an administrative problem in the
matter in view of a number of departments involved. He has stated
that there are vertical departments and they do not have proper
integration with each other. The Committee recommend that
concerted efforts should be made in consultation with the senior
officials of MCD and DJB so that the basis civic amenities of water
supply, electricity etc., are provided in dwelling units before
handling over the possession to the allottees. The Committee also
recommend that DDA should intervene in rectifying the complaints
of allottees on this count.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.22)
43. The Committee note that payment of deficiency charges to the
local bodies and concerned authorities are made in a routine manner.
The Committee are of the firm view that if the DDA areas are
developed in a wholesome manner, the question of payment of
‘deficiency charges’ to the urban local bodies should not arise. The
Committee therefore, recommend that purposeful steps be taken by
DDA so as to obviate deficiencies in the developed areas and the
consequent payment of the ‘deficiency charges’. The Committee also
recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should devise
suitable mechanism to ensure proper integration and coordination
between DDA, MCD, DJB and local bodies.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.23)
44. The Committee desire that the much needed civic amenities of
sewerage, water supply, electricity, storm drains, garbage disposal and
proper maintenance to all the DDA developed colonies/areas should
be provided hassle-free and within a given time frame. The Committee
would like to be apprised about the action taken in this regard.
45. The Government have replied as under:
To streamline the procedure of transfer of services of DDA colonies
to MCD and other local bodies, a meeting was held under the
Chairmanship of Hon’ble LG at Raj Niwas on 02.01.2003. In general
the following procedures were agreed to:—
It will be ensured that the transfer of the services is effected within
three months from the date of DDA’s request and submission of
plans with the following schedule:
(a) The work of scavenging and removal of garbage etc. will
stand taken over by the MCD after a month of submission
of request/plans by the DDA.

23
(b) Within 30 days of the submission of plans, joint inspections
will be carried out, the concerned local agency shall intimate
the deficiency, if any, immediately thereafter alongwith
detailed estimate. However, no claim about deficiencies shall
be entertained if it is received after three months from the
submission of request and plans by DDA.
(c) In case of total agreement of deficiency estimates, the DDA
shall arrange the payment of the same within four weeks.
In case total agreement is not arrived at, then part acceptable
to the DDA shall be released within four weeks and the
dispute on the remaining shall be settled at the level of
administrative head of the two organizations.
(d) After the receipt of the payment, the local agency shall take
over the physical services alongwith staff as per prescribed
norms within two weeks and the notification to this effect
shall be issued by DDA for information of the public and
all concerned.
(e) In any case all these formalities must be completed within
three months of DDA’s submission of plans and making a
request for transfer of services, so that the services should
stand transferred and a notification to the effect shall be
issued with the prior approval of Hon’ble LG. In case any
work is carried out by the concerned agency on behalf of
DDA as a “Deposit Work”, the same shall stand transferred
to the agency without any claim of deficiency or otherwise.
(f) Convenient Shopping Centres will be made integral part of
the residential pocket and shall not be treated as a separate
entity.
(g) The electrical services developed by DVB in the colonies/
pockets as “Deposit Work” shall stand transferred to the
respective DISCOMS, after completion of the work, without
any deficiency charges.
46. The Committee note that in order to streamline the procedure
of transfer of the services to DDA colonies to MCD and other local
bodies, a meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Lt.
Governor on 2.1.2003 and in that meeting, certain procedural steps
were agreed to. But, the Committee finds to their dismay that nothing
substantial has been done to resolve the imbroglio, even after three
years of agreement. While noting down the suggested procedural
steps of handing over functions of DDA colonies to MCD, DJB and

24
electricity supply Companies (DISCOMS), the Committee are
dismayed to note that nothing concrete is still visible. They, therefore,
recommend that synergic and coordinated efforts should be made
by all the concerned in respect of transferring and handing over
colonies to ULBs and DISCOMS and transparency should be
maintained as far as possible. In this regard, it is imperative that
Ministry of Urban Development will monitor the progress and work
done by all the agencies for the speedy delivery.
M. Treatment of People belonging to BPL Category in Private
Hospitals which have been provided land by DDA
Recommendation (Para No. 6.10)
47. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee express their distress over the fact that some
hospitals have violated the norms for free treatment of 25 per cent
patients belonging to BPL categories. Moreover, there have been
instances where the actual BPL categories of people were unable
to get their treatment done in such hospitals and others have taken
the benefit of the same by misrepresentation. The Committee,
therefore, firmly recommend that a mechanism to identify BPL
category by Government of NCT Delhi and issue of certificates to
such people alongwith their photo identity cards needs to be
devised so that genuine BPL persons are able to avail of medical
facilities in hospitals. It should be ensured that the hospitals strictly
provide free treatment to the stipulated percentage under BPL
category. The Committee should be kept informed of the steps
taken in this regard as also the punitive action taken/proposed for
violation thereof.
48. The Government have replied as under:—
The Govt. of NCT of Delhi has reported that patients belonging to
‘below poverty line (BPL)’ category can be identified from the
BPL ration card or a certificate issued by Area SDM in this regard.
Even in the absence of any of these two documents, a persons can
be considered to belong to BPL category, if he furnishes a proforma
declaration, in this respect.
49. While accepting the reply of the Government that patients
belonging to BPL category can be identified from BPL ration card or
a certificate issued by area SDM, the Committee express their doubt
on the veracity of proforma declaration. They have apprehension
that BPL proforma declaration may be misused by Above Poverty

25
Line (APL) people by misrepresentation, depriving actual BPL people
from availing medical facilities in private hospitals which have been
provided land by DDA. They therefore reiterate their earlier
recommendations that some accurate and convenient methodology
should be devised by Government of Delhi so that the genuine BPL
patients may avail free medical facilities in private hospitals without
any inconvenience.
N. Expeditious Clearance of Society Flats by RCS Office and DDA
Recommendation (Para No. 6.24)
50. The Committee had noted as below:—
The Committee feel that even though the office of the Registrar,
Cooperative Societies does not come under the jurisdiction and
control of Ministry of Urban Development however, the cooperative
group housing is being linked to housing sector, it is very much
related to the Ministry of Urban Development. They note that in
Delhi, allotment of land to Cooperative Group Housing Societies
is done by DDA. A large area of land i.e. approximately 1900
acres of land has been allotted to 877 Housing Societies. The
Committee, therefore feel that DDA cannot wash of their hands if
some misuse or misappropriation in Cooperative Group Housing
Societies takes place. While admitting that Cooperative Group
Housing Societies are regulated by RCS office under Cooperative
Societies Act and Rules, the Committee feel that DDA has a major
role to play and to oversee that the land allotted to Cooperative
Group Housing Societies is actually utilized in the interest of society
members, who mainly consist of middle and service class people
and who had invested all their earnings and borrowing for getting
a house of their own. While appreciating the move taken by DDA
and RCS to ward-off any misappropriation and to ensure that
Societies do not become the fiefdom of a selected few, the
Committee recommend that interest of bulk of society members
should not be neglected. The Committee understand that
management of Society should not flout any of the provisions
enshrined in Cooperative Societies Act and Rules. Act the same
time, they recommend that RCS office should not be too rigid in
such matters and should keep in mind the interests of genuine
members. The Committee note that there are several Societies whose
members are waiting for a long time for their draw of lots but
due to the mistake of their management and rigidity of RCS office,
most of them are suffering. They, therefore, recommend that an
institutional mechanism should be devised which is people’s
friendly, less time consuming and at the same time deterrent to
low breakers.

26
51. The Government have replied as under:—
DDA (Disposal of Developed Nazul Land) Rules 1972 provide for
allotment of land at predetermined rates to cooperative group
housing societies for construction of dwelling units for their
members. This provision is intended to encourage the cooperative
movement as far as housing sector is concerned, so as to facilitate
home ownership among the middle class which may not be
otherwise in a position to acquire houses in the open market. In
this approach the role of DDA is to make available land for housing
and allot the same to cooperative group housing societies. The
role of RCS GNCTED is to register cooperative group housing
societies, and oversee their management as provided for under the
Delhi Cooperative Act,2003 and Rules and Policy guidelines framed
by GNCTED in this behalf. DDA has been informing RCS after
ascertaining availability of land for allotment to CGHS and calling
for names of societies eligible for such allotments. RCS have been
forwarding such names after due verification of membership as
required under the Delhi Cooperative Act and Guidelines made
thereunder.
So far DDA has allotted land to 877 CGHS. Meanwhile the issue
of allotment of land to CGHS has been agitated in the High Court
of Delhi in CWP No. 10066/204; Yogiraj Krishna CGHS Vs. DDA
& Ors. The High Court has in its various directions issued in the
matter asked the Govt. of India to formulate a comprehensive
policy for allotment of land to CGHS to counter the takeover of
societies by builders’ mafia and speculation in land allotment. The
High Court has also directed that provision should be made for
the weaker sections of the society by formulating such policies.
Accordingly the Ministry and DDA have formulated policy
guidelines for allotment of land to Cooperative Group Housing
Societies (CGHS) and the said policy has been submitted to the
Hon’ble High Court. The policy provides for measures to reduce
the gap in price between price of allotment to CGHS and market
price of land. It is expected that such measures would reduce the
incentive for intervention by unscrupulous elements and reduce
speculative tendencies, without putting the land beyond the reach
of the middle class which is the intended beneficiary of the
cooperative housing movement. In its policy guidelines the Ministry
has also suggested that steps should be taken by the Registrar of
Cooperative Societies to ensure better management of CGHS, to
reduce takeover by builders, bogus membership, etc.

27
52. The Committee note that Government has adopted a policy
to reduce the gap in price between price of allotment to Cooperative
Group Hosing Societies (CGHS) and market price of land in order
to reduce the intervention by unscrupulous elements. The Committee
hope that such a move would reduce the takeover of CGHS flats by
builders, speculators and bogus members, While appreciating such a
move for future, the Committee also note that there is no time bound
and effective mechanism with the DDA and RCS office regarding
the allotment of society flats to its genuine members. The Committee
feel that housing is a big need for Delhi and depriving genuine
Society members at the cost of others would be an overzealous
attitude of Office of RCS which would diminish the objective of
Housing need of Delhi as the built up houses would remain
unoccupied. As already recommended, an institutional mechanism
should be devised, which is people’s friendly less time consuming
and at the same time deterrent to law breakers. Such a move should
be taken expeditiously. Here they also recommend to allow draw of
lots to genuine members at the earliest.
O. Customers’ Friendly Offices
Recommendation (Para No. 6.60)
53. The Committee had noted as under:—
The Committee are perturbed to note that a number of complaints
have been received by the general public on the cumbersome and
lengthy procedure adopted for conversion of property from lease-
hold to free-hold. The Committee fail to understand as to why the
DDA does not bother to look into its own records and expects
people to submit and re-submit the same documents on several
occasions for getting their final approval for conversion from lease
hold to free hold of property . The Committee observe that certain
documents like photocopy of lease-deed, Plinth Area Certificate,
Possession Certificate and Proof of physical Possession should be
available in DDA records. Such a situation speaks volume of lack
of coordination between different ‘wings’ of same organization.
The Committee therefore, firmly recommend that the procedure
for conversion of property from lease hold to free hold be simplified
by minimizing the number of documents to be submitted as well
as by fixing a time-frame for completion of the whole procedure
by DDA. DDA should also computerize this system and hold
periodical camps in the DDA colonies itself, for easy access to the
public and to mitigate their grievances on this count.

28
54. The Government have replied as under:
In pursuance of conversion policy issued by the Ministry of Urban
Development, DDA had decided to convert residential flats as well
as residential built up plots from leasehold to free hold on payment
of conversion charges. Accordingly, a brochure was prepared and
got published incorporating the salient features of the scheme,
amount of conversion charges payable for flats, category-wise and
zone-wise. The documents required to be submitted alongwith the
conversion application have also been clearly mentioned in the
said brochure. These documents are essential requirement and are
in accordance with the approved guidelines of the Government of
India for processing the application forms from leasehold to
freehold. Though documents like letter of possession and perpetual
lease deed/conveyance deed (in few cases) are available in file but
other documents i.e. proof of physical possession, no objection
certificate regarding mortgage and receipt of ground rent are
normally not available. For conversion of properties from lease
hold to free hold, the practice of obtaining the photocopy of the
lease papers has since been dispensed with. As regards the plinth
area certificate from the Group Housing Societies, efforts are now
being made that if in any particular Society a flat of the same
category has been converted into free hold, then its plinth area
copy can be obtained from any DDA file itself without bothering
the applicant for this purpose.
On the issue of dispensing with the requirement of proof of
physical possession, it is informed that in respect of the original
allottees, the letter of possession is required from the society and
in respect of the GPA holders a copy of the letter of possession is
required, so as to verify the signatures of the original allottee in
the GPA and Agreement to Sell. However, DDA is making efforts
to expedite conversion by simplification of its policies and
procedures. Several important proposals in this regard on issues
such as misuse charges, cases of share transfers etc., are under
review. As suggested by the Committee, Conversion camps are
being held in Group Housing Societies to meet proper requirements
at their door. Consequently, the number of conversion cases in
2004-05 was 7228 as compared to 2455 in 2004.
DDA is in the process of holding periodical camps in DDA colonies
for the purpose of expediting the conversions. Also a detailed
computerization proposals is presently underway in DDA which
includes in its ambit the computerization of various processes
involved in conversion of property from leasehold to freehold. As

29
regards the fixing of time frame for completion of conversion, it is
pointed out that DDA already has a time frame of three months
for finalizing such conversion cases.
55. The Committee note that various measures have been taken
by DDA for conversion of leasehold property to freehold, which
seem to be customers friendly. In reality however, the people are
still facing the problem and running from pillar to post for
conversion and other works. The Committee are seized with several
complaints from public in this regard. They, therefore, recommend
that all the requisite documents and formalities etc. required for
conversion from leasehold to freehold and in respect of other related
issues, should invariably be displayed in bold letters in billboards
of DDA’s office and people should not be asked to come again and
again for a simple document. In this regard, it is imperative that
e-governance should be implemented in DDA for documentation
and records which would serve the customers in a friendly and
transparent manners.
P. Malpractices by Property Dealers
Recommendation (Para No. 6.62)
56. The Committee had noted as under:
The Committee have received a number of Memoranda from the
General Public about the menace of property dealers who work in
DDA lands in connivance with DDA officials. Even before
allotments are made of the DDA’s dwelling units, boards and
hoardings of property dealers come up in the area. The Committee
feel that such commercialisation of the DDA’s Units shall defeat
the main purpose of giving cost effective housing to the weaker
sections of the society. They therefore, recommend that strict action
be taken against the field staff and officers of DDA, who operate
hand-in-glove with private property dealers and encourage sale of
dwelling units on ‘Power of Attorney’ at higher prices thereby,
earning unwarranted profits and periodical inspection is done in
this regard.
57. The Government have replied as under:
DDA has informed that before allotment of flats, fixing of Boards
and Hoardings by the property dealers is not permitted. However,
if any case regarding connivance of property dealers with DDA
employees comes to the notice, the same is referred to the Vigilance
Department for necessary action. In order to bring transparency in

30
system and to avoid any manipulation, computerized draws for
the flats are held in the presence of independent Judges who are
senior officers from different organizations and also the media.
The process of draws is also displayed in parallel on a big screen
and also posted on the notice board in the reception area, web site
and in the Newspapers.
All these arrangements have had a salutary impact and have
substantially minimized the scope of any complaint. The procedures
& arrangements are being regularly reviewed for further
improvement.
58. The Committee has been informed that vigilance Department
of DDA takes action in case any complaint pertaining to connivance
of DDA officials with property dealers come to their notice. The
Committee are not fully satisfied with this causal reply. The
Committee are of the view that the Vigilance Department should
also take suo-motto action is this regard and make surprise checks
instead of waiting for a formal complaint which may not be always
forthcoming. In this regard it is also imperative that Vigilance
Department become more effective, enhance their surveillance and
intelligence network substantially. They also desire that perfect
transparency should be maintained to avoid any manipulation in
the computerized draw of DDA flats. The Committee would like to
know about the number of complaints received during the last three
years and the punitive steps taken by Vigilance Department as a
consequence thereof.

31
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1.31)
As regards urbanized village in Delhi are concerned, the Committee
are informed that in MPD 2021, all these villages will come into urban
expansion areas, which will be developed/re-developed. During the
course of evidence before the Committee the Vice-Chairman, DDA
assured that all amenities and facilities would be provided in the urban
expansion areas with the maximum extent of planning that is possible.
The Committee feel that in order to upgrade, assimilate and integrate
these villages with the rest of the urban areas, it is extremely necessary
that the amenities, services and facilities provided to these villages
should not be less than those provided to their counter-part urban
localities and efforts should be made to take care of their livelihood.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that as proposed in MPD 2021,
effective steps within a specific time frame be taken by DDA to provide
the maximum civic amenities and facilities in the aforesaid urban
expansions and the urbanized villages falling in Delhi region.
Reply of the Government
Vide Delhi Admn. Order No. F. 12 (4) Plan/86/R/L&B of 11-12
March 1987, all the urban villages under DDA were transferred to the
MCD on, as is where is basis. Likewise orders were also issued by
CE (SEZ) DDA (Dt. 12.3.87) and E-in-C, MCD dated 19.3.87.
About 246 rural villages are under the jurisdiction of MCD and
GNCTD. MPD-2001 recommends that the villages need a sensitive
treatment in the planning and development process. The settlement
should get the modern services and amenities and should also be
catered for their traditional cultural styles. It recommends that,
comprehensive schemes for the development of villages should be
prepared by the concerned local bodies with the aim of providing
optimal facilities and services within the abadis and their integration
with the surrounding areas.
Government is also seized of the need to provide adequate civic
facilities and urban infrastructure in the urban villages in order to

32
keep them at par with other urbanized areas in terms of basic
amenities. DDA and MCD have been advised to initiate action in this
direction so as to integrate these urban villages with the other planned
areas of Delhi. MCD has decided to take up studies in 25 urban villages
in its jurisdiction with professional inputs with a view to develop an
action plan for providing urban infrastructure in these villages. DDA
has also taken up similar measures in urban villages in its jurisdiction.
The villages so selected for development would first be studied to
assess the current status of requirement and availability of infrastructure
and thereafter an action plan would be prepared for providing the
gaps in infrastructure, keeping in mind the availability of land and
resources for this purpose.
For the villages falling in DDA projects, DDA has already
undertaken for provision of civic amenities and facilities as provided
under Authority resolution No. 25/2004 dated 15.7.2004. DDA has also
undertaken preparation of Development Plans for urban villages
(3 each in Rohini, Narela and Dwarka Projects) for their integrated
development.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 1.32)
Regarding the MPD 2021, the Committee note that the draft MPD
2021 has been approved by DDA in their meeting held on 10th January,
2005. Thereafter, the Ministry of Urban Development permitted to notify
the Draft MPD 2021 for inviting objections/suggestions from the public
and accordingly a Gazettee Notification has been issued on 16th March,
2005 alongwith a Public Notice on 8th April. 2005. The Committee
recommend that the Draft MPD 2021 should be well contained with
the suggestions from the public, who are the actual recipients of the
benefits of MPD 2021. The Committee also desire that the Draft MPD
2021 is finalized and launched, expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
The Delhi Development Act 1957 provides for preparation of Master
Plan for Delhi. Accordingly DDA had earlier prepared and notified
MPD 1962 and MPD 2001. DDA has notified the Draft MPD-2021 on
8/4/05 through a public notice, for inviting objections and suggestions
from the public within 90 days. A large number (around 7000) of
objections and suggestions have been received. These are being
proposed and placed before the Board of Inquiry and hearing

33
constituted under the chairmanship of VC, DDA which has already
had 4 meetings.
The procedure for finalization of Master Plan provides for
consideration of each of the objections and suggestions received in
response to the public notice notifying the draft Master Plan-2021. The
Board of Enquiry is at present holding meetings to provide an
opportunity to stakeholders and persons who have submitted objections
and suggestions to present their view before the Board. Thereafter the
Board will submit its recommendations on the objections and
suggestions to the Authority, for its consideration. The Authority after
considering these recommendations will recommend modifications as
required to the draft Master Plan for Delhi, 2021. The revised draft
will then be examined by the Govt. and approved for final notification
under Section 11 of DD Act, 1957. As per the schedule laid down for
approval of draft MPD-2021, the final notification is expected by March,
2006.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 1.33)
The Committee note from ‘Print Media’ reports that DDA has,
recently, approved in principle the participation of private sector in
mega housing projects across the Delhi city. It envisages to engage the
private sector in constructions in a minimum area of 10 hectares or
50,000 square meters of built-up areas and above. Keeping in view of
the repeated complaints about the alleged nexus between DDA officials
and the private builders, the Committee contain their apprehension as
to whether the construction of dwelling units by these private builders
would be in accordance with the Zonal and Master Plan. The
Committee are of the firm view that the DDA must be primarily
responsible for the residential housing development in Delhi.
Participation of private builders in a large scale would lead to cost
escalation of the dwelling units and such dwelling units will be beyond
the purchasing power of the common urban population in Delhi. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the DDA and the GNCT of Delhi
should give a fresh look towards their decision of inviting private
builders in a large scale in taking up mega projects in Delhi.
Reply of the Government
As envisaged under Delhi Development Act, DDA has been
discharging the primary responsibility of development of land in Delhi.

34
For undertaking such development, DDA has been acquiring land
under the Scheme of Large Scale Acquisition of Land. The land is
acquired through Land Acquisition Collector, GNCTD under the
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. Experience indicates that
there is considerable delay in acquiring and taking possession of land
due to the elaborate procedures required to be followed as also the
litigation associated with the process. DDA takes up construction of
housing on acquired land and allots these houses to the citizens for
meeting the shelter needs of the population of Delhi. However, due to
delay in obtaining land, and the growing pressure of population, it
has not been possible to keep pace to fully meet the housing needs in
Delhi he draft MPD-2021 estimates a backlog of 4 lakh dwelling units
and as well as additional requirement of 20 lakh dwelling units by
2021.
In order to meet the requirement of housing units, and to overcome
the weaknesses in the procedure hitherto being followed by DDA and
GNCTD, it is proposed to permit participation of private sector in
land assembly and housing development. While permitting such private
participation, checks and balances will be introduced to ensure
compliance with provisions of Master Plan as well as building Byelaws,
the latter being administered by local bodies. At the same time it is
also proposed to make it mandatory for the private developers to
provide housing to EWS categories so that the overall objectives of
planned development are achieved. It is also expected that private
developers in the housing sector will introduce an element of
competitiveness and innovation in this sector in Delhi, which will
automatically counter any speculative tendencies or profiteering at the
expense of the citizen.
Procedural details in the matter and further fine-tuning of the
proposed models would however be worked out after detailed
deliberations and interaction with the stake holders so that the new
policy can be implemented in a transparent and realistic manner.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.34)
Under Section 21 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the DDA’s
Land Disposal Department disposes land meant for various uses such

35
as residential, industrial, institutional and commercial purposes. The
Committee are informed that for residential purposes, the DDA disposes
plots by way of allotment and auction. In case of Group Housing
Societies, the DDA allots lands on the basis of the recommendations
received from the Registrar Cooperative Societies (RCS) of Government
of Delhi. The RCS verifies the lists of members and the Group Housing
Societies and sends them to DDA for allotment of lands. DDA disposes
commercial properties as commercial plots or as built-up shops by
way of auction and tender. The built-up shops are sold by calling of
sealed tenders alongwith EMD of 25%. The commercial plots are
disposed by way of open auction. About 43% of the built-up shops
are allotted to the special categories of SC/ST/LAC, physically
handicapped, ex-Servicemen and freedom fighters. While the Committee
note that DDA has taken steps to curb malpractices relating to allotment
of plots and houses, the Committee urge that a high level body
comprising of senior officials of DDA, RCS, Ministry of Urban
Development and NCRPB may be formed so as to devise suitable
mechanism to check malpractices in allotment of plots and flats to
individuals and Group Housing Societies and ensure transparency in
the working of DDA. The Committee also recommend that the 43%
allotments are made to the special category persons as per rules and
the ‘built-up shops’ are allotted in a time bound manner.
Reply of the Government
To ensure transparency in allotment, the draw for allotment of
plots held by DDA has been computerized. For the purpose, the
applicants’ data and plots’ data are randomised through computer.
Randomization of Applicant’s Data : The data is sorted on application
number. A random number is assigned to each of the applicants
through computer. Data, after assigning random number, is sorted on
random number. A serial number is assigned to each applicant in the
randomised list.
Randomization of plots’ data : The plot data is sorted on plot details-
sector, block, pocket, plot Number. A random number is assigned to
each plot in the data. Data, after assigning random number, is sorted
on random number. A serial number is assigned to each plot in the
randomised list.
Draw: Draw is held from the two randomised lists as drawn above.
For triggering the draw, starting position in both the above lists is
selected by draw by a panel of judges. In the applicant data, allotment
starts from the serial number drawn from the randomized applicant’s

36
data and plot with the serial number drawn above is allotted to this
applicant. The process continues in the sequences of the serial numbers
assigned.
Wherever choice or option is applicable, allotment is made in the
sequence of serial number keeping in view the choice of the applicant
i.e in the randomised list, next available plot of choice in the
randomised list is allotted.
In order to bring transparency in the system and avoid any
possibility of manipulation, the computerized draws for the flats are
held in the presence of Sr. Officers, Independent Judges drawn from
different organizations and the media. The process is also displayed in
parallel on a big screen outside. The results of the draws are
immediately pasted on the notice board in the Reception area, the
web site and published in the newspapers. All these arrangements
have had a salutary impact and have substantially minimized the scope
for any complaint. The procedure and arrangements are being
continually reviewed to bring further improvement wherever possible.
The recommendation of the Committee for time bound allotment
of shops have been noted 43% of the shops are kept reserved for
allotment to special category persons, as per rules.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.13)
The Committee note that DDA has extensively developed green
areas in Delhi and has helped Delhi to grow as one of the greenest
cities in the country. While appreciating the achievements made by
DDA in developing the forests, woodland, green belts, district parks,
zonal parks, neighbourhood parks and children parks etc., the
Committee desire that maintenance of such green areas and water
bodies etc., should be carried out from time to time and all the basic
facilities viz. toilet, drinking water, eateries, etc. should be provided
for the welfare of public at large. The Committee are also of view that
co-ordinated efforts be made by the Ministry of Urban Development
with the Ministry of Environment and Forests so as to maintain the
water-bodies clean. The Committee desire that all public places
especially parks should have ‘Pay and Use’ toilets facilities as for
instance the ‘Sulabh’ toilets. Such toilet facilities would help in the
maintenance of environment. The Committee further recommend that
the viability for opening up food counters/eateries be examined by

37
DDA in or around the ‘public parks’. The Committee also recommend
that demands of the local residents for development of the already
existing Parks be met by DDA with a positive perspective in mind.
Reply of the Government
The maintenance and upkeep of green areas and water bodies is
an ongoing process being carried out regularly. The suggestion to
maintain clean water bodies has been noted for compliance. Providing
‘Pay & Use’ toilet facility in public places, specially parks is now
being considered and in most of the popular green areas, B.O.T. toilets
have been provided/are being provided.
The list of parks where this facility has been provided is as under:
1. Indraprastha Park (2 nos. provided & 2 nos. more to be
provided)
2. Park opposite LSR College
3. Rose Garden, Hauz Khas
4. Park at Savitri Nagar
5. District Park, Paschim Vihar
The list of parks where this facility is being provided is as under:
(1) Ashoka Garden, Ashok Vihar
(2) District Park, Pitampura
(3) Tughlakabad Recreational Complex
(4) Green Area near Siri Fort on Joseph Broz Tito Marg
(5) District Park, Sarita Vihar
(6) Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial Park at Vinoba Puri
(7) District Park, Sector-14, Rohini
(8) Swarna Jayanti Park, Rohini
(9) District Park, Avantika, Sector-1, Rohini
(10) Green Area, Sector-14, Dwarka
(11) Vasant Vatika, Vasant Kunj
(12) District Park, Janakpuri

38
(13) Salvage Park, Mayapuri Phase-II
(14) Satya Park, Naraina Road
(15) Priyadarshini Vihar
In addition to above, the feasibility to provide such facilities at
other places is examined from time to time.
Regarding opening of food counters/eateries in and around Public
Parks—as per Master Plan norms, restaurant/food kiosks are permitted
in any park having an area of more than 40 Hectares subject to other
development control norms.
Parks in which Restaurants have been provided and are operational:
(i) Hauz Khas Recreational Complex
(ii) Mehrauli Archaeological Complex
(iii) Swarn Jayanti Park, Rohini
(iv) Paschim Vihar G-17 (Not operational)
(v) Sanjay Lake Complex (Not operational)
Parks which have been provided with food kiosks/food courts:
(i) Indraprastha Park (Millennium Park)
(ii) District Park, Janakpuri
(iii) District Park, Pitampura
(iv) District Park, Gulabi Bagh
(v) Sector-VI, Dwarka
(vi) Sanjay Lake Complex
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
The Committee note that DDA spends about Rs. 40 crore every
year for developing new green areas and for maintaining the areas

39
already developed. Moreover, in 2004-2005 a provision of Rs. 114.19 crore
has been made by DDA for maintenance of parks. The Committee
recommend that all the funds yearly earmarked for maintenance of
Parks be utilized prudently for improving the conditions of the existing
Parks/green areas in Delhi. Also, new green areas, be developed in a
time bound manner.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for
compliance.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.20)
The Committee are happy to note of the efforts made by DDA in
the construction and development of Sports Complexes, play fields,
swimming pools, golf courses etc. for the purpose of sports activities
for the inhabitants of Delhi. They also note that some sports activities
are in progress. The Committee trust that such activities would be
continued and completed in a stipulated time frame.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations have been noted and the Engineering
Department of DDA would issue instructions that all sports related
projects should have a time schedule and these works should be
executed within this time frame.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.21)
As regards the training aspect of sportsmen/women, the Committee
also recommend that DDA should propagate its sports and coaching
facilities, fellowship facilities etc. for the knowledge of common sports-
loving persons so that people are encouraged to indulge in sports
activities. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Information about all the activities of the DDA Sports Wing and
the facilities available at the various sports complexes are regularly

40
published in a Sports Newsletter on a quarterly basis. The Sports
Newsletter is widely circulated amongst the sports fraternity including
schools, colleges, sports persons, Sports Federations/Associations, sports
clubs, etc., to inform them about the available facilities so that people
are informed and encouraged to indulge in sports activities.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.12)
The Committee strongly deprecates that a tangible number of
backlog of 8668 and 2,883 in respect of the New Pattern Registration
Scheme still exist with the DDA. Although more than two and half
decades have elapsed when the New Pattern Registration Scheme
(NPRS) was launched in 1979 but the bonafide registrants of this
scheme are still waiting for the allotments. The Committee need hardly
emphasize that as the New Pattern Registration Schemer, 1979 (NPRS)
had been open-ended, it was imperative that such a scheme is cleared
in time and with no backlog. The Committee, therefore, express
dissatisfaction that timely, honest and pragmatic measures have not
been taken by DDA in making the NPR Scheme a model and a
successful one.
Reply of the Government
As on 30.9.2005, the backlog of 8668 under NPRS-79 and 2883
under Ambedkar Awas Yojana-89 has been brought down to 8327 under
NPRS-79 and 2771 under Ambedkar Awas Yojana-89. It is expected to
clear the said backlog within a period of one year.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 38 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13)
As regards the Rohini Registration Scheme, 1981 the Committee
are further distressed to learn that a backlog of 27, 043 still exists. The
Committee need hardly emphasize that such a situation hampers the
credibility of DDA and sullies its public image.

41
Reply of the Government
It is stated that 1155 plots have already been allotted to the
registrants in the draw held on 21.9.2005. At present there are 25858
registrants in the waiting list under MIG/LIG/Janta category. Action
has been initiated for acquisition of land by the DDA on priority basis
so that the same may be developed/allotted to the respective registrants
by the end of 2006.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 38 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.14)
The Committee are informed that an action plan has been chalked
out by DDA for liquidation of the backlog of flats by December 2005
and of Plots by 2006. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that as assured to them, the backlog of the New Pattern Registration
Scheme, 1979 must be cleared expeditiously. The Committee also
recommend that the backlog in the Rohini Registration Scheme, 1981
is cleared by taking concerted action for acquisition of land by LAC
of Government of Delhi in a time bound manner. The Committee may
be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As informed in reply to para 4.13, so far as liquidation of backlog
of plots by 2006 is concerned, action is underway by DDA.
As on 30.9.2005, there is a backlog of 8327 Registrants under
NPRS-79 scheme and 2771 under Ambedkar Awas Yojna-89 as against
8668 and 2883 shown in the recommendations/observations. It is
expected to clear the said backlog within a period of one year.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 38 of Chapter I of the Report.)

42
Recommendation (Para No. 4.33)
The Committee note with concern that in many ‘Resettlement
Colonies’ for the slum dwellers, the dwelling units constructed are
grossly sub-standard and these units appear to be in a dilapidated
condition. This is because the material used is sub-standard and there
is hardly any quality control. The Committee would like to know, as
to why it is so and what remedial steps are proposed to repair these
houses. The Committee, therefore, recommend that thorough checks
be carried out at construction stage itself. The inspection team should
see to it that contractors assigned the job are adhering to the requisite
standards. This is extremely desirable so as to ensure that the dwelling
units for relocating the JJ clusters are of firm and livable standard.
Reply of the Government
The relocation of jhuggi dwellers is primarily done by Slum & JJ
Department of MCD. As per the present relocation policy, eligible jhuggi
dwellers are allotted alternate plots. Earlier DDA had constructed some
dwelling units for the resettlement of slum dwellers when the Slum
Wing was under its control. These dwelling units have since been
transferred to Slum & JJ Department, which is presently under the
control of MCD. DDA has very exhaustive quality control systems for
ensuring proper quality of the houses being constructed by DDA. In
addition to day-to-day supervision of construction of houses by the
concerned field staff right from the level of Junior Engineer to Chief
Engineer, there is an independent Quality Control Wing working under
the charge of a Chief Engineer on deputation from outside department,
who is directly reporting to Vice Chairman, DDA. Besides this, DDA
works also fall within the purview of checking/inspection by CTE’s
organization of C.V .C.
DDA has also decided to engage the services of reputed Institutions
like IIT, Delhi; CBRI, Roorkee and CRRI, New Delhi etc. for third
party quality assurance in r/o housing and other major works so as
to ensure quality construction.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 41 of Chapter I of the Report.)

43
Recommendation (Para No. 4.43)
As regards the water supply problem in Dwarka Area, the
Committee urge that suitable measures be taken to distribute water
supply.
Reply of the Government
To meet with the shortage of water in Dwarka, it is proposed to
augment the water supply through tubewells. DDA has taken up the
work of boring of additional 29 new tubewells in Dwarka. Water is
also being supplied through 18 tubewells out of 28 existing tubewells
as an interim arrangement. The remaining 10 tubewells are located in
the different pockets of Dwarka where there is no occupancy at present.
Thus in another few months, DDA will be able to supply water through
57 tubewells. The supply will be augmented to the extent of additional
2.8 MGD (approx.) of water. This is expected to ease the water scarcity
in Dwarka till the time DJB augements the supply fully.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.63)
The Committee are informed that DDA publicized a list of
‘Condonable Items’ in connection with alteration/addition in DDA Flats.
The Committee however express their concern about their
inconveniences, if any, caused to co-residents/neighbours where
additions/alterations have been carried out in DDA flats by occupants.
During the course of oral evidence the Secretary , Ministry of Urban
Development has stated that the list of ‘Condonable Items’ would be
expanded and revised. The Committee, recommend that the list of
‘condonable Items’ be revised by an ‘expert body’ in a scientific and
technical manner. The Committee are of the firm view that while
checking the list of ‘condonable Items’, adequate steps be taken to
ensure proper width of service lanes; sun-light; ventilation and safety
requirements of the colony. The Committee recommend that particular
attention be given towards ‘fire safety’ and rescue operations in event
of fire in DDA colonies. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the action taken in this regard in due course.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation vide
letter No. K-20014/6/2001-DD-IIA dt. 3.4.2001 had issued instructions

44
relating to addition/alteration and condonable items in respect of DDA
flats. The suggestions of the Committee have been noted for
compliance.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.64)
The Committee are of the view that after the flats have been
constructed, scope for addition/alterations should be minimal as it
causes inconvenience to the co-residents/neighbours and opens up
scope for misuse.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Standing Committee of Parliament
regarding minimizing the scope of addition/alteration of DDA flats
after their construction has been noted and this aspect is being
considered in the design of new housing schemes. In the earlier designs,
a number of terraces were being provided on which people were
constructing additional rooms. In the new designs, open areas are being
restricted to balconies/verandah only. Moreover, as far as possible outer
walls are being kept in straight line so that the open area between the
flat and road/footpath is minimized.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 5.25)
The Committee note that Section 36 of the Delhi Development
Act, 1957 empowers DDA to require the local authority to assume the
responsibility for extension of the amenities on the terms and conditions
agreed to between DDA and the local authority. The committee are
however informed that in case of ‘commercial and shopping complexes’
in many cases, the DDA does not hand over the maintenance to the
local authority or MCD for years together. The cases of ‘commercial
complexes’ at IP Extension is one such glaring example. These
complexes are in a dilapidated and dirty condition as they are neither
maintained by DDA nor by the MCD. The Committee are of the view
that since both DDA and MCD are governmental agencies, they must
join hands for the welfare of the public at large. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that DDA should immediately hand over all the
fully developed ‘commercial areas’ in Delhi including IP Extension to

45
MCD who should look after sewerage, cleanliness etc. of such areas.
The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
(a) Services of most of the commercial complexes developed by
DDA have been handed over to MCD except the following which are
under process of handing over to MCD:
South West Zone — 5 nos.
Dwarka Zone — 5 nos.
Rohini Zone — 2 nos.
North Zone — 46 nos.
East Zone — 24 nos.
(b) As regards the status of handing over of services of two Local
Shopping Complexes (LSC) at IP Extension, DDA had convened a
meeting on 10.8.2005 along with DJB & MCD Officers when it was
agreed to effect the transfer in a time bound manner.
Based on the agreed Plan of Action, completion plans and joint
inspection have been carried out in respect of two LSCs in IP Extension,
namely LSC near Prince Apartments and near Paradise Society. These
services are proposed to be handed over within two months after
finalization of deficiency estimates & payment of agreed deficiency
charges.
In respect of LSC near Paradise Society, the work is proposed to
be completed within one month after which the system would be
handed over to DJB in a similar time bound manner.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.11)
The Committee note that in one case, the land earmarked for
Dharamshala was used for Banquet Hall. The Committee take a serious
view of it and would like that the matter be thoroughly probed. Here,
they would also like to recommend that misuse of land should be
considered a criminal offence and necessary provisions in this regard
need to be incorporated in the law.

46
Reply of the Government
With reference to the specific case mentioned by the Committee,
DDA has reported that the lease in question has already been cancelled
and eviction proceedings have been initiated. The suggestion to consider
misuse of land as criminal offence would also be examined and further
action taken, in this regard by DDA.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.44)
The Committee note that a large number of Memoranda have been
received alleging inaction by various departments of the DDA. The
Committee have their apprehensions that inaction on the part of DDA
encourages defaulters who think that they can get away lightly. On
the other hand, honest people feel let down if no action is taken when
they report such in actions to the DDA. Inaction on part of DDA
obviously makes people suspicious. DDA needs to build its image by
acting timely on the genuine complaints of unauthorized constructions
and encroachments received from the common public. The Committee
recommend that the functioning of the enforcement and recovery
Department of DDA should be reviewed thoroughly so that suitable
check and balance is maintained by fixing time-frame for handling of
jobs at each desk. Further, officers delaying matters or not acting timely
on issues brought to their notice should be held accountable and
stringent action taken against them.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for
compliance.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.45)
Since its inception several decades back, DDA has made long
strides and flowered into a vast organization with manifold functions
and responsibilities and with vast area of operation. Over the years,
DDA’s function has focused mainly on building activities which has
become highly professional now a days. As such, it will be in the
fitness of things that the officers and staff of DDA should be highly

47
professional with more and more autonomy. As such, it is imperative
that top posts in DDA i.e. Vice-Chairman etc. should be manned by
the professionals who might be absorbed in the organization itself so
that they can concentrate more and contribute more towards its
upliftment and efficiency. It is high time to see whether DDA can be
given the status of navranta with more functional autonomy. The
Committee desire that the feasibility in this regard may be explored
and if necessary, amendment in rules/enactment may be carried out.
Reply of the Government
DDA is a vast organization having multi-functional responsibilities
in the field of housing, urban development, civil engineering, human
resource development, architecture and system management etc. DDA
is also responsible for implementing policies of the Government in
respect of land, planning and urban development. The fund being
operated by DDA is accrued from sale and revenue receipts relating
to land, which is a government resource, the management of which
has been entrusted to DDA in so far as Delhi is concerned. Hence a
person with sufficient managerial and administrative experience in
Government and exposure to urban affairs is best suited to head the
organization. The present process of selection for the post of VC DDA
has been found to be appropriate.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.46)
The reported mal-practices and alleged corruption prevailing in
DDA’s offices lead to some serious thinking about the functioning of
vigilance there and cast a sinister shadow on it. It seems that the
vigilance is not that effective as it should be or it has functional
hindrances due to one reason or the other as a consequence of which
they are not able to play their expected role. Any organization has to
be corruption free and to that effect effective deterrence to mal-practices
is a must. The Committee feel perhaps there is a gap here. There is
a need to strengthen the vigilance machinery substantially and to
acquaint them with the latest strides made in this area. Restructuring
and proper orientation have become more essential in view of the
irregularities reported from time-to-time. The Committee feel that the
officers heading the vigilance wing should be sufficiently senior in
hierarchy and should be permitted to work independently without
any interference. The entire vigilance wing should have functional

48
autonomy and the head of this wing should be made accountable to
the Lt. Governor only who is the ex-officio Chairman, DDA. The
feasibility in this regard may be explored and if found necessary,
amendment may be made in the rules or act.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is fully in agreement with the observations of the
Committee that Vigilance Wing of DDA shall have full functional
autonomy. In this regard, DDA is being advised to appoint persons
with sound experience in vigilance matters and also to provide vigilance
training to equip their officers with necessary skills. It is however felt
that it may not be feasible for CVO to report direct to LG, Delhi,
bypassing Vice Chairman, DDA. The present practice of CVO reporting
to LG, Delhi through, VC, DDA is appropriate and effective both
functionally and administratively. Further, CVO is also guided by the
Central Vigilance Commission, which is also a statutory authority.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.47)
The Committee observe that the staff strength of DDA has increased
manifold after its inception in 1957. They therefore, recommend that
in order to manage huge staff of DDA, DDA needs a full time Member
(Personnel) and for this purpose suitable amendment should also be
made in section 3 (3) of DD Act, 1957.
Reply of the Government
As per the DD Act, 1957, LG, Delhi is the Chairman of DDA.
Besides Vice Chairman, DDA, there are two Members of DDA i.e.
Finance Member and Engineer Member. The Ministry feels that there
is no justification for creation of a post of Member (Personnel) as the
functions relating to staff are dealt with by Commissioner (Personnel).
Staff function is a supporting function and not a primary function of
DDA.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.50)
The Committee note with satisfaction the various steps are being
taken by DDA to ensure public participation in their functioning. The

49
Committee, however, are concerned to note that a large number of
grievances against DDA and their officials are published in ‘Print
Media’ and people are constrained to take the help of Press to get
their problems redressed or to go to the Courts of law. This shows
that the DDA does not give proper and adequate response on a given
complaint. The Committee firmly recommend that an effective and
responsive mechanism for monitoring the complaints be devised by
DDA with a positive perspective in mind for timely and quick
Redressal of public grievances and the written complaints received in
DDA offices should be monitored and disposal on a regular basis.
Reply of the Government
It has been suggested that effective and responsible mechanism
for monitoring the complaints should be devised for quick redressal
of the grievances received in DDA.
Following steps have been taken by DDA to monitor the grievances
for effective and urgent redressal:
1. A scroll of the grievances received at computerized Receipt
& Dispatch counters is prepared on daily basis and
forwarded to all HODs for disposal and monitoring.
2. Steps are taken by the Nodal Officer (Grievance) in respect
of grievances received from the public through telephone
directly or through call center by directly approaching the
concerned senior officers for early redressal. Two Welfare
Inspectors have also been engaged in the PG departments
to constantly pursue the concerned departments for their
early redressal of the grievances so received.
3. Grievance received in the PG department from DPG, MOUD,
DARPG, are monitored regularly at the level of Principal
Commissioner-cum-Secretary , Vice Chairman and Secretary
(UD).
4. PGRAMS system for monitoring grievances has recently been
installed in DDA and grievances received would be
monitored through this software.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]

50
Recommendation (Para No. 6.60)
The Committee are perturbed to note that a number of complaints
have been received by the general public on the cumbersome and
lengthy procedure adopted for conversion of property from lease hold
to free-hold. The Committee fail to understand as to why the DDA
does not bother to look into its own records and expects people to
submit and re-submit the same documents on several occasions for
getting their final approval for conversion from lease hold to free hold
of property. The Committee observe that certain documents like
photocopy of lease-deed, Plinth Area Certificate, Possession Certificate
and Proof of physical Possession should be available in DDA records.
Such a situation speaks volume of lack of coordination between
different ‘wings’ of same organization. The Committee therefore, firmly
recommend that the procedure for conversion of property from lease
hold to free hold be simplified by minimizing the number of documents
to be submitted as well as by fixing a time-frame for completion of
the whole procedure by DDA. DDA should also computerize this
system and hold periodical camps in the DDA colonies itself, for easy
access to the public and to mitigate their grievances on this count.
Reply of the Government
In pursuance of conversion policy issued by the Ministry of Urban
Development, DDA had decided to convert residential flats as well as
residential built up plots from lease hold to free hold on payment of
conversion charges. Accordingly, a brochure was prepared and got
published incorporating the salient features of the scheme, amount of
conversion charges payable for flats, category-wise and zone wise. The
documents required to be submitted alongwith the conversion
application have also been clearly mentioned in the said brochure.
These documents are essential requirement and are in accordance with
the approved guidelines of the Government of India for processing
the application forms from leasehold to freehold. Though documents
like letter of possession and perpetual lease deed/conveyance deed (in
few cases) are available in file but other documents  i.e. proof of physical
possession, no objection certificate regarding mortgage and receipt of
ground rent are normally not available.
For conversion of properties from lease hold to free hold, the
practice of obtaining the photocopy of the lease papers has since been
dispensed with. As regards the plinth area certificate from the Group
Housing Societies, efforts are now being made that if in any particular
Society a flat of the same category has been converted into free hold,

51
then its plinth area copy can be obtained from any DDA file itself
without bothering the applicant for this purpose.
On the issue of dispensing with the requirement of proof of
physical possession, it is informed that in respect of the original
allottees, the letter of possession is required from the society and in
respect of the GPA holders a copy of the letter of possession is required,
so as to verify the signatures of the original allottee in the GPA and
Agreement to Sell. However, DDA is making efforts to expedite
conversion by simplification of its policies and procedures. Several
important proposals in this regard on issues such as misuse charges,
cases of share transfers etc., are under review. As suggested by the
Committee, Conversion camps are being held in Group Housing
Societies to meet proper requirements at their door. Consequently, the
number of conversion cases in 2004-05 was 7228 as compared to 2455
in 2004.
DDA is in the process of holding periodical camps in DDA colonies
for the purpose of expediting the conversions. Also a detailed
computerization proposals is presently underway in DDA which
includes in its ambit the computerization of various processes involved
in conversion of property from leasehold to freehold. As regards the
fixing of time frame for completion of conversion, it is pointed out
that DDA already has a time frame of three months for finalizing
such conversion cases.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 55 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.62)
The Committee have received a number of Memoranda from the
General Public about the menace of property dealers who work in
DDA lands in connivance with DDA officials. Even before allotments
are made of the DDA’s dwelling units, boards and hoardings of
property dealers come up in the area. The Committee feel that such
commercialisation of the DDA’s Units shall defeat the main purpose
of giving cost effective housing to the weaker sections of the society.
They therefore, recommend that strict action be taken against the field
staff and officers of DDA, who operate hand-in-glove with private
property dealers and encourage sale of dwelling units on ‘Power of

52
Attorney’ at higher prices thereby, earning unwarranted profits and
periodical inspection is done in this regard.
Reply of the Government
DDA has informed that before allotment of flats, fixing of Boards
and Hoardings by the property dealers is not permitted. However, if
any case regarding connivance of property dealers with DDA employees
comes to the notice, the same is referred to the Vigilance Department
for necessary action. In order to bring transparency in system and to
avoid any manipulation, computerized draws for the flats are held in
the presence of independent Judges who are senior officers from
different organizations and also the media. The process of draws is
also displayed in parallel on a big screen and also posted on the
notice board in the reception area, web site and in the Newspapers.
All these arrangements have had a salutary impact and have
substantially minimized the scope of any complaint. The procedures &
arrangements are being regularly reviewed for further improvement.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 58 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.66)
The Committee note with concern that the land use earmarked in
Zonal Master Plan has been changed by DDA after a passage of time
in certain areas of Delhi. The Committee are of the firm view that
such change in land use of an area should be made only in case of
compelling circumstances and for the facility/benefit of the residential
population of such area. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
prior to change in land use of an area, the RWAs etc. must be consulted
and such change should be avoided in cases where the area had been
earmarked ‘Green’ area in Zonal Plans.
Reply of the Government
The Master Plan prepared by DDA to provide overall guidance
and framework for planned development of Delhi assigns specific land-
use to different areas in the National Capital Territory of Delhi. The
main categories of land-use are residential, institutional, industrial,

53
commercial etc. A total 9 major categories and 37 sub-categories of
land-use are prescribed in the Master Plan, 2001. However, due to
exigencies of development and evolving needs for meeting various
requirements of the population, it becomes necessary to change the
assigned land-use of a particular plot of land. Such change in land-
use involves an amendment to the Master Plan, and is resorted to
only where inevitable and required in public interest.
The change of land use is done in accordance with the provision
of DDA Act 1957 and Public notice under section 11 A of the DDA
Act is issued for inviting Public objection/suggestion. The proposed
change of landuse is also examined by a Technical Committee of DDA
before it is decided to issue such public notice. Objections and
suggestions received in response to the public notice are also examined
by Technical Committee of DDA and recommendations of the same
are put up to the Authority for its consideration. Once the Authority
recommends the change of landuse after taking into consideration the
public objections/suggestions if any, the proposal is taken up in the
Ministry for approving the change of landuse by due notification
amending the Master Plan.
Therefore, it may be seen that sufficient examination of technical
issues as well as opportunity to stake holders and citizens including
RWAs is provided for in the procedure is being followed for effecting
any change in the landuse in Delhi. As far as areas earmarked green
are concerned, care is taken to see that land use of area already
developed as green is not changed except in unavoidable circumstances.
The orders of the Courts and guidelines of Ridge Management Board
are also taken into consideration by considering any such change of
landuse.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]

54
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 1.27)
The Committee note that according to the provisions of Section 6
of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the Delhi Development Authority
(DDA) is entrusted with aims and objectives to formulate a Master
Plan for covering the present and future growth of Delhi and to
promote and secure the development of Delhi according to the Plan
covering all the possible activities. It is entrusted to acquire, hold,
manage and dispose of land and other property and carry out building,
engineering, mining and other operations. Also, the DDA is required
to provide services and amenities incidental to the above. While the
Master Plans and the Zonal Plans as approved by the Central
Government serve as the basic framework for development of Delhi,
the DDA has to effectively complete the arduous task of providing
‘Housing’ facilities to the ever-growing population of Delhi. The MPD
1962 had recommended an area about 45000 hectares for urbanization
so as to accommodate a projected population of 5.3 million by the
year 1981. Further, the MPD 2001, which is presently under
implementation, has recommended to develop 18000 to 24000 hectares
of additional urban area so as to accommodate a projected population
of 12.8 million by the year 2001. The MPD 2001 also recommended for
urban structuring to be ‘Low Rise High Density’ with re-structuring of
physical infrastructure so as to also accommodate an additional
population of 3 to 4 million. The Committee are, however, concerned
to note that despite the efforts of DDA to meet the requirements of
‘Housing’ and accommodating the influx of people into Delhi for
livelihood, there is apparently a significant growth of unauthorized
colonies, JJ clusters and Squatter settlements in the metropolitan city
of Delhi, which is the capital city of India. The Committee finds that
Delhi is under severe pressure to house the rapidly increasing
population of the city. The Committee, therefore, recommend that DDA
should make earnest efforts to provide adequate ‘Housing’ for the
people of Delhi in coordination with the Government of Delhi and
other local bodies so that at least further growth of unauthorized
colonies and squatter settlements are stopped forthwith.

55
Reply of the Government
DDA, has since its inception provided housing stock of about 10.55
lakh dwelling units in Delhi through construction of flats and allotment
of plots to individuals, societies, resettlement colonies etc. As per the
Census 2001, Delhi has 24.5 lakh Census houses and a shortage of
about 1 lakh houses/dwelling units. Another about 3 lakh kuchha
structures require replacement. Based on the projected population of
230 lakh by 2021, the estimated additional housing stock required will
be around 24 lakh dwelling units. It has been assessed that around 20
and 40 per cent of housing need respectively can be met by the
development of accommodation in the adjacent NCR cities and through
redevelopment/upgradation of existing areas of Delhi. Thus
approximately 10 lakh new housing units will have to be provided, of
which around 50-55 percent of the housing requirement would be for
urban poor and economically weaker sections. Accordingly, the Draft
MPD-2021 has proposed a multi pronged strategy for provision of
housing as given below:
Indicative Distribution in Housing Type to be added during Plan
period (2001-2021)
Sl.No. Housing Type Development %
Agencies
1. Slum & JJ Public Agency 25
1. In-situ Rehabilitation Private Agency
2. Relocation/Reconstruction Co-op. Society
3. Up-gradation
2. Houses on Independent Plots Public Agency 8
& Redevelopment Private Agency
3. Group Housing (35% of total Public Agency 42
DUs not to exceed 2 room sets) Private Agency
Co-op. Society
4. Employer Housing Central/State Govt. 4
5. Unauthorised Colonies- Co-op. Society/ 15
Regularized Residents’
Association/
Private agency
6. Other Housing areas, Public Agency 6
Upgradation of Old areas/ Private Agency
Traditional areas/Villages Co-op. Society
Total 100

56
Draft MPD-2021 also stipulates that in any group housing scheme
35 per cent of the total DU’s be provided for EWS/LIG (below 40
sqm. plinth area/2 room units). As may be seen from the above, the
Draft Master Plan has, for the first time, placed emphasis on the need
for several agencies to be associated with housing development in
Delhi, and redefined the role of the State as a provider as well as
facilitator. It is proposed that private developers will be permitted to
take up housing development on both lands owned by DDA as well
as on private land under the guidelines laid down by the DDA, and
within the overall umbrella of the Master Plan.
While taking up construction of housing, the private developers
would also have to provide for EWS category housing in colonies
developed by them, so as to cater to the shelter needs of the service
providers in the informal sector. DDA has proposed that on DDA
lands, taken up for housing development by private developers, 35%
of the housing should be of EWS/LIG category and on private lands
minimum 20% of the housing should be in LIG category. This strategy
is expected to have the dual benefit of speeding up housing
development to cover up the backlog and estimated growth in housing
requirement and also to prevent the burgeoning of unauthorized
colonies and slums.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 1.28)
The Committee are informed that according to population
projections, 20 to 30% of the required 2.4 million dwelling units are to
be provided in the National Capital Region of Delhi but the augmented
housing requirement for Delhi cannot be provided within Delhi itself.
It has been projected that 30 to 40% of the dwelling units should
come in form of re-development and densification of existing areas,
which would also include things like higher density for slum
rehabilitation. Also, about 1.5 million dwelling units may have to come
up in the areas, which would be urbanized during the MPD 2021. The
Committee are also informed that at present about 23,000 dwelling
units are under construction by DDA and the ‘Housing Projects
Approval Committee’ of DDA has approved another 8000 housing
units for construction. While the Committee appreciate the efforts made
by DDA in providing dwelling units and planning housing projects in
Delhi, they are of the firm view that a lot is yet to be carried out so
as to house the populace of NCT of Delhi. The Committee, therefore,

57
recommend that intense and well-timed hard work is done so as to
accommodate the ever-present population in squatter settlements, JJ
clusters, etc. as per the Master Plans. The Committee also desires that
the developmental works of DDA should be toned-up to contain a
clean Delhi and a planned Delhi.
Reply of the Government
The Slum and JJ Deptt. of MCD is the main agency dealing with
matters relating to slums in Delhi. As per the relocation policy followed
in Delhi, S&JJ Wing provides alternative plots to eligible squatters.
Since 1991, it has allotted about 53,800 plots to eligible squatters. About
15,671 requests for relocation are reported to be pending with the
Slum and JJ Wing of MCD, for allotment of plots. However, DDA has
also been undertaking resettlement schemes to resettle the JJ clusters
from the DDA project sites or in the Development Areas of the DDA.
In view of the large number of families estimated to be living in
slums and JJ settlements, in the year 2004, MOUD had constituted a
Committee under the chairmanship of VC, DDA to prepare an Action
Plan to make Delhi Slum Free. The Committee recommended that the
present approach of providing site and services needs to be
progressively abandoned and substituted by an alternative approach,
comprising of the following strategies:
1. In-situ Rehabilitation
2. Relocation/Reconstruction
3. Up-gradation
These recommendations are reflected in Draft MPD-2021, which
stipulates 25% of the total housing should be devoted for Slum & JJ
Rehabilitation.
The Committee also recommended the rehabilitation of slum
dwellers in multi-storied tenements in order to overcome the constraint
of land availability and to preclude the possibility of large resettlement
colonies degenerating into mega-slums. The Ministry of Urban
development has accepted “in principle”, a proposal of DDA to take
up rehabilitation of slum dwellers in multi-storeyed tenements on pilot
basis. Such multi-storeyed tenements would be taken up on self
financing basis as far as possible by using land as resource. The
tenements would be allotted only on short-term lease or licence basis
with penalties for unauthorized transfer in order to counter alienation
and mis-appropriation by ineligible individuals or speculators. Based

58
on the above, the DDA has undertaken a pilot project for in-situ
rehabilitation of Slum & JJ clusters at Tehkhand for accommodating
about 3500-4000 JJ families.
In addition to this change in approach for rehabilitation of slum
dwellers, the Govt. has also proposed a new approach to cater for
shelter needs of service providers in the informal sector, who are
normally the main category of persons that squat on public or private
land around residential areas, in order to be close to their place of
employment. Under the new approach, it is proposed that every
residential colony, whether developed by group housing society,
cooperative group housing society, private developers or DDA would
have to construct EWS housing on land obtained for this purpose in
the vicinity. The number of such EWS dwelling units would be equal
to the number of dwelling units constructed for members or residents
of the colony. Such EWS dwelling units would be handed over to a
State agency (DDA or S&JJ) for allotment to eligible individuals of
EWS category, on licence basis. The EWS housing tenements would be
managed by a cooperative society or association to be set up by the
allottees under the guidance and overall supervision of a State agency
such as MCD or DDA.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.30)
The Committee note that DDA has taken over possession of
67354.88 acres of land acquired through the Land Acquisition Collector
of Delhi, till March, 2003. Till March, 2005, DDA has acquired land
totalling upto 69890 acres. The Committee note that land acquired for
DDA are to be developed for residential, recreational, industrial,
commercial and institutional purposes. The Committee appreciate that
DDA has developed/provided for 27 community centers, 125 local
shopping centers, 429 convenient shopping centers and a number of
dwelling units in the lands acquired for DDA. The Committee trust
that DDA moves ahead by providing adequate number of dwelling
units and other facilities to the urban population of Delhi so that the
city can boast of being a world-class city by 2021. The Committee also
desire that the upcoming dwelling units, shopping complexes,
institutions etc. as well as the existing constructions by DDA are
adequately maintained and upholstered with an aesthetic sense to
ensure that these dwelling units/flats, shopping complexes etc. give a
neat and modern look. Since private players have been encouraged by

59
DDA in building up the ‘Shopping Malls’ in Delhi, which have come
up lately, the Committee urge the Government to ensure that all the
required safeguards—such as fire fighting arrangements, emergency
exists, proper lifts in high rise buildings and constructions of earthquake
proof structures are adhered to strictly both by the private builders
and DDA.
Reply of the Government
Construction of buildings in Delhi is governed under the provisions
of the Unified Building Bye Laws for Delhi, 1983, which inter alia ,
provide for adequate measures and safeguards to ensure fire safety as
per National Building Code (NBC). In respect of Buildings that exceed
15 mts. in height, clearance from the Chief Fire Officers is required as
an additional safety measure. In respect of structural safety against
earthquakes, it is mandatory to give a certificate signed by a Structural
Engineer, Architect and Owner of the building that measures in
accordance with the NBC have been taken. This provision was
incorporated in building bylaws by amendment notified vide Gazette
notification No. S.O. 248 (E) dated 21.03.2001, issued with the approval
of the Govt. in the aftermath of the experience of the Gujarat
earthquake of January, 2001.
As regards the provision of required safeguards in high rise
buildings—such as fire fighting arrangements, emergency exists, proper
lifts and earth quake measures are concerned, all the norms are adhered
while designing and during the construction of such buildings by DDA.
For buildings to be constructed by private developers, enforcement of
these provisions is ensured by Building Section of DDA under Director
(Building).
As regards the constructions undertaken by DDA for residential
and commercial purposes, after construction is complete, the flats/
shopping complexes are handed over to the respective allottees. The
maintenance of such structures is the responsibility of the individuals,
RWAs or respective local bodies and DDA has no role to play in this
regard, after the areas are denotified. In respect of the areas/pockets
which are not denotified, unauthorized alterations/additions in the
construction, if detected, are reported by Engineering Wing to
Commissioner (Housing)/Commissioner (LM)/Director (Enforcement)
for taking action under building bye-laws/Delhi Development (Act/
terms & conditions of the lease deed etc.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]

60
Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)
The Committee observe that a vast number of marginalized poor
in the urban centers, particularly in the metropolitan cities live without
shelter, facilities and amenities for bare existence, deprived of basic
needs and means of livelihood. Such marginalized people could be
found either in slums or in other illegal and unauthorized habitations
with no semblance of civic amenities. They are mainly unorganized
daily wage earners, construction workers, vendors and hawkers,
rickshaw and cart-pullers, porters and loaders, street and working
children or simply the vagrants and homeless. The Committee also
note that the Delhi Master Plan defines ‘shelter’ as an essential need
of a family, including components like water, electricity, waste disposal,
education, health, recreational and other facilities’. It also mentions
about vendors and hawkers, reported to be 200,000 in Delhi. The
Committee are, therefore, of the firm view that ‘Housing’ for the EWS
including the JJ clusters should be one of the primary concerns of
DDA. The Committee recommend that clearcut and specific planned
measures be taken by DDA by  making suitable provisions in MPD-
2021 for providing dwelling units at an affordable price to the actual
EWS and JJ cluster population in the DDA housing scheme.
Reply of the Government
Keeping in view the socio-economic composition of the population,
the Draft MPD-2021, has estimated that around 50-55 percent of the
housing requirement would be for the urban poor and the economically
weaker sections in the form of houses of two rooms or less. Further
as per MPD-2021, as a mandatory provision 35% of the total dwelling
units are proposed to be upto two room units (upto 40 sq. mts. plinth
area) as to provide for EWS/LIG housing.
The category of the urban poor, would mainly comprise the
inhabitants of squatter settlements and informal service providers for
which innovative strategy of in situ slum rehabilitation along with
ongoing relocation & upgradation have been proposed.
MPD-2021 proposes that in every housing scheme taken up by
any agency at least 10 per cent of the saleable net residential land
should be reserved for EWS housing and pooled on a zonal basis to
have its even spread in different parts of the city and not concentrate
in one place. Such reserved lands should be used for promoting
housing for low income and weaker sections.

61
The policy for allotment of land to Cooperative Group Housing
Societies is under review to make it mandatory for construction of
EWS tenements by such societies for the service providers in the
adjoining localities.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.41)
The Committee are concerned to note that upto the end of 3rd
quarter of the year 1999, 10625 houses could not be allotted due to
absence of electricity and 5508 houses could not be allotted due to
absence of water supply. The Committee are of the view that before
construction of houses is taken up, DDA should satisfy itself about
the availability of water and power as per requirement. The Committee
would like to know whether proper assessment of the aforesaid
requirements was done before the construction was taken up. The
Committee recommend that sincere efforts be made by DDA, DJB and
the Electricity authorities to take corrective action, expeditiously, so
that the bonafide owners of these flats can be allotted the dwelling
units. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in the
matter.
Reply of the Government
10625 houses and 5508 houses, which could not be allotted due to
absence of electricity and water respectively, were subsequently released
for allotment after electricity was provided by DVB/DISCOMS and
water by DJB/or through interim arrangements made by DDA.
As per the present policy, flats are allotted only after all the services
including electricity are available.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]

62
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 1.29)
The Committee needs hardly mention that the problems faced in
Delhi in accommodating the migratory population from rural/small
towns and townships are manifold. The city is not only required to
provide ‘Housing’ to the incoming population, but also water supply,
sanitation, sewerage, treatment of sewers, electricity, garbage disposal
and environmental management. While the Committee appreciates that
the draft MPD 2021 envisions to make Delhi a global metropolis and
a world class city, they are however of the firm view that unless
coordinated efforts are made by DDA, the NDMC, Municipal
Corporation of Delhi, Delhi Jal Board and urban bodies to ensure
proper garbage disposal and curtail open-defecation in the squatter
settlements, this objective would be very difficult to be achieved. The
Committee recommends that DDA should develop suitable housing
structures for the urban pool with proper sanitation facilities and re-
locate people living in squatters and slum tenements in appropriate
areas.
Reply of the Government
The provision of the basic amenities in relocation sites is the
responsibility of the relocating agency, mainly the Slum and JJ Wing
of MCD. However services such as water supply, roads and drains
etc, are to be provided by DJB, MCD etc. However, as observed by
the Committee, there is often a backlog of sanitation and other services
in the Resettlement Schemes. This is mainly due to delay in the
provision of the services by the concerned agencies namely DJB, MCD
etc. However as far as possible, while relocating squatters to different
relocation colonies, both DDA and the Slum and JJ Deptt. of MCD
provide basic facilities like roads, electricity, water, schools, dispensaries,
toilet complexes etc. In addition, Slum and JJ Deptt. also provides
Basti Vikas Kendras, Community Halls and Shishu Vatikas in the
resettlement pockets developed by them.

63
Moreover, in order to plan for better provisioning for basic
amenities, Draft MPD-2021 proposes the following for Resettlement
Colonies:
“The immediate need is of individual services i.e. water, sewerage
and electricity. Regular sewerage network provision may not be
possible immediately in many areas because of non-availability of
connecting lines and financial constraints. In such cases, the low
cost sanitation on individual or collective basis should be adopted.
To ensure healthy and better environment, the construction of
houses needs to be based on approved/standard building plans.
Co-operative societies/private developers/Govt. agencies may come
forward for redevelopment based on the incentives as applicable
for the Squatter Rehabilitation Scheme.”
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 1.30)
The Committee are informed that specific provisions for Mixed
Land Use had been made by Government in the residential areas along
with Non-permissible Mixed Land use in MPD 2001. In this regard,
the Committee desire that proper and earnest steps are taken by the
concerned governmental authorities to ensure that non-permissible
limits of Mixed Land Use are adhered to in the urban areas of Delhi
so as to ensure security, safety and environmental quality of residential
areas. The Committee also desire that the provisions/limits of
permissible and non-permissible Mixed Land Use be reviewed in the
light of latest developments and necessary amendments be made in
these limits, if found necessary. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The provisions of mixed land use as given in Master Plan have
been worked out so as to maintain a balance between the ground
realities/provision of self-employment opportunities, with the need to
ensure security, safety and environmental quality of the residential
areas. DDA is responsible for administering the provisions relating to
mixed use in development areas and local bodies namely NDMC and

64
MCD are responsible for this function in those development areas that
have already been de-notified and transferred to them by DDA. The
relevant statutes namely, DD Act and the MCD Act provide for
prosecution and limited financial penalty in cases of misuse or violation
of provisions relating to mixed use. There are no provisions for sealing
the premises in cases of misuse under the Master Plan. Therefore,
there is no effective deterrent to prevent and tackle the problem of
misuse of properties beyond the extent of mixed use provided for
under the Master Plan. It is proposed to undertake revision of these
provisions in the Act to provide for more stringent and effective
deterrence against misuse and violation of provisions relating to mixed
land-use.
However, within the statutory provisions available at present, DDA
has been undertaking action in cases of violation of mixed land-use
provisions. The year-wise number of prosecution cases launched and
fine imposed by MM court are as under:—
Sl.No. Year Prosecution launched Fine imposed
by MM Court
1. 2002-03 599 Rs.  4.21 Lakh
2. 2003-04 199 Rs. 13.69 Lakh
3. 2004-05 408 Rs. 17.31 Lakh
Further, the draft MPD-2021, which has been published for inviting
objections/suggestions from the public in April, 2005 has proposed
the following with respect to Mixed Land-use:—
1. Non-residential activity on residential premises should be
permitted selectively and carefully taking into consideration
community needs, environmental impact and provision for
safe and easy traffic circulation and adequate parking.
2. In case of new developments, planned mixed residential
and non-residential activity should be introduced right at
the time of preparation of layout plans along with planning
of Commercial Centres for which appropriate provision of
parking, circulation and services be kept in view. Norms
for parking and commercial use on different floors be
specified.
3. Notified provisions made in the earlier plan may be
continued within the overall framework of the approved
plan.

65
4. Mixed use may be permitted on residential plot facing
streets/roads of minimum 18.0m ROW in regular residential
plotted development with prescribed development norms,
such streets should be notified and given wide publicity.
5. The bungalow areas of Lutyens Delhi and Civil Lines,
Government housing, institutional/staff housing and areas
of heritage and national importance shall not be covered
under the mixed use policy.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.29)
As regards, non-conforming use of the DDA lands, the Committee
note that DDA has initiated counteractive action under the provisions
of Section 29(ii) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 in 140 cases in
2003, 144 cases in 2004 and 332 cases in 2005. While the Committee
note with satisfaction that DDA has taken certain remedial actions in
cases of non-conforming use of their lands, with the Master Plans,
they desire that DDA should devise suitable in-built mechanism to
check misuse of their lands and ensure the developed areas remain
intact with the Master Plan.
Reply of the Government
Regarding non-conforming use of DDA land, the provision of
section 29(2) of the DD Act, 1957 has already been incorporated in the
lease deed(s) of properties. The violation of the terms and conditions
of the said provision in the lease deed attracts termination of the lease
deed and subsequent eviction proceedings against defaulting lessee of
the property . In addition, DDA has an in-built mechanism to detect
violations of section 29(ii) of DD Act through the Enforcement Branch
and Survey Wing. These wings of the DDA conduct periodical
inspection of the sites under their jurisdiction to ascertain the nature,
quantum and period of non-confirming use of DDA land, after which
the action stipulated in the lease deed follows.
The Enforcement Branch (Lands) of DDA takes action under
section 14 read with Section 29(2) of DD Act, 1957 regarding detection

66
of misuse in residential areas in contravention of the provisions of
Master Plan and issues show cause notices to the misuser of the
premises. Simultaneously, other Govt. Departments such as House Tax,
Licensing and Health Deptt. of MCD, Sales Tax Deptt. and ROC are
approached for verification of the ownership of the premises/
constitution of the misuser companies. On receipt of verification,
prosecution is launched against the misuser of the premises in the
Court of Metropolitan Magistrate, Patiala House, New Delhi.
Moreover, DDA imposes misuse charges for non-conforming use
of the property as and when conversion applications are received in
respect of such properties. In such cases, the past misuse charges are
also recovered and non-payment of the misuse charges amounts to
termination of lease deed and subsequent eviction from the property .
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
The Committee note that the Land Acquisition Collector acquires
land in Delhi from farmers and villagers and hands over such acquired
lands to DDA for development. At the time of acquisition of these
lands, the LAC fixes the acquisition rate to be paid as compensation
to the land losers. The Committee also note that alternative plots are
allotted to the recommended farmers whose land has been acquired
under large scale acquisition and development of land in Delhi. The
Committee, however, would like to point out that a number of
complaints have been received from such land losers by the Committee
in response to their ‘Press Communiques’. these complaints pertain to
fixation of low rate of compensation to the land losers, and denial of
allotment of alterative plots to certain land losers, specifically in Rohini
and Wazirpur areas. Apart from these, a number of cases are pending
in courts of law by complainants or land losers for suitable
compensation. The Committee recommend that keeping in mind the
needs of the farmers/villagers who have lost their lands, which were
their means of livelihood, the DDA as well as the concerned
Government authorities must take substantial steps so as to give
adequate monetary compensation and alternate lands to such land
losers with a positive perspective. The Committee strongly feel that
whenever any land is acquired by DDA from anyone, the process

67
should be so simplified that the land loser without any hassle and
delay, is able to get compensation on alternative land/flat/shop within
a specific time-frame and is not made to wait for years together as is
the case now. The Committee also recommend that whenever any land
is acquired, the landless labourers working on the same land should
be suitably rehabilitated, as they get deprived of their means of
livelihood.
Reply of the Government
The Delhi Development Act envisages planned development of
Delhi through the agency of DDA. In order to undertake this planned
development, DDA has been acquiring land in areas earmarked under
the Master Plan for urbanization. Acquisition of land is undertaken by
GNCTD on the basis of requisition given by DDA. The Land
Acquisition Collector (LAC), GNCTD carries out the acquisition under
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. Further to provide
for the peculiar nature of acquisition in Delhi for planned development,
a scheme for Large Scale Acquisition, Development and Disposal of
Land, was also formulated by the Govt. in 1961. While the Land
Acquisition Act provides for compensation to land owners at the rates
approved by the Govt. from time to time, the Scheme for large scale
acquisition provides for allotment of alternate residential plots to land
owners, by DDA, based on the certification of eligibility by GNCTD.
For the simplification of land acquisition process, a standard operating
procedure has been finalized between DDA and Land & Building
Department of GNCTD.
As far as monetary compensation is concerned, LAC/L&B Deptt./
Dy. Commissioner of GNCTD are competent to acquire land as per
the Land Acquisition Act. The compensation rate is fixed and award
is passé d by the LAC. The award is also approved by the Competent
Authority in GNCTD, after which the amount of compensation is
released by DDA. Land owners who are aggrieved by the rates fixed
by LAC, can file references before the Court of Addl. District Judge.
So far as the allotment of alternative land to the farmers whose
land has been acquired for the planned development of Delhi is
concerned, the role of DDA arises only after receipt of recommendations
from L&B Deptt. There is a clear cut policy for allotment of alternative
land which has been revised from time to time, keeping in view the
changes in land cost/market value and also the availability of sufficient
land. The policy for awarding compensation to land owners and grant
of alternate plots to them does not cover agricultural labourers that

68
may have been dependent on the acquired agricultural land. Any such
policy would have to be evolved by the L&B Deptt. of Govt. of NCT
of Delhi for rehabilitation of the labourers working on the said land,
after taking into account various factors such as availability of land,
nature of employment, and avenues for employment in non-agricultural
sector of urbanization of the acquired land.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.36)
The Committee are concerned to note that out of a large area of
about 1400 acres of DDA lands encroached upon by unauthorized
colonies, DDA has been able to reclaim only 433.98 acres of land
which means that less than one-third of the encroached land could
only be reclaimed by DDA. This is because unauthorized colonies
have come up on the remaining areas. The Committee feels that a
clear cut policy needs to be evolved by the Central Government with
regard to the treatment of unauthorized colonies. The Committee note
that though DDA has been vested with powers of demolition, stopping
and sealing powers, but not much has been achieved in reclaiming
encroached lands. The Committee, therefore, recommend that DDA
and the Ministry of Urban Development must take concrete measures
in consultation with local bodies, so as to reclaim all the encroached
lands of DDA, expeditiously. The Committee also recommend that a
suitable policy-framework be adopted so as to curb cropping up of
new unauthorized colonies. Regularization of unauthorized colonies in
course of time provides an incentive to such acts and legitimizes a
step which was considered illegal and was in violation of the law.
Reply of the Government
The DDA is maintaining regular vigil in respect of its land with
a view to strengthen preventive and protection arrangements. Specific
responsibilities have been entrusted to field functionaries in different
areas. Action for removal of encroachments is undertaken on a
continuous basis. Videography of the vacant lands belonging to DDA
has been done. Periodical videography of the DDA lands will help
prevent unauthorized encroachments. Security guards have been
deployed for safeguard of the DDA land. They are reporting to the

69
concerned SHO for unauthorised encroachments in the area as well as
to the controlling officers of DDA.
As per the recent scrutiny of unauthorised colonies it has come to
notice that out of 1432 unauthorised colonies, 145 are partly or fully
on DDA acquired/awarded land and 228 unauthorised colonies are
on land notified as Development Area, which are under control of
DDA. The issue of regularization of the unauthorised colonies is under
consideration of Government of India.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.24)
The Committee express their concern over the fact that only five
years are left for the commencement of Commonwealth Games 2010
and the construction of the Commonwealth Games Village at
Akshardham is yet to be begin. They also note that a small portion of
site belongs to Government of Uttar Pradesh for which negotiations
are going on with the State Government of Uttar Pradesh. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that matter should be sorted out
expeditiously and the construction of the “Games Village” should
commence without any delay. The Committee desire that prudent and
scientific techniques be adopted in development of ‘Commonwealth
Games Village’ at Akshardham in line with the international standards
of sports facilities. In the beginning itself it should be kept in mind
that the facilities to be created should be such that even after the
Commonwealth Games 2010 are over, these can be made use of
subsequently also.
Reply of the Government
Development work of the Games Village will be taken up by the
DDA after final decision of the Government is conveyed. DDA is also
pursuing with the Government of Uttar Pradesh for acquiring a portion
of the Games Village site which belongs to the Government of Uttar
Pradesh. Recommendations of the Committee on developing the Games
Village of international standards and its future utilization would be
incorporated while preparing final plans for the Games Village.

70
The status of efforts made to acquire land from Government of
Uttar Pradesh for the Commonwealth Games Village is as follows:
•A  proposal was sent by the DDA to the Government of
Uttar Pradesh for providing 41.3 acre land in village Chiraga
Janobi for the purpose of Commonwealth Games Village.
The land which belongs to Irrigation Deptt. of U.P . Govt.,
is bounded by Akshardham Temple on the South, Marginal
Bund (now a road) from Vikas Marg to Noida on the East,
New Railway line on the North and Road (adjoining
Yamuna River) on the West. This land was found to be
suitable for Commonwealth Games Village.
• The first communication was sent to Chief Secretary , Govt.
of U.P . by VC, DDA on 21st November, 2002. Several
meetings were held in the chamber of VC, DDA in which
Principal Secretary , Irrigation Deptt. of the U.P . was also
present. The site inspection was also conducted by the
Principal Secretary, Irrigation Department in which
Sr. Officers of DDA were present.
• Govt. of U.P . has proposed that the rate of land should be
par with the rate at which the agricultural lands are being
acquired by DDA. The L&B Deptt. of GNCTD was requested
to communicate the rate of this land proposed for Common-
wealth Games Village. In response the Land Acquisition
Collector (East) in his letter dtd. 7.12.2004 has informed
DDA that keeping in view the status of the required land,
the rate of Rs. 5,05,000/-per acre be fixed in accordance
with the letter dtd. 9.8.2001 of L&B Deptt., GNCTD, a copy
of which was sent to Irrigation Deptt. of U.P . Govt.
•A  meeting was held in the chamber of VC on 10th March,
2005 in which Secretary , Irrigation Deptt., Govt. of UP was
present. He requested DDA for market rates for allotment
of the required land.
• VC, DDA clarified that the land in the Akshardham Complex
was allotted at the Institutional zonal variant rates. He
further clarified that these rates for other categories of use
and allotment are based on the effect that various peripheral
infrastructure services and facilities like water supply,
sewerage, electrical sub-stations, roads, STP , etc. are provided
by the DDA and various elements of cross subsidization
for different uses are involved. Hence these rates could not
form the basis in deciding upon the issue of rates for

71
transfer of land by the U.P . Govt. to DDA for Common-
wealth Games Village. However normal acquisition rates
(Rs. 15.70 Lakh/acre) could be considered in view of possible
agricultural use of land due to construction of bundh by
DDA. Moreover, this land cannot be put to any use other
than permissible use under Master Plan, which is largely
green. The proposed land cannot be exploited commercially.
The minutes of the meeting were sent on 21st March, 2005
followed by reminders.
• Govt. of U.P . thereafter nominated the CEO of Noida for
further negotiations. In this regard another meeting was held
in the chamber of VC on 15th June, 2005 in which Chairman
& CEO, Noida and other officers were present. VC, DDA
has reiterated the whole issue once again in the meeting
and also informed that the normal acquisition rate fixed by
Govt. of Delhi which is around Rs. 15.70 lakh per acre
could be considered. The minutes were sent on 27.6.05. New
CEO of Noida met VC on 27.7.05 in this regard. The position
of DDA was reiterated.
• DDA is awaiting a positive response from U.P . Govt.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.21)
The Committee are concerned to note that colonies developed for
residential purposes by DDA are being handed over to MCD for
maintenance in a piece meal manner. In many areas as for instance
Dwarka, the Delhi Jal Board (DJB) has not taken over the area for
regular supply of water. The Committee are of the firm view that
areas developed and houses constructed by DDA should be de-notified
and handed over to MCD in one go rather than taking up the process
of transfer part by part. In regard to calculation of deficiency charges
at the time of transfer of DDA developed areas to MCD, the
Commissioner, MCD has conceded during evidence that there is an
administrative problem in the matter in view of a number of
departments involved. He has stated that there are vertical departments
and they do not have proper integration with each other. The

72
Committee recommend that concerted efforts should be made in
consultation with the senior officials of MCD and DJB so that the
basis civic amenities of water supply, electricity etc., are provided in
dwelling units before handing over the possession to the allottees. The
Committee also recommend that DDA should intervene in rectifying
the complaints of allottees on this count.
and
Recommendation (Para No. 5.22)
The Committee note that payment of deficiency charges to the
local bodies and concerned authorities are made in a routine manner.
The Committee are of the firm view that if the DDA areas are
developed in a wholesome manner, the question of payment of
‘deficiency charges’ to the urban local bodies should not arise. The
Committee therefore, recommend that purposeful steps be taken by
DDA so as to obviate deficiencies in the developed areas and the
consequent payment of the ‘deficiency charges’. The Committee also
recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should devise
suitable mechanism to ensure proper integration and coordination
between DDA, MCD, DJB and local bodies.
and
Recommendation (Para No. 5.23)
The Committee desire that the much needed civic amenities of
sewerage, water supply, electricity, storm drains, garbage disposal and
proper maintenance to all the DDA developed colonies/areas should
be provided hassle-free and within a given time frame. The Committee
would like to be apprised about the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
To streamline the procedure of transfer of services of DDA colonies
to MCD and other local bodies, a meeting was held under the
chairmanship of Hon’ble LG at Raj Niwas on 02.01.2003. In general
the following procedures were agreed to:
It will be ensured that the transfer of the services in effected within
three months from the date of DDA’s request and submission of plans
with the following schedule:
(a) The work of scavenging and removal of garbage etc. will
stand taken over by the MCD after a month of submission
of request/plans by the DDA.

73
(b) Within 30 days of the submission of plans, joint inspections
will be carried out, the concerned local agency shall intimate
the deficiency, if any, immediately thereafter alongwith
detailed estimate. However, no claim about deficiencies shall
be entertained if it is received after three months from the
submission of request and plans by DDA.
(c) In case of total agreement of deficiency estimates, the DDA
shall arrange the payment of the same within four weeks.
In case total agreement is not arrived at, then part acceptable
to the DDA shall be released within four weeks and the
dispute on the remaining shall be settled at the level of
administrative head of the two organizations.
(d) After the receipt of the payment, the local agency shall take
over the physical services alongwith staff as per prescribed
norms within two weeks and the notification to this effect
shall be issued by DDA for information of the public and
all concerned.
(e) In any case all these formalities must be completed within
three months of DDA’s submission of plans and making a
request for transfer of services, so that the services should
stand transferred and a notification to the effect shall be
issued with the prior approval of Hon’ble LG. In case any
work is carried out by the concerned agency on behalf of
DDA as a “Deposit Work”, the same shall stand transferred
to the agency without any claim of deficiency or otherwise.
(f) Convenient Shopping Centres will be made integral part of
the residential pocket and shall not be treated as a separate
entity.
(g) The electrical services developed by DVB in the colonies/
pockets as “Deposit Work” shall stand transferred to the
respective DISCOMS, after completion of the work, without
any deficiency charges.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 46 of Chapter I of the Report)

74
Recommendation (Para No. 6.10)
The Committee express their distress over the fact that some
hospitals have violated the norms for free treatment of 25 percent
patients belonging to BPL categories. Moreover, there have been
instances where the actual BPL categories of people were unable to
get their treatment done in such hospitals and others have taken the
benefit of the same by misrepresentation. The Committee, therefore,
firmly recommend that a mechanism to identify BPL category by
Government of NCT Delhi and issue of certificates to such people
alongwith their photo identity cards needs to be devised so that
genuine BPL persons are able to avail of medical facilities in hospitals.
It should be ensured that the hospitals strictly provide free treatment
to the stipulated percentage under BPL category . The Committee should
be kept informed of the steps taken in this regard as also the punitive
action taken/proposed for violation thereof.
Reply of the Government
The Govt. of NCT of Delhi has reported that patients belonging to
‘below poverty line(BPL)’ category can be identified from the BPL
ration card or a certificate issued by Area SDM in this regard. Even
in the absence of any of these two documents, a persons can be
considered to belong to BPL category, if he furnishes a proforma
declaration, in this respect.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 49 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.24)
The Committee feel that even though the office of the Registrar,
Cooperative Societies does not come under the jurisdiction and control
of Ministry of Urban Development however, the cooperative group
housing is being linked to housing sector, it is very much related to
the Ministry of Urban Development. They note that in Delhi, allotment
of land to Cooperative Group Housing Societies is done by DDA. A
large area of land i.e. approximately 1900 acres of land has been allotted
to 877 Housing Societies. The Committee, therefore feel that DDA
cannot wash of their hands if some misuse or misappropriation in
Cooperative Group Housing Societies takes place. While admitting that
cooperative Group Housing Societies are regulated by RCS office under
Cooperative Societies Act and Rules, the Committee feel that DDA has
a major role to play and to oversee that the land allotted to Cooperative
Group Housing Societies is actually utilized in the interest of society

75
members, who mainly consist of middle and service class people and
who had invested all their earnings and borrowing for getting a house
of their own. While appreciating the move taken by DDA and RCS to
ward-off any misappropriation and to ensure that Societies do not
become the fiefdom of a selected few, the Committee recommend that
interest of bulk of society members should not be neglected. The
Committee understand that management of Society should not flout
any of the provisions enshrined in Cooperative Societies Act and Rules.
Act the same time, they recommend that RCS office should not be too
rigid in such matters and should keep in mind the interests of genuine
members. The Committee note that there are several Societies whose
members are waiting for a long time for their draw of lots but due to
the mistake of their management and rigidity of RCS office, most of
them are suffering. They, therefore, recommend that an institutional
mechanism should be devised which is people’s friendly, less time
consuming and at the same time deterrent to low breakers.
Reply of the Government
DDA (Disposal of Developed Nazul Land) Rules 1972 provide for
allotment of land at predetermined rates to cooperative group housing
societies for construction of dwelling units for their members. This
provision is intended to encourage the cooperative movement as far
as housing sector is concerned, so as to facilitate home ownership
among the middle class which may not be otherwise in a position to
acquire houses in the open market. In this approach the role of DDA
is to make available land for housing and allot the same to cooperative
group housing societies. The role of RCS GNCTED is to register
cooperative group housing societies, and oversee their management as
provided for under the Delhi Cooperative Act,2003 and Rules and
Policy guidelines framed by GNCTED in this behalf. DDA has been
informing RCS after ascertaining availability of land for allotment to
CGHS and calling for names of societies eligible for such allotments.
RCS have been forwarding such names after due verification of
membership as required under the Delhi Cooperative Act and
Guidelines made thereunder.
So far DDA has allotted land to 877 CGHS. Meanwhile the issue
of allotment of land to CGHS has been agitated in the High Court of
Delhi in CWP No. 10066/204; Yogiraj Krishna CGHS Vs. DDA & Ors.
The High Court has in its various directions issued in the matter
asked the Govt. of India to formulate a comprehensive policy for
allotment of land to CGHS to counter the takeover of societies by
builders’ mafia and speculation in land allotment. The High Court has
also directed that provision should be made for the weaker sections of
the society by formulating such policies.

76
Accordingly the Ministry and DDA have formulated policy
guidelines for allotment of land to cooperative group housing societies
(CGHS) and the said policy has been submitted to the Hon’ble High
Court. The policy provides for measures to reduce the gap in price
between price of allotment to CGHS and market price of land. It is
expected that such measures would reduce the incentive for intervention
by unscrupulous elements and reduce speculative tendencies, without
putting the land beyond the reach of the middle class which is the
intended beneficiary of the cooperative housing movement. In its policy
guidelines the Ministry has also suggested that steps should be taken
by the Registrar of Cooperative Societies to ensure better management
of CGHS, to reduce takeover by builders, bogus membership, etc.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 52 of Chapter I of the Report)

77
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendations (Para No. 2.28)
In accordance with the provisions of Section 12 of the Delhi
Development Act, 1957, the Central Government by way of a
Notification in the Official Gazette declares any area in Delhi to be a
development area for the purposes of this Act. The Notified areas are
being looked after by DDA and the rest of the areas as ‘Denotified’
are looked after by MCD. The Committee are informed that about 181
Notifications have been issued since the year 1967 by the Land and
Building Department of the Government of Delhi. The Committee
express their concern that many a time there is a gap in the information
regarding “Notification’ and ‘Denotification’ of the ‘Development Areas’.
The Committee are informed that an exercise has been initiated to
streamline the information and procedure in respect of Notification of
‘Development Areas’ and their ‘Denotification’. Further, action has been
initiated to denotify the areas, which have already been developed.
The Committee recommend that the process of ‘Notification’ and
‘Denotification’ of DDA lands must be streamlined by amending and
adopting suitable procedures required to be followed by the
Government in consultation with the Land and Building Department
of the Government of Delhi so as to ensure that the aforesaid process
is expeditious and timely. The Committee consider it imperative that
the ‘Land Records’ of Delhi area maintained and updated regularly
for better land management.
Reply of the Government
The declaration of Development Area is done under Section 12 (I)
of Delhi Development Act 1957. The notifications in this respect are
issued by the Lands & Building Deptt. of GNCTD. So far about 181
notifications covering more than 44000 hectares of land have been
issued. After an area has been developed by DDA to the level
envisaged under the Master Plan, the area is denotified with the
approval of Lt. Governor, Delhi under Section 36 of DD Act and such
denotified area stands transferred to the local body for the purposes
of administering Building Byelaws and providing civic services.
However, there are delays in some cases in transfer of denotified areas
from DDA to MCD on account of time taken in calculating deficiency
charges, and effecting the physical transfer.

78
To streamline the process, a number of meetings have been held
between DDA and MCD and it has been decided that the modalities/
guidelines for modifications, transfer of services and building plan
records may be worked out by a Committee headed by Principal
Commissioner, DDA. Accordingly, the Committee is taking necessary
action in consultation with the concerned departments.
As far as maintenance of land records in Delhi is concerned, the
record of land and property is being maintained by different agencies
in respect of different areas in Delhi. DDA is maintaining records of
land and leased properties in respect of development area whereas
GNCTD maintains land record properties in respect of rural areas in
Delhi. Property records are maintained by the respective local body
namely, MCD and NDMC. The upkeep of the records has been
adversely affected by large number of unrecorded transactions taking
place in respect of land and built-up properties. The Ministry is already
seized of the matter and has advised GNCTD to submit a proposal
for undertaking a comprehensive study of the position as it obtains on
the ground and the system to be put in place to provide for an uniform
and integrated land record management system for Delhi. It is reported
that MCD has also taken up a studying this respect with assistance
from USAID.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.31)
While the Committee note that acquisition of land for planned
development is an ongoing process, the Committee are concerned to
note that about 1475.85 acres of DDA lands are under encroachment
by JJ clusters, etc. The Committee are perturbed to learn that the DDA
lands, which have been encroached upon by squatter settlements, slums
etc. in various parts of Delhi including the Yamuna Pushta areas are
not available for development. The Committee would like to know as
to how these encroachments were allowed to happen when they were
detected and what remedial measures were contemplated to thwart
such encroachments. The Committee recommend that timely remedial
actions are undertaken by DDA to remove such encroachments from
DDA lands as per governing laws and rules. The Committee also
recommend that coordinative efforts be made by DDA with the Police
authorities, GNCT of Delhi and local bodies so as to deal with this
persistent problem of encroachments on DDA lands by JJ clusters. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.

79
Reply of the Government
In a number of cases, at the time of taking over possession of
land by DDA from GNCTED, there exist built up structures/
encroachments in the land. DDA removes such encroachments as and
when land is taken up for development and utilization in accordance
with the development plan.
Action regarding removal of encroachments from DDA land is
taken up on a continuous basis and during the period 2000-2001 to
2004-2005, 2080 demolitions operations were carried out, 54265
structures removed and about 1176 acres of land reclaimed (including
land which was encroached upon before possession is taken by DDA).
Removal/relocation of the unauthorized encroachments on lands
in the form of Jhuggies is done primarily by the Slum and JJ
Department of MCD. It is only when the said department expresses
its inability for carrying out the task of removal/relocation of the
Jhuggies, DDA takes up this responsibility in respect of squatters on
its own land. Relocation of JJ squatters is done by DDA as per the
policy of the Govt. As per the policy, the pre-1990 squatters & pre
1998 squatters are allotted 18 sqm. and 12.5 sqm. of land respectively.
The land in Yamuna Pushta area belongs to the various
departments like PWD, L&DO, DVB, DDA etc. Survey of Jhuggie
dwellers on DDA lands in Yamuna Pushta area between Rajghat &
Old Iron Bridge of railway was done in the year 2002-2003. Removal
of the unauthorized encroachment of the area was to be done by
Slum & JJ Department being the nodal agency for such work in Delhi.
However, DDA had also undertaken removal of encroachment over a
portion of the Yamuna Pushta. DDA had removed about 11,500 jhuggies
from the area and relocated about 5,000 eligible JJ dwellers on plots
in Bawana area obtained from Slum & JJ Departments of MCD during
the year 2004-2005. Besides, some unauthorised jhuggie clusters from
other areas have also been relocated on the plots in Bawana. Due to
paucity of developed plots with DDA, the work of removal of various
jhuggie clusters and rehabilitation of eligible squatters could not be
taken up thereafter.
Till date, DDA has developed 8 resettlement/relocation colonies as
indicated below:—
1. Hastal 3993 plots
2. Madanpur Khadar 10061 plots

80
3. Rohini JJR, Pooth Sector-26 554 plots
4. Rohini JJ R, Pooth Sector-20 2304 plots
5. Rohini JJR Pooth Sector-27 1900 plots
6. Gautam Colony (Narela) 928 plots
7. Tikri Khurd 341 plots
8. In Sec-15, 16 (a) at Dwarka 3763 plots
DDA has also issued NOC for acquisition and development of
land by Slum & JJ Wing of MCD for rehabilitation at the following
locations
1. Bawana 100 acres
2. Holambi Kalan 70 acres
3. Bhalswa 200 acres
4. Savda/Ghevra 257 acres
5. Kadipur 65 acres
Total 692 acres
For rehabilitation of eligible JJ dwellers, DDA is now considering
relocation in multi storied built up accommodation in place of
horizonatal relocation by allotment of plots.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.32)
So far as the laldora areas of Delhi are concerned, the Committee
note that laldora areas were signified as village areas and defined way
back in 1908. However, there is no definition of an ‘extended laldora’
as the population of such areas has increased in the past decades. The
Committee are also informed that all matters related to laldora area
fall under the jurisdiction of the GNCT of Delhi. Eventually, in the
process of acquisition of land, all areas except the designated laldora

81
areas are notified by the Government. In this regard, the Vice-Chairman
of DDA during the course of evidence before the Committee has
expressed that there is an in-built problem for DDA in taking
possession of such lands. He has also informed that a suggestion has
been made to the Delhi Government that a ‘Survey’ may be undertaken
for ascertaining the laldora limits. The Committee desire that concerted
efforts be made by DDA with the local authorities concerned so as to
demarcate clearly and finally the extended limits of laldora lands in
Delhi for a planned development taking into consideration the natural
growth of population.
Reply of the Government
The matter pertains to Govt. of NCT of Delhi and the
recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to the
Development Commissioner, Govt. of NCT. of Delhi.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.35)
The Committee note that ‘Institutional Lands’ are allotted following
the Delhi Development Authority (Developed Land) Nazul Rules, 1981
for social, cultural, religious, educational activities etc. Broadly, these
allotments are divided into four categories viz. educational, general
Institutions, socio-cultural Institutes and Government Departments. The
Committee recommend that DDA should devise an in-built mechanism
so as to ascertain that allotments to the ‘Institutions’ are strictly made
in accordance with the governing Nazul rules and disciplinary actions
should be taken in any kind of malpractice. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The DDA (Disposal of developed Nazul lands) Rules provided for
allotment of land to eligible organizations and agencies for setting up
various categories of institutions. DDA has over time reformed its
institutional policy by shifting the following institutional  categories

82
viz. hospitals, professional and higher technical institutes and clubs to
the auction mode for disposal in order to ensure greater transparency,
ensure full realisation of value and in order to prevent black marketing
in such land by non-genuine societies. For community halls also, it
has been decided that 50% of the plots available would be offered to
the MCD and the balance 50% would be disposed of by auction.
Amendments to the Nazul Rules in respect of the above mentioned
category have already been made.
For the remaining categories viz. schools, religious sites and misc.
socio-cultural institutes, which continue to be in the allotment mode,
stringent criteria for screening allotment applications have been
prescribed by the DDA and these are strictly enforced. During the
period from 2003 to 2005, almost no institutional allotments have been
made to private societies. First preference is being given for allotment
to Govt. Deptt. in the various categories referred to above. In respect
of allotment of land for schools, DDA is considering a proposal to
provide for first right to refusal for allotment of school sites to the
Education Deptt. of the GNCTD and other Govt. agencies and the
residual cases are to be auctioned.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.23)
The Committee note that in the draft Master Plan 2021; 50-55%
dwelling units have been proposed for Economically Weaker Sections.
They also note that in the Rohini Residential Scheme 0.60 lakh dwelling
units are to be allotted to Economically Weaker Sections. While
appreciating the steps taken to provide houses to EW Sections of
population in Delhi by the Government, the Committee recommend
that proper scrutiny is carried out by DDA in coordination with the
State level authorities to identify the genuine EWS beneficiaries under
the Residential schemes of DDA. The Committee recommend that
proper measures by taken to ensure that only the actual EWS
beneficiary occupies such dwelling units. They also recommend that
DDA should enhance their vigilance and monitoring system so that
dwelling units allotted to identified EWS persons are not sold/re-sold
through property dealers. During the course of oral evidence Secretary,

83
Ministry of Urban Development informed that such allotments may
be made on license basis and not on lease basis. The Committee,
therefore, desire that steps be taken so as to give dwelling units to
EWS people on licence basis in ‘Pilot Project’ and thereby applied
uniformly to the Housing Schemes, appropriately. The Committee
recommend that community based structures and cooperative bodies/
NGOs be involved in the allotment of dwelling units to the EWS
people who will ensure that land/flats earmarked for poor population
is utilized by them. Direct allotment of houses to EWS should be
avoided and there should be a mandatory condition that resale of
such flats shall not be allowed.
Reply of the Government
Delhi Development Authority had earlier fixed an income limit of
Rs. 72,000/- per annum for deciding eligibility of persons for allotment
of Janata/EWS category of flats. Further the conditions of allotment
and of lease-deed for these flats prohibited the sale of the flats by the
allottees.
The Government has accorded in-principle approval of DDA to
take up a pilot project for construction of multi-storeyed tenements for
relocation of slum dwellers at Tehkhand using land as resource. An
area of 16 hectares of land has been identified for the purpose, which
will provide 3200 EWS tenements (approx. 25 sq.mt. each in multi-
storeyed complex) for slum relocation. The details are being worked
out by DDA and the project is expected to be taken up shortly.
Moreover, Draft MPD-2021 aims to maximise the delivery of
housing for EWS beneficiaries and makes the following provisions:
(a) Minimum 50-55 percent houses to be provided for lower
income groups and below.
(b) Each community module should have at least 30-35 per
cent DUs of area below 40 sqm. Mandatory provision of
30 per cent of DUs not exceeding two rooms sets in Group
Housing.
(c) The concept of land as a resource should be adopted to
develop such accommodation with private sector
participation and investment, to the extent possible.
(d) Incentives by way of higher FAR, part commercial use of
the land and, if necessary and feasible, transfer of
Development Rights, should be provided.

84
(e) A cooperative resettlement model should be adopted with
tenure rights being provided through the institution of
Cooperative Societies.
(f) The provision of accommodation should be based on cost,
with suitable arrangements for funding/financing keeping
in view the aspect of affordability and capacity to pay.
(g) In cases of relocation, the sites should be identified with a
view to developing relatively small clusters in a manner
that they can be integrated with the overall planned
development of the area, particularly keeping in view the
availability of employment avenues in the vicinity. Very large
resettlement sites could lead to a phenomenon of planned
slums.
(h) Suitable arrangement for temporary transit accommodation
for families to be rehabilitated is to be made. This may
preferably be near or at the same site and the utilization of
these may be synchronised with the phases of
implementation of the scheme of in-situ Upgradation.
The Ministry is in agreement with the suggestions for allotment of
flats to EWS category allottees on licence basis only in order to prevent
alienation by the unscrupulous elements. The proposed policy for
rehabilitation of slum dwellers in multistoried tenements and provision
for service providers in informal sector by group housing developers
take into account this recommendation and provide that allotments
would be made only on licence basis. Checks and balances will also
be put into place to ensure that any transfer by sale or GPA would
result in immediate cancellation of the allotment. This will protect the
original eligible allottee from being disposed or the flat by the
speculators and other unscrupulous elements. The proposed policy also
provides for creation of a cooperative or association of allottees which
would be assigned the responsibility for maintenance of the tenements
and management of the common affairs of the allottees. RCS GNCTD
as well as the agencies such as MCD can guide and supervise the
working of such cooperative/associations. The details of these policy
guidelines are under consideration for taking a final view in the matter.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)

85
Recommendation (Para No. 4.31)
The Committee are informed that the MPD-1962 required EWS
housing to be integrated into all residential development and MPD-
2001 explicates provisions for integration (25% EWS plots and 20%
LIG units in every residential area for 100,000 persons) and minimum
standards (25 sq.m. Plot, etc.). The Committee also note that DDA in
their Master Plan 2021 envisage amelioration of existing Jhuggi Clusters
through a judicious mix of relocation and in situ development. They
also note that a large number of flats have been constructed/being
constructed for Economically Weaker Sections by DDA. The Committee
recommend that proper measures be taken to ensure that the occupancy
certificates are given to any cluster of housing only with the prescribed
number of dwelling units for the EWS persons. The Committee, also,
recommend that earnest efforts be made by DDA for constructing EWS
dwelling units in the new housing colonies so that accumulation of
new slums/clusters is discouraged to a great extent. The Committee,
would like to be apprised of the progress in the matter in due course.
Reply of the Government
The current relocation policy provides for allotment of plots for
relocation of slum dwellers where necessary to vacate the land, as
also for in situ rehabilitation in case the encroached land is not required
for public purposes. A Committee set up by MoUD to prepare a master
plan for making Delhi slum free has suggested a shift towards
relocation or in situ rehabilitation in multi storied tenements instead of
on plots. Pilot projects are being taken up on this basis.
In respect of EWS housing, the Draft MPD-2021 has proposed to
make it mandatory for any group housing to provide at least 30 per
cent of the total Dwelling Units in the form of units not exceeding
two room sets.
Govt. is also considering a proposal to make it mandatory for the
housing colonies developed by the Group Housing Societies as well as
private developers to construct equal number of houses for EWS
categories to meet the requirement of service providers. Under the
proposal, completion certificates would be issued to CGHS/developers
etc. only after the required number of EWS units has also been
constructed.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)

86
Recommendation (Para No. 4.32)
The Committee recommends that annual targets may be fixed for
providing housing/dwelling units to the JJ clusters in line with the
slum population so that slum dwellers are accommodated in lands/
units developed by DDA. The Committee also desire that the dwelling
units developed to remove slum clusters are planned and allotted to
JJ clusters in phased manner. Further, it would be appropriate if the
slum dwellers could be suitably relocated in multistoried tenements
on DDA lands.
Reply of the Government
MoUD in June, 2004, had set up a Committee under the
Chairmanship of VC, DDA to prepare a Master Plan to make Delhi
Slum Free. The Committee had submitted its report suggesting
strategies for rehabilitation of the squatters/Slum dwellers. Suggestion
has been made by the Committee to adopt the strategy of in situ
Rehabilitation in multi-storied tenements in place of the existing scheme
of allotment of plots in resettlement colonies in view of increasing
constraint of land. Draft MPD-2021 also proposes the planning norms
including differential densities, and incentives by way of higher FAR
and part commercial use of the land.
The DDA has taken up a pilot project of in situ Slum & JJ
Rehabilitation at Tehkhand which has been approved vide Resolution
NO. 40/05 dated 6th May, 05. It has also been approved by the MoUD.
The project will provide for about 3500-4000 Dwelling Units for Slum
Dwellers. The detailed planning and designing of the project is
underway.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.44)
As regards, the Dilshad Garden area of Delhi, the Committee are
perturbed to learn about the poor standard of maintenance of sewerage
tanks and the inadequacy of sewage system. The Committee urge that
corrective measures be taken in this regard, expeditiously.

87
Reply of the Government
The services of entire area of Dilshad Garden have been handed
over to MCD in the year 1993 and are being maintained by MCD. The
discharge of sewerage of all Blocks/Pockets of Dilshad Garden
excluding the Block-A, B, C, & R goes to Sewage Pumping Station
(SPS) at Seemapuri, which is being maintained by MCD. Sewage
discharge of Block-A, B, C & R goes into separate septic tanks and the
effluent of these septic tanks is pumped into nearby Storm Water Drain
as a short term measure. For pumping the sewage of these blocks a
SPS could not be constructed, as the land for SPS was encroached by
the Gurudwara authorities. However, an alternate site of SPS has been
identified and action is being taken to construct the SPS within 9
months time for disposal of sewerage of these blocks.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.65)
As regards levy of misuse charges, the Committee note that under
Section 29(2) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, any person, who
uses any land or building in contravention of the provision of
Section 14 or regulations under the proviso to that Section shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees. The
Committee are, however, of the firm view that keeping in view of the
present day price indices, an amount of Rs. 5000/- as fine is too
meagre. The Committee, therefore, recommend carrying out suitable
amendments in the governing rules and regulations so as to
substantially raise the amount of fine limit imposed upon persons for
violation of the Delhi Master Plan norms.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted and suitable
steps will be taken in this direction.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)

88
Recommendation (Para No. 5.24)
Regarding taking over of private colonies by MCD, the Committee
recommend that in such cases, onus of payment of deficiency charges
should be on the private builders and not on the residents of that
colony. It is expedient that MCD should take over the private at the
earliest so that private builders do not get away from payment of
deficiency charges. They also recommend that it should be made
obligatory on the part of private builders to develop the private colony
at par with DDA colonies and then MCD should suo-moto take over
the colony from the ‘private players’ after recovering deficiency charges.
The Committee hope that Ministry of Urban Development would help
evolve such a mechanism under intimation to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations/suggestions of the Committee have been
conveyed to the MCD for evolving a mechanism to address the
problem.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.13)
The Committee note that it is the general tendency that plots
allotted to Societies for constructing primary schools are misused by
subsequent upgradation of schools thereby making them costlier and
beyond the reach of common people. The Committee feel that such a
tendency defeats the very purpose of allotment of land for a chartable
purpose viz. imparting of primary education. The Committee feel that
while Government is fully geared in ‘Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan’ (Universal
education), such type of misuse would be detrimental to the society
and would lead to commercialisation of education. They feel that such
tendency should be curbed at the earliest in consultation with
Government of NCT of Delhi. Here, they concur with the views of the
Ministry that land for construction of primary schools should be allotted
only to MCD, so that there remains no scope for any mis-utilisation
of the land. The Committee, therefore, recommend that necessary steps
in this regard be initiated by the Ministry and the Committee be kept
informed about the action taken.

89
Reply of the Government
Allotment of land for setting up of primary schools falls under
the category of institutional allotments. Under the category land is
provided by DDA to GNCTD and local bodies at concessional rates
and to private organizations fulfilling the eligibility criteria prescribed
in Rule 20 of Nazul Rules at Zonal Variant Rates. As already mentioned
in the reply to para 2.35, DDA is in the process of reviewing its
allotment policy for school sites.
To this end a proposal for giving first preference for the available
vacant school sites to Govt. agencies and thereafter auctioning the
residual sites to eligible organizations is under consideration in the
Authority. DDA has already suggested that all sites for primary schools
should be allotted to MCD. A list of vacant schools sites has already
been offered to the MCD. Only residual sites would be made available
to other organizations, through auction. This approach is being
proposed with the hope that it would bring transparency and curb the
black-marketing and misuse resulting from allotment of school sites at
concessional rate to private societies. This would also cater separately
to schools being run by Govt. and local bodies and those schools
being run on commercial basis by private bodies.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.25)
The Committee also note that the Cooperative Group Housing
Societies while constructing the dwelling units do not provide adequate
space for housing the daily service providers to the residents of such
dwelling units. The Committee, therefore, feel that at the planning
stage itself, it should be kept in mind that arrangements should exist
for service providers such as dhobi, mali, maidservant, safaiwala etc.
in these CGH Societies. Possibility of such an arrangement should be
explored.
Reply of the Government
The Govt. is alive to the need to provide for the service providers
in the informal sector, both in terms of housing as well as space for
informal markets etc.

90
Therefore, the Govt. has now proposed a policy wherein provision
for housing of EWS category will be made mandatory to cater to
shelter needs of service providers, by every residential colony whether
developed by group housing societies, CGHS, DDA or private
developers. It is intended that provision of EWS housing in the vicinity
of residential colony will not only provide shelter to the service
providers, reduce motivation for squatting but also provide employment
close to the place of residence thereby reducing cost of transportation
and pressure on urban transport system DDA vide Resolution no.
49/05 dt. 19/7/05 has approved in principle the provision of equivalent
number of single room (or around 25 sq. mt. of area each) for EWS
requirements to be provided by the Cooperative Group Housing
Societies.
Draft MPD-2021 has also considered the requirement of informal
trade services such as hawkers, vendors etc. and has proposed that
this require a mix of approaches and innovative solutions be adopted
for meeting their needs. Draft MPD-2021 also incorporates the provision
of informal of trade on the following norms:
Planning Norms for Informal Sector
Sl.No. Use Zones/Use premise No. of Informal shops/Units
12 3
(i) Retail trade:
Metropolitan City Centre 3 to 4 units per 10 formal shops (to be
District Centre pr ovided in informal bazaar/service
Community Centre market components)
Convenience Shopping Centre
(ii) Government and Commercial Offices 5 to 6 units per 1000 employees
(iii) Wholesale trade and Freight Complexes 3 to 4 units per 10 formal shops
(iv) Hospital 3 to 4 units per 100 beds
(v) Bus terminal 1 unit for two bus bay
(vi) Schools
Primary Secondary/ 3 to 4 units
Senior Secondary/Integrated 5 to 6 units
(vii) Parks
District Parks 8 to 10 units at each major entry
Neighbourhood Parks 2 to 3 units




91
12 3
(viii) Residential 1 unit/1000 population
(ix) Industrial 5 to 6 units per 1000 employees
(x) Railways Terminus/MRTS Stations To be based on surveys at the time of
preparation of the project.
The provision of informal sector trade units should be ensured at
the time of sanction of the building plans/layout plans.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.35)
The Committee note that DDA had set up an Urban heritage
foundation in September, 1999 which is a welcome measure. While
appreciating DDA for taking up eleven conservation projects, for
inculcating awareness among masses to project our urban heritage by
instituting Urban Heritage Award, they feel that DDA should have
taken up such initiatives at the time of its inception, itself and should
have planned the city accordingly. Had it been so done, a number of
various water-bodies, which have become dry could have been
protected from drying. The Committee is fully in conformity with the
views expressed by convenor INTACH that some areas such as Chandni
Chowk, Connaught Place, Lodhi Garden, Central Vista, Qutab
Archaeological park,  Luyten Zone, etc. should be developed as specific
heritage zones and all the governmental agencies of the city viz. NDMC,
MCD, CPWD, PWD ASI etc. should work in complete harmony and
with close coordination. Some concerted efforts should also be made
by Ministry of Urban Development and DDA to retain urban heritage
of Delhi for which it is known all over the world.
Reply of the Government
Keeping in view the importance of the unique heritage resources
of Delhi, Master Plan of Delhi has proposed an Area Based Approach
for the conservation of the built heritage.
A Special Chapter on ‘Conservation of Built Heritage’ has been
introduced which envisages various conservation strategies for Built

92
Heritage of Delhi. The Conservation Strategy identifies various agencies
involved in the task of conservation in Delhi and emphasizes on close
interaction and coordination between all these agencies keeping in view
common objectives and requirements. The Draft MPD-2021 also
identifies heritage zones and archaeological parks. the Draft plan also
envisages preparation of Special Conservation Plans by the local bodies
for the conservation of heritage areas/complexes.
Moreover, Government has amended the Building Bylaws, 1983 by
notification No. S.O. 904 (E) dated 6.8.2004 and set up a Heritage
Conservation Committee. The Committee consists of experts in the
field of urban architecture, history and conservation and is charged
with the responsibility of preparing a list of heritage buildings and
precincts in Delhi. The Committee has already taken up for
consideration a list of such buildings, identified by INTACH and it is
expected the list would be finalized shortly. Once notified in the list,
no alteration, major repairs or demolition of such listed buildings shall
be sanctioned by the local bodies without obtaining the prior clearance
of the Heritage Conservation Committee for such alteration, repair
etc.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.41)
While appreciating various measures taken by DDA for
e-governance and computerized public utility system at Vikas Sadan,
the Committee take a serious note of lack of computerized facilities at
Vikas Minar, which is the main centre of engineering, designing and
architectural activity, They feel that computerization and its full
utilization in respect of drafting, design and architectural work is pre-
requisite for the development and upgradation of technology and skill.
They therefore recommend that DDA should utilize state-of-art software,
hardware and other infrastructure in engineering and architecture. The
Committee also note that there is shortage of Junior Engineers at field
level. Since recruitment has stopped for several years, there is a need
for recruiting fresh engineers who are abreast with the latest technology
in the field. Also the Engineering and Architectural staff, presently

93
working in DDA, must be imparted ‘Refresher Courses’ and training
with the latest state-of-art, periodically. They therefore recommend for
filling up of all vacancies without any further delay. The also note
that DDA has not taken up work pertaining to the use of non-
conventional source of energy/alternate source of energy. They, therefore
recommend that DDA should take up other activities viz. alternate
source of energy like solar energy and solid waste management, which
is expedient for development as enumerated in its object.
Reply of the Government
A comprehensive computerization project by the name of Integrated
Management Information System has been undertaken in DDA which
will also cover extensive computerization of Engineering, Designing
and Architectural activities being carried out in Vikas Minar. Adequate
Hardware, Software and Networking infrastructure will be made
available under the project. The project is conceived to be completed
in 15 months’ time for which a technical Consultant has already been
engaged and the matter is in process for inviting “Expression of
Interest” and the “Request of proposal for Design, Supply, Installation/
Development, Commissioning, Operation and Maintenance of Software,
Hardware, LAN & WAN.”
The matter regarding exploring non-conventional sources of energy
has been considered by the DDA during the preparation of MPD-
2021, which has been approved by the Authority and MOUD for
publication, inviting objections/suggestions from the public. Draft MPD-
2021 states the following:
Low energy consuming gadgets and Non-conventional energy
sources like recovering energy from sewerage, solar energy should be
used for street lighting, lighting at public spaces, open areas, traffic
signals, hoardings etc. To meet the part of the estimated requirement
of 8800 Megawatts by Non-conventional sources/Solar Energy and other
actions, the following stipulations are proposed:
• For all establishments with floor area of more than 300 sqm,
solar energy should be mandatory.
• Compulsory Solar Panels for public advertising, lighting in
open areas, pubic utilities, streets, etc.
• As alternate mandatory arrangement during power cuts to
replace generators/inverters etc.
• Adoption of Load Management Technique.

94
•T ariff restructuring and improved metering arrangement to
minimise power thefts/losses.
• Interim solutions of single point connection in unauthorised
colonies and jhuggies.
• Private Sector Participation in different stages of Power
generation, transmission and distribution.
• Incentivising energy savings and use of energy efficient
gadgets.
• Public awareness, capacity building and training.
Draft MPD-2021 also states that Incandesent bulbs, neon tubes and
fluorescent lamps should give way to light-emitting microchips that
work longer, use less power and allow the use of light in new ways.
The eventual result will be huge savings in energy and maintenance
costs.
It has been mentioned that there is a shortage of JE’s at field
level. It has also been indicated that there is a need for recruiting
fresh JEs who are abreast with the latest technology in the field. In
regard to this observation of the Committee, it is to bring out that
position has not been correctly apprised to the Committee by the field
functionaries. In fact, there is no shortage of JEs at the field level and
on the contrary, there is a net surplus of JEs at present.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.55)
The Committee are distressed to learn that a large number of
corruption cases have been registered and as many as 115 cases of
corruption against DDA officials registered by various agencies are
pending disciplinary action. Moreover, out of the 174 disciplinary cases
processed in 2003-04, about 34 officials have been exonerated of the
charges. The Committee, therefore recommend that the internal vigilance
administration be further strengthened to make it more accountable,
transparent and reliable in the eyes of people. Further, DDA should
take timely disciplinary action against officials, who are found to be
involved in cases of bribery and in malpractices in allotment of lands/

95
flats etc. The Committee recommend that the structure and functioning
of the vigilance organization of DDA be effectively and comprehensively
reviewed by forming and internal ‘Working Committee’.
Reply of the Government
DDA has reported that necessary action is being taken to review
the structure and functioning of the Vigilance Division by a Committee.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.56)
The Committee note with concern that 48 complaints have been
reported against officials of its Building Departments. The Committee
strongly recommend that disciplinary action be taken against the
officials of the Building Department (DDA) who are involved in
corruption, malpractices and any kind of irregularities. The Committee
also find that procedures for approval of building plans are lengthy
and cumbersome. The Committee, therefore, recommend that simple
procedures be laid down to eliminate delay and unnecessary
harassment to people.
Reply of the Government
Sanction of Building activity by DDA is undertaken under Section
12 and 13 of Delhi Development Act, 1957 and the provisions of unified
Building Byelaws, 1983. This concerns public at large and during the
last two years, efforts have been made to simplify the procedures and
reduce the number of steps, forms etc. required in the process. Some
of such steps taken are as given below:
(i) Abolition of forms ‘C’ & ‘D’ and introduction of Plinth Level
Verification (B-1) in November, 2001.
(ii) the Building Bye-laws, 1983 have been amended vide Gazette
Notification dated 20.2.2004 whereby the building permits
shall remain valid for 5 years, in place of earlier 3 years.
(iii) Vide the Resolution of the Authority dated 24.8.2004, it has
been decided to modify building byelaws and doing away
with the need of provisional Occupancy Certificate (POC).

96
Draft MPD-2021 which has been published on 8th April, 2005 for
inviting objections/suggestions from the public after the approval of
the DDA and MOUD proposes that “to streamline the process of
building approvals and to bring together many agencies involved in
planning permissions and approvals, the Group shall work out the
establishment of a common platform. The aim will be to devolve the
process of building approvals and to deregulate, wherever necessary,
and to review the Building Bye-laws and procedures.”
Regarding action in respect of cases of irregularities and corruption,
it is mentioned that during the last three years, i.e. from April 2002 to
31st August 2005, departmental proceedings have been initiated against
19 officials of Building Department. Out of this, major penalty
proceedings were initiated against 16 officials and minor penalty
proceedings were initiated against 3 officials. During the same period
23 officials were levied penalties. Out of this, major penalties and
minor penalties were levied against 13 and 10 officials respectively.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/1/2005-DDIA
Dated: 16th November 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
27 June, 2006 Chairman,
6 Asadha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

97
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON FRIDAY THE 23rd JUNE, 2006
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P . Mohan
3. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
4. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
5. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
6. Shri K. Subbarayan
7. Shri Sugrib Singh
8. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
9. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
11. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
12. Shri Jayantilal Barot
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
2. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Assistant Director

98
2. The Committee took up for consideration Memorandum No. 5
regarding draft report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on
the subject ‘The Delhi Development Authority (DDA)’ of the Ministry
of Urban Development. The Committee adopted the draft Report with
slight modifications.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
Reports.
4. The Committee also decided to hold the next sitting on 4th July,
2006.
The Committee then adjourned

99
APPENDIX II
[Vide para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN
DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total Number of recommendations 58
II. Recommendations which have been accepted 25
by the Government:
Para Nos.: 1.31, 1.32, 1.33, 2.34, 3.13, 3.14, 3.20,
3.21, 4.12, 4.13, 4.14, 4.33, 4.43, 4.63, 4.64, 5.25,
6.11, 6.44, 6.45, 6.46, 6.47, 6.50, 6.60, 6.62
and 6.66.
Percentage of total recommendations 43.10
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not 5
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 1.27, 1.28, 2.30, 4.22, 4.41
Percentage of total recommendations 8.62
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of 11
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para Nos. 1.29, 1.30, 2.29, 2.33, 2.36, 3.24, 5.21,
5.22, 5.23, 6.10 and 6.24.
Percentage of total recommendations 18.96
V. Recommendations in respect of which final 17
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.28, 2.31, 2.32, 2.35, 4.23, 4.31, 4.32,
4.42, 4.44, 4.65, 5.24, 6.13, 6.25, 6.35, 6.41, 6.55
and 6.56.
Percentage of total recommendations 29.31