STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
CENTRAL PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
17

SEVENTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
( FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
CENTRAL PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 24.10.2006
Presented to Lok Sabha on ......................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ......................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
October, 2006 / Asvina, 1928 (Saka)

C.U.D. No. 17
Price : Rs. 72.00
© 2006 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by National Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .............................................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory ................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Maintenance of Residential Complexes ...................................... 9
CHAPTER III Construction and Maintenance of Other Structures ................... 27
CHAPTERIV Staffing of CPWD and Related Issues........................................ 33
CHAPTER V Miscellaneous Issues .................................................................... 43
APPENDICES
I. Major Works in hand ................................................................... 52
II. Details of different types and No. of General Pool Residential
Accommodation (GPRA) maintained by CPWD ....................... 54
III. Ban on Creation of Posts ........................................................... 56
IV. Guidelines on Expenditure Management .................................. 57
V. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee (2005-2006)
held on 13th September, 2005 .................................................... 59
VI. Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Committee (2005-2006)
held on 4th July, 2006 ................................................................. 61
VII. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee (2006-2007)
held on 4th October, 2006 ........................................................... 63

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Anant Gudhe
6. Shri Pushp Jain
7. Shri Kailash Joshi
8. Shri Sajjan Kumar
9. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
10. Shri A.K. Moorthy
11. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
12. Shri L. Rajagopal
13. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Papu Yadav
14. Shri D. Vittal Rao
15. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
16. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
17. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
18. Shri Jagdish Tytler
*19. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
20. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
Rajya Sabha
21. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
22. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
23. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
24. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
25. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
26. Shri Penumalli Madhu
27. Shri Mukul Roy
* Nominated w.e.f. 25.9.2006 vice Shri Ravi Parakash Verma, M.P ceased to be the member of the Committee
w.e.f. 25.9.2006.

28. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
29. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
**30. Shri Manohar Joshi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Saxena — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
** Nominated w.e.f. 1st September, 2006.
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2006-07)
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present
the Seventeenth Report on the subject ‘Central Public Works Department (CPWD)’.
2. The erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural Development (2003) had
selected the subject on Central Public Works Department (CPWD) for their examination
and Report. As decided by the Committee, Press Communiqué was released in electronic
and print media on 12th December, 2003 inviting the suggestions/views of people on
the working of CPWD.  In response, the Committee received 78 representations/
memoranda from the affected persons in Delhi and other parts of the country. These
representations contained grievances of the public about the maintenance works and
construction works assigned to CPWD and suggestions to improve its working. These
representations were sent to the Ministry of Urban Development for obtaining their
comments on the various points contained in the representations. Meanwhile, the tenure
of the Committee on Urban and Rural Development (2003) expired on 31st December,
2003 and the examination of the subject remained inconclusive.
3. The Committee on Urban and Rural Development (2004) was re-constituted
on 1st January, 2004 and the Committee selected this subject again for examination and
report. However, soon the tenure of the Committee lapsed due to dissolution of the
Thirteenth Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2004.
4. The Fourteenth Lok Sabha was constituted on 17th May, 2004. The Committee
on Urban and Rural Development was bifurcated into two separate Committees viz.
(i) Committee on Urban Development, and (ii) Committee on Rural Development. The
newly created Committee on Urban Development was formally constituted on 5th August,
2004. The new Committee on Urban Development (2004-05) then re-selected the subject
on CPWD for examination and report. As the factual comments of the Ministry of
Urban Development were not received on the points contained in the representations
sent to them, the Committee could not take up further examination on the subject.
Meanwhile, the tenure of the Committee lapsed and the Committee of Urban
Development (2005-06) was constituted on 5th August, 2005. The Committee again
selected the subject for examination. The Committee then further invited the views of
the public on the functioning of the CPWD through Press Communiqué released in
electronic and print media on 13th September, 2005. In response, the Committee received
274 representations/memoranda. The points submitted by the users of the CPWD
(v)

(vi)
Residential, Institutional and Official premises and other individuals were examined
and the factual comments sought from the Ministry of Urban Development and the
CPWD. The Committee were also briefed by the representatives of the Ministry of
Urban Development and CPWD on the functioning of the CPWD on 13th September,
2005.
5. Subsequently, the Committee decided to undertake one Local On-the-spot
Study Visit to the Residential complexes/Institutions constructed and maintained by
CPWD in Delhi as a sample study and obtain first-hand information on the construction
and maintenance works by CPWD.   Accordingly, the Committee visited the Vasant
Vihar Central Government Residential Accommodations including the General Pool as
well as the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Secretariat’s Residential complexes; Indian
Institute of Technology (IIT) Boys new Hostel and the Union Public Service (UPSC)’s
new Office Building in New Delhi on 21st September, 2005. The inputs received from
the Study Visits of the Committee have been suitably incorporated in the report.
6. The Ministry of Urban Development furnished their factual comments on
representations/memoranda received from the public in response to the Press
Communiqués in May/June, 2006. The Committee took the oral evidence of the officials
of the Ministry of Urban Development and CPWD on 4th July, 2006. The tenure of the
Committee lapsed and the Committee on Urban Development (2006-07) was constituted
w.e.f. 5th August, 2006.
7. The Committee (2006-2007) re-selected the subject again.  The Committee
considered and adopted their report on the subject at their sitting held on 4th October,
2006. Since the House was not in session and taking into account the significance and
important nature of the Report, the Committee decided to present the Report to
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under the provisos of Direction 71 A of the Directions by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha and circulate/print/publish the Report under Rule 280 of the
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. The Committee, therefore,
authorized the Chairman, Committee on Urban Development to present the Report to
Speaker, Lok Sabha on their behalf and present it to the House during the next session
at the first convenient opportunity by the Chairman.
8. The Committee convey their gratitude to the various individuals and Residents
Welfare Associations (RW As) who had enlightened the Committee by their views and
suggestions. The Committee also place on record their deep sense of appreciation for
the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
N
EW DELHI; MOHD. SALIM
12 October, 2006 Chairman,
20 Kartika, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

INTRODUCTORY
I. FORMATION OF PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT IN PRE-INDEPENDENT
INDIA
1.1 From the voluminous material supplied by the Ministry of Urban
Development, it is gleaned that CPWD is rooted in pre-independence era and it took
several decades to mature in its present form and stratum. CPWD’s setting up could be
traced as far back as 1849 at the initiative of British Government. Thereafter, it went on
growing in its shape and size. With the success of the Public Works Department in
Punjab, similar Departments were set up in Bengal, Madras and Bombay in 1854. Each
was placed under the charge of a Chief Engineer under the Lt. Governor of the Province.
To Co-ordinate and have budgetary control over the Provincial PWDs, a Secretary of
the Department of Public Works was appointed in the Government of India for the first
time in the year 1854. He was also vested with all powers of the Military Boards. During
the years 1863-66, the Department of Public Works in Government of India was split in
three separate Branches to deal with Military Works, Civil and Irrigation and Railways
works. These branches were placed under the charge of an Under Secretary each in the
Government of India in the year 1867 and had an Inspector General of Works attached
to each of them to co-ordinate the functions of each wing throughout the country. In
1890, however, the Branches dealing with the Military Works were transferred to the
Military Department of the Government under British period. Further, with the formation
of Local Boards in year 1872 such as District and Municipal Boards, a number of works
were transferred to these bodies. The functions of the Government of India were then
limited to formulation of the policy and occasional local inspections of the large project
works by the Public Works Department.
Setting–up of the C.P.W.D. at Delhi
1.2 On the proclamation of change of the Capital from Calcutta to Delhi in
December 1911, it became necessary to organize a Public Works Department exclusively
for buildings in the new capital of the country. Consequently, the CPWD came into
existence on 1st April, 1930 to look after the vast office and residential campus of the
Central Secretariat and allied Offices. Since the formation of the Department of Public
Works, way back in 1854, the CPWD is one of the important departments of the
Government of India, till date.
II. TODAY’S FUNCTIONS OF THE CPWD
1.3 The Central Public Works Department (CPWD) is the principal agency of
the Government of India under the Ministry of Urban Development for creation and
1

2
maintenance of all Central Government assets excluding those belonging to Railways,
Defence, Communication, Atomic Energy, Airports (National and International),
Department of Posts and All India Radio.
1.4 CPWD is a multi disciplinary engineering organization offering integrated
construction management services from concept to completion and post construction
maintenance management. CPWD also performs many regulatory functions for the
Government of India. The Central Public Works Department operates in a wide range
of sectors, which are as follows:—
Sectors-Type of Construction
Buildings — Residential, Non-residential & industrial buildings
of various organizations.
Infrastructure — Roads, Bridges, Flyovers, Tunnels, Runways,
Airports etc.
Education — Universities, Schools, Colleges, Training Institutes
Health — Hospitals and Medical Institutes.
Agriculture — Silos, Food Grain Godowns
Industry — Mints, Banknote Presses, Papermills etc.
Tourism — Holiday homes, Tourist Centres, Samadhis, Parks
Environment — Energy Conservation, Sanitation, Water Supply,
Horticulture
Science & Technology — Scientific Laboratories, Computer Centres
Aviation — Airport buildings, Runways, Runway lighting and
all allied works
Sports & Culture — Sports Complexes, Stadiums and Cultural/
Conference Centres
National Security — Border Fencing/Flood lighting, Roads and other
works of paramilitary organizations in border and
remote areas
Campus Development — Complete campus development for learning and
many more.
CPWD also executes many overseas works such as construction of Embassies
and Hospital Buildings in various countries and Roads & Bridges such as in Nepal and
Afghanistan for the Ministry of External Affairs, as a part Government of India aid
programme.

3
Process of the works
1.5 Involvement of CPWD with a project starts from the stage of selection of
site, carrying out geo-technical investigations, collection of field data, assisting the client
in analyzing their requirements, preparation of architectural, structural, electrical, air
conditioning and landscape designs and drawings, undertaking construction management
including quality assurance and post construction maintenance management.
Organizational set-up of CPWD
1.6 The Central PWD has Director General Works as its head. The Director
General Works, is also the Technical Advisor to the Government of India and is required
to give advice to the Government on various technical issues. The CPWD has been
headed, invariably, by specialized Engineers. Jurisdiction of the department and is divided
into seven regular Regions headed by Additional Directors General for effective control
of works and administrative matters. These Regions are viz. the New Delhi Region,
Delhi Region, Northern Region, Southern Region, Western Region, Eastern Region,
PWD Delhi Region and the other area of works are in the Border areas of the country.
Apart from other regions, the CPWD has been executing a number of infrastructural
works in the North Eastern States of the country. The head quarters of the CPWD, in
this area, is located in Shillong with divisions located at Guwahati, Shillong, Imphal,
Tejpur, Silchar & Agartala. The field units of CPWD are located all over India to take
up construction and maintenance works, even in the remotest parts of the country. Through
its countrywide network of planning and construction units, it is in a position to undertake
the works for the Government and other organizations desirous to entrust their work to
the department.
1.7 For the purpose of handling the constructions, maintenance and other works,
the CPWD has documented specifications & standards and schedule of rates, which are
updated from time to time, to keep pace with latest technologies and market trends.
These publications are followed by various construction organizations both in public as
well as private sectors. The department brings out a number of manuals/handbooks for
assisting in execution of projects. Guidelines for designing buildings for elderly and
disabled people, Manual of rain water harvesting etc., published by CPWD, have been
found very useful in the whole country.
Specialised Units of CPWD
1.8 To achieve excellence in its operation, CPWD contains the following
Specialized Units:
(i) Central Designs Organization
(ii) Training Institute
(iii) Landscape Horticulture Unit

4
(iv) Standards and Specifications Unit
(v) Technology Application & Development Cell
(vi) Consultancy Cell
(vii) Techno-legal Cell
(viii) Quality Assurance Wing
(ix) Architectural Documentation Centre
(x) Central Laboratory
The Contract Specification & QA wing deals with the Standards and
Specifications, Techno-legal issues, Quality Assurance functions and Contract & Manual
Cell of CPWD. The Vigilance Unit of CPWD is headed by a Chief Engineer, who is
also the Chief Vigilance Officer of the Department. The activities of the Vigilance Unit
includes investigation of complaints, enquiries against erring officers and staff of CPWD,
issuance of Vigilance Clearance Certificates, conducting surprise checks on stores and
preventive vigilance by suggesting changes in procedures.
Computerization has been introduced by CPWD in areas like preparation of
architectural designs, structural designs & detailing, project planning & scheduling,
monitoring, preparation of schedule of rates, tender justification, payrolls, personnel
management, inventory control, accounting and budgeting, maintenance management
etc. A fully computerized complaint receiving and monitoring system has been put in
use by CPWD in Delhi. The service can be accessed at http://cpwdsewa.nic.in. 
Major Contributions made by CPWD
1.9 The Central Public Works Department is executing the work of border fencing,
flood lighting and construction of roads along the international borders of the
country both in the West and the East. In all 2400 Km of fencing, 1900 Km of road and
1550 Km of flood lighting along international borders have been completed by CPWD.
Along the Gujarat border 123 Km of road including link road has been completed and
132 Km is in progress. A large number of border out posts have also been built for the
BSF by CPWD. 1565 Km. of road, having 14130 m of bridges and 649 Km of fencing
has been completed along Indo-Bangla Border.
The maintenance of the infrastructure created along the border in the form of
roads, bridges, flood lighting etc. has also been entrusted to CPWD. Special units have
been opened in Rajasthan and North East to look after the works. About 2482 Km of
road along the full IBB is being maintained by CPWD.
1.10 CPWD has executed a large number of works for educational institutions
all over the country. Construction of a large number of Navodya Vidyalyas, Kendrya
Vidyalyas, colleges, universities has been carried out by the CPWD. It also has to its

5
credit construction of many research institutions, laboratories etc. The first IIT in the
country was built by CPWD and it is still executing works for IIT’s at Delhi and Roorke
in Uttaranchal. CPWD also builds many vocational training institutes and other similar
works where training is imparted to artisans.
1.11 CPWD has constructed the largest number of sports complexes in the
country. The National Stadium and the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium along with many
other works in Delhi were done by the department. Even in difficult locations like Port
Blair, Agartala etc. sports facilities of national and international standards have been
created by the department. It has to its credit the laying of the first Astroturf in the
country.
1.12 It has to its merit building of the engineering marvels like the Jawahar
Tunnel on the Jammu Pathankot Road. A large number of bridges, flyovers have also
been constructed by the department.
1.13 CPWD has to its merit the construction of large and small hospitals and
medical institutions. The first AIIMS was built by CPWD. All Government hospitals in
Delhi have been built by the department. It has also constructed many hospitals for the
paramilitary forces. Complexes for prestigious medical institutions like JIPMER in
Pondicherry have also been developed by the CPWD.
1.14 CPWD has also created landscaped gardens parks and also provided façade
lighting and illumination in many places. Recently, the CPWD has provided illumination
in the world famous Ajanta caves and made their viewing a pleasure for the tourists.
1.15 As the CPWD executes works for the CPMFs such as CRPF, BSF, SPG,
NSG, ITBP, Assam Rifles, IB etc. all across the country, about 700 works amounting to
Rs. 1030 crore are in progress and about 173 works valued at Rs. 293 crore are about to
start for the Paramilitary Forces. The Ministry of Defence has embarked on a project to
provide residential accommodation for the armed forces. CPWD has been entrusted the
work of constructing these at 12 locations in the States of Rajasthan, Punjab and J&K.
Detailed project reports for 10 stations amounting to Rs. 1031.77 crore have been sent.
Sanction for works located at Jalandhar and Janglote have been issued by the Ministry
of Defence.
Execution of works for Ministry of External Affairs (MEA)
1.16 CPWD is executing many works on behalf of MEA in Kabul through its
Consultancy Services Organisation. These include construction of the Chancery Building,
Repair & Rehabilitation of Habiba School and Indira Gandhi Institute for Child Health.
Augmentation of electrical supply and up-gradation of tool room in Pul-e-Charkhi near
Kabul is also being done. CPWD is also likely to be entrusted the work of construction
of new parliament Building for Govt. of Afghanistan. Work of renovation of the Palace
building at Kabul is also likely to be taken up.

6
Tourism related works
1.17 CPWD has taken up in a big way the works related to tourism. Many works
on heritage sites such as Kurukshetra, Red Fort in Delhi etc. are being carried out.
Tourism related works in the states of Assam, Bihar, Delhi, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Gujarat,
J&K, West Bengal, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamilnadu, UP,
Uttaranchal, Maharashtra etc. are being done by CPWD.
Total works
1.18 At present CPWD has more than 2400 works costing more than rupees one
crore at various stages in hand. Total value of works in progress is approximately Rs.3530
crore. Value of works sanctioned is about Rs. 1826 crore and value of works in pipeline
is estimated as Rs. 3429 crore. Some other major works in hand and those contemplated
have been given in Annexure I to the Report.
1.19 The Committee on Urban Development heard the briefing by the Ministry
of Urban Development and Senior Officials of CPWD on their functioning during the
sitting held on 13th September, 2005. At the sitting, the representative of the Ministry of
Urban Development informed as follows:-
“The Department has a presence virtually in all parts of the country with about
19,000 engineering and non-engineering staff. In addition to that there are about
23,000 work-charged workers who take care of the various small and
miscellaneous duties here and there. During 2004-2005, CPWD registered
a significant growth in its workload. We jumped to about Rs 4,211 Crore in
2004-2005 as against Rs 3,550 Crore during the preceding year (2003-2004).
The targeted growth for the current year i.e. 2005-2006 is Rs. 5,130 Crore.”
1.20 When the Committee enquired about the maintenance of buildings,
residential accommodations (General Pool Residential Accommodations -GPRA), roads
etc, and the poor image of CPWD in the eyes of the users; the representative of the
Ministry of Urban Development replied as follows:-
“Our image is essentially determined by the maintenance of the condition of the
Government houses, which are there and our performance in the maintenance
field. So, this becomes a very critical area of operation for us from the image
point of view because other things may not be known by other people. Maintenance
is the important point. We really want to bring in the maintenance a major
improvement. The funds which are available with us for the maintenance is hardly
sufficient to carry out our day-to-day requirements for renewal and special funding
will be required. If we can get additional funds steadily, at least Rs. 40 to 50
Crore a year for the next five to six years, then we can bring some discernible
changes in the houses, which will really improve not only the buildings but it will
still add to our image problem also.”

7
1.21 In order to obtain public views/expressions on the working of the CPWD,
the erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural Development (2003-2004) had issued a
Press Communiqué on 12th December, 2003 and the present Committee on Urban
Development again issued a Press Communiqué on 13th September, 2005 inviting the
opinion/views of the public on various aspects of the functioning of the CPWD. In
response, the Committee received 78 and 274 representations/memoranda, respectively.
The points raised by the users of the CPWD Residential, Institutional and Official
premises and other individuals had been examined and the factual position on certain
selected cases had been sought from the Ministry of Urban Development and the CPWD.
Accordingly, the replies of the Ministry of Urban Development/CPWD had been received
by the Committee.
The main points received from the public have been briefly stated as follows :—
Problems submitted by users of CPWD Quarters/ General Pool Residential
Accommodation(GPRA).
 There are two main hurdles, which prevent proper maintenance of residential
accommodations by CPWD are - ‘Ban’ on recruitment of Work Charged
labor imposed in November, 1985.
 There is shortage of funds as compared to demand and depletion of strength
of workers due to retirement etc. in CPWD.
 There is unauthorized encroachments in CPWD residential complexes by
slum dwellers and the Contractors leave the premises dirty/shabby after
completion of works and inordinately delay the works.
 The Junior Engineers concerned do not attend to the civil as well as electrical
complaints promptly and they are mostly not available in the Enquiry Offices
of CPWD.
 There is inordinate delay and imperfect works of white wash, painting and
other repair works of petty nature in the CPWD complexes.
 There is seepage in the quarters and occupants are forced to live in unhygienic
conditions as the walls remain damp in many area, which is mainly due to
rusting of old pipe lines and lack of responsiveness of the CPWD engineers.
 The drainage and sewage system in CPWD complexes are not being
maintained properly, which leads to accumulation of dirty water in residential
premises.
 The Common area and corridors are not lighted properly and cleaned through
the CPWD workers and the approach roads in the complexes are broken at
many points. The problem gets complicated due to multiplicity of
organizations as some areas come under municipality or other ULB.

8
 The Resident Welfare Associations (RW As) must be actively associated with
the CPWD workers and meetings must be held at regular intervals so as to
redress the grievances of the occupants of the GPRA in time.
Apart from the above, certain memorandum had been received by the employees
of CPWD, which dealt with the ‘Cadre Review’ or other service matters. The aforesaid
issues have been examined in the succeeding Chapters of the Report.

9
CHAPTER II
MAINTENANCE OF RESIDENTIAL COMPLEXES
2.1 The Central Public Works Department (CPWD) is entrusted with the
responsibility of construction and maintenance of Residential and Non-Residential
buildings for Ministries and Departments of Central Government throughout the country
(excluding those of Defence, Railways, Deptt. of Telecommunications & Posts, All
India Radio, Doordarshan and Civil Aviation).
2.2 The CPWD Charter reflects the commitment of the CPWD in the matter of
constructions and maintenance of the both Residential and Non-Residential buildings
for:
 Ensuring an efficient, transparent, accountable and cost effective organisation
at all levels;
 Award of contract in a transparent manner and in the best interest of the
Government and by ensuring maintenance of all round integrity as well as
best possible standards and adequate supervision;
 Preventive maintenance and special repair for ensuring soundness and safety
of building structures;
 Periodic and day-to-day repair and maintenance for ensuring habitability
and aesthetics of buildings;
 Efficient and prompt operation, maintenance and upkeep of various services
such as Water Supply, Electricity, Air-conditioning, Lifts, Fire Fighting,
Drainage and Horticulture; and
 Attention of responding promptly to up gradation of building structures and
providing additions/alterations to meet user specific demands subject to
structural and technical feasibility and availability of funds.
To ensure timely, prompt and efficient service to the users of the buildings
mentioned above, the CPWD shall:
 Provide a widely dispersed network of service centers with a suitable
complaint recording and monitoring system and a single window where
complaints and grievances will be registered and acknowledged immediately
indicating the time limit within which action is expected to be taken;

10
 Ensure attending of routine complaints within 24 hours;
 Provide emergency essential maintenance services beyond regular working
hours as well as round the clock for a group of colonies or group of Govt.
houses particularly in regard to electrical installation, water supply and
sewerage;
 Display names, designation, addresses, telephone numbers of all officers up
to the rank of Executive Engineers, in all service Centres, as also the name,
designation, address and telephone number of the next superior officers to
whom complaint can be made , in case of the unresolved grievances and
complaints;
 Ensure intimation of the reasons for delay for non-compliance etc. of the
request/complaint/grievance of the allottees within 15 days of receipt of the
same;
 Ensure that all persons manning counters at the service Centers and all
workmen wear name badges and carry identity cards and that they behave
courteously with the residents and users of buildings at all times;
 Ensure that names of lift/pump operators are invariably indicated and that
they are available in position. In case of absence of lift man on leave, provide
one lift operator for a group of lifts and in the case of unmanned lifts, give
indication as to whom to contact in case of emergency;
 Make available information booklets/slips containing details of service
rendered by the Deptt. for use by individual allottees Deptt./Ministry and/or
Resident Welfare Associations; and
 Provide Action Plan for ensuring year, in respect of additions/alterations,
special and periodic repairs like white/colour washing painting etc. not later
than 30th April of each year and make this Action Plan along with the schedule
to Residents Welfare Associations in respect of residential colonies and to
the Administrative authorities concerned in the case of Non-Residential
buildings;
And in case of things going wrong, provide a well organized Grievance Redressal
Mechanism.
 By designating an officer of the rank of Executive Engineer as the Welfare/
Grievance Officer for each or a group of colonies/buildings who will
coordinate and get the needful done. The list of such officials alongwith
their addresses and telephone numbers (Office and Residence) would be
displayed in all service Centers; and
 By eliciting feed back on performance and for further improvement in the
providing of various services through questionnaires, surveys etc.

11
In return the CPWD expects the users,
 To extend all assistance and cooperation to the maintenance staff in carrying
out their bonafide duties;
 Not to make any unauthorized construction or to make any additions/
alterations to the premises allotted to them without the express approval of
the Deptt;
 To ensure that the accommodation is used only by the allottees and is used
only for the purpose for which it has been allotted;
 Not to sublet the whole or part of the accommodation allotted;
 Not to tamper with the equipment and installations and ensure that the
electrical installations are not overloaded;
 Maintain the accommodation allotted and the surroundings in a hygienic
manner and conform to the rules and regulations of the local bodies in this
regard;
 To be vigilant about public property like pipes, valves, fittings, lamps, tube
lights and other accessories installed in a common areas such as staircase/
corridor/gates/service roads/passages etc;
 To remove unauthorized civil, electrical or horticulture works when called
upon to do so by the Deptt;
 To restore the civil and electrical systems to the original shape while vacating
the quarters;
 To get the electricity and water supply disconnected and produce ‘No Dues
Certificate’ for these services from local bodies at the time of vacation;
 To bring to the notice of senior officers of the Department genuine grievances
not attended to at the lower levels; and
 To feel free to write to the Department for any constructive suggestions for
further improving this Charter, to Deputy Director General (Works), C.P.W.D.
Poor Maintenance of General Pool Residential Accommodations (GPRA s) and
Lok Sabha &Rajya Sabha Residential Accomodations in Vasant Vihar Complex,
New Delhi.
2.3 Although CPWD’s above Charter includes a proper ‘Grievances Redressal
Mechanism’ however in response to the Committee on Urban Development’s Press
Communiqués, the Committee had received a number of complaints from the users of
the CPWD Residential Complexes in Delhi and other places. The Committee on Urban
Development (2005-2006), therefore, considered it expedient to undertake Local Study
Visits to the residential complexes constructed and maintained by CPWD. Accordingly,

12
the Committee visited the Vasant Vihar Central Government Residential Accommodations
including the General Pool as well as the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Secretariat’s
Residential complexes in New Delhi on 21st September, 2005. The Committee were
informed that the area consisted of 1275 residential units. There were 405 Quarters
belonging to Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI); 645 Quarters belonged to the General
Pool and 225 Quarters belonged to Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Secretariats.
2.4 The Committee then physically inspected the Quarters and the Complexes
and held discussions with the representatives of the RW A and they found that:-
(i) The Roof Projections were in a dilapidating condition and these had been
broken up by a Contractor for renovation but the Contractor left the work
mid-way and the broken chunks of cement fell occasionally on passer-byes
endangering them and gave a very shabby look to the buildings.
(ii) The iron-rods from the Roofs were visible and the Residential Blocks had
not been painted/white washed for a long period.
(iii) A shopping complex had been built by CPWD in the area, but it had been
occupied by unauthorized persons and slum dwellers.
(iv) There was acute shortage of water supply in the vicinity from the Delhi Jal
Board.
(v) In the Enquiry Office in the area no full time JE (Electrical) had been posted
and mostly the officials were not present to attend to daily complaints from
the residents.
2.5 Meanwhile, the local MLA of the area outlined the problems of the residents
of Vasant Vihar to the Committee and requested for redressal of the grievances, which
included demands for fixation of grills/fencing, Kota stones on stairs, Boundary Wall,
Opening up of Shopping Complex, removal of slum dwellers, Opening of Enquiry Office
on Saturdays and Sundays and other petty works to be done promptly by the Work
Charged workers. The Ministry of Urban Development were then requested to submit
their point-wise replies to the above issues. In response, the Ministry in their written
note stated that CPWD had been rendering services to the best of the resources available.
Regular meetings were conducted with the RW A to sort out the civil and electrical
problems and find out the best possible solutions within constraints of funds/resources.
Regarding, shortage of water supply, the Ministry informed that the total
requirement of the area is 900 Kilolitre (KL) per day and the Delhi Jal Board is providing
water through bulk connection and CPWD is getting water through a 8" Dia CI Pipe in
an underground Sump of 1150 KL capacity. The same water got pumped to overhead
tank of 600 KL capacity, which is distributed through a pipe network in the whole
colony.

13
2.6 About the shortage of water supply, the Ministry gave the reason that since
the campus of Vasant Vihar has been located at the tail end of the DJB supply, the
availability of water is very less. DJB, which is primarily responsible for ensuring
adequate water supply has been supplying only 10 to 15 % of the total requirement of
water in the Vasant Vihar CPWD Residential Complex. In order to deal with the shortage
of water supply, CPWD had tried re-boring of old tube wells and increasing the depth of
existing tube wells in the area, but all this had improved the yield of water only marginally.
In August 2005, CPWD also got new tube wells bored after approval of the Central
Ground Water Authority (CGWB) and these tube wells are giving the yield of about 2
KL per hour. Two additional tube wells had been sanctioned by CGWB and financial
sanction for the same is being obtained by CPWD. However, as the water table of the
area in question had receded and the yield from existing tube wells had been unviable,
this project had to be abandoned. At present, about 70 to 80 KL of water supply per day
is being pumped into the Sump through tube wells and supplemented by the DJB Water
Tankers supply to mitigate the water shortage.
2.7 On the question of repair and rehabilitation works of the complex, the Ministry
stated that the repair and rehabilitation work of 8 blocks has already been undertaken.
R&R work of remaining blocks is in progress and it is expected to complete the entire
work during this financial year (2006-2007). Efforts were made to repair the doors and
windows, wherever possible and replacement of doors/windows has also been
undertaken. The Ministry clarified that there had been a mistake in interpretation of
orders of Ministry of Urban Development on upgradation of these quarters. The position
has now been clarified to the field unit and upgradation of vacant quarters of Lok Sabha/
Rajya Sabha Residential Pool will also be taken up in terms Ministry of Urban
Development directions, subject to availability of funds.
2.8 During the course of oral evidence of the Ministry held on 4th July, 2006,
the Committee pointed out to the officials of the Ministry of Urban Development and
CPWD about the grave problems faced by the occupants of the Vasant Vihar, CPWD
Residential Complex. The Director General, CPWD also conceded before the Committee
as follows:—
“I suppose you are talking about Vasant Vihar Enclave flats and Lok Sabha and
Rajya Sabha areas. I assure that during this financial year, all the repair works
will be done. Tenders have been invited and repairing of doors and windows
have started repair of pipelines have started. We will be able to complete all the
repairs in this financial year itself (i.e. 2006-2007). It is not possible to do for the
entire area in one go because the increase i.e. increase in funds in 2006-2007 is
not that much to do all the repairs in one go. But we are during it in phases. But
with the funds available, that is, Rs.40 to 50 crore, etc., for special repairs which
we have got, we will be able to do it. Vasant Vihar was in bad shape. We have
taken this works on priority. The funds required for Vasant Vihar is Rs. 7 to 8
crore and not beyond that.”

14
2.9 On being asked about the external finishing of CPWD residential buildings
and their maintenance, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development stated that:
“We are now insisting that in all the external finishing of the CPWD buildings
should be of a permanent nature and should be maintenance free. We have
upgraded specifications for Government buildings but the only thing is, we will
be able to take up in phases. They cannot take it up altogether in one go. All
instructions have been approved by the Ministry and we have upgraded the
external finishing so that the paint getting spoiled or washed away will not be
there.”
Lack of proper maintenance of Vasant Vihar Residential Complex by CPWD
2.10 The Committee note that the CPWD’S Charter clearly demarcates
that for both the residential as well as non-residential buildings periodic and day-
to-day repair and maintenance works may be undertaken for ensuring habitability
and aesthetics of buildings constructed by CPWD. However, in response to their
Press Communiqués the Committee received several complaints from the users of
the residential buildings/accommodations about lack of proper and timely
maintenance and repair works by CPWD authorities in various residential areas.
The Committee, therefore, felt it expedient to undertake an on-the-spot-study visit
to the Vasant Vihar Residential Complex, New Delhi in order to gather first hand
information in this matter. Accordingly, the Committee visited the above stated
complex on 21st September, 2005 and physically inspected these quarters and held
discussions with the users of these quarters and the Residential Welfare Association
(RWA) of the area. The Committee were surprised to find the exposed iron-rods
coming out of the roofs of these residential buildings and chunks of cement falling
from the roofs and the shabby look of these buildings.
2.11 Regarding the repair works in the Vasant Vihar Complex, the Director
General, CPWD has assured during the course of oral evidence before the
Committee that all repair works in this complex will be completed in the present
financial year i.e. 2006-2007. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that
all repair and maintenance works at the Vasant Vihar Residential Complex must
be completed by CPWD within this financial year, as assured by them to the
Committee. The Committee also recommend that senior CPWD officials must
properly coordinate with the concerned RWA so as to ensure appropriate repair
and maintenance works in the complex i.e. up to the satisfaction of the users of
these residential quarters. The Committee also recommend that suitable external
finishing or face-lift must be given to these residential buildings which should
be of permanent nature. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
action taken in the matter within two months of presentation of this Report to the
House.

15
Lack of infrastructure facilities at the Vasant Vihar Complex
2.12 The residents of the Vasant Vihar Complex have further brought to
the notice of the Committee the following points:—
(i) A Shopping Complex had been built by CPWD in the area it is
dysfunctional but it is occupied by unauthorized persons.
(ii) There is acute shortage of water supply in the Residential Complex.
As regards encroachment of the Shopping Complex, the Committee
recommend that suitable coordinative measures must be taken by the Ministry of
Urban Development and CPWD with the Municipal Corporation of Delhi/other
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) so as to remove unauthorized occupation in the said
Shopping Complex. The Committee also recommend that appropriate steps must
be taken for allotment of shops and opening-up of proper consumer goods shops in
the Shopping Complex for the use of the residents of the Vasant Vihar Government
Residential Complex.
2.13 Regarding the shortage of water supply in the aforesaid area, the
Ministry have stated that since the campus of Vasant Vihar is located at the tail
end of the Delhi Jal Board’s (DJB) supply, the availability of water is very less.
The Ministry have also stated that the DJB is primarily responsible for ensuring
adequate water supply but it has been supplying only 10 to 15 % of the total
requirement of water of this Complex. In order to deal with the shortage of water
supply, CPWD had tried re-boring of old tube wells and increasing the depth of
existing tube wells in the area; but all this had improved the yield of water only
marginally. In August 2005, CPWD also got new tube wells bored after approval
of the Central Ground Water Authority (CGWB) and these tube wells gave the
yield of about 2 KL per hour. Two additional tube wells have also been sanctioned
by CGWB and financial sanction for the same is being obtained by CPWD.
However, the Ministry have informed that as the water table of the area has receded
and the yield from existing tube wells has been unviable, this project has been
abandoned. They have, finally, stated that at present, about 70 to 80 KL of water
supply per day is being pumped into the Sump through tube wells and supplemented
by the DJB Water Tankers supply to mitigate the water shortage of the Residential
Complex.
2.14 While the Committee express their serious concern over the acute
shortage of water supply in the Vasant Vihar Residential Complex of CPWD, they
are not at all convinced that the availability of water is less because this campus is
located at the tail end of the Delhi Jal Board’s (DJB) supply. The Committee are of
the firm view that CPWD and DJB are duty bound to find a permanent solution to
the water crisis in the area and provide the much-needed water supply at the Vasant
Vihar Residential Complex. The Committee strongly recommend that concerted
efforts must be made by the Ministry of Urban Development/CPWD to persuade

16
the DJB to lay down adequate pipe lines and build water tanks by taking the
required financial sanction for the same so as to provide adequate and regular
DJB water supply to the aforesaid residential complex. The recent availability of
water from Sonia Vihar Water Works should be suitably made use of to augment
the water supply to the colony. The Committee may be apprised about the action
taken in this regard within two months of presentation of this Report to the House.
2.15 The Committee would also like to emphasize that the study about
the maintenance activities at the Vasant Vihar Residential Complex in Delhi may
be considered as a sample case as similar problems exist in other CPWD residential
colonies or GPRAs in the country. The Committee , therefore, strongly recommend
that all the shortcomings in the maintenance activities and infrastructure facilities
in all the CPWD built/maintained residential colonies in Delhi as well as other
cities should be rectified by promptly attending to the problems of the users of
these residential units. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in
the matter within two months of submission of this Report.
Posting of full time JE (Electrical) at the Enquiry Office
2.16 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee by the residents of
the Vasant Vihar Complex that no full time JE(Electrical) has been posted at the
CPWD Enquiry Office in their complex and mostly the CPWD officials are not
present to attend to the daily complaints of the residents. The Committee , therefore,
recommend that suitable disciplinary action must be taken against the officials
absenting themselves from the Enquiry Office of the Complex and ensure prompt
handling of the complaints of the residents. The Committee also desire that a suitable
full time JE (Electrical) may be posted at the said CPWD Enquiry Office for
handling complaints.
Overall maintenance problems in other CPWD Residential areas and their funding
2.17 Monies are sanctioned for maintenance of works of General Pool Residential
Accommodation under different bodies:—
(i) 2216 (Minor works) – For expenditure on minor (original) works on Govt.
Residential buildings.
(ii) 2216 (Ordinary repairs) – For expenditure on day to day ordinary repairs on
Govt. Residential buildings.
(iii) 2216 (Special repairs) – For expenditure on special repairs of on Govt.
Residential buildings which add to the capital cost of the buildings and
account for in assessing of Standard rent of buildings.
(iv)  2216 (Lease charges) – For all expenditure on lease charges paid by CPWD
in respect of residential accommodation, hires, requisitioned or leased by it.

17
(v) 2216 (Furnishing) – For all expenditure on table fans, furniture etc. provided
to residences being maintained by Govt.
2.18 The break-up of the allocations for Delhi and outside Delhi for maintenance
purposes is given as under :—
Delhi
No. of Budget for maintenance Amount in Crores
housesYear type-I to 2216-Minor 2216 Ord. 2216-Spl. Lease Charges Totaltype-VIII works Repairs Repairs
Bgt. Expn. Bgt. Expn. Bgt. Expn. Bgt. Expn. Bgt. Expn.
2001-02 68483 7.45 7.21 91.52 92.41 17.0 17.0 20.21 20.29 136.18 136.91
2002-03 68483 9.46 8.37 89.07 98.86 18.10 17.97 25.37 26.33 142.0 151.53
2003-04 68483 8.95 8.64 98.80 97.09 20.4 19.75 19.15 18.08 145.3 143.56
2004-05 68483 8.43 8.34 99.95 100.91 16.65 16.71 17.20 17.96 142.23 143.91
2005-06 68483 7.07 6.94 99.14 99.71 18.14 17.99 19.27 19.29 143.62 143.93
2006-07 68483 8.00 — 96.60 — 22.05 — 17.30 — 144.0 —
Outside Delhi
No. of Budget for maintenance Amount in Crores
housesYear type-I to 2216-Minor 2216 Ord. 2216-Spl. Lease Charges Totaltype-VIII works Repairs Repairs
Bgt. Expn. Bgt. Expn. Bgt. Expn. Bgt. Expn. Bgt. Expn.
2001-02 35257 0.55 0.49 28.11 37.54 7.0 7.19 8.0 9.94 43.7 55.16
2002-03 35257 0.54 0.93 36.50 27.86 10.10 10.03 12.0 11.03 59.1 49.85
2003-04 35257 1.05 0.62 33.44 36.15 8.60 8.70 10.85 9.07 53.9 54.54
2004-05 35257 1.0 0.55 35.07 35.64 6.35 7.36 9.43 10.10 51.9 53.65
2005-06 35257 0.93 1.42 37.20 37.26 7.26 7.08 10.93 10.81 56.3 56.57
2006-07 35257 2.95 — 37.35 — 16.23 — 10.16 — 66.69 —
The different types of GPRAs as maintained by CPWD in the country, are given
in Annexure II to the Report.

18
(i) General Complaints received from GPRAs
2.19 In response to the Committee’s Press Communiqué, generally, complaints
about repair and maintenance of work had been received which are summed up as
follows:—
Sl. Complainant / Area Type of Complaint
No.
12 3
1. Central Government (i) White washing of external faces of the houses
Employees Residential has not been done for the last 10 to 12 years by
Welfare Association, CPWD at Faridabad.
Faridabad (ii) There is need for repairs of roads, providing of
sinks/wash basins in old houses, installation of
sewage treatment plant, rainwater harvesting to
combat water scarcity, repair of broken boundary
wall, providing of foot-path, street lights, and
development of park in Residential Complex at
Faridabad.
(iii) Dues to non-attending of complaints by CPWD
there is need for centralized complained system
in Faridabad.
(iv) There is illegal occupation and misuse of quarters
by unauthorized persons.
2. CGS, quarters at (i) There is need for upgradation of quarters by
Narkeldanga, Kolkata providing additional amenities like wash basin,
Mirror, Kitchen sink, Towel Rail in the Quarters.
3. CPWD Quarters at (i) Contractors engaged by CPWD at Sadiq Nagar
Sadiq Nagar, are technically ill-equipped and use sub-standard
New Delhi materials. They also leave the work half-way/
unfinished.
(ii) The JEs/AEs do not reach the Service Centre in
time and attend to works promptly.
(iii) Surprise inspections must be carried out by
CPWD in the area.
4. CPWD Quarters at (i) The maintenance of residential quarters
Kurnool, particularly civil items of quarters at Kurnool are
Andhra Pradesh (AP) dismal.
(ii) No complaint Book is available with a ‘Service
Centre’ at Kurnool (AP).
5. CPWD Quarters at (i) Inspite of repair works, the ceilings and walls
BKS Marg, New Delhi could not withstand a single rainy season
resulting in major leakage/seepage in quarters.

19
(ii) Outer ceiling between two quarters at top floor
adjacent to water tanks are in shambles and
needed repairing, immediately.
6. CPWD Quarter at (i) There is acute shortage of water supply in Blocks
Aram Bagh, 1 to 10, Aram Bagh.
New Dellhi (ii) No park or Horticulture work.
(iii) Change in internal wiring is needed.
(iv) Proper Kota stone to be provided in Kitchens
etc.
(v) Need for a compound wall.
(vi) Encroachments by slum dwellers in CPWD
complex.
(vii)Old and dangerous Quarters need to be repaired
to be safe and habitable.
7. Central Government (i) There is encroachment of land by slum dwellers
Employees RW A, in CPWD area.
Santragachi (W.B.) (ii) Three are 1100 quarters at Santragachi, which
are 40 years old and poorly maintained by
CPWD.
(iii) There is shortage of water supply.
8. UDAP Colony, (i) Maintenance of basic civic amenities in the
Nehru Nagar, Government colony must be given to a single
New Delhi agency.
(ii) Repairs works suffer due to acute shortage of
funds.
(iii) The approach road to the colony is in a
dilapidating condition.
9. Government (i) There is lack of maintenance of civil amenities
Employees Common in common areas.
Cause Association, (ii) There is need for removal of unauthorized
R.K. Puram, New Delhi construction and sub-letting of quarters.
(iii) Removal of encroachments by slum dwellers in
CPWD lands, specially ‘ the Sarasvati camp
Jhuggies’.
10. Nauroji Nagar (i) There is rude and arrogant behaviour of the staff
Residents Association, at the Complaint Centre.
Nauroji Nagar, (ii) Length of wind/air Pipes provided for emission
New Delhi of gases at backside of kitchen/Toilets are
short.
(iii) Seepage in toilets/bathrooms/kitchens are
overlooked.
12 3

20
(iv) Sub-standard materials have been used by
contractor on sun-shades to the quarters.
11. RW A, Pusph Vihar, (i) Works of replacement of doors, windows, WC
M.B. Road, New Delhi pans are pending for long by CPWD.
(ii) Fitting and fixtures which are 20 years old have
not been replaced yet.
12. RW A, Sarojini Nagar, (i) Sufficient funds must be allotted for addition/
New Delhi alteration works to be done on payment of 10%
of cost by allottees.
(ii) Provision of tiles be made instead of mosaic
flooring in the vacant quarters and upgraded
properly.
13. RW A, Timarpur, Delhi (i) There is poor maintenance of quarters.
(ii) There is poor maintenance of roads, service lanes
etc.
(iii) Progress of works of CPWD in Timarpur
Residential Colony is very slow.
(ii) Complaints from Members of Parliament
2.20 Apart from the complaints from the general public, the Committee also
heard complains about maintenance of CPWD accommodations for Members of
Parliament in North Avenue, South Avenue, V .P. House and Lutyen’s area in Delhi. The
Hon’ble members mostly complained about defective Air-conditioners fitted by CPWD
in their houses, poor maintenance of gardens, poor maintenance of approach roads/
service lanes, delays in attending to complaints by Enquiry Office, continuous work
process by contractors of the same nature like digging, removing tiles etc. and dumping
of wastes by workers of the contracts, which are not removed by CPWD or Municipal
body (NDMC).
2.21 During the course of oral evidence before the Committee on 4th July, 2006,
the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development stated as follows in regard to maintenance
of MPs Residential units:—
“The MP Bungalows in North and South Avenues, is one area which was taken
up for special attention and repairs are being done as per the programme drawn
up. So, it is not only done from the Government budget but there is also the urban
development fund from where some money has been given so that there could be
proper finishing to improve the aesthetic ambience. But it is a fact that the problems
in the Lutyen’s Bungalow Zone are serious. These houses were built 50 to 60
years ago and we all know that they are in a bad condition. ……. Fortunately, at
the House Committee’s insistence, we got a separate budget. It is not going to be
12 3

21
part of the total budget whatever is kept for the special repairs of the flats of MPs
will be spent on the buildings. … We are also interacting with the Delhi Urban
Arts Commission. The moment we talk about re-development (of Luyten’s Zone)
there is a huge ‘Press Campaign’ as if we are selling everything to the private
builders or the heritage area is getting sold in the hands of private builders etc.
But we will pick up four or five bungalows. We want to restore the buildings.”
2.22 Regarding some of the general complaints cited above in para 2.16 ante,
the Ministry of Urban Development in their written note have explained that in Faridabad
Complex the work of external white washing could not be done due to shortage of
funds. However in the current year 2006-07, additional funds have been allocated in
maintenance heads. It is proposed to take up the work in phases, some work will be
taken up during current financial year. Regarding repair of roads, in the year 2004-05,
an amount of Rs. 35 lacs was spent on repair of roads. Repair of roads could not be
taken up in 2005-06 due to constraint of funds. Further repair of roads will be taken up
during current year also. The work of providing sinks and wash basins is also being
taken up shortly to be done in phases. The proposal of sewage treatment plant has been
prepared and is under examination. Regarding supply of drinking water from rain water
scheme, CPWD has been requesting the Municipal Corporation of Faridabad for supply
of its share of water to NH-IV complex but so far they have not supplied the same.
Regarding the construction of broken boundary wall, the same will be repaired in the
broken portions and the missing links will be completed during the current financial
year. The complaints are being handled manually at the Faridabad Service Centre. About
street-lights, the Ministry stated that CPWD has taken steps to provide new street lights
in phases at locations of old street lights of Municipal Corporation of Faridabad and
few street lights inside the Faridabad campus is being maintained by CPWD, itself.
2.23 On the complaint from Narkeldanga, Kolkata, the Ministry informed that
the Central Government Staff Quarters Complex at Narkeldanga was put to use in the
year 1968, when the amenities like wash basin, mirror kitchen sink etc. were not provided
at the time of construction. However, the yard stick for amenities to be provided in
quarters has been revised vide Ministry of Urban Development OM No. 28012/1/2003-
WI dated 19.02.2004. Due to limitation of funds, addition/alteration work items to
upgrade the amenities in old quarters are being provided by the Department on vacation
of quarters only. Accordingly the work of upgradation is being done in phases and this
work will be continued in the current financial year, also.
2.24 On the complaint from the residents of Sadiq Nagar, CPWD Complex, the
Ministry stated that efforts are being made to make working of CPWD effective and
friendly to allottees and the quality control wing of CPWD has inspected many Service
Centres in the past.
2.25 On the complaint from Kurnool in A.P., the Ministry conceded that CPWD
could not pay adequate attention towards maintenance of Central Excise Quarters at
Kurnool, because, there is no regular establishment of CPWD at Kurnool and nearest

22
station, where CPWD has its regular establishment, is about 200 Kms from Kurnool.
However, the repair and maintenance of immediate nature has already been taken up
and completed. Remaining repairs and maintenance works, as needed, shall be completed,
shortly. The particulars of the maintenance staff to whom complaint is to be addressed
has been given to the Welfare Officer/ Care-taker of the client department. Complaint
book is now proposed to be maintained with the Welfare Officer/Care-Taker of the
client department. The EE/AE/JE incharge shall on regular basis interact now with the
Welfare Officer/Care-taker for attending the complaints, timely.
2.26 Regarding removal of encroachments in Aram Bagh area in Delhi, the
Ministry informed that CPWD had already paid Rs.13,29,000/- to the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi (MCD) for the necessary action by the Slum Department of MCD.
2.27 Regarding the complaint from residents of Pushp Vihar Complex, the
Ministry conceded that it is true that fittings & fixtures have a limited useful life period
after which they need replacement. The replacement of out dated items is being done as
per necessity & availability of funds. However, this work is being taken up in phases
depending upon the availability of funds. Regarding the replacement of door/window/
WC pan etc., the same are covered under ‘Special Repair’. The Pushp Vihar was
constructed under ‘Crash Housing Programme’. A considerable portion of ‘Special Repair
Fund’ utilized, had been spent on retrofitting of the houses involving repairing the
structural repairs of the building. In view of this, priorities are fixed for the balance
items of complaints depending upon the available funds. However during 2006-07,
some additional funds have been allocated under special repairs, which will be utilized
for retrofitting works and other essential works of special repairs.
2.28 Similarly, on the complaint of slow progress of works in Timarpur
Residential Colony, the Ministry informed that by the additional funds allocated for
maintenance in current year 2006-2007, more maintenance works will be taken up at
Timarpur.
Complaints redressal system
2.29 The Ministry have informed that ‘Complaint Boxes’ are available at Enquiry
Offices. However, miscellaneous complaints like encroachment of Government land,
non-maintenance of Parks or street-lights, roads etc. are to be made to the concerned
authorities. CPWD takes action only on issues, which are pertaining to its jurisdiction
or works which are entrusted to it.
2.30 Further, the Ministry have stated that the CPWD is responsive and prompt
in redress of complaints. The day-to-day complaints are attended promptly in most of
the cases. However some complaints like replacement of doors and windows, flooring,
cisterns, etc., which cannot be attended through departmental labour are transferred to
a ‘Major Complaints Register’ for monitoring. Such works are done after Call of tenders.
This takes some more time.

23
2.31 The Ministry have opined that maintenance is an operation in which
achieving 100% satisfaction is a very difficult target to realize. This is compounded
with the fact that the services being rendered by CPWD are free of cost. Further most of
the assets being maintained by CPWD are quite old and were built with specifications
prevailing in those times, which are now out of date. The aspirations of the people who
use the assets have risen as they are exposed to modern building materials now available
in the market. It is also a fact that the work force available with CPWD is ageing and its
efficiency is also not as high as that of normal contract labour available in the market.
All these factors contribute to a certain level of dissatisfaction prevailing in the public
using the Government assets. It is, however, a fact that most of day-to-day complaints
are attended within the prescribed time schedule.
2.32 The Ministry also stated that major day-to-day complaints are main source
of irritants. These are such as replacement of broken doors and windows, overhead CI
systems, replacement of terrace tanks, replacement of corroded GI pipes and soil pipes,
rewiring etc. and other works of repair, rehabilitation and aesthetic improvements. It
has not been possible, for long, to have these types of complaints attended to on a
regular basis, in a comprehensive manner, because of paucity of funds. However, in this
financial year, Government has sanctioned additional funds, which are being planned to
be spent as per our Action Plan through a special repair drive.
Allocation of funds for maintenance works of residential units under CPWD
2.33 The Committee note that CPWD have constructed and are maintaining
a large number of residential complexes in Delhi and outside Delhi. From the break-
up of financial allocations for Delhi and outside Delhi, it is noted that under Minor
Head-2216, a budgetary allocation of Rs. 144 crore has been made for 2006-2007
for the maintenance works for 68,483 number of General Pool Residential
Accommodations (GPRAs) in Delhi and an amount of Rs. 66.69 crore has been
earmarked for similar works for 35,257 number of GPRAs outside Delhi in
2006-2007. While the Committee trust that adequate funds are allocated for the
maintenance works for the GPRAs in Delhi as well as outside Delhi, they desire
that these funds are used prudently by the executing agencies i.e. the CPWD Work
charged workers or the contract workers, so as to complete the repair/maintenance
jobs in time and in an efficient manner. The Committee also insist that the end-use
of these funds, allocated for the maintenance works, must be thoroughly verified
by senior officials of the Ministry of Urban Development and CPWD so as to
obviate any kind of diversion of funds.
Handling of general complaints received from users of GPRAs
2.34 The Committee have received a number of complaints from the users
of the residential units constructed and maintained by CPWD from various parts
of the country as detailed in para 2.19 of the Report ante. It is seen that mostly the
complaints deal with the lack of attention towards the complaints of the users by

24
the Service Centers staff, rude behavior of the Service Center staff, non-
maintenance of the Complaint Books, inordinate delays in white-washing the
external structures of the residential buildings, leaving of works by contractors in
the mid-way and dumping of wastes in the area, usage of sub-standard materials
by contractors in sun-shades, seepage on ceilings and walls of the quarters etc. It
has been further complained by the users of GPRAs that JEs/AEs are mostly not
available at the Service Centers and complaints are not being attended to promptly.
There is lack of water supply in certain CPWD Residential Complexes. The flooring
of the quarters need proper upgradation, while service lanes/approach roads need
maintenance as these are broken at many places. There are inadequate street lights
and the progress of works is very slow. The Committee express their serious concern
over the aforesaid problems faced by the residents, who are the employees of the
Government and have been compelled to face difficulties in day-to-day living in
their officially provided accommodation. The Committee desire that CPWD should
resolve the problems faced by the occupants of GPRAs in a two-pronged strategic
way i.e. firstly, the works done through contractors must be completed in time and
properly by using good quality building materials etc. and secondly, the CPWD
must coordinate with the ULBs and Municipalities of the area concerned for
construction of service lanes, roads, etc. and provide adequate number of street
lights and adequate water supply in and around the residential areas. The
Committee also recommend that attendance of the Enquiry Staff of CPWD must
be ensured in each locality.
2.35 The Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Urban
Development that for the year 2006-2007, additional funds have been allocated to
CPWD for carrying out the repair and maintenance works. The Ministry has also
assured that the works of up-gradation, repair and maintenance of the CPWD
Quarters will be taken up in a phased manner and will be completed during the
current financial year. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that effective
and timely measures are taken by the CPWD in coordination with the Ministry of
Urban Development and other ULBs so to resolve all the difficulties faced by the
users of the residential areas under the care of CPWD in coordination with the
RWAs of each area.
Non-maintenance of Complaint Book as Kurnool(AP), GPRA
2.36 The Committee are amazed to find that in the residential quarters at
Kurnool in Andhra Pradesh, no Complaint Book was available at the Service Center
earmarked for CPWD. In this regard, the Ministry have stated that CPWD could
not pay attention towards maintenance of the Central Excise Quarters at Kurnool,
because, there is no regular establishment of CPWD at Kurnool in the vicinity of
the area. Also, ‘Complaint Book’ has now been proposed to be maintained with
the Welfare Office/Care-taker of the client department and that too perhaps only
at the intervention of the Committee. The Committee take serious note of the
lackadaisical manner in which CPWD has reacted towards non-keeping of

25
Compliant Books for registering of complaints by the users of these residential
units. The Committee, therefore, recommend that proper Complaint Books must
be kept and maintained in all the residential units under the supervision and control
of CPWD in the country. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken
in this matter. The CPWD should also have a regular establishment at Kurnool to
give better, timely and effective service.
Redress of Complaints by CPWD
2.37 The Ministry of Urban Development have informed the Committee
that in many of the major day-to-day complaints relating to replacement of broken
doors and windows, overhead CI systems, replacement of terrace tanks,
replacement of corroded GI pipes and soil pipes, rewiring etc. and other works of
repair, rehabilitation and aesthetic improvements, it has not been possible, for
long, to attend to them on a regular basis and in a comprehensive manner, because
of paucity of funds. However, in this financial year, Government has sanctioned
additional funds and these funds are planned to be spent as per an Action Plan
through a special repair drive. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
concerted efforts should be made by CPWD to complete all repair works and to
attend to all the pending complaints in various CPWD Enquiry Offices through
this Action Plan to meet the requirements of the users of the GPRAs and office
accommodations. The Committee also recommend that concerted efforts should
be made by CPWD in coordination with the municipal bodies to provide
maintenance works in the areas of residential colonies falling under the
municipalities.
Removal of encroachments in CPWD complexes
2.38 Another major issue which has come to the notice of the Committee is
the encroachment by slum dwellers in residential premises of CPWD at
Aram Bagh area and encroachments in the R.K Puram area by the so called
‘Saraswati Camp Jhuggies’ in Delhi. As regards, the Jhuggies at Aram Bagh, the
Committee are informed that CPWD has paid Rs 13,29,000/- to the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi (MCD) for removal of these slums. The Committee strongly
recommend that all out and earnest efforts must be made by CPWD to persuade
the ULB concerned to remove the encroachments by slum dwellers immediately in
the vicinity and inside the residential areas under CPWD. The Committee note
that there is acute shortage of water supply in Aram Bagh CPWD area and
the booster pumps are not in working order. There have been frequent power
failures as there is no dedicated separate electricity supply arrangements for
the residential area and the existing arrangements are linked with electricity
supply to the commercial areas of adjoining Paharganj area. The Committee would
like to know about the outcome of the efforts made by CPWD in the aforesaid
cases.

26
Complaints from Members of Parliament
2.39 As regards, the maintenance and up keep of the CPWD Residential
Complexes in North Avenue, South Avenue, V .P. House and the Lutyen’s Bungalow
Zone, the Committee have also received complaints from the users, who are the
Hon’ble Members of Parliament. These complaints mostly pertain to poor
maintenance of Air Conditioners, non-stop digging works in the vicinity of the
premises by contractors, dumping of wastes by contractors, poor maintenance of
gardens, service lanes, roads etc, and carrying out of the similar nature of jobs by
different contractors in different times for reasons best known to the CPWD. The
Committee note that at the House Committee’s intervention, a separate special
budget has been given for this area apart from the total budget. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that prompt and effective measures are taken by
CPWD to rectify the above stated problems and to restore and maintain the
beautiful ambience of the ‘Central Vista Area’ of Delhi. The Committee may be
apprised about the action taken in the matter within two month of presentation of
this Report to the House.
Prompt handling of grievances of the users of CPWD colonies
2.40 As regards, handling of the grievances of the users of the CPWD
residential areas the Committee recommend that special workshops should be held
by CPWD in order to train its work-force in prompt disposal of maintenance works
including civil works and electrical works in all the CPWD colonies.

CHAPTER III
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF OTHER STRUCTURES
3.1 CPWD handles and executes wide ranging buildings projects other that the
residential buildings and complexes. These buildings are Office and Commercial
Buildings, Institutional Buildings like Universities, Schools and Colleges Medical
Colleges and Hospitals, Scientific and Research laboratories; Recreational & Sports
Buildings like Holiday Home, Tourist Resorts Stadiums and Cultural Complexes
Conference Buildings and Industrial Buildings like Silos, Mints and Bank Note Presses
and Paper Mills.
(i) Types of works
3.2 CPWD also undertakes ‘Deposit Works’ for clients, where funds get
deposited with the concerned field units by the clients, directly. For all Centrally
Funded Works, CPWD does not charge any fees for carrying out such Deposit Works.
However, in case these works have to be carried out for non-Central Funds Scheme,
then CPWD charges prescribed rates of the Department for such works. In the
‘Deposit Account’ basis are the works pertaining to autonomous bodies, educational
institutions like IITs, Universities etc. where the client department deposits whole
or part of the sanctioned amount with CPWD, which is taken in CPWD books and
then expenditure is booked on the project of the client from the money deposited. The
money so deposited by the client is further deposited by CPWD in the Consolidated
Fund of India and Letter Of Credit (LOC) for the actual funds demanded is asked
for from the Chief Controller of Accounts (CCA). No separate account is opened
for this deposit, however, the actual transactions are duly noted in the deposit register
and the clients are intimated of the deposits and expenditures every month.
3.3 On the question of number of Deposit Works carried out by CPWD,
the Ministry in their written note had stated that no statistical information in respect
of number of Deposit Works carried out by CPWD in the past is maintained. However,
as on date, one hundred and ninety seven number of major works (costing more
than Rs.1 crore) are being carried out as Deposit Work by CPWD. This reflects
about 17% of total major works being carried out by the Department under ‘Deposit
Works’.
3.4 In respect of Central Civil Services (CSS) account, this system is
followed only for the works pertaining to the Cabinet Secretariat and the Ministry of
Defence. In this, the expenditure on the project is booked by CPWD first in
27

28
Suspense Account and then the bill is raised on the client in prescribed format
against which payments are made by the client and the suspense account is cleared.
LOC for this is also given by CCA against assurances given by the clients as to
how much expenditure can be booked by the divisions against their works.
(ii) Tendering Process
3.5 In actual practice, the CPWD carries out a number of works through
Contractors and the staff of CPWD. As regards, the works carried out through
Contractors of ‘Major’ and ‘Minor’ nature, the Ministry of Urban Development have
informed that the entire procedure for calling of tenders, processing the same and
awarding the work is extremely well documented and is followed strictly under the
supervision of senior level officers. The powers to call contracts and award works is
graded and it depends upon the seniority of the officers concerned. All tenders,
irrespective of the cost of the works are given wide publicity including publishing
of the same on the Internet at a pre-determined website. This fact is also indicated
in the press notice issued by the Department so that the intending constructors can
see the notices at the website also. Receipt of tenders is done at a pre-determined
date and time and the same are opened in the presence of all intending contractors,
who desire to be present at the time of opening. As the tenders are opened, rates quoted
by each of the bidders is announced to all those who are present. The process of
tender is done on the basis of well laid down procedure and the rate at which the
work is awarded is compared to a justified rate/amount worked out independently
by the Departmental officers, which is based on the prevailing market rates of
materials and labour. Only when the lowest bid is found comparable to the justified rate
worked out, the work is awarded. Further negotiations are carried out only with the
lowest bid received, as per the directions given by the Central Vigilance Commission
(CVC).
3.6 As regards the rates of works, the Ministry in their written note have
informed that the ‘Schedule of Rates’ are not higher than the prevailing market rates.
The market rates for different items and at different locations vary from time to time
and are determined by the market forces. There are the matters of concentration or
flow of works, supply/shortage of materials, labour, type and nature of construction,
location of site and other related issues affecting the actual market rate of the item.
All such issues are duly accounted for by CPWD while assessing the reasonability of
rates received when tenders are invited. The Schedule of Rates is arrived at by calculating
the rates of finished items based on the labour required for execution. Details of this
are available in the analysis of rates prepared by CPWD and given in the
‘Delhi Schedule of Rates 2002’. These rates are arrived at after assessing and enquiring
about the market rate of materials required for execution of items, cost of carriage of
these materials and other liveries, which are required to be paid.

29
(iii) Increase in workload of CPWD
3.7 The Ministry submitted the break-up of the work load of CPWD in terms of
construction and maintenance as follows:—
The work load of CPWD (2004-2005)
(Normal and Project Zones)
Sl. CATEGORY OF ZONES CONSTN. MAINT. IFT. EQ.(T)No.
1 2 3 4 5=(3+4) 6=(3+2.25X4)
1 Normal Zones with 2202.29 768.15 2970.44 3930.63
construction and maintenance
for various departments
2 Project Zones for construction 175.44 46.97 222.41 281.13
and maintenance of specific
projects
 Grand Total 2377.73 815.12 3192.85 4211.76
3.8 In order to gather first hand information about the construction works done
by CPWD, through ‘Deposit Works’, the Committee visited the new IIT Boys Hostel
‘B’, New Delhi on 21st September, 2005. The Committee then physically inspected the
IIT Boys Hostel, which was under construction. This Hostel has an occupancy capacity
of 400 persons. The Committee were informed here by the CPWD officials that good
standard quality construction materials had been used in the buildings as per the standard
specification. Besides, machine made bricks cladding on outer periphery and stone grit
plaster on internal periphery of the building, had been used to give it a good external
finish.
The Committee also visited the New Office Building of the UPSC in Delhi. The
plinth area of the building was 15805 sqm. The sanctioned cost of the project was
Rs. 2121 lacs, while the actual cost of work was Rs. 2209 lacs. The building gave a
modern and presentable look and contained facilities for conferencing etc.
3.9 During their on-the-spot study visits outside Delhi also, the Committee had
the opportunity to inspect the CPWD constructed buildings at Chennai, Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, Ootty, Leh and few other places presenting neat external appearance
and finish.
(iv) Designing/Architecture and strength look of structures
3.10 Regarding the architecture and design of certain buildings, the Committee
received a memorandum from the Bombay Environmental Action Group stating that
the CPWD gives no attention to the local architectural style and building materials and
the buildings are not earth-quake resistant. In this respect, however, the Ministry in their

30
note had stated that as far as possible, local architectural styles are followed and local
building materials are used in CPWD design and construction.
Regarding the question whether buildings are earthquake proof or not, the Ministry
confronted by stating that whether in Kashmir or in Andaman and Nicobar Islands, it
has been proved that construction of  CPWD could withstand the earthquakes effectively.
CPWD have made sample construction with local building materials like stone, wood
etc. using adequate protection necessary to resist earthquakes.
3.11 The Committee, undertook an on-the-spot study visit to Leh and Srinagar
recently from 29th May, to 1st June, 2006. During their visit to Leh, the Committee
visited the Central Institute of Buddhist Studies at Choglamsar on 30th May, 2006. The
Committee inspected the main buildings of this Institute i.e. Library buildings and the
Residential Quarters of the campus. During inspection, the Committee found certain
superficial cracks on the buildings, especially in the Library Building. On being asked
about the appearance of cracks on the buildings, the officials of the CPWD stated that
these cracks had appeared due to cold climate and harsh weather condition at Leh. The
Committee further noted that the structure of the buildings did not depict at any place
the Buddhist architecture or design, though it is an Institute for Buddhist Studies. The
residents of the Centre for Buddhist Studies also complained that the ‘Residential
Quarters’ had not been provided with wooden floor to fight the severe cold in winter. In
the circumstances, the students were compelled to leave temporarily during the winter
season. At this, the officials of CPWD assured that wooden flooring will be provided in
due course.
3.12 The Committee asked about the architectural design, planning and
construction of major buildings during the course of oral evidence of the Ministry of
Urban Development and CPWD at their sitting held on 4th July, 2006. At this, the
Director General (CPWD) stated as follows :—
“We have got an organization Architect. It is headed by ADG (Architect). We
have got four architects and 21 senior architects. They not only do the initial
planning but also the initial coordination during the planning process. They are
involved up to detailed engineering stage, then occasionally supervision and finally
the completion certificate.”
3.13 On a specific query by the Committee as to whether the CPWD constructed
buildings had adhered to the Municipal laws or Building bye-laws of an area or local
designs, the Director General (CPWD) gave an evasive reply to the Committee by stating
that there might be a mistake.
3.14 At this point, Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development added:—
“I think, there should be some advisory from Additional DG(Architect) to all his
field formations that while they are designing a building, they must take into
account the local ambience, the local aesthetic and the local urban form.”

31
Calling of tenders for works
3.15 The Committee note that CPWD carries out most of the ‘Major
Projects’ of buildings through calling of ‘Tenders’ for the construction works. The
‘Architectural & Designing’ aspect of the buildings are carried out by technically
qualified personnel of the CPWD. The Committee also note that the Charter of
CPWD specifies categorically that the awarding of contract must be in a transparent
manner and in the best interest of the Government by ensuring maintenance of all
round integrity as well as best possible standards and adequate supervision by the
Department. While the Committee are satisfied to learn that well laid out procedures
are followed in the calling of tenders and the work rates awarded are based on
prevailing market rates of material and labour they, however, stress that sincere
and concerted efforts should be made to review and upgrade the process of calling
of tenders from time to time by the CPWD by forming an internal ‘Review
Committee’ in order to keep pace with the changing arts and architectural designs
and ensuring transparency at the same time. Since there are other private players
in the building industry doing yeomen services to construction industry, the
Committee are of the firm view that CPWD also should make proper and timely
efforts for standardization of its new buildings with the latest architectural designs
in a cost-effective manner. The Committee may be apprised about the steps taken
in this direction.
Usage of local architecture and design in CPWD constructed buildings, specially,
at the Central Institute of Buddhist Studies, Leh
3.16 The Committee have noticed that in certain buildings constructed by
CPWD, the local architecture, artifacts and design have not been given due
consideration by its Architectural and Technology Application & Development
Cell. One such example is the Central Institute of Buddhist Studies at Choglamsar
at Leh, which had been visited by the Committee during its On-the-Spot Study
visit on 30th May, 2006. The Committee found to their dismay that this Central
Institute of Buddhist Studies was devoid of any type of Buddhist form of art, design
and architecture, which are in fact well-known forms of designs in the area. The
building gave a flat look. The Committee strongly feel that the local forms of designs
and style must be taken into consideration while drawing blue prints for a building
structure in a particular area. The local ethos should be considered giving due
regard to the aesthetic, ambience and the tradition including the folk lore. As the
Central Institute of Buddhist Studies is yet to be completed, the Committee,
recommend that suitable facelift to this Institute be given by usage of Buddhist
form of art and design so as to make it look attractive enough for the tourists who
are visiting Leh. The Committee also recommend that as Leh region is faced by
harsh winter and the much-needed wooden flooring in the residential premises
and other office premises should be provided by CPWD, expeditiously.

32
Appearance of cracks at the Central Institute of Buddhist Studies buildings
3.17 Further, the Committee found that superficial cracks had appeared in
the structures already completed at the Central Institute of Buddhist Studies,
Choglamsar, Leh. The Committee take a serious note of this fact and recommend
that proper safeguards and protective measures are taken to remove such cracks
on the buildings and make them earthquake resistant, as Leh falls under the high
seismic zone. The Committee may be kept informed about the steps taken in this
direction.
Adherence to local Municipal laws/building laws in construction works by CPWD
contractors
3.18 As regards the question of adherence to the prevailing Municipal laws
and Building bye-laws of an area, the Committee considers it pertinent to point
out that the local Municipal Laws and Building Bye-laws must be followed by
CPWD, while constructing a structure/building. The Committee are also of the
firm view that factors such as Rainwater Harvesting must be given due attention
by the CPWD in its construction works and proper checks should be carried out
to oversee that the ‘Contractor’ adheres to the Municipal laws and building laws
of a given area. The Committee recommend that necessary instructions should be
issued to all concerned in this regard.

CHAPTER IV
STAFFING OF CPWD AND RELATED ISSUES
(i) Ban on recruitments of staff in CPWD
4.1 Due to ban in the recruitment of workers since 1985 there has been continuous
decline in the strength of work charge staff of all categories due to retirement etc. in
CPWD and to cope up with shortage of staff the maintenance by available work charged
staff is being supplemented by carrying out works at locations through contracts.
Therefore, the CPWD officers were forced to recruit workers on casual basis after the
ban on recruitment in the department.
4.2 In response to the Press Communiqué, the All CPWD Employees Union,
Lodhi Colony Enquiry Office, New Delhi had contended that the policies of CPWD are
against the workers as the strength of engineers are increasing and those of workers are
reducing. Centralized service provider unit like Central store, fire service Division,
Road material testing laboratory are nearing closure. Workers of contractors employed
in notified categories have not been removed. Court Cases filed by the grieving
employees are kept pending and Judicial orders are either not implemented or
implemented in piece-meal manner.
4.3 When the Committee sought clarification from the Ministry of Urban
Development in this regard, the Ministry stated in their written note that the
recruitment of work-charged staff is carried out as per policy guidelines issued by
the Government of India from time to time. Engaging of workers on Muster Roll/Hand
Receipt/Daily-rated basis was resorted only to fill the gap in availability of the labor
and to get over special situations so that the works do not suffer.
4.4 When asked about the reasons behind the ban on recruitment of Work
Charged Staff, the Ministry stated that the ban on recruitment of work charged
staff stems from the general govt. policy directives regarding fresh recruitment
in Government. A complete ban was imposed by Government, on the deployment of
daily-rated muster-roll/hand-receipt workers w.e.f. 19.11.1985 (See Annexure-III).
The ban on deploying contract labour in 15 specified categories in CPWD, was imposed
by the Ministry of Labour. The Central Government and the Central Advisory
Contract Labour Board having regard to the condition of work and benefits provided
for contract labour and other relevant facts, specified, in sub-section (2) of section 10
of Industrial Dispute Act, prohibited employment of contract labour in the process,
33

34
operation or work specified in the offices/establishments of CPWD w.e.f. 31.7.2002
vide their Notification No. S.O 813 (E) dt.31.7.2002, on the following 15 categories:—
1. Air Conditioner Mechanic
2. Air Conditioner Operator
3. Air Conditioner Khalasi/Helper
4. Electrician
5. Wireman
6. Khalasi (Electrical)
7. Carpenter
8. Mason
9. Fitter
10. Plumber
11. Helper/Beldar
12. Mechanic
13. Sewer-man
14. Sweeper
15. Foreman
4.5 The Ministry stated that the reasons behind the above prohibition of contract
labour, apparently, intended that the type of work being done by the staff deployed by
CPWD is of a perennial nature and as per the Contract Labour Act, such type of work
should be done by regular employees and not through contract labour. The CPWD,
however, is of the opinion that the two bans have constrained the capacity of
the organization to carry out effective maintenance. The Ministry of Finance vide its
O.M. dated 5.8.1999 (See Annexure-IV) had also imposed ban on filling-up of the
posts in the Direct Recruitment Quota. Hence, the vacant posts available in the Direct
Recruitment Quota cannot be filled up by the department without obtaining the approval
of Ministry of Finance and the Screening Committee. Recently, the Screening Committee
vide its communication dated 22nd February, 2006 did not give permission to fill-up the
vacant posts borne on the Work-charged Establishment of CPWD and abolished all the
178 vacant posts of Work-charged staff of CPWD, for the year 2004-2005.
4.6  Asked about the difference between the Group ‘D’ employees and the Work
Charged staff of CPWD, the Ministry stated that there is no difference between Group
‘D’ employees and the work charged Group ‘D’ staff of CPWD. The work charged staff
of CPWD are regular employees of the Department/Government of India and governed

35
by Financial Rules and Service Rules and have been classified in to Group ‘C’ and ‘D’.
They draw pay and allowances and other perks/benefits as are admissible to regular
Govt. employees. The difference lies in the fact that the salary of the Work Charged
Staff is charged to the head of account of maintenance on which they are deployed,
whereas salaries of other regular employees of CPWD is drawn from the head of account
for salaries of the Government of India.
(ii) Recruitment/Promotion of Junior Engineers (JE) and Executive
Engineers (EE)
4.7 In a memorandum received from the CPWD Graduate Engineers Association,
Delhi, the employees of CPWD contended that previously the ratio of Officers was
normally in the ratio of 1:4 i.e. four Subordinate Engineers to each Supervisory
Engineers, but no recruitments/promotions have taken place in CPWD since long period.
Consequently, there is reduction in the Staff Strength of JEs. To this matter, the Ministry
stated that the purpose of making recruitment at Junior Class-I level is that well
qualified and bright Engineers will be inducted in the Government and that they
would be given an opportunity to lead the Department by manning senior level posts.
The officers recruited at the Junior Engineer level will have the qualification appropriate
for the type of work being done at that level and would be given due promotional
avenues upto middle management level. To improve the promotional prospects there
is a proposal of ‘Cadre Review’ of the CPWD under examination in the Ministry
which will have to take into consideration the just aspirations of all the streams and the
necessity of the Department to have an efficient management structure.
4.8 The Committee enquired about the position of ‘Cadre Review’ during the
course of oral-evidence held on 4th July, 2006. The Secretary, (Ministry of Urban
Development) stated as follows:—
“I would very briefly touch upon the question of cadre re-structuring. It is true
that cadre re-structuring matter has been under consideration for long. But
I mentioned about the two things that have not happened. One, a holistic view
about all categories has not been taken. Cadre re-structuring proposal
which comes only for upgradation for the higher level posts certainly would
not lead to any harmony in the organization. It will lead to resentment and we
did get a lot of representations from junior level officers. Therefore, after
interaction, we have requested the CPWD to hear out all the unions and in
consultation with them let it be a complete exercise for all levels and categories
and let upgradation not take place at the cost of lower most functionaries
because that rather than satisfying the entire organization or a majority of the
organization will lead to more resentment. So, it depends on what sort of
consultative process they go through and what proposals are finally given in
respect of the total cadre structure. But I want to assure you that we are sensitized
to this issue and as soon as that comes it will receive our utmost priority. I want
to given an assurance.”

36
4.9 On being asked as to whether ‘Cadre Review’ in respect of JEs/AEs and
XEN had been conducted, the Ministry in their written note submitted that the ‘Cadre
Review’ proposals for different grades in the department i.e. Group ‘A’ Officers belonging
to the three organized Group ‘A’ Services of CPWD i.e. CES, CE & MES, CAS; Group
‘B’ & ‘C’ Engineering and Architecture Cadres, Stenographers of CPWD, Ministerial
staff of CPWD, have been framed and are under consideration of the Ministry. CPWD,
while framing the proposals, has ensured that each of the proposals is financially neutral,
fits into a revised and modified structure envisaged for the department in which multi
disciplinary zones, having technical and administrative control over all the disciplines
of the department, are envisaged to be created.
4.10 On being asked as to whether the ‘Cadre Review’ of Draftsman had also
been considered by the Ministry, the Committee were informed that in respect of ‘Cadre
Review’ for the Draftsman Cadre in the CPWD, a proposal in this regard had been
prepared in 2001 and was forwarded for the consideration of the Ministry. In the
meantime, the Expenditure Reforms Commission of the Government of India examined
the working of CPWD and gave recommendations in respect of rationalization of the
working of the department. It recommended abolition of 600 posts out of approximately,
1275 sanctioned posts in the department in the grade of Draftsman. In view of this and
in view of changing technologies being used by the department in preparation of drawings
etc., it was felt that the working of CPWD, will not be affected if the number of posts in
the Draftsman cadre are reduced. However, in 2005 on the representations from the
Association of the Draftsman, the CPWD has requested the Ministry to reconsider their
‘Cadre Review’. The matter is under examination.
Pending recruitments/promotions in the Executive Engineer Grade
4.11 The Committee then pointed out to the Ministry that almost 47% of posts
of Executive Engineers (EE) were lying vacant in CPWD, mainly, due to pending
litigations before the Courts. In this matter, the Ministry submitted to the Committee
that the court cases for the promotion to the post of EE are being fought by the
departmental candidates and direct recruit Class I Officers.
In July, 1999 the Ministry of Urban Development took a policy decision after
consulting Department of Personnel & Training (DOPT) and Union Public Service
Commission (UPSC) to divert the backlog of unfilled vacancies in the grade of Executive
Engineer (EE) (Civil) & (Electrical) in the Pay Scale of Rs.10000-15200, pertaining to
1954 Recruitment Rules, numbering 430 (Civil) and 120 (Elect.) belonging to the quota
of Class-l (direct recruit) Assistant Executive Engineers (AEEs) (Civil) &(Elect.) to the
quota of Assistant Engineers (AEs) (Civil) & (Elect.) with a view to regularizing the
adhoc promotions of AEs.
Pursuant to above decision, a DPC was held in UPSC in September, 1999 for
selection of officers for regular promotion from AE (Civil) & (Electrical) to the grade
of EE (Civil) & (Electrical) from amongst AEs (Civil & Elect.) for a total of 480 & 140

37
vacancies of Civil & Elect.(this included 50 & 20 vacancies of their own quota
respectively) in the years of 1994-95, 1995-96 and 1996-97 (upto 28.10.96). The DPC
held in September 1999, recommended only 328 candidates for promotion against 480
vacancies in Civil side and 84 candidates against 140 vacancies in Electrical side. The
officers recommended for promotion in the Civil and Electrical were promoted vide
two separate office orders dated 3.11.1999. However, the Class-I Officers Association
challenged the action of the Department to divert the vacancies from their quota in
favour of Class-II AEs for regularizing their adhoc promotions in Central Administrative
Tribunal, Principal Bench and High Court. The CPWD Graduate Engineering
Association, which represents Class-II AEs, also filed application in Tribunal, Principal
Bench for filling the remaining vacancies by regular promotion of AEs in accordance
with the 1954, Rules.
The Ministry then finally stated that the vacancies in the grade of EE(Civil) &
(Electrical) could not be filled up since 1999, due to pending court cases and interim
stay granted by Hon’ble High Court of Delhi. Despite the Department filing a number
of Miscellaneous Applications in the High Court and also SLP before Supreme Court
against the stay order of the High Court, the stay could not be vacated. The Hon’ble
High Court of Delhi vide its order dated 31.3.2006, has allowed the department to make
adhoc appointment in the grade of EE (Civil) & (Electrical) against 313 and 118 vacancies
in the grade of EE (Civil) & (Electrical), respectively, in accordance with provisions of
1996, Recruitment Rules and subject to the outcome of the writ petitions pending in the
High Court. Accordingly, the adhoc appointment of 278 officers to the grade of
EE (Civil) & 89 officers to the grade of EE (Electrical) have been made in the months of
April and May, 2006.
4.12 During the course of oral evidence held on 4th July, 2006, the Committee
pointed out to the Ministry that preference must be given by CPWD to employ adequate
number of engineering graduates from Civil as well as Electrical side for the jobs for
which the Contracts are awarded by the CPWD. To this, the DG(CPWD) stated as
follows:—
“Sir, regarding employment of the engineering graduates I would like to submit
that in the construction industry engineers graduates are required for construction,
management etc. But if we just insist only for engineering graduates then there
will be problems. What we are insisting on is that the contractors must have
adequate number of engineering graduates. Not only that, we have recently
introduced a system where the penalties for not employing graduates at sites has
been substantially increased. So, they are trying to employ a number of engineering
graduates for better construction techniques and for better improvement in quality.
Employing engineering graduates at site has to be increased substantially and it
would result in giving employment also to the engineering graduates. This is a
big step we have taken. Though there is a little bit of resentment from the
contractors, but they have been asked to go by it.”

38
Training of Staff
4.13 The CPWD has established training institutes at Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai
and other places in the country. The Committee, therefore, asked the Ministry to furnish
the number of employees who have received proper training from the CPWD Institutes
of Training. In reply, the Ministry informed that the Training Institutes in CPWD are
very old and these have been imparting training not only to the fresh recruits in the
Department but also carrying out refresher courses for the in-service officers and staff.
The present Campus of the Training Institute in Ghaziabad had started functioning from
the financial year 1999. From its creation at Ghaziabad till March, 2006, 18000 Engineers
and 2200 Workers have been imparted training. CPWD Training Institute has been
imparting training to officers of other sister Departments like DDA, State PWD etc.
from the year 2005. CPWD Training Institute has also started imparting specialized
training in designing of multi hazardous resistant structures and retrofitting of existing
structures to make them safe and strong so that they can resist natural hazards. The
training Institute at Ghaziabad has been designated as National Resource Institute in
this regard.
4.14 Regarding in-service training of professionals of the organization, the
Ministry informed that in-service training is an ongoing process. This never ends. Due
to advent of new materials and new techniques a person has to be called for training
again and again.
4.15 On the question of imparting training to the employees of the organization
about the latest state-of-the-Art technologies in building, architectural and other technical
aspects; the Ministry stated that, though, every course is intended to upgrade skill and
technology, special courses are arranged whenever any major change takes place. When
the basic design code IS 456 was revised in 2000, special workshops were arranged at
various places like Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Mumbai etc. A major upgradation has
taken place in Concrete Technology. Now, RMC is gradually finding place in concrete
construction. CPWD Training Institute has been arranging courses on this aspect twice
a year. When earthquake Code IS 1893 was drastically revised in 2002, special workshops
were arranged. Now, when the Government of India laid much emphasis on Disaster
Management, CPWD Training Institute is conducting the courses on Hazard resistant
Design construction, enforcement of Techno-legal regime and retrofitting. About 150
engineers of various States and UTs have been trained. In 2005-06, about 12 batches
are being conducted as requested by Delhi Disaster Management Authority. CPWD
Training Institute has arranged training in the State of J&K also after the earthquake.
4.16 The Ministry further stated that in consultations with CIDCC, IGNOU, the
CPWD training Institute has started skill upgradations of unskilled workers in Four
categories i.e. Mason, carpenter, plumber and electrician. Beldars and Khalasies are
trained for the required durations and tested & certified by IGNOU and certificate are
awarded to those workers who pass the test done by IGNOU. 600 workers have been

39
trained and certified during 2005-06 and 240 workers have been trained and certified
upto 30.6.06 during this year in Delhi. Similar courses have been proposed to be
conducted for the workers at Mumbai and Kolkata also along with Delhi. The Training
Institute of CPWD carried out regular training programme on Advance Project
Management Technique for CPWD officers. Most of the senior Engineers in the
Department have undergone such training module and are well versed with the Project
Management techniques.
Process of designating Project Managers by CPWD
4.17 It had been informed to the Committee that there is a proposal in CPWD to
designate Project Managers, who will be individually responsible for over all delivery
of projects and will be delegated suitably, enhanced powers so that they can achieve the
goals of the organization. The Committee, therefore, desired to know the compulsions
behind the need to appoint/designate Project Managers by CPWD. To this issue, the
Ministry informed that the process of designating Project Managers, for identified
projects, was not to create any separate Cadre/Posts in the Department. No Post/Grade
of Project Manager is being created in the Department. Officers of the rank of Executive
Engineer/Superintending Engineer/Chief Engineer are being designated as Project
Managers depending upon the magnitude/complexity of the Project. However, while
selecting officers, to be designated as Project Managers, their experience in handling,
successfully, various Projects and their aptitude to be able to lead the team is always
being taken into consideration.
4.18 The Ministry also stated that it was meant to designate an officer as Project
Manager for a project, so that responsibility could be delegated for delivery of the
project. It was to ensure the completion of project within the estimated time and cost
and as per the desired quality standards. Orders for delegation of enhanced powers to
the officers, who will be designated as Project Managers, have already been issued by
the Department and implementation in this regard has already started.
4.19 It may also be added that further powers, particularly to engage Consultants
for Out Source Works, where required, to expedite processes is required to be made to
the officers, who will be designated as ‘Project Managers’. A proposal in this regard has
also been sent to the Ministry for its consideration.
Ban on recruitments in CPWD
4.20 The Committee note that due to ban in the recruitment of workers
since 1985 there has been a continuous decline in the strength of work charged
staff of all categories due to retirement etc. in CPWD. To cope up with shortage of
staff, the maintenance by available work charged staff, is being supplemented by
carrying out works at locations through contracts. Therefore, the CPWD officers
have been forced to recruit workers on casual basis after the ban on recruitment
in the department.

40
4.21 The Committee express their deep concern over the fact that a complete
ban on recruitments had been imposed by Government including the deployment
of daily-rated muster roll/hand-receipt workers w.e.f. 19.11.1985 in CPWD. Besides
this, the Government and the Central Advisory Contract Labour Board further
imposed a ban on employment of Contract labourers in respect of 15 categories
w.e.f. 31.07.2002, which contained the categories of Air Conditioner Mechanic,
Air Conditioner Operator, Air Conditioner Khalasi/Helper, Electrician, Wireman,
Khalasi (Electrical), Carpenter, Mason, Fitter, Plumber, Helper/Beldar, Mechanic,
Sewer-man, Sweeper and Foreman.
4.22 The Committee need hardly emphasize that the aforesaid bans in
employing labour force in CPWD including work charged workers and contract
labourers has had an adverse impact on the efficiency and working of CPWD. The
Committee note that the Employees Union of this Department have approached
the courts of law and a number of court cases filed by the grieving employees are
still pending before the Courts, thereby, involving the CPWD management in
unfruitful works. The Committee are concerned about the damaging effects of
these recruitment bans on the efficient functioning of CPWD. The Committee
recommend that this matter should be reviewed in-depth in order to restore and
maintain the expertise of the CPWD trained personnel in various construction
technologies by employing/ promoting the original workers of CPWD rather than
resorting to the hired or contract workers in various fields. The Committee,
therefore, strongly feel that conscious and concerted efforts have to be made by
Government to explore the feasibility of employing and recruitment of adequate
number of workforce in CPWD in future. Steps in this regard should be taken
urgently.
Ban on Direct Recruitment
4.23 The Committee also note that the Ministry of Finance vide its OM
dated 5th August, 1999 had imposed a ban on filling up of the posts in the Direct
Recruitment Quota. Untill recently, the Screening Committee vide its
communication dated 22nd February, 2006 had also not given permission to
fill-up the vacant posts borne on the work-charged establishment of CPWD and it
abolished all the 178 vacant posts of work-charged staff of CPWD for the year
2004-2005. The Committee are informed that the work-charged staff of CPWD
are regular employees of CPWD in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ and their salaries are charged
to the ‘Account Head’ of maintenance and not the ‘Account Head’ for salaries of
the Government of India. Hence, from the above it may be seen that 178 vacant
and regular posts had been abolished in CPWD by Government. The Committee
take a serious view of the above facts and stand-by the cause of the aspiring
candidates for employment in CPWD. The Committee feel that engineering
graduates must get an opportunity to serve in CPWD and help in the growth of
this organization and recommend that the process of recruitment should be
reviewed to filling various vacant posts.

41
Abolition of posts in CPWD and Cadre Review for Draftsmen
4.24 The Committee note that the Expenditure Reforms Committee of the
Government had examined the working of CPWD and it gave recommendations
for rationalization of the working of the department. It recommended abolition of
600 posts out of about 1275 sanctioned posts of ‘Draftsmen’ in CPWD. In this
regard, the Ministry have explained that in view of the changing technologies being
used in CPWD in preparation of drawings etc., it was felt that the working of
CPWD will not be affected if the number of posts of ‘Draftsmen’ are reduced. The
Committee are, however, not satisfied by the above stated reasoning of the Ministry
for reducing the posts of ‘Draftsmen’. The Committee are of the firm opinion that
the CPWD has well established training institutions and instead of resorting to
reduction in posts of ‘Draftsmen’, it must impart the State-of-the-art/latest
technological knowledge and training to these ‘Draftsmen’, for, utilizing their
services fruitfully. The Committee are informed that CPWD has requested the
Ministry of Urban Development to reconsider the issue and undertake the ‘Cadre
Review’ of Draftsmen in CPWD which is under examination. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the ‘Cadre Review’ of Draftsmen must be carried out
by a high level internal ‘Review Committee’ so that the judicious claims of the
Draftsmen of CPWD are met by the Government in a time-bound manner. The
Committee may be apprised about the latest position in the matter.
Cadre Review for Engineering Staff
4.25 In respect of the ‘Cadre Review’ of Junior Engineers (JEs)/Assistant
Engineers (AEs) and Executive Engineers (EEs), the Committee note that the
‘Cadre Review’ proposals for different grades in the department for Group ‘A’
Officers have been framed and are under consideration of the Ministry of Urban
Development. The Committee are amazed to note that almost 47% of the posts of
Executive Engineers (EEs) have been lying vacant in CPWD. These vacancies have
piled-up mainly due to pending litigations before various courts of law. It has been
informed that in July 1999, as per the decision of the Ministry of Urban
Development, Department of Personnel and Training (DOPT) and UPSC, the
backlog of 550 unfilled vacancies in grade of EE (Civil and Electrical) as per
Recruitment Rules, 1954 had been diverted from the Quota of Class–I (Direct
recruit) Assistant Executive Engineers (Civil and Electrical) to quota of Assistant
Engineers (Civil and Electrical). Accordingly, based on DPC, only 412 officers
had been recommended for promotion in the Civil and electrical sides on 3rd
November, 1999. However, the Class-I Officers Association challenged this action
of the Department before the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) and in the
High Court of Delhi. Hence, the vacancies in EE (Civil and Electrical) could not be
filled up since 1999 due to pendency of litigations. Lately, the High Court of Delhi
vide its order dated 31.3.2006 has allowed the department to make adhoc
appointments in EEs grades against 313 vacancies and 118 vacancies in EE (Civil)
and EE (Electrical), respectively, under the Recruitment Rules, 1996. Accordingly,

42
adhoc appointments of 278 officers in EE (Civil) and 89 Officers in EE (Electrical)
have been made in April-May, 2006 by CPWD.
4.26 While the Committee are happy to note that with the intervention of
the High Court of Delhi, 278 EE (Civil) and 89 EE (Electrical) have been given
adhoc promotion, the Committee feel that this step may resolve only a pint of the
ocean of problems being faced by the well-qualified engineers in their carrier
progression in the services of CPWD. The Committee recommend that a
comprehensive ‘Cadre Review’ must be carried out by the Ministry of Urban
Development so as to give assured career progression to the technically qualified
and experienced personnel of CPWD.
Assigning of Project Managers by CPWD
4.27 The Committee note that there is a proposal in CPWD to designate
‘Project Managers’ who will be individually responsible for over all delivery of
projects to achieve the goals of the organization. CPWD officers of the rank of
EE/Superintending Engineers/Chief Engineers would be designated as ‘Project
Managers’ for individual projects with enhanced powers to oversee the execution
and completion of projects. The Committee also note that there is also a proposal
for CPWD to engage consultants by outsourcing. In this regard, the Committee
are of the view that the Ministry of Urban Development and CPWD should devise
an insitu arrangement for designating the ‘Projects Managers’ and ensure that
efficient ‘Project Managers’ with sound knowledge of latest technologies in
construction works are appointed for the purpose. The Committee also desire that
from time to time comprehensive and accurate project appraisals are carried out
of all the on-going construction projects of CPWD.

CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES
5.1 It has been informed that a ‘Review Committee’ to monitor the functioning
of CPWD had been set up under the Chairmanship of Shri Nitin Gadkari. This ‘Review
Committee’ in its report of November, 2002 recommended for outsourcing of
maintenance contracts in consultation with the client departments in cases of medium
term works upto 6 to 8 months. This Committee had also deliberated on various factors
affecting the working of CPWD with the objective of identifying a workable solution
for CPWD, which ensured a win-win situation for both the CPWD as an organization
and the client departments of CPWD.
5.2 During the course of oral evidence held on 4th July, 2006 on the issue of
outsourcing the works of CPWD, the Secretary (Urban Development) stated before the
Committee on Urban Development as follows :—
“Regarding outsourcing, for the last about two years that I have been in this
Ministry, one of the major issues that we have been talking about is, although in
original works in new buildings the CPWD performance is good, if the client is
vigilant and monitors, then it is of a good quality and they are able to produce
good buildings which we have seen all over the country. It is only in respect of
maintenance that the response is not adequate, timely, prompt and efficient. It
has been repeatedly mentioned that there must be supervisory staff, there must
be accountability and there must be interaction with Resident Welfare
Associations. All these instructions have been given repeatedly. It is only the
question of getting them implemented out at the ground level. One of the elements
which has been empirically improved and which shows efficiency of a given
organisation is the element of competition. It is with this intention that we said
that on a pilot basis we will outsource maintenance activity. Later on, it turned
out to be the recommendations of the ICRA Consultants report also M/s ICRA
consultant was a private entrepreneur to carry out study on working of CPWD.
So, we selected a model of about six to seven colonies where we could outsource
and let use see how a private partner performs and what is the response of the
public. If it is found good, then we could extend and outsource to more areas and
it should also instill a sense of confidence. If a private party can maintain better,
then surely our officers where maintenance works are held would be able to
perform. This is our intention. As I said, in the meantime, the report of the ICRA
Management Committee has come and it has been suggested that we should shift
into project management mode. Projects should be taken up in that format and
43

44
we should stop working like all the inputs coming from different sources and
there is a lack of coordination. So, there will be overall change in the entire
structure and management of project implementation, teams, etc. and this would
need to be very seriously considered.
5.3 He added that :—
“This is not the first time that CPWD is outsourcing maintenance activities.
Maintenance activities have been outsourced by CPWD itself in various other
stations except Delhi. The results of some of these buildings where they have
maintained have been very good and it has had a very good impact on the
organization. It is with this intention that on a trial basis, it is being done. However,
if it does not work, it will not be replicated, it will not be repeated and will not be
continued. But if it works and if it improves the overall quality of maintenance of
CPWD’s in-house maintenance activity, it is worth trying. It is only with this
intention that this work has been taken up.
5.4 The Ministry in a written note informed that outsourcing of maintenance
works in residential colonies had been taken on pilot basis. With the permission of the
Ministry,seven colonies in Delhi have been identified for outsourcing the maintenance
activities to agencies selected after call of open tenders. In this system, the entire
responsibility will continue to rest on the CPWD, however, the actual works including
receiving, distributing and attending to complaints will be done by the selected agency.
Tenders for some colonies have been received and are being processed while tenders
for the remaining will be received shortly. The colonies where this experiment is being
carried out are:
(i) Vithal Bhai Patel House
(ii) MP Flats at North Avenue
(iii) Nivedita Kunj, Sector-X, R.K. Puram
(iv) Sector-III, R.K. Puram
(v) Aram Bagh Colony
(vi) Sector-I, Pushp Vihar
(vii) Chanakyapuri flats
The Ministry also stated that at present the proposal is to have this work carried
out on an experimental basis. Further action will depend upon the outcome of this venture.
Out-sourcing of works and Pilot Project in Delhi
5.5 The Committee note that a ‘Review Committee’ headed by Shri Nitin
Gadkari and a private consultant namely M/s ICRA consultants appointed to study
the working of CPWD, have recommended outsourcing of maintenance operations
of CPWD by inviting private players in such works. The Committee are also

45
informed that maintenance activities have been outsourced by CPWD itself, in
various other stations of the country, except, Delhi. For outsourcing of maintenance
works in residential colonies on ‘Pilot’ basis, seven colonies have been presently
selected by CPWD. The Ministry have assured the Committee in this regard that
in this new system of outsourcing, the entire responsibility will continue to rest
with CPWD but the actual works including receiving, distribution and attending
to complaints will be done by the selected private agency. During the course of
oral evidence, Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development has stated before the
Committee that if it (i.e. maintenance outsourcing works) improves the quality of
maintenance of CPWD then it is worth trying. The Committee, however, strongly
feel that outsourcing of maintenance activities by CPWD would not perhaps bring
any sea change in the quality of performance in maintenance of the CPWD
residential complexes unless and until the CPWD officials are involved at the ground
level of these activities to properly supervise the maintenance works. The Committee
desire that a close watch must be kept by senior CPWD Engineers upon the
aforesaid ‘Pilot Project’ of outsourced maintenance in seven complexes in Delhi.
The Committee would like to be apprised about the outcome of the ‘Pilot Project’
and the latest developments in this matter within two months of submission of the
Report.
The Committee also desire that a comprehensive review or evaluation must
be carried out on the effectiveness of the aforesaid ‘Pilot Project’ with active
involvement of the residents and the Residential Welfare Associations (RWAs) of
these seven CPWD colonies. The Evaluation Report of the ‘Pilot Project’ must be
submitted to the Committee in a specific time- frame.
Research and Technology Development of CPWD
5.6 On the question of R&D system in CPWD, the Secretary (UD) stated during
the evidence held on 4th July, 2006 that there is an Additional DG in charge of R&D.
At this point, the DG(CPWD) added that :
“We have got a Technology Advance Cell in which all the new materials which
are introduced in the country are tested, examined on a pilot basis and used. This
is the only organization, which does things in a practical manner. We do not just
believe in one test or one laboratory result.”
Research & Development in CPWD
5.7 The Committee note with satisfaction that CPWD gives the due attention
towards the R&D works and have the ‘Technology Advance Cell’ for the purpose.
The Committee desire that these R&D works are carried out and updated from
time to time to fall in line with the State-of-art technologies in architecture/
construction and quality standards/certifications of the field.

46
Delays in execution of works
5.8 There have been a number of complaints received by the Committee
pertaining to delays in execution of works. These delays may be due to the time taken in
awarding contracts to the ‘Registered Contractors’ or due to lack of work-force.
In a written note, the Ministry submitted that the main reasons for delay in any
project may be due to the following factors :—
 Client not ready with the final requirement about the project. Requiring many
changes during execution phase.
 Site of work being encroached upon and not made available by client.
 Delay in preparation of Preliminary Estimates and Preliminary Drawings by
CPWD because of shortage of staff/large number of works to be handled
and no authority being available for outsourcing.
 Delay in final approval to preliminary drawings and estimates by client
departments.
 Non-release of adequate and timely funds by client departments.
 Delay in approval of plans by concerned local bodies.
 \Shortage or non-availability of critical materials like cement, steel etc.
 Shortage of labour because of festivals and other reasons.
 Non-performance or slow performance by executing agency.
 Large scale changes in the original proposal by client department,
necessitating closure/modification of contracts.
 Delay in grant of utility connections like water supply, electricity etc.
 Delay in grant of completion certificate by local bodies.
In a recent case reflected in ‘Press Trust of India’ news report dated 21st March,
2006 it has been reported that an avoidable expenditure of Rs.1.65 crore was incurred
by the Central Public Works Department (CPWD) due to inordinate delay in completion
of a residential project for government employees in Kolkata. Though, the pile foundation
work for a residential complex for Central Government employees was completed in
January, 1998; the construction was awarded to the contractor by the CPWD after three
years, in January, 2001. As a result of the delay, escalation charges amounting to
Rs. 30.20 lakh were paid by CPWD, which could have been avoided if the
pre-construction requirements were met, expeditiously. It was also found that CPWD
submitted the building plans to the Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) for approval
in April, 1996 and the department took six years to comply with the requirements of the
civic body, resulting in avoidable additional payment of Rs. 28.68 lakh. Meanwhile, the

47
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) also pointed out that slackness in
enforcing contractual provisions and completion of work in construction of the Indo-
Bangla Border Road in Cooch Behar district of West Bengal by CPWD resulted in
extra expenditure of Rs. 18.45 lakh and loss of Rs. 18.85 lakh towards non-recovery of
dues.
Delay in execution of works and costs overrun
5.9 The Committee have received a number of complaints about delays in
execution of maintenance as well as construction works of CPWD carried out
through Contractors. The Ministry have stated that the delays in execution/
completion of works/projects are due to delays in preparation of preliminary
estimates and preliminary drawings by CPWD; delay in final approval to
preliminary drawings and estimates by client departments; non-release of adequate
and timely funds by client departments; delay in approval of plans by concerned
local bodies; shortage or non-availability of critical materials like cement, steel,
labour etc.; non-performance or slow performance by executing agency; large
scale changes in the original proposal by client department necessitating closure/
modification of contracts; delay in grant of utility connections like water supply
electricity etc. and encroachments of site of work and thus not made available to
the client. While the Committee note that certain practical difficulties are faced by
CPWD in getting the works through their registered Contractors, they express
their deep concern over the fact that such delays in execution/completion of projects/
works would entail unwanted and avoidable cost over-runs. The Committee,
therefore, desire that a high level ‘Review Committee’ must be constituted by the
Government so as to find out the proper via-media to ensure timely and proper
execution of works by the Contractors.
Delay in Execution of Projects in West Bengal
5.10 The Committee would like to point out that due to inordinate delays in
construction of the CPWD Residential Complex at Kolkata, CPWD incurred an
avoidable expenditure of Rs.1.65 crore. Also that the C&AG of India has pointed
out slackness in enforcing contractual provisions and completion of works in the
Indo-Bangla Border Road in Cooch Behar district of West Bengal. This delay in
Indo-Bangla Border Road has resulted in extra expenditure of Rs.18.45 lakh and
loss of Rs.18.85 lakh towards non-recovery of dues. The Committee express their
deep concern on the aforesaid matter and recommend that proper corrective action
must be taken by CPWD’s Senior Officials on a regular and timely basis so that
such avoidable extra expenditure is not incurred in future in CPWD projects. The
Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this direction with two months
of presentation of this Report to the House.

48
Transparency in works and quality control
5.11CPWD Enlistment Rules provides for checking for the quality of work done
by the contractor previously and only if it is found to be satisfactory the enlistment is
done or revalidated. This process is examined by a Committee of officers in the
organization to ensure transparency and objectivity. Provision of suspension of
registration already exists in the Enlistment Rules. All policy decisions in the Department
are taken after taking into consideration views expressed by all the ‘Stake Holders’ and
the directions of the Government existing on these issues. A proper grievance mechanism
is also available in the Department. Inter discipline issues are also deliberated by DG(W)
and other senior officers with various service organizations at regular intervals. In this
regard, it is mentioned that a negative list is maintained by the Department in which
officers who are of doubtful integrity or their performance has been questioned previously
are not given charge of projects.
Transparency in works including contractual works
5.12 The Committee note that the CPWD Enlistment Rules provides for
checking of quality of works done by the contractors and ensure transparency in
the procedure of the contractual works carried out by the CPWD. The Committee
are informed that a Committee of officers in the organization keeps a check on the
progress of Contractual works from the stage of calling of tenders and it ensures
transparency and objectivity. However, the Committee desire that proper
regulatory steps should be taken to lay-down clear-cut guidelines to be followed
by the registered contractors in order to meet the demands of the users of structures/
buildings under CPWD. The Committee also desire that earnest and effective
measures must be taken by the department to ensure complete transparency and
easy access to information to the users as per the Right to Information Act, 2005.
The Committee may be apprised about the steps taken in this direction.
Vigilance of CPWD Officials
5.13 In respect of vigilance of the officers of CPWD, it is informed that a Vigilance
Unit exists in CPWD, which is headed by a Chief Engineer (Vigilance) with three
Superintending Engineers (Vigilance) for investigation of cases and follow-up action
and one Superintending Engineer (Inquiry) to conduct the inquiry proceedings. The
three SE’s(Vig) are assisted by ten Executive Engineers (Vigilance) for investigation of
cases and three Engineer Officers (Disciplinary) for presenting the departmental cases
before the Inquiry Officer, as well as for the follow up action on the Inquiry Officer’s
reports. Besides, each Executive Engineer has one Assistance Engineer to assist him.
There are also two Sections, each headed by a Section Officer to assist the Vigilance
Unit in all secretarial work.
5.14 It has, however, been reported that in a number of cases penalties have
been imposed on CPWD Officials by the CVC. The Commission had imposed major

49
penalty in 2003 on five CPWD officials, initiated enquiries against two officials of
CPWD and penalties to two officials of CPWD.
Vigilance of CPWD Officials
5.15 The Committee are informed that a Vigilance Unit exists in CPWD,
which is headed by Chief Engineer (Vigilance) and he is assisted by three
Superintendent Engineers (Vigilance) for investigation of cases and follow-up
action. The Committee take a very serious note of the fact that in spite of an insitu
arrangement for vigilance by the Vigilance Unit in the Department, the Central
Vigilance Commission (CVC) had to intervene and report a number of cases of
corruption by CPWD officials by awarding ‘Major Penalties’ to five CPWD officials
in 2003, while it initiated enquiry proceedings against few other officers of CPWD.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that honest and earnest steps must be taken
to strengthen the ‘Vigilance Unit’ of CPWD to ensure complete transparency of
works and strict disciplinary action must be taken against the defaulting/corrupt
CPWD Officials. The steps taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee,
expeditiously.
Project of CPWD in Tsunami affected Andaman and Nicobar Islands
5.16 The Committee have been informed that the Central Public Works
Department (CPWD) will be building around 6500 houses for the people displaced by
the Tsunami waves in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The ground has been cleared,
laborers have reached the area and ships carrying construction material are already on
their way to the islands. Around 9500 houses are to be built for the people displaced by
the Tsunami waves in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, of which 6500 will be built by
the CPWD and the remaining are to be constructed by NGOs. The houses to be built by
CPWD will have a steel frame and doors and windows will be made of bamboo.
5.17 The Committee have also been informed that the Tsunami re-construction
programme in the Andaman & Nicobar Islands is valued at approx. Rs. 750 crore.
Re-habilitation works for Tsunami affected areas
5.18 The Committee note that CPWD has taken-up building around 6500
permanent houses for the people displaced by Tsunami in the Andaman & Nicobar
Islands. Since sizable time has already lapsed in execution of this project, the
Committee expects that proper concerted efforts be made by CPWD to complete
this construction project in time and within the estimated Project cost. The
Committee may be apprised about the latest position in the matter.
Commenwealth Games Project
5.19 The Committee have been informed that for the Commonwealth Games
2010, this construction project would be executed by the CPWD at approx. Rs. 1500

50
crore cost alongwith involvement of other agencies like Delhi Development Authority
(DDA) and certain private players.
5.20 During the course of oral evidence of the Ministry held on 4th July, 2006,
the DG (CPWD) stated that:—
“We are working in the structures like the Commonwealth Games Village. The
latest structures are there.”
Timely completion of the Commonwealth Games Village
5.21 The Committee note that the Commonwealth Games 2010 is to be
hosted at New Delhi and the construction work of the Commonwealth Games Village
at Akshardham in East Delhi by CPWD is yet to commence. The Committee strongly
recommend that timely steps should be taken by Government in order to ensure
timely completion of the Project with high quality construction within the estimated
cost of Rs.1500 crore. The Committee may be apprised about the progress of the
above works within two months of presentation of this Report to the House.
Few important points to be followed by CPWD
5.22 While congratulating the CPWD over completion of its 150 years of
existence, hon’ble President of India at his address on 19.07.2004 had declared that the
focus of this organization should be towards the following:—
1. Building design, which uses maximum solar energy and reduces the energy
consumption per square meter by half compared to the present practice.
2. Water harvesting, water recycling and water management scheme in all
buildings to reduce the fresh water consumption by at least 50% within five
years.
3. Buildings in Zone IV of the earthquake prone area conforming to a cost
effective and adoptable standard for earthquake prone building including
protection mechanism and appliances to avoid fire hazards. In this connection,
design of buildings in earthquake regions of Tokyo, California, Kutch,
Uttaranchal and Latur could be one of the inputs.
4. Constructed buildings are to be water-proof free for at least ten years without
any maintenance, this should be taken as a challenge.
5. Requirement of all services such as civil, electrical, water, drainage, gas,
and communication are planned and integrated in the conceptual stage itself,
thereby needing no rework after building construction.
6. All buildings to be made friendly for disabled persons through special
provisions.

51
7. Maximum use to be made of green building materials such as recycled fly-
ash bricks, and equipment and green building concepts.
8. Department to seek ISO certification and also promote engagement of
contractors who are ISO certified for enriching the quality of future buildings
through Total Quality Management.
9. Conduct a yearly seminar in partnership with industry, educational
institutions, scientific institutions and users for deriving state-of-the-art
knowledge for incorporation in future assets and cost effective modernization
of existing assets.
10. CPWD may evolve a management structure for its vast organization across
the country through the implementation of networked e-governance solutions
to promote higher level of transparency in multiple transactions.
Certain important points to be followed by CPWD in carrying out its works
5.23 The Committee note that on the occasion of completion of 150 years of
CPWD, Hon’ble President of India mentioned certain important points to be
followed by the CPWD in its works which are inter-alia mentioned in para 5.22
ante. The Committee are confident that the said points are duly noted by CPWD
for follow-up action and they would like to know about the steps taken in this
regard.
N
EW DELHI; MOHD. SALIM
12 October, 2006 Chairman,
20 Kartika, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

APPENDIX I
(See para 1.18 of the Report)
 New wing for National Gallery of Modern Art, Jaipur House, New Delhi
(50 crore)
         Office building for SEBI, Mumbai (50 crore)
         Office building for Income Tax, Department Hyderabad ( 28.05 crore)
         Construction of various buildings for IIT Roorkee
         Construction of various buildings for IIT Delhi
         Inland Waterways Terminal, Guwahati, Patna , Kerala
         Staff quarters for Income Tax, Hyderabad (12.54 crore)
         National Institute for Sidhha, Chennai (20.00 crore)
         Construction of Sardar Swaran Singh National Institute of Renewable Energy,
Kapurthala- Rs. 21.53 crores
         GPOA, Cochin (19.80 crore)
         GPRA, Bangalore (15.85 crore)
         Renovation of NGMA, Bangalore (7.78 crore)
         Construction of Navodaya Vidyalyas in various States ( 300 completed 200 in
hand)
         Construction of Kendrya Vidyalyas in various States
         Office building for UPSC, New Delhi ( 20 crore)
         Trauma Centre at RML Hospital- 12 crore
         V M Medical College at S.J. Hospital – 60 crore.
         GPOA at CBD Shahadra- 22 crore
         Development of tourism circuit at Bodh Gaya – 20 crore
         Office building for Cabinet Secretariat, New Delhi-93 crore
         Construction of accommodation for, officers of Southern Naval Command at
Cochin (76.74 crore)
52

53
         Super Specialty hospital for ESIC at Kollam, Kerala
         Office for Regional Labour Commissioner, Kanpur
         National Academy for Customs & Central Excise, Faridabad
         Construction of various buildings for Assam University at Silchar , Assam
         Construction of Mizoram University , Aizwal
         Office for Anthropological Survey of India , Udaipur , Rajasthan
         Auditorium and Museum for Uday Shankar Academy for Dance & Music, Almora
New Schemes
         Redevelopment of
         LBZ area, New Delhi
         Netaji Nagar, New Delhi
         Dev Nagar, New Delhi
         Aliganj , New Delhi
         Minto Road , New Delhi
         Lodhi Estate
         Construction of office accommodation at INA, New Delhi
         CGO at Pushpa Bhawan Phase-II, New Delhi
         GPRA Vasant Vihar, New Delhi
         Construction of Videsh Bhawan for MEA, New Delhi
         Renovation of Constitution Club
         RTI for Income Tax Department, Bangalore

54
APPENDIX II
DETAILS OF DIFFERENT TYPES AND NO. OF GENERAL POOL RESIDENTIAL ACCOMMODATION (GPRA) MAINTAINED BY CPWD
Sl. STATION Type Of General Pool Residential AccommodationNo.
S/ Qrs. T-I T-II T-III T-IV T-IV- T-V D-I D-II T-VI C-I C-II T -VII T-VIII HOSTEL T otal
Spl. S/S D/S
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9
DELHI 1488 18205 25818 13287 5526 834 982 677 1051 261 124 315 137 113 1118 35 68483
OUT SIDE DELHI
Southern Region
1. Channai 450 944 659 379 122 20 50 30 2654
2. Bangalore 380 480 314 154 46 4 51 33 1462
3. Mysore 32 40 40 16 8 0 6 6 148
4. Trivandrum 16 16 134 54 12 232
5. Cochin 32 116 68 24 4 19 20 283
6. Hyderabad 184 416 224 32 36 32 924
Western Region
7. Indore 108 140 116 26 8 398
8. Bhopal 29 51 58 14 8 160
9. Mumbai 2652 3491 1119 334 28 206 90 53 149 8122
10. Navi Mumbai 150 300 400 112 55 1017
11. Nagpur 255 946 439 172 102 6 8 1928
Eastern Region
I/c North East
12. Kolkata 1448 2885 1734 268 267 83 154 48 6887
13. Agartala 48 46 54 12 4 164
14. Imphal 16 28 24 4 72

55
15. Kohima 8 16 40 64
16. Shilong 22 34 24 8 2 90
17. Guwahati 24 24 72 24 144
Northern Region
18. Chandigarh 690 1104 560 112 36 2 2504
19. Shimla 346 366 323 93 25 5 1158
20. Srinagar 30 114 84 16 244
21. Ghaziabad 176 480 132 24 8 820
22. Faridabad 482 832 328 140 52 15 1849
23. Agra 16 32 60 8 116
24. Allahabad 108 414 270 42 10 2 846
25. Deheradun 10 2 8 2 22
26. Kanpur 354 406 174 64 31 1029
27. Lucknow 272 474 225 90 32 20 24 1137
28. Varanasi 24 60 102 12 198
29. Jaipur 92 130 224 70 24 6 546
30. Jodhpur 4064 14
31. Jaisalmer 0 4 4
32. Bikaner 6681 21
Total (Out side 0 8464 14397 8023 2311 28 1098 0 0 233 0000 3 9 3 3 1 0 3 5257
Delhi)
Grand Total 26669 40215 21310 7837 862 2080 677 1051 494 124 315 137 113 1511 345 103740
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9

APPENDIX III
NIRMAN MAHANIDESHALAYA KENDRIYA LOK NIRMAN VIBHAG
No. 38/11/84-BOX New Delhi: the 19.11.85
Subject :— Ban on creation of posts–guidelines for processing of cases–regularisation
of Muster Roll Workers regarding.
In modification of this office memo of even number dated 22.12.84, this is to
state that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) have since agreed that
the vacancies on the workcharged establishment of CPWD falling to the direct recruitment
qoute which had come under ban due to their remaining unfilled and other vacancies
existing, as on date, may be filled up by regularisation of eligible muster roll workers
after proper screening. Instructions issued for regularisation of Muster Roll Workers as
now inforce will apply.
For future, it has been decided that there should be an absolute ban on recruitment
on Muster roll.
Sd/-
(S.S. Mehra)
Dy. Director of Admn.II.
To
1. All Chief Engineers/Superintending Engineers/Executive Engineers in
C.P.W.D.
2. Director of Horticulture/Dy. Directors of Horticulture.
3. Sr. Labour Officers/Labour Officers.
Copy to :—
All the Unions recognised to represent W.C. staff.
Sd/-
(S.S. Mehra)
Dy. Director of Admn. II
56

57
APPENDIX IV
No. 7(3)/B(Coord)/ 99
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
New Delhi: 5th August, 1999
Office Memorandum
Subject : Guidelines on Expenditure Management–Fiscal prudence and austerity.
In continuation of this Department's O.M. No. 19(1)-E.II(A)/98 dt. 20th August,
1998 and 10th February, 1999 on the subject cited above, it has been decided to implement
the following additional austerity measures with immediate effect:—
(1) Ban on creation of Plan and Non-Plan posts
The existing ban on creation of Non-Plan posts will continue and should be
strictly enforced. Any unavoidable proposals for the creation of plan posts
including Groups ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts shall continue to be referred to the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for approval.
(2) Ban on filling up of vacant posts
Every Ministry/Department shall undertake a review of all the posts which are
lying vacant in the Ministry/Department and in the Attached and Subordinate
Offices, etc., in consultation with the Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Expenditure).
FAs will ensure that the review is completed in a time bound manner and full
details of vacant posts in their respective Ministeries etc., are available. Till the
review is completed no vacant posts shall be filled up except with the approval
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).
(3) 10% cut in posts
Those Ministries/Departments which have not fully implemented Government's
decision to achieve 10% reduction in the number of posts (as on 1.1.92) shall
implement the said decision immediately.
(4) Purchase of new vehicles
Purchase of new vehicles is banned until further orders. Exceptions will be allowed
only for meeting the operational requirements of Defence, Central Para Militry
Forces, etc.

58
(5) 10% mandatory cut on Non-Plan, non-salary expenditure
Every Ministry/Department shall make a 10% mandatory cut during the current
year (1999-2000) on Non-Plan, non-salary expenditure, i.e., on TA, Office
Expenses, POL, OTA, Honorarium, etc. No re-appropriation of funds to augment.
These heads of expenditure would be allowed during the current financial year.
Austerity must be reflected in functions organised by the Govt. of India (Meetings,
conferences, etc.) and in furnishing of office/offices at residences. The expenditure
limit prescribed for these purposes shall be strictly enforced.
(6) Foreign Travel
Foreign travel funded by the Govt. of India, unless it is absolutely unavoidable,
shall not be undertaken till the end of the current financial year.
(7) New expenditure proposals
No new expenditure proposals will be entertained during the current financial
year except those announced in the budget.
(8) Expenditure on existing schemes/programmes
Any unavoidable increase in expenditure on existing schemes/projects shall be
met out of savings; no additional funds will be provided for this purpose. Proposals
for inter State transfer of funds in respect of schemes covering all the States will
not normally be entertained.
2. All existing instructions on austerity/economy in expenditure issued by the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) from time to time shall be strictly
enforced.
3. Secretaries to the Govt. of India and Financial Advisers are requested to ensure
strict compliance of the above instructions.
Sd/-
(C.M. Vasudev)
Secretary of the Govt. of India
To,
All Secretaries to the Govt. of India (By name)
All Heads of Public Sector Enterprises
All FAs (By name)
All Chief Secretaries of State Governments with the request that they may consider
issuing similar instructions in respect of their State Governments.

59
APPENDIX V
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY , 13TH SEPTEMBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’ Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
3. Shri Amitava Nandy
4. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
5. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
6. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
7. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
8. Shri Sugrib Singh
9. Shri K. Subbarayan
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
11. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Shri Jayantilal Barot
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Joint Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Assistant Director

60
WITNESSES
(i) Ministry of Urban Development
1. Shri B.S. Lalli, Addl. Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Pradhan, Jt. Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Chaturvedi, Director
(ii) Central Public Works Department(CPWD)
1. Shri B. Majumdar, Director General (W)
2. Shri A. Chakrabarti, Addl. Director General
3. Shri K. Srinivasan, Addl. Director General
4. Shri L.P. Srivastava, Chief Engineer
5. Shri Ananthanarayan, Chief Engineer
6. Shri V .K. Sharma, Director (S&D)
7. Shri Vijay Dev, Director of Estates
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and the representatives
of the Ministry of Urban Development and CPWD. The Chairman then briefed the
Committee about the work done by the erstwhile Committee on the subject, ‘CPWD’ in
the past. Additional Secretary (UD) and Director General (Works), CPWD thereafter
gave a brief presentation convening the role of CPWD and the recent projects undertaken
by them.
3.  The Chairman and members of the Committee then raised certain queries
which were duly replied to by the Officers of the Ministry of Urban Development and
CPWD respectively.
4.  The Committee then decided to undertake local visits to CPWD offices/
projects and residential areas in and around Delhi periodically to gain first hand
knowledge about their work. It was proposed that the first visit should be undertaken on
21st September 2005.
5.  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX VI
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY THE 4TH JULY , 2006
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’ Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pushp Jain
3. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
4. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
5. Shri D. Vittal Rao
6. Shri Sajjan Kumar
7. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
8. Shri K. Subbarayan
9. Shri Sugrib Singh
10. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
11. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
13. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
14. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
15. Shri Jayantilal Barot
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Mukul Roy
61

62
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
2. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Assistant Director
WITNESSES
1. Shri Anil Baijal, Secretary, (UD)
2. Shri A. Chakrabarti, DG, CPWD
3. Shri O.P. Aggarwal, OSD (MRTS)
4. Shri Ananth Ram, ADG (S&P), CPWD
5. Shri L.P. Srivastava, CE (NDZ-I), CPWD
6. Shri D.S. Sachdev, CE (NDZ-II), CPWD
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the
Committee and briefed them about the status of the examination of the subject ‘Central
Public Works Department’
[The representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development and CPWD were
thereafter called in]
3. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Urban
Development and CPWD. He also drew the attention of the representatives to the
Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker.
4. The Committee, thereafter, took oral evidence of the representatives of
Ministry of Urban Development on the subject “Central Public Works Department
(CPWD)”. The members of the Committee then raised some queries which were duly
replied by the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development and the representatives of
Central Public Works Department.
3. The Committee also decided to hold the next sitting on 18th July, 2006.
The Committee then adjourned.

63
APPENDIX VII
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY THE 4TH OCTOBER, 2006
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’ Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
3. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
4. Shri Anant Gudhe
5. Shri Pushp Jain
6. Shri Sajjan Kumar
7. Shri A.K. Moorthy
8. Shri D. Vittal Rao
9. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
10. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
11. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
13. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
14. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
15. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
16. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
17. Shri Penumalli Madhu
18. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
19. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
20. Shri Manohar Joshi

64
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Sexana — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the
Committee. The Committee took up for consideration the draft report of the Committee
on the subject ‘Central Public Works Department (CPWD)” of the Ministry of Urban
Development. The Committee then adopted the draft Report with slight modifications.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports.
4. As the Committee have completed their Report and the House is not in session,
the Committee also authorized the Chairman to present the report to the Speaker under
direction 71A (1) of Directions by the Speaker Lok Sabha.
The Committee then adjourned.