9
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT
AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION
SWARNA JAYANTI SHAHARI
ROZGAR YOJANA
NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT AND
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
SWARNA JAYANTI SHAHARI
ROZGAR YOJANA
Presented to Lok Sabha on 2.8.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 2.8.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2005/Sravana, 1927 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 09
Price : Rs. 24.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2004-2005) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory ................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Funding, utilization of funds and performance
of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
(SJSRY) ......................................................................... 3
CHAPTER III Component wise analysis of Swarna Jayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) ............................. 8
(A)  The Urban Self Employment Programme
(USEP) ................................................................ 8
(B) Development of Women and Children in
Urban Areas (DWCUA) ................................ 13
(C)  The Urban Wage Employment Programme
(UWEP) .............................................................. 18
(D) Information, Education and Communi-
cation (IEC) and Community Structure
Components ...................................................... 20
ANNEXURES
I. Number of Beneficiaries under SJSRY .......................... 30
II. UWEP Component of SJSRY ........................................... 32
III. Minutes of the ninth sitting of the Committee held
on 17.2.2005 .......................................................................... 34
IV . Minutes of the sixteenth sitting of the Committee
held on 3.5.2005 .................................................................. 36
V. Minutes of the twenty first sitting of the Committee
held on 28.7.2005 ................................................................ 38
VI. Statement of observations/recommendations .............. 40

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Pushp Jain
*6. Shri P . Mohan
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Amitava Nandy
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
11. Shri L. Rajgopal
12. Shri D. Vittal Rao
13. Shri Sajjan Kumar
14. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Sugrib Singh
17. Shri K. Subbarayan
18. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
19. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
20. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
21. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
*Nominated w.e.f. 27 October 2004.
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
*23. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
24. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
25. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
26. Shri Jayantilal Barot
27. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
28. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
29. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
30. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
31. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
4. Shrimati Neera Singh — Under Secretary
*Nominated w.e.f. 24 March 2005.
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Ninth Report on the subject ‘Swarna
Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana’ (SJSRY)
2. The Standing Committee on Urban Development (2004-2005)
has selected the subject ‘Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana’ (SJSRY)
for examination and Report to Parliament.  The representatives of the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation briefed the
Committee on the subject   on 17 February, 2005.  On 3rd  May, 2005,
the Committee took the oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Financial Sector) and the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation.
3. The Committee also invited memoranda from the public in
general and experts/professionals/associations interested in the subject
in particular.  The Committee received near about one hundred
memoranda from the interested parties.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting
held on 28th July, 2005.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation and the
Ministry of Finance (Financial Sector) for placing before them the
requisite material and their considered views in connection with the
examination of the subject.  The Committee express their profuse thanks
to the individuals/experts/professionals/association who furnished
memoranda to the Committee.
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation of the invaluable assistance rendered to them
from time to time by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached
to the Committee
 N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM
28 July, 2005 Chairman,
6 Sravana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development
(v)

REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
SWARNA JA YANTI SHAHARI ROZGAR YOJANA (SJSRY)
1.1 With a view to provide gainful employment to the urban
unemployed or underemployed through encouraging the setting up of
self-employment ventures or provision of wage employment, a new
urban poverty alleviation programme, namely, Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rojgar Yojana (SJSRY) was launched on 01.12.1997 after subsuming the
earlier three Urban Poverty Alleviation Schemes, namely Urban Basic
Services for the Poor (UBSP), Nehru Rojgar Yojana (NRY) and Prime
Ministers Integrated Urban Poverty Eradication Programme (PMI
UPEP). The SJSRY programme is funded on a 75:25 basis between the
Centre and the States. The programme is applicable to all urban towns
in India and is implemented on a whole town basis with special
emphasis on urban poor clusters. This programme targets the urban
poor, as those living below the urban poverty line, as defined from
time to time by the Planning Commission. Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rojgar Yojana (SJSRY) consists of two major components, namely—
(i) The Urban Self Employment Programme (USEP)
(ii) The Urban Wage Employment Programme (UWEP)
Salient Features of SJSRY
1.2 The SJSRY rests on a foundation of community empowerment.
Rather than relying on the traditional method of top down
implementation, this programme focusses on establishing and
promoting community organizations and structures to provide
supporting and facilitating mechanism for local development. Towards
this end. Community organizations like Neighbourhood Groups
(NHGs), Neighbourhood Committees (NHCs) and Community
Development Societies (CDSs) are set up in the target areas. The CDSs
are the focal point for the purpose of identification of beneficiaries;
preparation of applications, monitoring of recovery and generally
providing whatever other support that is necessary to the programme.
The CDSs are to identify viable projects suitable for that particular
area depending upon the local conditions of a given area.

2
1.3 These CDSs also set up themselves as Thrift and Credit
Societies to encourage community savings as also other group activities.
However, Thrift and Credit Societies can be set up separate from the
CDSs as well. These bodies try to link local resource generation efforts
with wider institutional finance. These bodies are expected to be
registered under Societies Registration Act or other appropriate Acts
to provide them direct access to funds under various schemes as also
a wider finance and credit base. A maximum expenditure at the rate
of Rs.100 per member for the first year and Rs. 75 per member for
each subsequent year is allowed for activities concerned with the CDSs.
The CDSs, being a federation of different community based
organizations, are the nodal agency for this programme. It is expected
that these lay emphasis in providing entire gamut of social sector
inputs to their areas including, but not limited to, health, welfare,
education etc. through establishing convergence between schemes being
implemented by different lines of departments within their jurisdiction.
1.4 Under SJSRY, the funds are allocated on a 75:25 basis between
the Centre and the States. Upto 3% of the total SJSRY funds are retained
by the Ministry as administrative expenses as well as under
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) and Research and
Study component for capacity building of the project functionaries/
officers and for undertaking concurrent evaluation studies of the
scheme. The balance funds are distributed to the States/UTs in
accordance with their incidence of urban poor population below the
poverty line. The funds under various components of SJSRY are
released to the States/UTs in the following manner :—
USEP 65%
UWEP 20%
Community Structure 15%
1.5 The funds under USEP component are further distributed under
its various subcomponents as per the following:—
USEP (subsidy) and DWCUA (subsidy) 30%
USEP (training) 40%
Thrift & Credit Societies 25%
Infrastructure Support 5%

3
CHAPTER II
FUNDING, UTILIZATION OF FUNDS AND
PERFORMANCE OF SJSRY
2.1 During the 9 th Five Year Plan and 10 th Five Year Plan (first
three years) the total outlay for the SJSRY scheme is Rs. 1009 crore
and Rs. 541 crore, respectively. Year-wise outlay details are as under:
Year Amount
9th Five Year Plan (Total outlay Rs. 1009 crore)
1997-98 Rs. 102.54 crore
1998-99 Rs. 162.28 crore
1999-2000 Rs. 126.35 crore
2000-2001 Rs. 95.03 crore
2001-2002 Rs. 45.50 crore
10
th Five Year Plan (Total outlay Rs. 541 crore)
2002-2003 Rs. 105.00 crore
2003-2004 Rs.105.00 crore
2004-2005 Rs.103.00 crore
2.2 The Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation in
a written note submitted that the allocations made by the Planning
Commission are grossly inadequate keeping in view the number of
Urban poor (6.71 crore as estimated in 1999-2000) in the country. The
actual demand made by the Ministry for the Tenth Plan for the Scheme
was Rs. 2000 crore for the entire Tenth Plan period (2002-2007),
however, Rs. 541 crore had been allocated by Planning Commission
Utilization of funds
2.3 Under SJSRY, Central funds are allocated/distributed to the
States/UTs in proportion to the incidence of urban poverty in that
State/UT. The tentative allocation to every State/UT is made at the
beginning of the year on that basis. However, the actual release of
funds is made only after receipt of UCs for the earlier releases and

4
also the release of matching State share for the earlier releases, as per
the prescribed criteria.
2.4 As intimated by the Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation upto 31.3.2005 the total unspent funds available
with the States/UTs was Rs. 300.53 crore, which includes both Central
and State shares under SJSRY. This includes the amount of Rs. 122.01
crore released to the States/UTs during the year 2004-2005.
2.5 When asked as to whether States/UTs released their matching
share on time under the Scheme, the Ministry in their written reply
stated that most of the States/UTs had been releasing their matching
State share in time except a few, who face difficulty in providing their
share on time. Many of the States have requested for increasing the
ratio of Central share. In the recently held meeting of High Level
Monitoring Committee of SJSRY, on 25.2.2005, some States have
demanded that the funding ratio between centre and states may be
revised to 90:10 (Central : State) for the special category States, in the
proposed modification of the guidelines of SJSRY.
2.6 On being asked about the States which have been assigned as
“Special Category States” under the SJSRY scheme, the Ministry
informed that in total 11 States (8 NER States including Sikkim and 3
hilly States), have been categorised as “Special category States.” These
are : Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and
Uttaranchal.
Performance of the SJSRY
2.7 The Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation that the following problems are
experienced during the implementation of the SJSRY Scheme.
- Low budget provisions under the Scheme.
- Identification of genuine BPL beneficiaries.
- Non-flexibility in the Scheme guidelines.
- No scope for taking innovative projects.
- Non-release of State Share.
- Low priority given by the States to SJSRY Scheme in
comparison to the rural programme.

5
2.8 On the question of low priority given by the States/Union
Territories to SJSRY in comparison to the ‘Rural Employment’
programmes, the Ministry have stated in their written note that the
main factor for this may be the low budget of the Scheme, which is
able to cater to only a token segment of the urban poor. However, this
Ministry is trying hard to capture the attention of State Governments
towards the ever-increasing problem of urban poverty. The Budget for
the Scheme is also being gradually increased to deal with the problem
of urban poverty more effectively. During the year 2004-2005, a
provision of Rs. 160.00 crore has been made for the Scheme as against
Rs. 103.00 crore for the year 2004-2005.
2.9 However on the question of advancing the benefits to the
targeted BPL families, it may be pointed out that the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India in its Report (Civil) of 2001 in Chapter III
regarding the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
categorically observed that the Ministry had not been able to address
satisfactorily the issue of targeting the urban families below poverty
line for providing employment. Beneficiaries had been neither registered
nor issued family cards. Employment had, therefore, been provided to
unregistered workers and in most cases they either did not have family
cards or where these where available, the employment details were
not noted in them. Thus, there was no certainty whether the intended
population, which was to be provided employment under the schemes
was actually targeted in a comprehensive manner nor whether the
persons provided employment has actually fulfilled the criteria for
grant of wage employment. The Ministry’s role was confined only to
framing and circulating the guidelines to the State Governments,
without ensuring compliance of the instructions so that benefits could
flow to the targeted group, and funds properly utilized.
2.10 The Committee note that Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar
Yojana (SJSRY) is the only urban poverty alleviation programme of
the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation directly
providing employment opportunities to the urban unemployed or
under employed living below the poverty line, which is estimated
at 6.71 crore. The Committee further note that Rs. 541 crore were
allocated to SJSRY during the 10th Five Year Plan as against the
demand of Rs. 2000 crore made by the Ministry which, in the opinion
of the Committee, is not adequate to meet the demands of the
growing unemployment in the urban areas. The Committee
recommend that priority should be given to SJSRY Scheme by the
Government and adequate financial allocations should be made for
this scheme so as to tackle the massive problem of growing
unemployment in an effective manner.

6
2.11 The Committee note that upto 31.3.2005, States/UT s have total
unspent funds to the tune of Rs. 300.53 crore, which includes both
Central and State shares under SJSRY. The Committee fail to
understand why such a huge amount remained unspent when there
is also a move to augment the budgetary allocation due to financial
crunch felt in the implementation of the programme. An indepth
study is necessary to find out as to why the funds could not be
utilized within the time limit. Non utilization of funds means that
actual benefits do not reach the poor. This is a cause for concern.
The Committee are of the view that such a huge amount of unspent
balance is a serious matter and has an adverse effect on the overall
performance of the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, urge the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation to make
strenuous efforts to motivate and direct the States/UTs for utilizing
these unspent funds and furnish their utilisation certificates to the
Ministry.
2.12 The Committee desire that the Ministry should ascertain
the reasons as to why a few States find difficulty in providing their
matching share on time under SJSRY and if their difficulties are
genuine, the Ministry should resolve them by revising the guidelines
of the Scheme.
2.13 The Committee are not satisfied to learn that the Ministry
of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation have not fruitfully
and effectively addressed the issue of targeting the urban families
below poverty line for providing employment. This fact has also
been highlighted by C&AG in its Report (Civil) of 2001, Chapter III
that the Ministry has not been able to address satisfactorily the
issue of targeting the urban families below poverty line for providing
employment. The Committee need hardly emphasize that although
SJSRY is a well-designed scheme based on community participation/
the actual potential of the programme is yet to be realized.
Unfortunately, implementation efforts by local bodies in various
States/UTs have encountered several roadblocks including lack of
community leadership, poor finance from banks and delay in
launching of ‘Employment Generating’ units under the scheme. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that concerted efforts must be made
by the Union Ministry to urge the States/UTs to effectively implement
the SJSRY by passing on its benefit to the targeted BPL persons.
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should take proper
follow-up action with the States/UTs to ensure compliance of
Ministry’s guidelines issued to the States/UTs on SJSRY from time
to time.

7
2.14 In regard to low priority given to SJSRY as compared to the
Rural Employment Schemes, the Ministry have stated that the main
factor for this may be the low budget of the Scheme, which is able
to cater to only a token segment of the urban poor. The Committee
are, however, not convinced by this reply of the Ministry. The
Committee recommend that concerted efforts should be made by the
Union Ministry to grab the attention of the States/UTs for effective
implementation of the employment generating schemes under SJSRY
in their States/UTs to deal with the ever increasing problem of urban
poverty.

8
CHAPTER III
COMPONENT-WISE ANALYSIS OF SWARNA JAYANTI
SHAHARI ROZGAR YOJANA (SJSRY)
A. The Urban Self Employment Programme (USEP)
3.1 The salient features of this component are:—
(i) Assistance to individual urban poor beneficiaries for setting
up gainful self-employment ventures.
(ii) Assistance to groups of urban poor women for setting up
gainful self/employment ventures. This sub-scheme has been
titled as “The Scheme for Development of Women and
Children in the Urban Areas (DWCUA)”.
(iii) Training of beneficiaries, potential beneficiaries and other
persons associated with the urban employment programme
for upgradation and acquisition of vocational land
entrepreneurial skills.
(iv) Special attention is given to women, persons belonging to
Scheduled Castes/Tribes, disabled persons  and other such
categories as may be indicated by the Government from
time to time.
(v) The percentage of women beneficiaries under this
programme should not be less than 30%.
All other conditions being equal, women beneficiaries belonging
to women-headed household, viz., widows, divorcees, single women,
or even households where women are the sole earners are ranked
higher in priority.
SCs and STs  must be benefited at least to the extent of the
proportion of their  strength in local population .
A provision of  3% should be  reserved for the disabled .
(vi) There is no minimum educational qualification for
beneficiaries under this programme. However, this scheme
is not applicable to the persons educated beyond the
IXth standard.

9
(vii) A house-to-house survey for identification of genuine
beneficiaries is prescribed. Non-economic criteria for the
purpose of prioritization within the BPL exist in the scheme.
(viii) (A) Setting up Micro – Enterprises and Skill Development
Maximum unit cost = Rs. 50,000/-
Subsidy = 15% of the project cost
subject to a maximum of
Rs. 7500/-
Margin money to be = 5% of the project cost
contributed by the
beneficiaries
(B) Training and Infrastructure Support
Training cost Per person = Rs. 2000/-
Training period = Two to Six months
subject to a minimum of
300 hours
Tool Kit worth = Rs. 600/-
3.2 The USEP programme encourages under-employed and
unemployed urban youth to set up small enterprises relating to
servicing, petty business and manufacturing, for which there is a lot
of potential in urban areas. Local skills and local crafts are encouraged
for this purpose. Each town has to develop a compendium of such
projects/activities keeping in view cost, marketability, economic viability
etc. To avoid duplication with the ongoing Prime Minister’s Rozgar
Yojana (PMRY), this component of SJSRY is confined to below poverty
line beneficiaries who have got education upto Ninth standard with
emphasis on those given a higher priority on the basis of the non-
economic criteria.
3.3 Skill development through appropriate training is another
element of USEP . It is intended to provide training to the urban poor
in a variety of service and manufacturing trades as well as in local
skills and local crafts so that they can set up self-employment ventures
or secure salaried employment with enhanced remuneration. Training
is also imparted in vital components of the service sector like the
construction trade and allied services like carpentry and plumbing
and also in manufacturing low cost building materials based on
improved local technology. Services of the Building Centres sponsored
by the HUDCO/BMTPC within the state may be utilized for this
purpose, as per the local requirements.

10
3.4 Training institutions such as ITIs/Polytechnics/Shramik
Vidyapeeths, Engineering Colleges and other suitable training
institutions run by the Government, private or voluntary organizations
are utilized and provided appropriate support for this purpose. In
addition, the Building Centres existing within the states may also be
utilized.
3.5 In a written note, the Ministry informed that four National
level Training Institutes ;viz Human Settlements Management Institute
(HSMI), New Delhi; Regional Centre for Urban and Environment
Studies(RCUES), Mumbai; Regional Centre for Urban and Environment
Studies (RCUES), Hyderabad and Institute of Local Government and
Urban Studies (ILGUS), Kolkata have been identified by the Ministry
for carrying out training/capacity building of the ‘Project Functionaries’
under SJSRY. In their training programmes, the training institutes,
regularly, invite the experts as the faculty for the training courses.
3.6 When asked about the infrastructure support provided to the
beneficiaries under USEP , the Ministry of Urban Employment Poverty
Alleviation in a written note stated that special assistance is provided
for setting up of community kendras that are used for multifarious
activities such as work places/marketing centers etc. These Kendra are
administrated on a day-to-day basis by the local Community
Development Societies (CDSs). Land for such Seva Kendras is provided
free of cost either by the local body or any other agency. Examples of
infrastructural support are like setting up of Nagar Palika Sewa Kendras
for construction and other activities like those provided by carpenters,
plumbers, electricians, TV/radio/refrigerator mechanics who are
available to city residents on call, provision of weekend markets/
evening markets in municipal grounds, or on road sides and technical
assistance in relation to market surveys/trades, joint brand names/
designs and advertising.
3.7 On being asked about the role of the urban local bodies such
as the Municipalities in capacity building of the urban local poor for
schemes under SJSRY, the Ministry submitted in a written note that
the urban local bodies arrange for training institutes. The Town Urban
Poverty Alleviation cell at the urban local level has the overall
responsibility for such skill training of beneficiaries.

11
3.8 The Committee note that skill development through
appropriate training is one of the elements of USEP which intend to
provide training to the urban poor in a variety of service and
manufacturing trades as well as in local skills and local crafts so
that they can set up self/employment ventures and secure salaried
employment with enhanced remuneration. In this regard, the
Committee recommend that skill oriented training to beneficiaries
under the Scheme should be provided based on the suggestions of
the CDSs, which are suitable with the local conditions and
marketable activities of the region. The Committee are of the firm
view that a positive correlation needs to be developed between the
number of persons trained and the number of persons employed/
setting-up micro enterprises, so as to keep them motivated as well
as making the ‘Training Courses’ more result oriented. The Committee
recommend that if necessary, suitable amendments be carried out in
the governing rules so that a target number of trained persons set-
up units or engage in activities under the SJSRY schemes.
3.9 The Committee also desire that the Government should work
out the strategy to utilize the services of employment exchanges in
the urban areas, which can act as the focal point for placement of
unemployed youth who would be trained under SJSRY. The person
so trained under SJSRY should be issued training cards/certificates
which could help them in availing loans from the banks/financial
institutions.
3.10 The Committee note that special assistance is provided for
setting up of community kendras that are used for multifarious
activities such as work places/marketing centres etc. The Committee
desire that such Community kendras should be strengthened and
further diversified. These Community Kendras must be effectively
utilized for display and marketing of products manufactured by Self-
Help Group and micro-units under the SJSRY schemes.
3.11 The Committee also desire that training budget of
Rs. 2000/- per participant under the USEP should be increased and
successful micro entrepreneurs should be associated for imparting
‘Enhancement Courses of Skill training. The Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation must regularly analyse the
training needs of the beneficiaries in consultation with the State
level authorities specially the Town Urban Poverty Alleviation Cells
in the States/UTs so as to extend the scope of coverage of this
centrally sponsored self-employment scheme.

12
House-to-house survey for identification of beneficiaries
3.12 Under the scheme, house-to-house surveys for identification
of the genuine beneficiaries below the poverty line is done by the
State Governments. Non-economic parameters are also applied to
identify urban poor in addition to the economic criteria of the urban
poverty line. Community Structures like CDSs are involved in this
task under the guidance of the Town Urban Poverty Eradication Cell/
Urban Local Bodies. Lists of beneficiaries finalized are displayed at
the Urban Local Body Office as also in the concerned local areas. For
ease of operation, if desired, the house-to-house survey and beneficiary
identification can be got done by the State nodal agency through any
identified body at the ULB/community level specially empowered in
this behalf.
3.13 As per the guidelines of SJSRY, house to house survey can be
got done by the State nodal agency through any identified body at
the ULB/Community level, including NGOs/Voluntary organizations,
specially empowered in this behalf.
3.14 As r eported by the Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation upto 31.3.2005, out of the total 3799 towns in the
country, house to house survey has been carried out only in 3536
towns thus leaving 263 towns behind.
3.15 The Committee note that under the Scheme, house-to-house
surveys for identification of the genuine beneficiaries below the
poverty line is done by the State Governments. Non-economic
parameters are also applied to identify urban poor in addition to
the economic criteria of the urban poverty line. The Committee also
note that upto 31.3.2005, out of the total 3799 towns in the country,
house-to-house survey has been carried out only in 3536 towns thus
leaving 263 towns unsurveyed. The Committee are of the opinion
that without proper identification of genuine beneficiaries, it would
be difficult to effectively implement and assess the actual
performance of the SJSRY Scheme. Non-availability of BPL list and
lack of transparency in compilation and dissemination of the lists
would definitely hamper the successful implementation of the urban
poverty alleviation programme like SJSRY. Once the BPL list has
been finalised, the same should be widely publicized as in case of
voters list for the general information of public with specific
economic and other parameters used to identify the genuine persons
for inclusion in the list. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Ministry of UEPA should impress upon the State Governments
to conduct house-to-house survey in the remaining 263 towns at the

13
earliest and for this purpose, services of NGOS ,VOs and Community
Based Organisation should also be availed. The Committee would
like to be apprised about the action taken in this regard.
B. Development of Women and Children in Urban Areas (DWCUA)
3.16 Salient features under DWCUA:-
- DWCUA aims at helping groups of urban poor women in
taking up self-employment ventures.
- The group may consist of at least 10 women.
- The ceiling of subsidy under the scheme is Rs. 1.25 lakh or
50% of the cost of the project whichever is less.
- Where the group sets itself up as Thrift & Credit Society, in
addition to its self employment venture, it will be eligible
for an additional grant of Rs. 25,000 as revolving fund at
the rate of Rs.1,000 maximum per member. The fund is
meant for purposes like purchases of raw materials and
marketing, infrastructure support, one time expense on child
care activity, expenses upto Rs. 500 on travel cost of group
members to bank, payment of insurance premium for self/
spouse/child by maintaining savings for different periods
by a member and any other expense allowed by the State
in Group’s interest. The revolving fund can be availed by
a Group only after one year of its formation.
3.17 This scheme is distinguished by the special incentive extended
to urban poor women who decide to set up self employment ventures
in a group as opposed to individual effort. Groups of urban poor
women take up an economic activity suited to their skill, training,
aptitude and local conditions. Besides generation of income, this group
strategy strives to empower the urban poor women by making them
independent as also providing a facilitating atmosphere for self
employment.
3.18 To be eligible for subsidy under this scheme, the DWCUA
group should consist of at least 10 urban poor women. Before starting
income generating activity, the group members must got to know each
other well, understand the group strategy, and also recognize the
strength and the potential of each member of the group. The group
also selects its own activity. Care is taken for selecting the activity
because the future of the group rests wholly on an appropriate
selection. As far as possible, activities be selected out of an identified

14
shelf of projects for that area maintained by the Town Urban Poverty
Eradication Cell. In addition, every effort is made to encourage the
group to set itself as a Thrift and Credit society.
3.19 The DWCUA group Society is entitled to a subsidy of Rs.
1,25,000/- or 50% of the project cost whichever is less. Where the
DWCUA group sets itself as a Thrift and Credit society, in addition to
its other entrepreneurial activity, the group/Thrift and Credit society
is also entitled to a lump sum grant of Rs25,000/- as revolving fund
at the rate of Rs.1000 maximum per member. This revolving fund is
available to a simple Thrift and Credit Society also, even if the society
is not engaged in any project activity under DWCUA.
3.20 When asked about the provisions made for the forward and
backward linkages to DWCUA groups, the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation in a written note stated that it is
for the State Governments to work out such linkages in accordance
with the Guidelines of the Scheme, which stipulate that in selection of
the trades by the DWCUA Groups, local skills and local crafts are
encouraged under the Scheme. Each town has to develop a
compendium of such activities keeping in view the cost, marketability,
economic viability etc.
3.21 When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation to publish the success stories of
DWCUA groups particularly of Kudumbashree so as to motivate the
others, the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation in
a written note submitted that the Ministry is planning to give publicity
for setting up of units/projects under the scheme as also to document
at the National/State level the best practices/success stories of DWCUA
Groups including those in Kudumbashree of Kerala State from the
current year.
3.22  The Ministry stated that the model of Kudumbashree has
been impressed upon all the Northern States and Officials of the
Northern States are encouraged to have study visits to Kerala to get
the first hand knowledge of the effective implementation of the Scheme.
The success story of Kerala has been given wide publicity by the
Kudumbashree by circulating the documentations of its achievements.
3.23 When asked as to whether there is any proposal to increase
subsidy component in USEP component the Ministry Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation stated in a written reply that in

15
the proposed modifications of the guidelines of the SJSRY, the ceiling
of the project cost in individual cases has been increased to a maximum
of Rs. 1 lakh. However, to ensure that the total flow of subsidy under
the scheme does not increase substantially, it is proposed to have a
slab system of subsidy so that the projects costing up-to Rs. 50,000/- the
project subsidy will remain same as 15%. For the projects costing
Rs. 50,000/- to Rs. 75,000/- the proposed subsidy will be fixed as
Rs. 75,00/- and for the projects costing Rs. 75,000/- to Rs. 1,00.000/-
, the proposed subsidy will be 10% of the project cost. Thus though
the actual amount of subsidy is increased from Rs. 7500/-, for the
projects costing between Rs. 75000/- to Rs. 100000/- the percentage is
decreased from 15% to 10%.
3.24 Under DWCUA there is a proposal to raise the subsidy
amount to Rs. 2.00 lakh or 50% of the project cost whichever is less.
3.25 The Committee note that DWCUA Scheme is distinguished
by the Special incentive extended to urban poor women, who decide
to set-up self employment ventures in a group comprising of at
least ten women. The Committee feel that there is a need to review
the said condition as sometimes this precondition of having atleast
ten women to constitute a group hampers the formation of DWCUA
group for lack of prerequisite number. The Committee recommend
that the viability of keeping the condition of minimum number of
members in DWCUA, should be explored by the Ministry
expeditiously. The Committee are of the firm view that more number
of DWCUA groups would be formed if this norm of stipulated
groups number is relaxed. The Committee also note that State
Governments work out forward and backward linkages in accordance
with the guidelines of the Scheme concerning the DWCUA groups.
The Committee desire that integration to the extent possible should
be forged between urban self help groups under DWCUA and rural
self help groups so that urban SHGs under DWCUA could be
engaged in the marketing of products produced by rural SHGs or
vice-versa.
3.26 The Committee, further desire that innovative areas of
employment as has been developed in the State of Kerala under
Kudumbashree programme need to be emulated in other States and
best practices/success stories of DWCUA groups should be given
wide publicity.

16
Micro Credit Facilities available to the beneficiaries and the Role of
Banks
3.27 Micro Credit Facilities are available to the eligible BPL
beneficiaries who are desirous of setting up self-employment ventures
under USEP component of SJSRY 95% of the project cost is sanctioned
as composite loan by the banks at the rates of interest applicable to
such priority sector loans fixed by the Reserve Bank of India from
time to time. Subsidy is @ 15% of the project cost. Each beneficiary is
required to contribute 5% of the project cost as margin money in cash.
The DWCUA group is entitled to a subsidy of Rs. 1,25,000 or 50% of
the cost project whichever is less.
3.28 Banks play an important role in the implementation of the
self/group enterprise component of the SJSRY. Urban poor people
require financial assistance to setup micro/group enterprises. Banks
sanction and release 95% of the project cost as a composite loan to the
beneficiaries. The subsidy portion of the Scheme is administered as
back-end subsidy, i.e, the subsidy portion covered in the loan sanctioned
being adjusted against the last few installments of the repayment of
loan.
3.29 The Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
in a written note submitted that the Banks are many a time reluctant
to lend to urban poor inter alia due to non-availability of stable address.
Therefore, micro-credit through Micro-Finance Institutions (MFIs)/NGOs
with support from SIDBI, RMK and NABARD becomes important.
However it is a fact that presently available micro-credit is inadequate
and needs to be upscaled.
3.30 When asked about the reasons for rejection of applications
under SJSRY by the banks the Ministry of Finance (Financial Sector) in
their written note stated that the reasons reported by Scheduled
Commercial Banks for rejection for applications under SJSRY Scheme
are:-
- Lack of co-ordination among implementing agencies.
- Poor quality of loan applications.
- Bunching of loan applications in the last quarter of the year.
- Revision of targets after the year begins.
- Lack of publicity for the Scheme.
- Lack of awareness among the borrower regarding repayment
ethics.
- Delay in releasing of subsidy .

17
3.31 The rate of interest charged by the Banks for the SJSRY
proposals, is decided by the Reserve Bank of India time to time, for
its “priority sector lending”. Sometimes, it varies for the different trades
keeping in view the viability of projects as well as repaying capacity.
3.32 When asked about the steps taken to ensure that the
beneficiaries of SJSRY get easy and timely access to towns from the
banks the Ministry of Finance (Financial sector) in their written note
stated that the Reserve Bank of India issues detailed instructions in
the form of ‘master circular’ every year. The last such circular was
issued on September 06, 2004 and is available at RBI website rbi.org.in.
The instructions include various features of the SJSRY Scheme, process
for monitoring and review, process for rejection, administration of
subsidy etc. The instructions have been kept to the bare minimum so
that suitable operational flexibility is available to the Banks. In brief,
the RBI has advised that:
- Loans sanctioned under SJSRY should be treated as advances
under priority sector.
- Loan applications should be disposed of within a fortnight
for loans up to Rs. 25,000/- and those for credit limits above
Rs. 25,000/- within 8 to 9 weeks.
- Steps should be initiated to ensure that documentation
process is kept simple to avoid hardship to the beneficiaries
and consequent delay in disposal of applications.
- Applications should not be rejected on flimsy grounds. In
case of rejection of application, reasons for rejection of
application should invariably be recorded.
3.33 On receipt of specific complaints from beneficiaries regarding
non-co-operation of banks in extending loans to them, RBI takes up
the matter with the concerned banks for redressal of grievances of the
beneficiaries. Further, the RBI instructions stipulate that:
A. Banks should establish a machinery at the regional offices
to entertain complaints from the borrowers if the branches
do not follow these guidelines, and to verify periodically
that these guidelines are implemented by the branches in
actual practice.
B. The names and addresses of the officer with whom
complaints can be lodged should be displayed on the notice
board of every branch.

18
3.34 To address the issue of providing micro-finance to the urban
poor in a holistic manner, a Task Force under the chairmanship of
Secretary (Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation) has been set up
in the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation. The Task
Force is expected to provide its report shortly.
3.35 The Committee note that credit facilities are available to
the eligible BPL beneficiaries who are desirous of setting up self-
employment ventures under USEP component of SJSRY and 95% of
the project cost is sanctioned as composite loan by the banks to the
beneficiaries. The Committee also note that banks are many a times
reluctant to lend to urban poor due to a number of reasons and
presently available micro-credit is inadequate and needs to be
upscaled. The Committee desire that the Government should set up
a parallel funding mechanism/agency just like NABARD to
specifically address the needs and the issues of funding and loaning
of the urban poor under SJSRY and for this purpose either SIDBI
should be strengthened or some parallel mechanism should be set
up so that the urban poor can have easy access to micro finance.
3.36 The Committee also desire that all issues related to non-
cooperation by banks regarding sanctioning and disbursement of
loan to the beneficiaries under SJSRY should be sorted out in close
coordination with the State level Banker’s Committee, Ministry of
Finance, RBI and the commercial Banks by holding periodical and
timely meetings.
3.37 The Committee note that to address the issue of providing
micro-finance to the urban poor in a holistic manner, a Task Force
under the chairmanship of Secretary (UEPA) has been set up in the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation. The Task
Force is expected to present its report shortly. The Committee hope
that the report of the Task Force would provide formulation for a
viable micro-credit mechanism for the urban poor and would
strengthen the existing micro-credit financing institutions to provide
finance to encourage self employment among the urban poor.
C. The Urban Wage Employment Programme (UWDEP)
3.38 Salient features of UWEP:—
(i) This component seeks to provide wage employment to
prospective beneficiaries living below the poverty line within
the jurisdiction of urban local bodies by utilizing their labour
for construction of socially and economically useful public
assets.

19
(ii) Under this component, there are no restrictions on
educational qualifications.
(iii) This programme applies to the urban local bodies having
population less than 5 lakh as per the 1991 Census.
(iv) The material labour ratio for works under this component
is to be maintained at 60:40.
(v) The prevailing minimum wage rate, as notified from time
to time for each area, has to be paid to beneficiaries under
this component.
3.39 As per the Guidelines of the Scheme of Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), under UWEP , wage employment is provided
to the urban poor living below the poverty line within the jurisdiction
of the urban local bodies by utilizing their labour for the construction
of socially and economically useful public assets. However, this
condition of employing the local urban poor is only for the works
being executed under UWEP . For routine municipal works in an area,
the ULBs may or may not be employing the local urban poor
depending upon the cheap labour available sometimes from the rural
migrants.
3.40 Under UWEP component of SJSRY, the socially and
economically useful public assets are constructed for the community.
The selection of the work is done by the Community development
Society, itself, keeping in view the necessity and also the local
conditions in the area. Therefore, full flexibility is provided to the
communities for selecting such works.
The wage employment provided under UWEP is not of sustainable
in nature and it provides only temporary employment.
3.41 The Committee note that UWEP Component seeks to provide
wage employment to prospective beneficiaries living below the
poverty line within the jurisdiction of urban local bodies by utilising
their labour for construction of socially and economically useful
public assets. The Committee also note that the wage employment
provided under UWEP is not sustainable in nature and it provides
only temporary employment. The Committee desire that UWEP
Component of SJSRY need to be used only for building Community
assets and infrastructure relating to the urban poor and not general
municipal works as this would ensure improvement in the civic
amenities meant for urban poor. The Committee further desire that
for providing sustainability of employment under UWEP to the

20
beneficiaries, the beneficiaries should be equipped with the
sustainable level of skill for self employment. The Committee
recommend that UWEP must be strengthened in such a way that the
schemes under UWEP provide maximum employment opportunities
to the unorganized sector of labour in the country.
3.42  The Committee note that under UWEP the material labour
ratio for works is to be maintained at 60:40. The Committee desire
that material labour ratio flexibility should be provided to States so
as to suit their local conditions and requirements so as to make the
UWEP schemes more practical and progressive.
D. Information, Education and Communication (IEC) and Community
Structure Components
3.43 Salient features under IEC & CS Components:—
(i) With a view to play an effective role in coordination and in
organising training, monitoring, evaluation, dissemination of
information etc. the component of IEC has been evolved
under SJSRY. It seeks to provide a coordinated and uniform
level of training across the country for training of trainers,
elected representatives, functionaries of Urban Local Bodies
and field functionaries like Project Officers, Community
Organisers etc. through national Training Institutes and
selected State Training/Field Training Institutes.
(ii) All the State Governments took action to set up community
structures, create Community Development Societies (CDSs)
and form Thrift & Credit Society etc., in all the urban towns
under their charge, all over the country.
3.44 In a written note the Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation submitted that under the IEC Component of SJSRY,
upto 2% of the allocation at the State/UT level is retained for the
capacity building of the project functionaries and other IEC activities.
At the Central level also 2 to 3% of the total allocation is retained and
kept separately for training, workshops, seminars and other IEC
activities. Documentation of best practices in the field of poverty
alleviation is one of the most important activity under the IEC
component. The Training Institutes identified under SJSRY are directed
to document such achievements and propagate them in other areas
also so that the Scheme gets more publicity. Audio-video films are
also produced on such practices which are given due publicity in
various workshops/Seminars at national and International level.

21
3.45 The Ministry is planning this year a comprehensive Media
Plan for advertising the Scheme of SJSRY through DAVP and other
agencies. In addition to this documentation of best practices under
SJSRY is also done at ULB/State/National level and given wide
publicity through circulation in the States/UTs for generating awareness
about the Scheme.
3.46 In a subsequent written note, the Ministry submitted that
States/UTs have been advised to prepare the guidelines/other literature
for the Schemes in the vernaculars so that it is helpful to the
beneficiaries. The four national Training Institutes under SJSRY also
prepare and circulate the documents on best-practices in local
languages, to the States/ULBs.
3.47 During the course of oral evidence, the Secretary of Ministry
of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation, herself admitted that
one or two areas in which they have been weak and which needed to
step was documentation and dissemination of information and
dissemination of replicable projects under SJSRY.
3.48 When asked about the participation of private companies in
providing training to the unemployed urban youth under SJSRY the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation in a written
reply stated that involvement of private companies and other public
corporations for training to the unemployed youth under SJSRY may
be a good concept. However, this needs critical examination as the
administrative cost and other expenditures charged by the private sector
may be too high. Moreover, local institutions like ITIs/Polytechnics/
Building Centres etc. are already involved in providing skill training
under SJSRY.
3.49 When asked about the role of NGOs in providing skill training
under SJSRY the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation in a written note stated that NGOs can be associated under
SJSRY at the CDS level for generating awareness among the poor as
well as for providing skill training to the urban poor. However, it is
a fact that due to absence of any financial assistance for the NGOs
under SJSRY, contribution of NGOs is very little in the implementation
of the Scheme.
3.50 The Committee note that under Information, Education and
Communication (IEC) component of SJSRY, upto 2% of the allocation
at the State/UT level is retained for the capacity building of project
functionaries and other IEC activities. At the central level also, 2 to
3% of the total allocation is retained and kept separately for training,

22
workshops, seminars and other IEC activities. The Committee also
note that four national level training institutes have been identified
by the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation for
carrying out training/capacity building of the project functionaries
under SJSRY. The Committee desire that funds allocation under IEC
component should be increased and regular capacity building
exercises, training of project functionaries and officials involved in
the implementation of the Scheme by associating the national level
training institutes, which have been identified by the Ministry, should
be undertaken.
3.51 The Committee further desire that community structures
created under the SJSRY should be fully involved in the activities
under the Scheme, including selection and implementation of works,
thrift and credit groups and group economic activities etc.
Sensitisation programmes for the implementing agencies should be
conducted regularly. Specific provisions for involvement of NGOs
for training programmes should be incorporated in the Scheme. If
necessary, the Government should also explore the feasibility of
participation of private companies in providing training to the
beneficiaries under SJSRY.
3.52 The Committee note that documentation of best practices in
the field of poverty alleviation is one of the most important activity
under the IEC component. In respect of documentation and
dissemination of information, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation has admitted that this area has
been weak. The Secretary also admitted that the dissemination of
replicable projects needed to be stepped up. Lack of documentation
of the viable projects by the States is also one of the weak areas.
The Committee also note that the Ministry of UEPA is planning this
year a comprehensive Media Plan for advertising SJSRY through
DA VP and other agencies. The documentation of best practices under
SJSRY is also being done at ULB/State/National level and publicised
widely through circulation in the States/UTs for generating awareness
about the Scheme. The Committee would like to be kept informed
about further steps taken in this direction. The Committee also desire
that the Government should make earnest efforts in association with
the National/State/ULB level functionaries and NGOs in propagation
and dissemination of success stories and best practices under SJSRY
Scheme. Wide publicity about the scheme should be given in the
vernaculars also so as to generate awareness of the Scheme amongst
the urban poor.

23
Physical progress under SJSRY
3.53 During the 9 th Plan, no State-wise physical targets were
prescribed under the Scheme and this was left to be decided by the
State/UTs as per their needs. However, in the 10
th Plan, target of
setting up of 4 Lakh micro-enterprises and skill up gradation of
5 Lakh below poverty line persons has been fixed.
3.54 As r eported by the Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation upto 31.3.2005, 6,90,721 micro-enterprises have been
set up for assisting the urban poor for self-employment, 7,01,096
persons have been imparted skill training and 532.50 lakhs of mandays
of work have been generated under the wage employment component.
3.55 The year-wise and State-wise details of the number of urban
poor assisted to set up micro-enterprises, number of persons given
skill training and number of mandays of works generated under wage
employment component of SJSRY, for the last three years is given at
ANNEXURE-A
3.56 The number of mandays of work generated under the Urban
Wage Employment Programme during the last 5 years, State-wise and
year-wise, is given at ANNEXURE-B. The information also contains
the details for the first three years of the 10
th Plan i.e. 2002-2003,
2003-2004 and 2004-2005.
3.57  The Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
in a written note stated that the annual target of assisting 80,000 urban
poor for setting up of micro enterprises for self-employment and
providing skill training/upgradation to 1,00,000/- urban poor under
SJSRY has been fixed for 2005-2006.
3.58 When asked as to how the Ministry would be able to meet
the target fixed in the 10
th Plan, the Ministry stated that during the
first three years of the Tenth Plan, as reported up to 31.3.2005, total
2,97,419 micro-enterprises have been set up and 3,27,399 beneficiaries
have been provided skill training under USEP . Thus the annual
achievement of targets is more that 100%. Therefore, the targets for
the Tenth Pan are certainly achievable. States/UTs have been directed
to formulate their annual action plans and fix their physical targets
commensurate with the availability of funds under the Scheme and
with reference to their local needs. Most of the States/UTs have
responded positively.

24
3.59 When asked whether the States are giving priority to SJSRY
as being given by them to rural schemes, the Ministry has stated that
it is true that the urban poverty alleviation scheme of SJSRY is given
low priority as compared to other big budget rural development
schemes. The main factor for this may be the low budget of the Scheme
which is able to cater only a token segment of the urban poor and
therefore States/UTs are not inclined for mere tokenism. However,
this Ministry is trying hard to capture the attention of State
Governments towards the ever-increasing problem of urban poverty.
The Budget for the Scheme is also being gradually increased to deal
with the problem of urban poverty more effectively.
3.60 The Committee note that under SJSRY scheme no physical
targets were fixed during the 9
th Plan. However, in the 10 th Plan,
target of setting upto 4 lakh micro-enterprises and skill upgradation
of 5 lakh has been fixed. For the year 2005-2006 the target of assisting
80,000 urban poor for setting up of micro enterprises for self-
employment and providing skill training/upgradation to 100000 urban
poor has been fixed. During the first three years of the 10
th Plan
upto 31.3.2005, a total of 2,97,419 micro-enterprises have been set up
and 3,27,399 beneficiaries have been provided skill training under
USEP . The Committee also note that low priority is given by the
States to SJSRY Scheme in comparison to the rural Schemes. The
Committee desire that for the assessment of the Scheme, annual
physical targets under the Scheme should be fixed by the Municipal
level functionaries in the States/UTs and such targets be adhered to.
The Committee further desire that keeping in view the high
magnitude of urban unemployment, the Government should
encourage the States/UTs to give priority to this urban sector schemes
as given by them to the rural Schemes by making the urban schemes
innovative and more acceptable to them. The Committee recommend
that the States/UTs, which are lagging behind in implementation of
SJSRY schemes must be encouraged to improve their performance
and the Government should ensure that proper physical progress is
made by States/UTs and the funds made available to them are fully
utilized.
Monitoring/Evaluation of SJSRY
3.61 The Scheme is being monitored through quarterly progress
reports and periodical review meetings under the Chairmanship of
Minister/Secretary/Joint Secretary/Director of the Ministry. To further
improve the implementation of the Scheme, a proposal to modify the
guidelines of the scheme is under consideration of the Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation on the basis of the
problems faced by the States/UTs.

25
3.62 Concurrent evaluation of SJSRY in seven States of Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Rajasthan,
Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh has been got conducted during 2001-
2002, through Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) and other
renowned agencies. Further, an evaluation study on SJSRY on all India
basis has been assigned to Human Settlement Management Institute
(HSMI), New Delhi during last year. The study is likely to be completed
during 2005-2006.
3.63 On monitoring and concurrent evaluation of SJSRY Scheme,
the Secretary , Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation during the
course of oral evidence stated as below:—
“Another weak area is concurrent evaluation. This is another thing
which we have done but it has been in a piecemeal form and we
hope to take it up this year in a much more concentrated and
focussed manner and we will be grateful for the suggestions of
the Committee and further support in these two areas.
Then, we have defaulting in holding the Monitoring Committee
under SJSRY. Recently, we have done that and we will take things
forward after that.”
3.64 When asked as to whether States/UTs are sending their
quarterly progress reports on regular basis, the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation in a written reply stated that
most of the States/UTs are sending their quarterly progress reports on
regular basis. However, some States like Goa, Jharkhand have not sent
their QPRs since long. This Ministry is repeatedly reminding them but
their response is awaited.
3.65 When asked about the criteria of judgement of better
performing and bad performing in respect of implementation of the
SJSRY Scheme, the Ministry stated that the better performing States
and bad performing States are judged on the basis of receipt of UCs,
release of matching State shares, physical progress and sending of
Quarterly Progress Reports in time.
3.66  On the periodicity of review meetings, the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation in a subsequent note stated that
the Meetings of High Level Monitoring Committee (HLMC) under
SJSRY are required to be held once in six months. The last such meeting
was held on 25.2.2005. Besides this review meetings are taken by senior
Officers of the Ministry during their visits to the States/UTs.

26
3.67 When asked about the current status of the revision/
modification of the guidelines of the SJSRY Scheme, the Ministry in a
written reply stated that the modification of Guidelines of SJSRY is at
the advanced stage. The draft EFC Memo has been prepared and it
has been sent to the Financial Advisor for their concurrence, before
being circulated to all concerned for their comments. It is expected
that the Guidelines may be revised within the next 6 months or so.
3.68 When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to make
the guidelines of SJSRY flexible, the Ministry has stated that the
provision for innovative/special projects on the lines of Swarna Jayanti
Gram Swarozgar Yojna (SGSY) of the Ministry of Rural Development
is proposed in the modification of guidelines of SJSRY. It will provide
rooms for innovation and involvement of other agencies/NGOs/MFIs
in the field of urban poverty alleviation.
3.69 The Ministry has enlisted five better performing and five bad
performing States in the SJSRY scheme. The better performing States
are Kerala, Karnataka, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh.
The bad performing States are Jharkhand, Goa, Manipur, Delhi and
Daman & Diu.
3.70  When asked about the main reasons given by the bad
performing States regarding their slugging or non-implementation of
the SJSRY scheme, the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation in a written reply stated that in case of Manipur, the State
Government has said that the Banks are not coming forward in
sanctioning loans and, therefore, the Scheme is lagging behind.
Jharkhand and Goa are not sending even Quarterly Progress Reports
under SJSRY. No report has been received from Jharkhand since the
formation of the State despite repeated reminders from the Ministry.
The UTs of Delhi and Daman & Diu have not responded the concerns
of the Ministry and request for sending their officers to the Ministry
for the review of the Scheme.
3.71  The Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
experienced following problems during the implementation of the
SJSRY:
(i) Low budget provision under the Scheme.
(ii) Identification of genuine BPL beneficiaries.
(iii) Non-flexibility in the Scheme guidelines.
(iv) No scope for taking innovative projects.

27
(v) Non-release of State share.
(vi) Non-fixation of physical targets.
(vii) Low priority given by the States to this Scheme in
Comparison to the rural programmes.
(viii) Frequent transfers of the project functionaries.
(ix) Delay in acceptance/rejection of applications by banks.
(x) Reluctance of the banks in extending loans.
(xi) Non-repayment of loans by the beneficiaries in time.
(xii) Poor-scrutiny of pr oject applications by project functionaries.
(xiii) Lack of documentation of the viable projects by the States.
(xiv) Lack of appropriate linkage between the skill training and
setting up of the Micro-enterprises.
3.72 The Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
proposed the following modification in guidelines of the SJSRY for its
effective implementation.
- Financial pattern of the Scheme- no change except in the
case of 11 special category States for which the proposed
ratio is 90:10 between the Centre and States.
- Educational Qualifications – No educational level to be
prescribed.
-P roject ceiling cost to be raised upto to Rs. 1 Lakh.
-P roject subsidy to be raised to Rs. 15000/- or 15% of the
project cost whichever is lower. For special Category States,
subsidy may be 30% of the project cost or Rs. 30,000/-
whichever is lower.
-P roject subsidy for DWCUA Group to be raised to
Rs. 2 lakh or 50% of the project cost, whichever is less.
-T raining cost to be raised to Rs. 5000/- per head and average
cost per person limited to Rs.3500/-.
-T ool Kit- to be raised from Rs. 600/- to Rs. 1000/- per
trainee.
- Material – labour ratio – flexibility to the States.
- Formation of DWCUA Group – minimum to be reduced
to 5.

28
- Allocation under A&OE to be increased .
- NGOs involvement- Specific provisions for involvement of
NGOs in the Scheme.
- Micro Credit-flexibility to States for involving FIs/Co-
operatives/NGOs under USEP Component.
- Innovative projects-specific budgetary provisions for such
projects under the Scheme similar to those under SGSY.
3.73 The Committee note that the Scheme is being monitored
through quarterly progress reports and periodical review meetings
under the Chairmanship of Minister/Secretary/Joint Secretary/Director
of the Ministry. Most of the States/UTs are sending their quarterly
progress reports on regular basis. The Committee are perturbed to
learn that some States like Goa, Jharkhand and Delhi have not sent
their quarterly progress reports since long on the implementation of
this important self employment scheme for urban poor. The
Committee desire that States like Goa, Jharkhand, Delhi and other
bad performing States which are not sending their quarterly progress
reports since long should be impressed upon to send their quarterly
progress reports timely so that actual impact of SJSRY Scheme could
be properly assessed in these States. If required, the Ministry should
take this matter at the Minister/Chief Secretary level of the concerned
States.
3.74  The Committee are also distressed to learn that Delhi is
one of the States, which has not undertaken projects under the SJSRY,
although the GNCT of Delhi is facing an ever-increasing urban
unemployment and problems in employment opportunities for the
unorganized Sector of labour. The Committee strongly recommend
that corrective action be taken by the Government in coordination
with GNCT of Delhi so as to undertake SJSRY projects in a
wholesome manner.
3.75  The Committee note that concurrent evaluation of SJSRY
in seven States has been conducted during 2001-2002 through Indian
Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) and other renowned
agencies. Further, an evaluation study on SJSRY on all India basis
has been assigned to Human Settlement Management Institute
(HSMI), New Delhi during the last year. The Study is likely to be
completed during the 2005-2006. The Committee recommend that the
Ministry should strengthen the monitoring of the Scheme at both
the Central and State levels by conducting regular field visits by
senior officers of the Ministry. As regards the concurrent evaluation

29
of the Scheme, the Committee desire that the Ministry should take
necessary action to have the Concurrent evaluation study completed
at the earliest.
3.76 The Committee note that the modification of guidelines of
the SJSRY Scheme is at an advanced stage on the basis of the
problems being faced by the States/UTs. The draft Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC) memorandum has been prepared and it
has been sent to the Financial Adviser for their concurrence before
being circulated to all concerned for their comments. The Committee
desire that the revised guidelines of the Scheme be finalized at the
earliest after taking into consideration the views of all concerned
with the implementation of the Scheme. The Committee hope that
the revised guidelines of the Scheme would be flexible, innovative
and would be able to cater to the requirements of the urban poor
to a large extent. These new revised guidelines of the Scheme should
be effective enough in removing the hurdles experienced in the
implementation of this Scheme.
3.77  The Committee trust that the Ministry would make sincere
efforts to remove/plug all the shortcomings/lacunae noticed in the
Scheme and make the modifications in the guidelines of the Scheme
as proposed by them at the earliest for the effective implementation
of the Scheme.
 N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM
28 July, 2005 Chairman,
6 Sravana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development

30
ANNEXURE-I
NUMBER OF BENEFICIARIES UNDER SJSRY
Sl. Name of State/ No. of persons assited to No. of persons trained No. of mandays of owrk
No. UT set-up micro-enterprises generated
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
12 3 45678 9 1 0 1 1
v. Andhra Pradesh v{~~{ xx|v~ w~yvx }{vv z{xz yx|{ v.|Æ v.~y z.}z
w. Arunachal Pradesh x|y x~ yÆ {w vy~ Æ Æ.|v x.Æ| x.z~
x. Assam }y xÆ{| vvzÆ {xx zy} y{x} Æ.{z v.wx Æ.~y
y. Bihar ÆÆÆ ÆÆ Æ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ
z. Chhattisgarh zzvz x{ vÆw~ w{xy Æ v~|{ Æ.ÆÆ x.|x Æ.ÆÆ
{. Goa xz Æ Æ Æ Æ Æ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ
|. Gujarat |z}y wÆvy zwxÆ {{|~ yzy| {ww} v.Æ{ |.~y Æ.v{
}. Haryana v|}Æ w~{z vz}~ v}w| xwxv w|x| Æ.vÆ Æ.x{ Æ.v|
~. Himachal Pradesh wwv v|z xyÆ v{} {wz vÆwÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ
vÆ. Jammu & Kashmir xvzÆ {}v vw{z x~x{ }x} v|y} Æ.Æ| Æ.Æ} ~.w~
vv. Jharkhand ÆÆÆ ÆÆ Æ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ
vw. Karnataka z}~} }x}{ xÆww w{z} v~wÆÆ Æ y.{| |.z{ v.wy
vx. Kerala x|}y wv~} v}|x v|}~ zvvw xxwy Æ.vv Æ.Æy Æ.Æ}
vy. Madhya Pradesh v|x}| y|~~ vy~y {wy~ }z|z yyvÆ v.}v Æ.|y Æ.|y
vz. Maharashtra vx~Æ} vx{Æz |}|} xv|x| x~xz| wz|Æ} z.~x x.v~ Æ.zx
v{. Manipur ÆÆÆ ÆÆ wzÆ{ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.~Æ Æ.ÆÆ
v|. Meghalaya vw~| Æ Æ yÆ{ ~x~ Æ v.ÆÆ Æ.z} Æ.ÆÆ
v}. Mizoram ÆÆÆ ÆÆ x|~ Æ.ÆÆ x.{{ Æ.ÆÆ
v~. Nagaland vy|w vvxw Æ zvÆ vÆÆ Æ Æ.vx Æ.xw Æ.ÆÆ
wÆ. Orissa w}w} }wwz {y~ w{Æw xyx~ wywz x.x| Æ.~w Æ.zv

31
12 3 45678 9 1 0 1 1
wv. Punjab ~|Æ |wy yv{ v{Æz vxÆw v}x} Æ.Æx Æ.yz Æ.v~
ww. Rajasthan |z|~ yÆÆ} yÆ}x vyÆ} v{~{ v~z| x.}w v.{~ Æ.w{
wx. Sikkim vÆ~ y| {} wvÆ Æ wÆv Æ.xÆ Æ.zz z.~v
wy. Tamil Nadu vz{w} x~wÆ wxz{ v|yw xÆxx yx{~ v.v~ w.wy Æ.zx
wz. Tripura zy~ xy| z~} y}z |{z y|}x Æ.vy Æ.yw Æ.Æ~Æ
w{. Uttaranchal }w~ Æ vzx wÆw Æ |{x Æ.ÆÆ Æ.Æ| Æ.ÆÆ
w|. Uttar Pradesh vv}zw {}{} y}{~ x~~x vyyzw wz|w~ x.vw x.{x v.|{
w}. West Bengal |ÆÆÆ w|{Æ ~yv v}{Æ{ z}}Æ y|y~ Æ.~v w.yw v.zy
w~. Andaman and
Nicobar Islands wvÆ ÆÆ Æ Æ.w~ v.z} Æ.yx
xÆ. Chandigarh zx yz w} wÆz wyw yxw Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ -
xv. Dadra and Nagar
Haveli wÆ Æ vÆ }{ Æ ~} Æ.vx Æ.Æy Æ.ÆÆ
xw. Daman and Diu ÆÆÆ ÆÆ Æ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ
xx. Delhi xwy |w vyw xwz vzz Æ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ -
xy. Pondicherry {zw vÆ|Æ Æ yx v||y Æ Æ.Æw Æ.x~ v.y{
Total vw|}}Æ vÆÆ~Æx {}{x{ ~~yvv vwvz~y vÆ{x~y xv.w{ y~.|y xz.v}

32
ANNEXURE II
UWEP COMPONENT OF SJSRY
YEAR-WISE No. OF MANDAYS OF WORK GENERATED
(IN LAKHS)
10th Five Year Plan
Sl.No. Name of States/ 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
UTs
12 3 4 567
v. Andhra Pradesh {}.{z x.v| v.|Æ v.~y z.}z
w. Arunachal Pradesh Æ.ÆÆ Æ.v~ Æ.|v x.Æ| x.z~
x. Assam w.}Æ Æ.yx Æ.{z v.wx Æ.~y
y. Bihar vx.x} Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ
z. Chhattisgarh Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ x.|x Æ.ÆÆ
{. Goa Æ.Æw Æ.|z Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ
|. Gujarat x.{} x.|v v.Æ{ |.~y Æ.v{
}. Haryana Æ.yx Æ.y{ Æ.vÆ Æ.x{ Æ.v|
~. Himachal Pradesh v.x~ Æ.{| Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ
vÆ. Jammu & Kashmir Æ.zv Æ.Æv Æ.Æ| Æ.Æ} ~.w~
vv. Jharkhand Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ
vw. Karnataka vy.~{ wÆ.yz y.{| |.z{ v.wy
vx. Kerala Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.vv Æ.Æy Æ.Æ}
vy. Madhya Pradesh x.xx w.{} v.}v Æ.|y Æ.|y
vz. Maharashtra y.}Æ |.v| z.~x x.v~ Æ.zx
v{. Manipur Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.~Æ Æ.ÆÆ
v|. Meghalaya Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ v.ÆÆ Æ.z} Æ.ÆÆ
v}. Mizoram Æ.~x Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ x.{{ Æ.ÆÆ
v~. Nagaland Æ.{| Æ.ÆÆ Æ.vx Æ.xw Æ.ÆÆ
wÆ. Orissa x.zÆ Æ.v~ x.x| Æ.~w Æ.zv
wv. Punjab Æ.|~ Æ.}w Æ.Æx Æ.yz Æ.v~

33
12 3 4 567
ww. Rajasthan vÆ.y~ w.z{ x.}w v.{~ Æ.w{
wx. Sikkim Æ.x~ Æ.yy Æ.xÆ Æ.zz z.~v
wy. Tamil Nadu v{.x{ x.~{ v.v~ w.wy Æ.zx
wz. Tripura Æ.vÆ Æ.~| Æ.vy Æ.yw Æ.ÆÆ
w{. Uttaranchal Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.Æ| Æ.ÆÆ
w|. Uttar Pradesh vy.Æw z.xy x.vw x.{x v.|{
w}. West Bengal y.}{ w.}z Æ.~v w.yw v.zy
w~. Andaman & Nicobar
Islands Æ.ww Æ.y| Æ.w~ v.z} Æ.yx
xÆ. Chandigarh -----
xv. Dadra and Nagar Haveli Æ.Æ} Æ.Æz Æ.vx Æ.Æy Æ.ÆÆ
xw. Daman & Dev Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ
xx. Delhi -----
xy. Pondicherry Æ.ÆÆ Æ.ÆÆ Æ.Æw Æ.x~ v.y{
Total v{{.x{ z|.xy xv.w{ y~.|y xz.v}

34
ANNEXURE III
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON THURSDAY, THE 17TH FEBRUARY, 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room
‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri P . Mohan
4. Shri Amitava Nandy
5. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
6. Shri D. Vittal Rao
7. Shri Sajjan Kumar
8. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
9. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
Rajya Sabha
10. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
11. Shi Jayantilal Barot
12. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
13. Shri Prasanta  Chatterjee
14. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
15. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . D. T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary

35
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Employment
and Poverty Alleviation
1. Smt. Chitra Chopra, Secretary
2. Shri Pankaj Jain, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and the
representatives of the Ministry. He indicated in brief some of the major
problems being faced in the implementation of the SJSRY. He requested
the Ministry to enlighten the Committee as to how the Ministry would
address these problems. The Chairman then drew the attention of the
representatives of the Ministry to the provision of direction 55(1) of
the Directions by the Speaker.
3. Thereafter, the representative of the Ministry made an audio-
visual presentation before the Committee on the SJSRY. The
representatives of the Ministry clarified to the queries of the members.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

36
ANNEXURE IV
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-05)
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, 3 MAY, 2005
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room
‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
3. Shri P . Mohan
4. Shri Amitava Nandy
5. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
6. Shri L. Rajgopal
7. Shri Sajjan Kumar
8. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
Rajya Sabha
9.  Shri B. K. Hariprasad
10. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
11. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
2. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
3. Shri A. K. Srivastava — Assistant Director
(i) Reprsentatives of Ministry of Finance (Financial Sector) & RBI
1. Shri Vinod Rai, Additional Secretary
2. Dr. K. B. L. Mathur, Economic Adviser
3. Shri G. Srinivasan, CGM, RBI

37
(ii) Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
1. Smt. Chitra Chopra, Secretary
2. Shri Pankaj Jain, Joint Secretary (H)
2. As the Chairman was away due to some urgent work, the
Committee chose Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, M.P . to act as Chairman
for the sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance (Financial Sector) and the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation to the sitting of the Committee.
The Chairman, thereafter, outlined in brief some of the major hurdles
being faced in the implementation of ‘Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar
Yojana’ (SJSRY). He requested the Ministry of Finance (Financial Sector)
to indiate as to how effectively they could address these problems.
The Chairman, then drew the attention of the representatives of both
the Ministries to the provision of direction 55(1) of the Directions by
the Speaker.
4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Finane (Financial Sector) and the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation on the Subject ‘Swarna Jayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana’ SJSRY. The Committee discussed in detail the
various issues related to the above subject. The representatives of both
the Ministries clarified to the queries raised by the members.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

38
ANNEXURE V
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY, 28 JULY 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Room No. ‘139’
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
4. Shri Amitava Nandy
5. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
6. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
7. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri B. K. Hariprasad
9. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
10. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
11. Shri Jayantilal Barot
12. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
13. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
4. Shri A. K. Srivastava — Assistant Director

39
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee first took up for consideration tthe
draft report on the subject ‘Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana’
(Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation). After
deliberation, the Committee adopted the draft report with slight
modifications.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration Memorandum
No. 4 regarding draft Report on the action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the Third Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Implementation of Part IX A of the
Constitution’ (Ministry of Urban Development). After deliberation the
Committee adopted the draft report without any modifications.
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise both
the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Ministries and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
5. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked all the members of the
Committee and the Officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to
the Committee for their active cooperation and support extended by
them during the tenure of the Committee (2004-2005).
The Committee then adjourned.

40
ANNEXURE VI
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Sl.No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations
12 3
1. 2.10 The Committee note that Swarna Jayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) is the only
urban poverty alleviation programme of the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation directly providing employment
opportunities to the urban unemployed or
under employed living below the poverty
line, which is estimated at 6.71 crore. The
Committee further note that Rs. 541 crore
were allocated to SJSRY during the 10
th Five
Year Plan as against the demand of Rs. 2000
crore made by the Ministry which, in the
opinion of the Committee, is not adequate
to meet the demands of the growing
unemployment in the urban areas. The
Committee recommend that priority should
be given to SJSRY Scheme by the
Government and adequate financial
allocations should be made for this scheme
so as to tackle the massive problem of
growing unemployment in an effective
manner.
2. 2.11 The Committee note that upto 31.3.2005,
States/UTs have total unspent funds to the
tune of Rs. 300.53 crore, which includes
both Central and State shares under SJSRY.
The Committee fail to understand why such
a huge amount remained unspent when
there is also a move to augment the
budgetary allocation due to financial crunch
felt in the implementation of the
programme. An indepth study is necessary

41
12 3
to find out as to why the funds could not
be utilized within the time limit. Non
utilization of funds means that actual
benefits do not reach the poor. This is a
cause for concern. The Committee are of
the view that such a huge amount of
unspent balance is a serious matter and has
an adverse effect on the overall
performance of the Scheme. The Committee,
therefore, urge the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation to
make strenuous efforts to motivate and
direct the States/UTs for utilizing these
unspent funds and furnish their utilisation
certificates to the Ministry.
3. 2.12 The Committee desire that the Ministry
should ascertain the reasons as to why a
few States find difficulty in providing their
matching share on time under SJSRY and
if their difficulties are genuine, the Ministry
should resolve them by revising the
guidelines of the Scheme.
4. 2.13 The Committee are not satisfied to learn
that the Ministry of Urban Employment
and Poverty Alleviation have not fruitfully
and effectively addressed the issue of
targeting the urban families below poverty
line for providing employment. This fact
has also been highlighted by C&AG in its
Report (Civil) of 2001, Chapter III that the
Ministry has not been able to address
satisfactorily the issue of targeting the
urban families below poverty line for
providing employment. The Committee
need hardly emphasize that although SJSRY
is a well-designed scheme based on
community participation/ the actual
potential of the programme is yet to be
realized. Unfortunately, implementation

42
12 3
efforts by local bodies in various States/
UTs have encountered several roadblocks
including lack of community leadership,
poor finance from banks and delay in
launching of ‘Employment Generating’ units
under the scheme. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that concerted efforts
must be made by the Union Ministry to
urge the States/UTs to effectively implement
the SJSRY by passing on its benefit to the
targeted BPL persons. The Committee also
recommend that the Ministry should take
proper follow-up action with the States/
UTs to ensure compliance of Ministry’s
guidelines issued to the States/UTs on
SJSRY from time to time.
5. 2.14 In regard to low priority given to SJSRY as
compared to the Rural Employment
Schemes, the Ministry have stated that the
main factor for this may be the low budget
of the Scheme, which is able to cater to
only a token segment of the urban poor.
The Committee are, however, not convinced
by this reply of the Ministry. The
Committee recommend that concerted
efforts should be made by the Union
Ministry to grab the attention of the States/
UTs for effective implementation of the
employment generating schemes under
SJSRY in their States/UTs to deal with the
ever increasing problem of urban poverty.
6. 3.8 The Committee note that skill development
through appropriate training is one of the
elements of USEP which intend to provide
training to the urban poor in a variety of
service and manufacturing trades as well
as in local skills and local crafts so that
they can set up self/employment ventures

43
12 3
and secure salaried employment with
enhanced remuneration. In this regard, the
Committee recommend that skill oriented
training to beneficiaries under the Scheme
should be provided based on the
suggestions of the CDSs, which are suitable
with the local conditions and marketable
activities of the region. The Committee are
of the firm view that a positive correlation
needs to be developed between the number
of persons trained and the number of
persons employed/setting-up micro
enterprises, so as to keep them motivated
as well as making the ‘Training Courses’
more result oriented. The Committee
recommend that if necessary, suitable
amendments be carried out in the
governing rules so that a target number of
trained persons set-up units or engage in
activities under the SJSRY schemes.
7. 3.9 The Committee also desire that the
Government should work out the strategy
to utilize the services of employment
exchanges in the urban areas, which can
act as the focal point for placement of
unemployed youth who would be trained
under SJSRY. The person so trained under
SJSRY should be issued training cards/
certificates which could help them in
availing loans from the banks/financial
institutions.
8. 3.10 The Committee note that special assistance
is provided for setting up of community
kendras that are used for multifarious
activities such as work places/marketing
centres etc. The Committee desire that such
Community kendras should be
strengthened and further diversified. These

44
12 3
Community Kendras must be effectively
utilized for display and marketing of
products manufactured by Self-Help Group
and micro-units under the SJSRY schemes.
9. 3.11 The Committee also desire that training
budget of Rs. 2000/- per participant under
the USEP should be increased and
successful micro entrepreneurs should be
associated for imparting ‘Enhancement
Courses’ of Skill training. The Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
must regularly analyse the training needs
of the beneficiaries in consultation with the
State level authorities specially the Town
Urban Poverty Alleviation Cells in the
States/UTs so as to extend the scope of
coverage of this centrally sponsored self-
employment scheme.
10. 3.15 The Committee note that under the Scheme,
house-to-house surveys for identification of
the genuine beneficiaries below the poverty
line is done by the State Governments.
Non-economic parameters are also applied
to identify urban poor in addition to the
economic criteria of the urban poverty line.
The Committee also note that upto
31.3.2005, out of the total 3799 towns in
the country, house-to-house survey has been
carried out only in 3536 towns thus leaving
263 towns unsurveyed. The Committee are
of the opinion that without proper
identification of genuine beneficiaries, it
would be difficult to effectively implement
and assess the actual performance of the
SJSRY Scheme. Non-availability of BPL list
and lack of transparency in compilation and
dissemination of the lists would definitely
hamper the successful implementation of

45
12 3
the urban poverty alleviation programme
like SJSRY . Once the BPL list has been
finalised, the same should be widely
publicized as in case of voters list for the
general information of public with specific
economic and other parameters used to
identify the genuine persons for inclusion
in the list. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry of UEPA
should impress upon the State Governments
to conduct house-to-house survey in the
remaining 263 towns at the earliest and for
this purpose, services of NGOS ,VOs and
Community based Organisation should also
be availed. The Committee would like to
be apprised about the action taken in this
regard.
11. 3.25 The Committee note that DWCUA Scheme
is distinguished by the Special incentive
extended to urban poor women, who
decide to set-up self-employment ventures
in a group comprising of at least ten
women. The Committee feel that there is a
need to review the said condition as
sometimes this precondition of having
atleast ten women to constitute a group
hampers the formation of DWCUA group
for lack of pre-requisite number. The
Committee recommend that the viability of
keeping the condition of minimum number
of members in DWCUA, should be
explored by the Ministry expeditiously. The
Committee are of the firm view that more
number of DWCUA groups would be
formed if this norm of stipulated groups
number is relaxed. The Committee also note
that State Governments work out forward
and backward linkages in accordance with
the guidelines of the Scheme concerning the

46
12 3
DWCUA groups. The Committee desire that
integration to the extent possible should be
forged between urban self help groups
under DWCUA and rural self help groups
so that urban SHGs under DWCUA could
be engaged in the marketing of products
produced by rural SHGs or vice-versa.
12. 3.26 The Committee, further desire that
innovative areas of employment as has been
developed in the State of Kerala under
Kudumbashree programme need to be
emulated in other States and best practices/
success stories of DWCUA groups should
be given wide publicity.
13. 3.35 The Committee note that credit facilities are
available to the eligible BPL beneficiaries
who are desirous of setting up self-
employment ventures under USEP
component of SJSRY and 95% of the project
cost is sanctioned as composite loan by the
banks to the beneficiaries. The Committee
also note that banks are many a times
reluctant to lend to urban poor due to a
number of reasons and presently available
micro-credit is inadequate and needs to be
upscaled. The Committee desire that the
Government should set up a parallel
funding mechanism/agency just like
NABARD to specifically address the needs
and the issues of funding and loaning of
the urban poor under SJSRY and for this
purpose either SIDBI should be
strengthened or some parallel mechanism
should be set up so that the urban poor
can have easy access to micro finance.
14. 3.36 The Committee also desire that all issues
related to non-cooperation by banks
regarding sanctioning and disbursement of

47
12 3
loan to the beneficiaries under SJSRY
should be sorted out in close coordination
with the State level Banker’s Committee,
Ministry of Finance, RBI and the
commercial Banks by holding periodical
and timely meetings.
15. 3.37 The Committee note that to address the
issue of providing micro-finance to the
urban poor in a holistic manner, a Task
Force under the chairmanship of Secretary
(UEPA) has been set up in the Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation. The Task Force is expected to
present its report shortly. The Committee
hope that the report of the Task Force
would provide formulation for a viable
micro-credit mechanism for the urban poor
and would strengthen the existing micro-
credit financing institutions to provide
finance to encourage self employment
among the urban poor.
16. 3.41 The Committee note that UWEP
Component seeks to provide wage
employment to prospective beneficiaries
living below the poverty line within the
jurisdiction of urban local bodies by
utilising their labour for construction of
socially and economically useful public
assets. The Committee also note that the
wage employment provided under UWEP
is not sustainable in nature and it provides
only temporary employment. The
Committee desire that UWEP Component
of SJSRY need to be used only for building
Community assets and infrastructure
relating to the urban poor and not general
municipal works as this would ensure
improvement in the civic amenities meant

48
12 3
for urban poor. The Committee further
desire that for providing sustainability of
employment under UWEP to the
beneficiaries, the beneficiaries should be
equipped with the sustainable level of skill
for self employment. The Committee
recommend that UWEP must be
strengthened in such a way that the
schemes under UWEP provide maximum
employment opportunities to the
unorganized sector of labour in the country.
17. 3.42  The Committee note that under UWEP the
material labour ratio for works is to be
maintained at 60:40. The Committee desire
that material labour ratio flexibility should
be provided to States so as to suit their
local conditions and requirements so as to
make the UWEP schemes more practical
and progressive.
18. 3.50 The Committee note that under
Information, Education and Communication
(IEC) component of SJSRY, upto 2% of the
allocation at the State/UT level is retained
for the capacity building of project
functionaries and other IEC activities. At
the central level also, 2 to 3% of the total
allocation is retained and kept separately
for training, workshops, seminars and other
IEC activities. The Committee also note that
four national level training institutes have
been identified by the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation for
carrying out training/capacity building of
the project functionaries under SJSRY. The
Committee desire that funds allocation
under IEC component should be increased
and regular capacity building exercises,
training of project functionaries and officials

49
12 3
involved in the implementation of the
Scheme by associating the national level
training institutes, which have been
identified by the Ministry, should be
undertaken.
19. 3.51 The Committee further desire that
community structures created under the
SJSRY should be fully involved in the
activities under the Scheme, including
selection and implementation of works,
thrift and credit groups and group
economic activities etc. Sensitisation
programmes for the implementing agencies
should be conducted regularly. Specific
provisions for involvement of NGOs for
training programmes should be
incorporated in the Scheme. If necessary,
the Government should also explore the
feasibility of participation of private
companies in providing training to the
beneficiaries under SJSRY.
20. 3.52 The Committee note that documentation of
best practices in the field of poverty
alleviation is one of the most important
activity under the IEC component. In
respect of documentation and dissemination
of information, the Secretary, Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
has admitted that this area has been weak.
The Secretary also admitted that the
dissemination of replicable projects needed
to be stepped up. Lack of documentation
of the viable projects by the States is also
one of the weak areas. The Committee also
note that the Ministry of UEPA is planning
this year a comprehensive Media Plan for
advertising SJSRY through DAVP and other
agencies. The documentation of best

50
12 3
practices under SJSRY is also being done
at ULB/State/ National level and publicised
widely through circulation in the States/
UTs for generating awareness about the
Scheme. The Committee would like to be
kept informed about further steps taken in
this direction. The Committee also desire
that the Government should make earnest
efforts in association with the National/
State/ULB level functionaries and NGOs in
propagation and dissemination of success
stories and best practices under SJSRY
Scheme. Wide publicity about the scheme
should be given in the vernaculars also so
as to generate awareness of the Scheme
amongst the urban poor.
21. 3.60 The Committee note that under SJSRY
scheme no physical targets were fixed
during the 9
th Plan. However, in the
10th Plan, target of setting upto 4 lakh
micro-enterprises and skill upgradation of
5 lakh has been fixed. For the year
2005-2006 the target of assisting 80,000
urban poor for setting up of micro
enterprises for self-employment and
providing skill training/upgradation to
100000 urban poor has been fixed. During
the first three years of the 10
th Plan upto
31.3.2005, a total of 2,97,419 micro-
enterprises have been set up and 3,27,399
beneficiaries have been provided skill
training under USEP . The Committee also
note that low priority is given by the States
to SJSRY Scheme in comparison to the rural
Schemes. The Committee desire that for the
assessment of the Scheme, annual physical
targets under the Scheme should be fixed
by the Municipal level functionaries in the
States/UTs and such targets be adhered to.

51
12 3
The Committee further desire that keeping
in view the high magnitude of urban
unemployment, the Government should
encourage the States/UTs to give priority
to this urban sector schemes as given by
them to the rural Schemes by making the
urban schemes innovative and more
acceptable to them. The Committee
recommend that the States/UTs, which are
lagging behind in implementation of SJSRY
schemes must be encouraged to improve
their performance and the Government
should ensure that proper physical progress
is made by States/UTs and the funds made
available to them are fully utilized.
22. 3.73 The Committee note that the Scheme is
being monitored through quarterly progress
reports and periodical review meetings
under the Chairmanship of Minister/
Secretary/Joint Secretary/Director of the
Ministry. Most of the States/UTs are
sending their quarterly progress reports on
regular basis. The Committee are perturbed
to learn that some States like Goa,
Jharkhand and Delhi have not sent their
quarterly progress reports since long on the
implementation of this important self
employment scheme for urban poor. The
Committee desire that States like Goa,
Jharkhand, Delhi and other bad performing
States which are not sending their quarterly
progress reports since long should be
impressed upon to send their quarterly
progress reports timely so that actual
impact of SJSRY Scheme could be properly
assessed in these States. If required, the
Ministry should take this matter at the
Minister/Chief Secretary level of the
concerned States.

52
12 3
23. 3.74  The Committee are also distressed to learn
that Delhi is one of the States, which has
not undertaken projects under the SJSRY,
although the GNCT of Delhi is facing an
ever-increasing urban unemployment and
problems in employment opportunities for
the unorganized Sector of labour. The
Committee strongly recommend that
corrective action be taken by the
Government in coordination with GNCT of
Delhi so as to undertake SJSRY projects in
a wholesome manner.
24. 3.75  The Committee note that concurrent
evaluation of SJSRY in seven States has
been conducted during 2001-2002 through
Indian Institute of Public Administration
(IIPA) and other renowned agencies.
Further, an evaluation study on SJSRY on
all India basis has been assigned to Human
Settlement Management Institute (HSMI),
New Delhi during the last year. The Study
is likely to be completed during the
2005-2006. The Committee recommend that
the Ministry should strengthen the
monitoring of the Scheme at both the
Central and State levels by conducting
regular field visits by senior officers of the
Ministry. As regards the concurrent
evaluation of the Scheme, the Committee
desire that the Ministry should take
necessary action to have the Concurrent
evaluation study completed at the earliest.
25. 3.76 The Committee note that the modification
of guidelines of the SJSRY Scheme is at an
advanced stage on the basis of the problems
being faced by the States/UTs. The draft
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)
memorandum has been prepared and it has

53
12 3
been sent to the Financial Adviser for their
concurrence before being circulated to all
concerned for their comments. The
Committee desire that the revised
guidelines of the Scheme be finanlized at
the earliest after taking into consideration
the views of all concerned with the
implementation of the Scheme. The
Committee hope that the revised guidelines
of the Scheme would be flexible, innovative
and would be able to cater to the
requirements of the urban poor to a large
extent. These new revised guidelines of the
Scheme should be effective enough in
removing the hurdles experienced in the
implementation of this Scheme.
26. 3.77 The Committee trust that the Ministry
would make sincere efforts to remove/plug
all the shortcomings/lacunae noticed in the
Scheme and make the modifications in the
guidelines of the Scheme as proposed by
them at the earliest for the effective
implementation of the Scheme.