10
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
IMPLEMENTATION OF PART IX-A OF
THE CONSTITUTION
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee
on Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
TENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


TENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
IMPLEMENTATION OF PART IX-A
OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee
on Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 2.8.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 2.8.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2005/Sravana, 1927 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 10
Price : Rs. 27.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 16
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 42
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 43
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 48
APPENDICES
I. Status Report received from States/UTs
regarding setting up of Ward Committees ........ 49
II. Devolution of Functional Powers on Urban
Local Bodies ............................................................... 52
III. Details of State Finance Commission .................. 56
IV . Minutes of the 21st sitting of the Committee
held on 28 July, 2005 ............................................. 58
V. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the Third
Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ...... 60

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Pushp Jain
*6. Shri P . Mohan
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Amitava Nandy
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
11. Shri L. Rajgopal
12. Shri D. Vittal Rao
13. Shri Sajjan Kumar
14. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Sugrib Singh
17. Shri K. Subbarayan
18. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
19. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
20. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
21. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
*Nominated w.e.f. 27 October 2004.
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
**23. Shri Vairender Singh Bajwa
24. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
25. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
26. Shri Jayantilal Barot
27. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
28. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
29. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
30. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
31. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
4. Shrimati Neera Singh — Under Secretary
**Nominated w.e.f. 24 March 2005.
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Tenth Report on Action Taken by
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Third Report
of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2004-2005) on
‘Implementation of Part IX-A of the Constitution’.
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 7th December,
2004. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 27th June, 2005.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
28 July, 2005.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Committee
(2004-2005) is given in Appendix V .
 N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM
29 July, 2005 Chairman,
7 Sravana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Urban Development (2004-2005)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Third Report on ‘Implementation of Part IX-A of
the constitution which was presented to Lok Sabha on 7
th December,
2004.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 26 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows.
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.23, 2.24, 2.25, 3.8, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.19, 3.20,
3.21, 3.22, 3.31, 3.32, 3.36, 4.8, 4.9, 4.10, 4.11, 4.12, 5.3, 5.4,
6.2, and 7.4
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para No.3.9
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para No. 2.21 and 2.22
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para No. Nil
3. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Implementation of the provisions of Part IX-A of the Constitution
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.21 and 2.22)
4. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee definitely regard the Constitutional (74
th
Amendment) Act, 1992 as a path-breaking piece of legislation by

2
which Constitution of India has been amended to incorporate a
separate Chapter on Urban Local Bodies (ULB) by emphasizing
the deserved significance of local self-governance in line with the
democratic set-up of the country. The 74 th CAA has redefined the
role, power, function and finances of “Municipalities” or ULBs
across the country. The Committee, therefore, are of the firm view
that with the complete and proper implementation of the provisions
under Article 243P to 243ZG of Part IX A of the Constitution,
better control and effective working of the Urban Local Bodies in
passing on the economic benefits and suitable urban infrastructure
to the people at large, would be achieved. The Committee also
recommend that innovative and good governance methods be
adopted by Urban Local Bodies with proper information and
training inputs, data base, as required, for improving the living
conditions and quality of life of urban residents in the country”.
(Recommendation Para No. 2.21)
5. The Government in their reply have stated as under:
“The Ministry has been taking up the issue of implementation of
Article 243P to 243ZG of Part IX A of the Constitution with the
States on a continuous basis. As a result different provisions of
Part IX A have been implemented by the States which include
elections to urban local bodies (except Jharkhand and Pondicherry)
for a fixed term of five years, devolution of functional and financial
powers, reservation of seats for SC/ST and women, setting up of
State Finance Commission etc. However, certain states like Andhra
Pradesh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Nagaland, Punjab, Tripura, Uttar
Pradesh, Uttaranchal & Pondicherry are lagging behind in setting
up of District Planning Committees (DPCs) for which the Ministry
of Urban Development has been pursuing. It is, however, submitted
that the subject of DPC has since been transferred to the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj and the recommendation of the Committee has
been forwarded to them for further follow up. Out of the 15 States
having Metropolitan cities with a population of 10 lakh or more,
Metropolitan Planning Committees (MPCs) have been constituted
in two States namely West Bengal and Maharashtra. Similarly, Ward
Committees (WCs) have been set up in 9 States/UTs, as per the
details placed at Annexure-I.
In order that governance in urban local bodies be improved further
and these bodies become more responsive, accountable and
transparent, the Ministry is proposing to launch a Mission Mode
Project on e-Governance in Municipalities. The main objective of

3
the e-Governance initiative is application of electronic means to
improve efficiency and effectiveness of urban local bodies in the
interaction between local government and its citizens as well as
other interested groups.
This Ministry in coordination with the C&AG is pursuing reforms
in the field of Municipal Accounting System for which a National
Municipal Accounts Manual (NMAM) has already been circulated
to the State Governments to help them to develop State specific
municipal accounting manual.
Ministry of Urban Development has also circulated Model
Municipal Law (MML), which intends to assist urban local bodies
in the areas of accounting reforms, resource mobilization, levy of
users charges, entry of private sector partnership etc.
This Ministry proposes for launching National Urban Renewal
Mission (NURM) and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme
for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) in which, inter-alia, the
following reforms at the level of ULBs/States are being proposed
to be made mandatory to qualify for availing Central assistance:—
1. Adoption of modern, accrual-based double entry system of
accounting in urban local bodies
2. Reform of property tax with GIS, so that it becomes major
source of revenue for urban local bodies
3. Levy of reasonable user charges by urban local bodies with
the objective that full cost of operation and maintenance is
collected within next five years
4. Implementation of decentralization measures as envisaged
in 74
th Constitution Amendment Act
5. Introduction of independent regulators for urban services
6. Assigning and associating elected urban local bodies as with
“City Planning function”
The above initiatives of Ministry of Urban Development are
expected to enable ULBs to perform their assigned duties and
responsibilities in a more effective and efficient manner to improve
the living conditions and quality of life of urban residents.
6. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that the 74
th CAA aims at a Constitutional
guarantee to safeguard the interest of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)

4
to enable them to function as effective, democratic and self-
governing institutions at grass root level. The Committee strongly
emphasize that suitable steps be taken to ensure the following:—
-r egularity in elections under the supervision of the State
Election Commission;
-a  clear tenure of five years for the elected body;
-p rotection for the elected body against arbitrary dissolution;
- Constitution of Ward Committees for greater proximity to
the citizens;
- mandate to State Legislature to endow the ULBs with such
powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them
to function as institution of self-Government;
- the functions enumerated in Twelfth Schedule are effectively
transferred to the Urban Local Bodies;
- the constitution of State Finance Commission (SFCs) to
review municipal finances and make recommendations
regarding distribution of the proceeds of State-level taxes
between the State Governments and the Urban Local Bodies
criteria for grants-in-aid, measures needed to improve the
financial position of the Urban Local Bodies and compliance
of the recommendations of the State Finance Commissions;
and
-u rgent formation of District Planning Committees (DPCs)
and Metropolitan Planning Committees (MPCs) for
integrated as well as coordinated planning for urban and
rural areas”.
(Recommendation Para No2.22)
7. The Government in their reply have stated as under:
“The Ministry agrees with the above observations of the Committee.
The Ministry has been impressing upon the States to fully
implement the provisions of the Constitution (74
th Amendment)
Act. The latest position with regard to the above observations is
as under:—
I. Elections of the urban local bodies have been held in all
States and UTs except Jharkhand and Pondicherry. The
Government of Jharkhand and UT of Pondicherry have been

5
requested to conduct the elections of municipalities without
further delay.
II. Article 243 U already provides for fixed terms of five years
for Municipalities and the States have made relevant
provisions in their municipal laws.
III. A provision already exists in the Constitution to give a
municipality a reasonable opportunity of being heard before
its dissolution.
IV . Ward Committees have been constituted in various States
where municipalities with population over 3 lakh exist. A
Statement showing position in this regard is placed at
Annexure-I.
V. As per Article 243W of the Constitution, it is for the
Legislature of State to devolve such powers and
responsibilities upon municipalities as necessary to enable
them to function as effective units of Local Self Government
including those listed in the Twelfth Schedule. A Statement
showing the status of devolution of functions listed in the
Twelfth Schedule of Constitution upon municipalities in
various States is placed at Annexure-II.
VI. State Finance Commissions (SFCs) have been set up by all
the States (Annexure-III). In four States/UTs namely Kerala,
Uttar Pradesh, Haryana & NCT of Delhi, third Finance
Commissions have also been set up. The Ministry is in
constant touch with the State Governments to ensure that
the recommendations of the SFCs are implemented
expeditiously. Gist of the recommendation of the SFCs and
action taken thereon, already annexed to the main report of
the Committee as Annexure-VIII (pages 96-111 of the report)
VII. For early setting up of DPCs and MPCs, the Government
of India is pursuing the matter with the concerned State
Governments. Chief Secretaries have been requested vide
letter No. G-20011/1/2004-UCD dated 21.4.2005 to take
suitable action in this regard. It is submitted that the subject
of DPC has since been allocated to the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj. Further follow-up action on DPC will be
taken by them”.
8. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that
certain states like Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Nagaland,

6
Punjab, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal & Pondicherry are lagging
behind in setting up of District Planning Committees (DPCs) for
which the Ministry of Urban Development has been pursuing.
However, the subject of DPC has since been transferred to the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj and the recommendation of the Committee
has been forwarded to them by the Ministry of Urban Development
for further follow up. The Committee express their deep concern
over the slackness on the part of a number of States who had failed
to constitute District Planning Committees (DPCs) despite the fact
that almost a decade has elapsed since the enactment of the
Constitution (74
th Amendment) Act. The Committee , therefore, firmly
recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development in coordination
with Ministry of Panchayati Raj should urge the defaulting States/
Uts to take expedient steps to constitute the DPCs The Committee
are also concerned to note that even the Metropolitan Planning
Committees (MPCs) have not been constituted in most of the States.
Out of 15 States only 2 States namely West Bengal and Maharashtra
have constituted the MPCs. The Committee are, therefore, of the
opinion that the spirit of the Constitution (74
th Amendment) Act has
not been adhered to in many States. The Committee are of the firm
view that till decentralization becomes effective both in terms of
functions and resources, the aims and objectives behind the
enactment of the Constitution (74
th Amendment) Act will not be
realized.
B. Parallel Bodies
Recommendation (Para No. 3.12)
9. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee are perturbed to note that with the presence of
various other governmental and non-governmental bodies there is
considerable encroachment upon the functional domain of the
‘Municipalities’. The Committee also note that such bodies are not
accountable to ‘Municipalities’, although such agencies deal with
even basic municipal functions like water supply, sewerage and
capital works etc. The Committee have been informed by an expert
that in certain cases, the capital works are executed by a Specialised
Agency and their loan liability is passed on to the Municipalities.
The Committee can not approve of this kind of practice. The
Committee, therefore strongly recommend that the functional
domain of the ‘Municipalities’ must be exclusive and clearly
demarcated to check any kind of encroachment and confusion. If
due to special and technical reasons other bodies are required, the

7
Committee recommend that such bodies should be made
accountable and answerable to the Municipalities”.
10. The Committee have replaced as below:
“The Ministry agrees with the observation of the Committee on
encroachment upon the functional domain of the municipalities by
various other Governmental and non-governmental bodies. The
recommendation of the Committee has been brought to the notice
of all States concerned.  In order that all civic functions of ULBs
being performed by other agencies are transferred to them, in the
proposed National Urban Renewal Mission (NURM) and Urban
Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns
(UIDSSMT), it would be obligatory upon States to undertake to
transfer over a period of five years all specialised agencies that
deliver civic services in urban areas to ULBs and create
accountability platforms for all urban civic services providers in
transition”.
11. The Committee appreciate that in the proposed National
Urban Renewal Mission (NURM) and Urban Infrastructure
Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT), it
would be obligatory upon States to undertake to transfer over a
period of five years all specialised agencies that deliver civic services
in urban areas to ULBs and create accountability platforms for all
urban civic service providers in transition. The Committee hope that
the proposed NURM and UIDSSMT would be able to eliminate the
encroachment upon the functional domain of Municipalities by the
parallel bodies and that all special agencies currently involved in
delivering urban civil services would be brought under the
supervisions of municipalities, thus creating a uniform accountability
platform.
C. Financial Position of Municipalities
Recommendations (Para Nos. 3.19 and 3.21)
12. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee express their deep anguish to note that most of
the Municipalities etc., which are statutorily responsible for
provisioning and maintenance of basic infrastructure and services
in cities and towns are under fiscal stress. They are given to
understand that many of the Municipalities have not been able to
carry out their assigned civic functions and pay salaries and wages

8
to their employees, although, the financial conditions of bigger
municipal corporations had not been as bad as of smaller
municipalities. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of
Urban Development should coordinate and persuade the concerned
State Governments/ UTs to take the necessary corrective measures
on their part by adopting suitable taxation methods, accounting
standards etc. to enable the Municipalities to generate their own
funds. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Urban
Development should persuade the State Governments to link their
development plans with resources mobilization plans and credit
enhancement mechanisms keeping in view the long-term
perspective and aims of the institutions of urban local self
government. The Committee recommend that cost recovery
procedures and revenue collection methods of such bodies should
be strengthened in a scientific and prudent manner. As regards
the action taken on the suggestions of the ‘Task Force’ as constituted
by the Ministry, the Committee would like to be apprised about
the latest position in the matter”.
(Recommendation Para No.3.19)
13. The Government have replied as below:
“In order to bring much needed reforms in taxation method of
municipalities, this Ministry has circulated Guidelines for Property
Tax Reforms in March, 1998 to exploit the potential of property
tax, the major source of income for ULBs, for strengthening their
revenue base. Many States like Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa,
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil
Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Chandigarh, Delhi and
Pondicherry have introduced/are introducing Unit area based
system of property tax valuation. At present, there is a proposal to
launch a new scheme namely National Urban Information System
(NUIS) in order to help ULBs in planning and management of
urban settlement based on updated and scientific database as a
decision support system, employing modern planning method using
GIS technology. It will help in creation of database of properties
for better enforcement of property tax. In the first phase, 137
towns/cities are proposed to be covered under NUIS.
Similarly for proper maintenance of accounts and the audit of
ULBs, the Ministry has prepared a National Municipal Accounts
Manual in cooperation with the office of Comptroller & Auditor
General of India (C&AG). This manual has been circulated to all

9
States in January, 2005 to help the States formulate their State-
specific municipal accounting manuals. Accounting principles
mentioned in the Manual are primarily focussed on the concept of
accrual basis of accounting.
This initiative is expected not only to enhance the capacities of
ULBs in municipal accounting leading to increased transparency
and accountability in the utilization of public funds but also help
urban local bodies to play their roles more effectively and ensure
better service-delivery. As per information available, the States
excepting Assam, Meghalaya and Nagaland have taken necessary
initiatives for adoption of the provisions of the Manual to reform
the municipal accounting in ULBs.
Regarding cost recovery procedures and revenue collection methods,
the Model Municipal Law (MML) circulated by this Ministry to all
States in 2003 inter-alia envisages a provision to empower ULBs to
levy users charges for cost recovery of various services. To fix the
users charges, a provision has also been made in the MML for
setting up State Level Regulatory Authority . As per information
available, States/UTs namely Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Karnataka,
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan,
Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttaranchal, A&N Islands, Chandigarh
& Delhi have initiated necessary action to adopt the provisions of
MML.
Besides, under the proposed National Urban Renewal Mission
(NURM) and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small
and Medium Towns (UDISSMT), it is being made mandatory for
ULBs and State Governments to undertake, inter-alia, the following
reforms to qualify for Central assistance:
1. Adoption of modern, accrual-based double entry system of
accounting in urban local bodies.
2. Reform of property tax with GIS, so that it becomes major
source of revenue for urban local bodies.
3. Levy of reasonable user charges by urban local bodies with
the objective that full cost of operation and maintenance is
collected within next five years.
4. Implementation of decentralization measures as envisaged
in 74
th Constitution Amendment Act.
5. Introduction of independent regulators for urban services.

10
The above initiatives of Ministry of Urban Development are
expected to enable ULBs to strengthen the cost recovery procedures
and revenue collection methods in a scientific and prudent manner
and enhance their credit worthiness to access the Institutional
finances.
The Mission strategy of the proposed NURM envisages that every
identified city would prepare planned urban prospective framework
for a period of 20-25 years indicating policies, programmes and
strategies of meeting fund requirement. This provision of the
proposed NURM would ensure linking development plan of the
city with resource mobilization of ULBs.
Regarding the present position of the Task Force constituted by
the Ministry, it is submitted that the Task Force has have held 3
meetings with the State representatives and is at present in the
process of finalization of its recommendations”.
14. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee note that the Tenth Finance Commission
recommended for a provision of Rs.1000 Crore to enable the Urban
Local Bodies to meet their primary obligations. It also desired that
Local Bodies should provide suitable matching contribution by
raising resources. The Committee further note that the Eleventh
Finance Commission had emphasized the need for meeting the
revenue mobilizations by the local bodies themselves. It suggested
for suitable reforms in property/house tax system and the need
for replacing octroi/entry tax with a suitable tax and also revising
the rate structure of user charges on a regular basis. The Eleventh
Finance Commission has recommended for devolution of Rs.2000
Crore to Urban Local Bodies for 5 year period from 2000 to 2005.
While the Committee are happy to note that financial provision by
way of devolution of Rs.2000 crore to Urban Local Bodies has
been made by Eleventh Finance Commission, but the
Municipalities/Urban Local Bodies are still unable to perform well
due to lack of funds. The Committee desire to know why the
resource crunch still exists inspite of the recommendation of
devolution of a considerable amount by the Eleventh Finance
Commission. The Committee recommend that the Union
Government should impress upon the State Governments to bring
up proper reforms of Municipal taxes, including property tax
system so that Urban Local Bodies could generate sufficient
resources to finance the maintenance of civic services. The
Committee also recommend that loopholes in collection of

11
Municipal taxes, leakage/diversion of funds etc. are plugged and
action is taken against any misuse of funds”.
(Recommendation Para No. 3.21)
15. The Government have replied as below:
“As regards resource crunch existing in the municipal bodies inspite
of recommendations of devolution of grants by 11 th Finance
Commission, it is submitted that this Ministry had requested the
11th  Finance Commission to devolve Rs. 18,500 crore to
municipalities during 2000-2005 to fill up the revenue gap for
operation and maintenance of core civic services. Against this
requirement, the 11
th Finance Commission had devolved Rs. 2000
crore only for urban local bodies leaving a huge gap of Rs. 16,500
crore.
Similarly, before the 12
th Finance Commission, the Ministry had
projected resource gap to the tune of Rs. 76,896 crore during 2005-
2010 for operation and maintenance of various civic services of
ULBs and had requested the 12
th Finance Commission to devolve
the necessary funds of Rs. 76,896 crore so that deficiency/shortfall
in municipal resources in urban areas could be remedied. In its
recommendation, the 12
th Finance Commission is able to devolve
only Rs. 5000 crore against the requirement of Rs. 76,896 crore. In
order that the financial position of ULBs improve to some extent,
the Ministry have already launched certain initiatives which include
Property Tax Reform Guidelines (1998), Model Municipal Law
(2003) and National Municipal Accounts Manual (NMAM) (2005).
These initiatives of the Ministry are expected to help State
Governments to bring needed reforms in the urban governance
and help local bodies to devolve sufficient resources to finance the
maintenance of civic services.
Besides, the State Finance Commissions also look into the financial
position of urban local bodies and recommend various measures
for improving the financial health of ULBs. In order to improve
financial position of ULBs, it is being made mandatory for ULBs
in the proposed National Urban Renewal Mission (NURM) and
Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium
Towns (UIDSSMT) to levy reasonable user charges with the
objective that full cost of operation and maintenance is collected
within the next five years. Introduction of independent regulators
for urban services is also being made mandatory in the above two
proposed schemes.

12
Property tax reforms, creation of database of all properties under
the proposed NUIS shall help in plugging the loopholes in property
tax, which is the major source of revenue for ULBs. NMAM shall
help local bodies in preparation of transparent financial records,
more efficient use of funds and detect leakage/diversion of funds
etc”.
16. The Committee note with optimism that in order to bring
much needed reforms in taxation method of municipalities, the
Ministry of Urban Development has circulated Guidelines for
Property Tax Reforms in March, 1998 to exploit the potentials of
property tax, the major source of income for Municipalities for
strengthening their revenue base, and many States have introduced/
are introducing unit area based system of property tax valuation.
For proper maintenance of accounts and the audit of Municipalities,
the Ministry has prepared a National Municipal Accounts Manual
in cooperation with the office of Comptroller & Auditor General of
India(C & AG) and the manual has been circulated to all States in
January, 2005 to help the States formulate their State-specific
municipal accounting manuals.
17. The Committee also note that regarding cost recovery
procedures and revenue collection methods, the Model Municipal
Law (MML) circulated by the Ministry of Urban Development to all
States in 2003 inter-alia envisages a provision to empower
Municipalities to levy user charges for cost recovery of various
services. Fiscal stress precludes the Municipalities from discharging
their assigned functions effectively resulting in inconvenience to the
public. As such, this is a primary area which needs to be addressed
seriously. While the Ministry has drawn an ambitious programme,
its feasibility and practicability should also be taken into account.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Urban
Development should develop some effective mechanism to monitor
the implementation and progress of the above new initiatives taken
to strengthen the financial position of Municipalities. The Committee
are of the view that by merely drawing the plans on paper would
not serve the desired purpose. The fundamental need is also to
strengthen the functional as well financial position of the
Municipalities which should be result oriented.
18. The Committee note that the Ministry of Urban Development
has launched certain initiatives to help State Governments to bring
the much needed reforms in the urban governance and help local
bodies to develop sufficient resources to finance the maintenance of

13
civil services. The Committee also note that the State Finance
Commissions also look into the financial position of Municipalities
and recommend various measures for improving the financial health
of Municipalities. The Committee are of the opinion that finances
of Municipalities need strengthening through working of the State
Finance Commissions awards, rationalization and improvement of
the property taxation system, proper financial management and
transparency in functioning so that Municipalities would be able to
meet their primary obligations in an effective manner. Accordingly,
the necessary steps in this direction should be initiated by the
Ministry and the Committee should be kept informed.
D. State Finance Commissions
Recommendations ( Para Nos. 3.31 and 3.32)
19. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee note that the State Finance Commissions are
required to be set up under Article 243-I of the Constitution. There
was delay in Constitution of First SFC in Goa, Pondicherry and
Jharkhand and Second SFC is yet to be constituted in Pondicherry.
Keeping in view the gist of recommendations of the various SFCs
and the action taken thereon as Annexed (Annexure VIII) to the
Report, the Committee observe that most of the recommendations
made by the various State Finance Commissions have been accepted
by the respective State Governments. The Committee desire that
the State Governments should take expeditious measures to ensure
that all recommendations of the respective State Finance
Commissions are implemented through relevant administrative,
legislative and financial measures within a given time frame. The
Committee also recommend that the Union Government should
pursue with the respective State Governments/UTs which are
lagging behind in the setting up of the SFCs within the prescribed
time-limit and give their recommendations/observations to the
Governor of the State so as to facilitate better fiscal management
by the Urban Local Bodies. Since the administration of UTs. is
directly under the Union Government an example could be set up
in regard to the role of the State Finance Commissions by accepting
in recommendations regarding the concerned UTs”.
(Recommendation Para No. 3.31)
20. The Government have replied as below:—
“The Ministry agrees with the views of the Committee. All the State
Governments have set up SFCs as per Article 243-I ( Annexure-III).

14
In the case of Pondicherry, the first Finance Commission was
constituted for a three year tenure on 10.03.1997. Its 1 st and 2 nd
reports were approved and implemented by the Government. The
remaining 3 rd to 6 th reports of the first Finance Commission are
under examination with the UT Administration. The Second
Pondicherry Finance Commission has been constituted on 05.01.2004
and is functioning. The first report of the Second SFC is being
examined by the UT Administration for implementation.
With respect to other UTs, Third Finance Commission for Delhi
and Chandigarh has been constituted in October, 2004. Ministry of
Home Affairs who is the nodal agency for Union Territories, has
been requested to ensure implementation of SFCs recommendations
in respect of Union Territories. In order that the recommendations
made by the SFC are acted upon in a time bound manner, the
Ministry is pursuing the case with the respective State Governments
and will continue to take all conceivable steps to ensure that
recommendations of SFCs are implemented by the State
Governments”.
21. The Committee had recommended as below:—
“The Committee note Article 243Y accords the primary
responsibility to oversee the financial position of the Municipalities
to State Finance Commission with a view to make recommendations
to the Governor of the State relating to the principles which should
govern (i) the distribution between the State and the Municipalities
of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by
the State, which may be divided between them and the allocation
between the Municipalities at all levels of their respective shares
of such proceeds; (ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls
and fees which may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the
Municipalities; and the grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the
Consolidated Fund of the State. The SFCs then give their
suggestions and the measures needed to improve the financial
position of the Municipalities and report to the Governor of the
State. In this regard, the Committee recommend that appropriate
steps should be taken up by the Union Government to impress
upon the State Governments to implement all recommendations of
the respective State Finance Commission within a given time-frame
and in the case of Union Territories, Government of India should
take necessary steps in this regard.
(Recommendation Para No. 3.32)

15
22. The Government have replied as below:—
“This Ministry agrees with the views of the Committee. The
Ministry is continuously pursuing the matter of implementation of
Part IXA of the Constitution, including implementation of the
recommendations of the State Finance Commission. As per the
feedback received from the States, State Finance Commissions’
recommendations are being implemented by them in varying
degrees. Gist of the recommendation of the SFCs and action taken
thereon, already annexed to the main report of the Committee as
Annexure-VIII (pages 96-111 of the report). The recommendation
of Commission has been forwarded to the M/o Home Affairs for
implementation of SFCs recommendations in UTs”.
23. The Committee note that the third round of State Finance
Commissions (SFCs) are in place in some States and in order that
the recommendations made by the SFCs are acted upon in a time
bound manner, the Ministry of Urban Development is pursuing with
the respective State Governments to ensure that recommendations of
SFCs are implemented by them. The Committee are of the opinion
that the objective of the system of SFCs would be fulfilled only if
an adequate level of resource transfers to  Municipalities take place.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that specific attention be
drawn of the States/UTs by the Union Government in this regard.

16
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.23)
The Committee also find that all States except Jharkhand and Union
Territory of Pondicherry conducted initial elections to Municipal bodies.
Also Urban Local Bodies do not exist in Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram,
Sikkim, Lakshadweep and Dadra & Nagar Haveli. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Union Government hold municipal
elections in the Union Territory of Pondicherry at the earliest. The
Committee further urge Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Sikkim,
Lakshadweep and Dadra & Nagar Haveli for early setting up of Urban
Local Bodies so that the system of self-governing institutions at
grassroots level could be established without any delay and the
development schemes/Programmes are implemented effectively.
Reply of the Government
Regarding holding of elections in the UT of Pondicherry, the
Government of Pondicherry has intimated that the State Election
Commission is taking steps to conduct elections of municipalities and
Electorate Rolls have been updated. The Government of Jharkhand
and UT of Pondicherry have been requested vide letter No. N-11025/
23/2005-UCD dated 31.5.2005 to conduct the elections of municipalities
without further delay. This recommendation has also been
communicated to the Ministry of Home Affairs, which is the nodal
Ministry for Union Territories for further action, vide OM
dated 19.5.2005.
For setting up of urban local bodies in States/UTs where no such
body exist, the concerned States/UTs i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram,
Sikkim, Lakshadweep and Dadra & Nagar Haveli, have been requested
vide letter No. N-11025/27/2005-UCD dated 10.6.2005, to constitute
urban local bodies without further delay. Arunachal Pradesh has
constituted a Committee under Chairmanship of their Minister (UD)
to go into details of drafting municipal laws in line with the Model
Municipal Laws. The Government of Sikkim is also drafting a new
municipal laws and they have expressed hope to constitute ULBs early
next year.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]

17
Recommendation (Para No. 2.24)
The Committee note that the responsibility of implementation of
all matters relating to Municipalities has been entrusted to the Ministry
of Urban Development and the Ministry has been in constant touch
with the State Governments in the task of implementation of Part IX-
A of the Constitution. Also Meetings/Conferences with Ministers/
Secretaries-in-Charge of local self-Government to States/UTs and elected
representatives of Urban Local Bodies have been held from time to
time to impress upon them the need for proper implementation of
Part IX-A. While the Committee are quite convinced that co-
coordinative efforts are being made by the Ministry of Urban
Development for the implementation of Part IX-A of the Constitution
the Committee feel that the mandatory as well as recommendatory
provisions of Part IX-A of the Constitution are not being properly
implemented by the respective State Government/UTs. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that Union Government should make a
comprehensive study of the existing situation and ensure that
mandatory as well as recommendatory provisions of Part IX-A are
followed by the State Governments/UTs in letter and spirit. Since UTs
are under its direct administrative control, an example in local self-
governance to be followed by others can be set up in UTs by the
Government of India.
Reply of the Government
As recommended by the Committee, a study on the status of
implementation of the 74
th CAA in States/UTs has been awarded by
this Ministry to the Indian Institute of Public Administration , National
Institute of Urban Affairs and Regional Centres for Urban and
Environmental Studies on zonal basis. The reports of these Institutes/
Centres except NIUA have been submitted to the Ministry. NIUA has
submitted the draft report (containing information on 14 States/UTs)
in November 2004. The NIUA is now in the process of detailed
discussions with the concerned State-level official. After NIUA submits
its report, the action point requiring urgent attention of the State
Governments would be identified and matter will be taken up with
them for remedial action. Meanwhile, under the proposed National
Urban Renewal Mission (NURM) and Urban Infrastructure
Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT), it is
being made mandatory for the State Government to implement certain
urban reforms including implementation of decentralization measures
as envisaged in the Constitution (74
th Amendment) Act to qualify for
availing Central assistance. This will encourage States to implement
the Constitution (74 th Amendment) Act expeditiously.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]

18
Recommendation (Para No. 2.25)
The Committee are informed that a ‘Task Force’ consisting of
representatives of States and the Ministry of Urban Development has
been constituted to look into devolution of function into specific
operational and activity related responsibilities of Urban Local Bodies
and suggest administrative and managerial measures to bring into
operation the administrative decentralization and rationalization of
delivery mechanism and implementation of urban development
programmes by Municipalities/Urban Local Bodies. In this regard, the
Committee recommend that a high level body, or ‘Review Committee’
at the Central level may be constituted so as to review the proper and
timely implementation of the norms and conditions laid down in Part
IX-A and the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution relating to Urban
Local Bodies.
Reply of the Government
The Task Force constituted by the Ministry on devolution of powers
and functions upon municipalities is yet to finalize its recommendations
as necessary input from the member States have not been received in
time. The Task Force is in the process of finalization of its
recommendations.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.8)
The Committee note that the Constitutional (74
th Amendment) Act
seeks to devolve functional and financial powers to Urban Local Bodies.
Article 243W requires the State Legislatures to make law to endow the
Municipalities with such powers and authority, as may be necessary
to enable them to function as institutions of self-governance,
particularly, with respect of preparation of plans for economic
development and social justice, and perform functions and implement
all Schemes as are entrusted to them including matters listed in the
Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution. Similarly , as per Article 243X, it
has been left to the Legislature of the State to specify by law the
matters relating to imposition of taxes. The Committee would like to
emphasize that measures must be taken by the Union Government so
as to ensure that the stipulated functions, powers and finances actually
devolve on the Urban Local Bodies. The Committee find that any
mismatch between functions and finances of the ULBs, may slacken
the growth of Urban Local Bodies and optimum utilization of the

19
available resources and infrastructure for the various urban
developmental schemes. The Committee, therefore recommend that the
Ministry of Urban Development should draw upon the suggestions of
the expert bodies like National Institute of Urban Affairs by maintaining
proper data base and utilization of the state-of-the-art technologies.
The Committee also recommend that Community Based Information
System formulated by National Institution of Urban Affairs be made
available to the Municipalities etc. for better resource management
and planning.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry agrees with the observations/findings of the
Committee. However, as Local Government is a State subject as per
Entry 5 of the State list of the Constitution, it falls entirely within the
domain of State Government to devolve requisite functional and
financial powers upon municipalities to enable them to function as an
Institution of Local Self Government. Following the provisions of the
Constitution (74
th Amendment) Act States have devolved functional
and financial powers upon municipalities in varying degrees. Under
the proposed National Urban Renewal Mission (NURM) and Urban
Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns
(UIDSSMT), it is being made mandatory for the State Government to
implement certain urban reforms including implementation of
decentralization measures as envisaged in the Constitution (74
th
Amendment) Act to qualify for availing assistance for infrastructure
projects.
This Ministry takes the help of National Institute of Urban Affairs
(NIUA) from time to time for getting various inputs for formulation
of schemes/policies for urban development. With regard to maintaining
of proper data base and utilization of the state-of-the-art technologies,
it is submitted that for creation of data base relating to finances of
local bodies, the 11
th Finance Commission allocated Rs. 200 crore. The
C&AG in accordance with the recommendations of the Eleventh Finance
Commission, has formulated standard formats for data base on finances
of urban local bodies and circulated to all States in August, 2003. This
matter is being regularly pursued by the Office of C&AG with the
State Governments who are responsible for data collection, input
uploading, transmission and maintenance of the data base. Five States
(Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan & Tamil Nadu) have
generally agreed in principle to adopt the formats for ULBs with
changes to suit their requirements. Office of C&AG has further
informed that regular discussions/correspondences with other States

20
by the Field Accountants General to generally adopt the formats are
continuing. Suggestions by the State Governments for changes in the
formats are promptly considered and view points of C&AG conveyed
to the States with the request to adopt the formats. In this endeavour,
the services of NIUA would be utilised in optimum manner.
The Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) in its report has mentioned
that high priority should be accorded to creation of database and
maintenance of accounts at the grassroot level. Though TFC has not
made any specific allocation for the above purpose, it has left it to the
States to assess the requirement of each local body and earmark funds
accordingly out of the total allocation recommended by the
Commission.
The Community Based Information System developed by the NIUA
is available on NIUA’s website www.niua.org. for information/guidance
of the users e.g. municipalities etc.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.10)
The Committee also note that the State Governments specify the
taxes that the Municipalities could levy and collect which are largely
taken from the State List in the 7
th Schedule of the Constitution of
India. Since no distinctive tax domain has been specified for the
Municipalities, the State Municipal Laws are non-uniform in respect of
municipal taxes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Union
Government should emphasise on the States/UTs for clear-cut tax
domain for Municipalities in all the State Governments UTs so as to
ensure more methodical and proper fiscal management by Municipal
bodies.
Reply of the Government
Since local Government is a State subject, no tax domain has been
prescribed by the Constitution (74
th Amendment) Act. As per Article
243X it has been left to the legislature of the State to specify, by law,
the matter relating to imposition of tax by municipalities, assignment
of taxes, duties, tolls etc. collected by the State to municipalities and
providing grant-in-aid to municipalities.
In order that municipalities have a clear-cut tax domain, necessary
provisions have been made in the Model Municipal Law circulated by
the Ministry of Urban Development to all States/UTs in October 2003.

21
The Ministry is pursuing with the States to implement various
provisions of Model Municipal Law. As per information available State
viz. Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat,
Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura,
Uttaranchal, A&N Islands, Chandigarh & Delhi have initiated necessary
action in the matter.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.11)
The Committee note that the Ministry had invited proposals from
the Regional Centres for Urban and Environmental Studies (RCUES)
to conduct detailed study on devolution of funds, functions and
deployment of functionaries to Municipalities. A ‘Task Force’ consisting
of representatives of States and the Ministry has been constituted to
look into the devolution of functions into specific operational and
activity related responsibilities of Urban Local Bodies and suggest
administrative and managerial measures. The Committee would like
that an in depth study is made on the suggestions/recommendations
of RCUES by a High level Governmental Committee or a Review
Committee, and suitable procedural amendments/modifications, if
required, be advised to the State Governments for effective functioning
of the Urban Local Bodies and ensure good governance and adequate
financial resources for the Municipalities.
Reply of the Government
After the finalisation of report of Task Force and completion of
study by RCUES/NIUA, their suggestions/recommendations shall be
analysed by the Ministry and suitable modifications/amendments shall
be suggested to States for effective functioning of ULBs.
As regards in depth study of suggestions/recommendations of the
outcome of above Study/Task Force by a High level Governmental
Committee or a ‘Review Committee’, the Ministry may consider the
issue, at a later stage, if required.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.12)
The Committee are perturbed to note that with the presence of
various other governmental and non-governmental bodies there is

22
considerable encroachment upon the functional domain of the
‘Municipalities’. The Committee also note that such bodies are not
accountable to ‘Municipalities’, although such agencies deal with even
basic municipal functions like water supply, sewerage and capital works
etc. The Committee have been informed by an expert that in certain
cases, the capital works are executed by a Specialised Agency and
their loan liability is passed on to the Municipalities. The Committee
can not approve of this kind of practice. The Committee, therefore
strongly recommend that the functional domain of the ‘Municipalities’
must be exclusive and clearly demarcated to check any kind of
encroachment and confusion. If due to special and technical reasons
other bodies are required, the Committee recommend that such bodies
should be made accountable and answerable to the Municipalities.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry agrees with the observation of the Committee on
encroachment upon the functional domain of the municipalities by
various other Governmental and non-governmental bodies. The
recommendation of the Committee has been brought to the notice of
all States concerned.  In order that all civic functions of ULBs being
performed by other agencies are transferred to them, in the proposed
National Urban Renewal Mission (NURM) and Urban Infrastructure
Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT), it
would be obligatory upon States to undertake to transfer over a period
of five years all specialised agencies that deliver civic services in urban
areas to ULBs and create accountability platforms for all urban civic
services providers in transition.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.19)
The Committee express their deep anguish to note that most of
the Municipalities etc., which are statutorily responsible for provisioning
and maintenance of basic infrastructure and services in cities and towns
are under fiscal stress. They are given to understand that many of the
Municipalities have not been able to carry out their assigned civic
functions and pay salaries and wages to their employees, although,

23
the financial conditions of bigger municipal corporations had not been
as bad as of smaller municipalities. The Committee recommend that
the Ministry of Urban Development should coordinate and persuade
the concerned State Governments/ UTs to take the necessary corrective
measures on their part by adopting suitable taxation methods,
accounting standards etc. to enable the Municipalities to generate their
own funds. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Urban
Development should persuade the State Governments to link their
development plans with resources mobilization plans and credit
enhancement mechanisms keeping in view the long-term perspective
and aims of the institutions of urban local self government. The
Committee recommend that cost recovery procedures and revenue
collection methods of such bodies should be strengthened in a scientific
and prudent manner. As regards the action taken on the suggestions
of the ‘Task Force’ as constituted by the Ministry , the Committee would
like to be apprised about the latest position in the matter.
Reply of the Government
In order to bring much needed reforms in taxation method of
municipalities, this Ministry has circulated Guidelines for Property Tax
Reforms in March, 1998 to exploit the potential of property tax, the
major source of income for ULBs, for strengthening their revenue base.
Many States like Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar
Pradesh, West Bengal, Chandigarh, Delhi and Pondicherry have
introduced/are introducing Unit area based system of property tax
valuation. At present, there is a proposal to launch a new scheme
namely National Urban Information System (NUIS) in order to help
ULBs in planning and management of urban settlement based on
updated and scientific database as a decision support system,
employing modern planning method using GIS technology. It will help
in creation of database of properties for better enforcement of property
tax. In the first phase, 137 towns/cities are proposed to be covered
under NUIS.
Similarly for proper maintenance of accounts and the audit of
ULBs, the Ministry has prepared a National Municipal Accounts Manual
in cooperation with the office of Comptroller & Auditor General of
India (C&AG). This manual has been circulated to all States in January,
2005 to help the States formulate their State-specific municipal
accounting manuals. Accounting principles mentioned in the Manual
are primarily focussed on the concept of accrual basis of accounting.

24
This initiative is expected not only to enhance the capacities of
ULBs in municipal accounting leading to increased transparency and
accountability in the utilization of public funds but also help urban
local bodies to play their roles more effectively and ensure better
service-delivery. As per information available, the States excepting
Assam, Meghalaya and Nagaland have taken necessary initiatives for
adoption of the provisions of the Manual to reform the municipal
accounting in ULBs.
Regarding cost recovery procedures and revenue collection methods,
the Model Municipal Law (MML) circulated by this Ministry to all
States in 2003 inter-alia envisages a provision to empower ULBs to
levy users charges for cost recovery of various services. To fix the
users charges, a provision has also been made in the MML for setting
up State Level Regulatory Authority. As per information available,
States/UTs namely Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu,
Tripura, Uttaranchal, A&N Islands, Chandigarh & Delhi have initiated
necessary action to adopt the provisions of MML.
Besides, under the proposed National Urban Renewal Mission
(NURM) and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and
Medium Towns (UDISSMT), it is being made mandatory for ULBs
and State Governments to undertake, inter-alia, the following reforms
to qualify for Central assistance:
1. Adoption of modern, accrual-based double entry system of
accounting in urban local bodies.
2. Reform of property tax with GIS, so that it becomes major
source of revenue for urban local bodies.
3. Levy of reasonable user charges by urban local bodies with
the objective that full cost of operation and maintenance is
collected within next five years.
4. Implementation of decentralization measures as envisaged
in 74th Constitution Amendment Act.
5. Introduction of independent regulators for urban services.
The above initiatives of Ministry of Urban Development are
expected to enable ULBs to strengthen the cost recovery procedures
and revenue collection methods in a scientific and prudent manner
and enhance their credit worthiness to access the Institutional finances.

25
The Mission strategy of the proposed NURM envisages that every
identified city would prepare planned urban prospective framework
for a period of 20-25 years indicating policies, programmes and
strategies of meeting fund requirement. This provision of the proposed
NURM would ensure linking development plan of the city with
resource mobilization of ULBs.
Regarding the present position of the Task Force constituted by
the Ministry, it is submitted that the Task Force has have held 3
meetings with the State representatives and is at present in the process
of finalization of its recommendations.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 & 17 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.20)
The Committee note that the Eleventh Finance Commission (EFC)
has suggested for developing a data base on the finances of the
Panchayats and Municipalities at the District, State and Central
Government level. It has further suggested that Director, Local Fund
Audit or the authority prescribed for conducting the audit of accounts
of the local bodies may be assigned responsibility for this task. The
Chief Secretary of the State may do the State level coordination and
monitoring and the Comptroller and Auditor General of India do the
same at the Central level. The Committee are of the firm view that
this would ensure greater accountability in matters relating to municipal
management and transparency in their functioning. The Committee
recommend that proper and timely follow-up action should be taken
up by the Ministry of Urban Development for updating and
maintenance of the ‘Data Base’ of the finances of the Municipalities as
the planning exercise needs continuous ‘Data Base’ analysis. The
Committee also recommend that a computer generated data base and
information system be developed at various levels which would provide
support to planners in development planning.
Reply of the Government
In accordance with the recommendations of the Eleventh Finance
Commission, standard formats for data base on finances of urban local
bodies were prepared by the Office of the Comptroller & Auditor
General (C&AG) of India and circulated to all States in August, 2003.

26
The matter is being regularly pursued by the Office of C&AG with
the State Governments who are responsible for data collection, input
uploading, transmission and maintenance of the database. Five States
(Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan & Tamil Nadu) have
generally agreed in principle to adopt the formats for ULBs with
changes to suit their requirements. Office of C&AG has further
informed that regular discussions/correspondences with other States
by the Field Accountants General to adopt the formats are being held
continuously. Suggestions by the State Governments for changes in the
formats are promptly considered and view points of C&AG conveyed
to the States with the request to adopt the formats. Regarding computer
generated database and information system, under the proposed
National Urban Information System (NUIS) comprehensive GIS database
and urban management tools would be developed which will support
master plan preparation and urban management.
The Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) in its report has mentioned
that high priority should be accorded to creation of database and
maintenance of accounts at the grassroot level. Though TFC has not
made any specific allocation for the above purpose, it has left it to the
States to assess the requirement of each local body and earmark funds
accordingly out of the total allocation recommended by the
Commission.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.21)
The Committee note that the Tenth Finance Commission
recommended for a provision of Rs. 1000 crore to enable the Urban
Local Bodies to meet their primary obligations. It also desired that
Local Bodies should provide suitable matching contribution by raising
resources. The Committee further note that the Eleventh Finance
Commission had emphasized the need for meeting the revenue
mobilizations by the local bodies themselves. It suggested for suitable
reforms in property/house tax system and the need for replacing
octroi/entry tax with a suitable tax and also revising the rate structure
of user charges on a regular basis. The Eleventh Finance Commission
has recommended for devolution of Rs. 2000 crore to Urban Local
Bodies for 5 year period from 2000 to 2005. While the Committee are
happy to note that financial provision by way of devolution of
Rs. 2000 crore to Urban Local Bodies has been made by Eleventh
Finance Commission, but the Municipalities/Urban Local Bodies are
still unable to perform well due to lack of funds. The Committee

27
desire to know why the resource crunch still exists inspite of the
recommendation of devolution of a considerable amount by the
Eleventh Finance Commission. The Committee recommend that the
Union Government should impress upon the State Governments to
bring up proper reforms of Municipal taxes, including property tax
system so that Urban Local Bodies could generate sufficient resources
to finance the maintenance of civic services. The Committee also
recommend that loopholes in collection of Municipal taxes, leakage/
diversion of funds etc. are plugged and action is taken against any
misuse of funds.
Reply of the Government
As regards resource crunch existing in the municipal bodies inspite
of recommendations of devolution of grants by 11th Finance
Commission, it is submitted that this Ministry had requested the
11th Finance Commission to devolve Rs. 18,500 crore to municipalities
during 2000-2005 to fill up the revenue gap for operation and
maintenance of core civic services. Against this requirement, the
11th Finance Commission had devolved Rs. 2000 crore only for urban
local bodies leaving a huge gap of Rs. 16,500 crore.
Similarly, before the 12th Finance Commission, the Ministry had
projected resource gap to the tune of Rs. 76,896 crore during 2005-
2010 for operation and maintenance of various civic services of ULBs
and had requested the 12th Finance Commission to devolve the
necessary funds of Rs. 76,896 crore so that deficiency/shortfall in
municipal resources in urban areas could be remedied. In its
recommendation, the 12th Finance Commission is able to devolve only
Rs. 5000 crore against the requirement of Rs. 76,896 crore. In order
that the financial position of ULBs improve to some extent, the Ministry
have already launched certain initiatives which include Property Tax
Reform Guidelines (1998), Model Municipal Law (2003) and National
Municipal Accounts Manual (NMAM) (2005). These initiatives of the
Ministry are expected to help State Governments to bring needed
reforms in the urban governance and help local bodies to devolve
sufficient resources to finance the maintenance of civic services.
Besides, the State Finance Commissions also look into the financial
position of urban local bodies and recommend various measures for
improving the financial health of ULBs. In order to improve financial
position of ULBs, it is being made mandatory for ULBs in the proposed
National Urban Renewal Mission (NURM) and Urban Infrastructure
Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) to

28
levy reasonable user charges with the objective that full cost of
operation and maintenance is collected within the next five years.
Introduction of independent regulators for urban services is also being
made mandatory in the above two proposed schemes.
Property tax reforms, creation of database of all properties under
the proposed NUIS shall help in plugging the loopholes in property
tax, which is the major source of revenue for ULBs. NMAM shall help
local bodies in preparation of transparent financial records, more
efficient use of funds and detect leakage/diversion of funds etc.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.22)
The Committee note with optimism the various reform initiatives
taken by the Union Government to strengthen the capacity of Urban
Local Bodies to perform their assigned functions in an effective manner.
The Committee should be kept informed that the achievements made
out of the reform agenda and the steps taken by the States in
streamlining the functioning of Urban Local Bodies in pursuance
thereof.
Reply of the Government
In order to strengthen urban local bodies both in terms of financial
and administrative matter, the Ministry of Urban Development have
taken various reform initiative which include the following:
1. Property Tax Reform:
Property tax which are one of the most important tax revenue for
ULBs have not been exploited fully due to various reasons such
as high rate of tax, unscientific manner of assessment etc. To help
ULBs to reform the property tax system, the Ministry has circulated
Property Tax Reform Guidelines to all States/UTs in 1998. Based
on the Guidelines, the Property Tax Reforms have been taken or
under consideration in Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat,
Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Chandigarh, Delhi and
Pondicherry.

29
2. Model Municipal Law
Ministry of Urban Development has prepared a Model Municipal
Law (MML), which intends to assist urban local bodies in the
areas of accounting reforms, resource mobilization, levy of users
charges and entry of private sector partnership. The Model
Municipal Law, inter alia , aims at simplification of municipal by-
laws, provides for enhanced borrowing, entry of private sector in
urban infrastructure and services and authorising concessionaire to
penalize users for non-payment of tariffs. This initiative is expected
not only to enhance the capacity of urban local bodies to leverage
public funds for development of urban sector but will also help in
creating an environment in which urban local bodies can play
their role more effectively and ensure better service delivery.
The MML was circulated to all States on October 13, 2003. To
impress upon the States about the provisions of MML, a National
Workshop was held in Delhi in November, 2003. To sensitize the
States further to incorporate the provisions of MML in their
municipal laws, four Regional Workshops were conducted by the
Ministry at Jaipur, Kolkata, Hyderabad & Pune in Sept’04, Nov’04,
Feb’05 and April’05, respectively.
As a follow-up, States/UTs, namely Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, J&K,
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttaranchal, A&N Islands,
Chandigarh & Delhi have initiated necessary action to adopt the
provisions of MML.
3. Municipal Accounting Reforms
The 11
th Finance Commission had devolved upon the Comptroller
& Auditor General (C&AG) of India the responsibility for exercising
control and supervision over the proper maintenance of accounts
and the auditing of all urban local bodies (ULBs). Accordingly, a
Task Force was set up by the C&AG of India to prescribe the
budget and accounting formats for ULBs with proper codification
and classification of budget and account heads. The Task Force
after having considered the matter in its entirety and in consultation
with this Ministry finalized its report. This report recommends for
introduction of double entry accounting system, implementation
of improved accounting policies and use of model budgeting and
accounting formats by ULBs. The report was circulated to all States
for implementation in April, 2003.

30
To impress upon the States the benefits of double entry accounting
system and other features of the Task Force Report, a National
Workshop on Municipal Accounting Reforms was organized in
September, 2003. In that Workshop, it was decided that a National
Municipal Accounts Manual (NMAM) would be prepared and
circulated to all States/UTs to help them prepare their State-specific
Municipal Accounts Manual.
Ministry of Urban Development in cooperation with the Office of
C&AG of India has prepared NMAM and circulated to all States
in January, 2005. Amongst others, the NMAM provides for common
accounts manual for Municipal Corporations and Councils,
segregation of operating and/or recurring items from non-recurring
items, financial statements to throw up issues for policy
formulation, etc.
Another National Workshop was also organized in Delhi in
February, 2005 to discuss the features of NMAM and impress upon
the States to draft their State-specific Municipal Accounts Manual
for adoption the double entry accounting system by the ULBs. As
a follow-up, almost all the States except Assam, Meghalaya and
Nagaland have initiated action for adoption of the provisions of
NMAM.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.31)
The Committee note that the State Finance Commissions are
required to be set up under Article 243-I of the Constitution. There
was delay in Constitution of First SFC in Goa, Pondicherry and
Jharkhand and Second SFC is yet to be constituted in Pondicherry.
Keeping in view the gist of recommendations of the various SFCs and
the action taken thereon as Annexed (Annexure VIII) to the Report,
the Committee observe that most of the recommendations made by
the various State Finance Commissions have been accepted by the
respective State Governments. The Committee desire that the State
Governments should take expeditious measures to ensure that all
recommendations of the respective State Finance Commissions are
implemented through relevant administrative, legislative and financial
measures within a given time frame. The Committee also recommend
that the Union Government should pursue with the respective State
Governments/UTs which are lagging behind in the setting up of the
SFCs within the prescribed time limit and give their recommendations/
observations to the Governor of the State so as to facilitate better

31
fiscal management by the Urban Local Bodies. Since the administration
of UTs is directly under the Union Government an example could be
set up in regard to the role of the State Finance Commissions by
accepting in recommendations regarding the concerned UTs.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry agrees with the views of the Committee. All the
State Governments have set up SFCs as per Article 243-I (Annexure-
III). In the case of Pondicherry, the first Finance Commission was
constituted for a three year tenure on 10.03.1997. Its 1
st and 2nd reports
were approved and implemented by the Government. The remaining
3
rd to 6th reports of the first Finance Commission are under examination
with the UT Administration. The Second Pondicherry Finance
Commission has been constituted on 05.01.2004 and is functioning.
The first report of the Second SFC is being examined by the UT
Administration for implementation.
With respect to other UTs, third Finance Commission for Delhi
and Chandigarh has been constituted in October, 2004. Ministry of
Home Affairs who is the nodal agency for Union Territories, has been
requested to ensure implementation of SFCs recommendations in respect
of Union Territories. In order that the recommendations made by the
SFC are acted upon in a time bound manner, the Ministry is pursuing
the case with the respective State Governments and will continue to
take all conceivable steps to ensure that recommendations of SFCs are
implemented by the State Governments.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.32)
The Committee note Article 243Y accords the primary responsibility
to oversee the financial position of the Municipalities to State Finance
Commission with a view to make recommendations to the Governor
of the State relating to the principles which should govern (i) the
distribution between the State and the Municipalities of the net
proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State, which
may be divided between them and the allocation between the
Municipalities at all levels of their respective shares of such proceeds;

32
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be
assigned to, or appropriated by, the Municipalities; and the grants-in-
aid to the Municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the State. The
SFCs then give their suggestions and the measures needed to improve
the financial position of the Municipalities and report to the Governor
of the State. In this regard, the Committee recommend that appropriate
steps should be taken up by the Union Government to impress upon
the State Governments to implement all recommendations of the
respective State Finance Commission within a given time frame and in
the case of Union Territories, Government of India should take
necessary steps in this regard.
Reply of the Government
This Ministry agrees with the views of the Committee. The Ministry
is continuously pursuing the matter of implementation of Part IXA of
the Constitution, including implementation of the recommendations of
the State Finance Commission. As per the feedback received from the
States, State Finance Commissions’ recommendations are being
implemented by them in varying degrees. Gist of the recommendation
of the SFCs and action taken thereon, already annexed to the main
report of the Committee as Annexure-VIII (pages 96-111 of the report).
The recommendation of Commission has been forwarded to the M/o
Home Affairs for implementation of SFCs recommendations in UTs.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.36)
The Committee note that the Eleventh Finance Commission have
made certain suggestions for proper upkeep of accounts of
Municipalities and their audit. The Committee desire that State
Government should be persuaded to bring needed reforms in the
existing Municipal Accounting System of Urban Local Bodies as
suggested by the Eleventh Finance Commission. The Committee further
desire that Municipal accounting system should be overhauled and
made transparent with a view to ensure acceptance by lending agencies
and financial market so that Urban Local Bodies could have proper
access to debt funds to Finance and maintain the civic amenities which
are suffering due to lack of funds.

33
Reply of the Government
The 11th Finance Commission had devolved upon the Comptroller
& Auditor General (C&AG) of India the responsibility for exercising
control and supervision over the proper maintenance of accounts and
the auditing of all Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). Accordingly, a Task
Force was set up by the C&AG of India to prescribe the budget and
accounting formats for ULBs with proper codification and classification
of budget and account heads. The Task Force after having considered
the matter in its entirety and in consultation with this Ministry finalized
its report. This report recommends for introduction of double entry
accounting system, implementation of improved accounting policies
and use of model budgeting and accounting formats by ULBs. The
report was circulated to all States for implementation in April, 2003.
To impress upon the States the benefits of double entry accounting
system and other features of the Task Force Report, a National
Workshop on Municipal Accounting Reforms was organized in
September, 2003. In that Workshop, it was decided that a National
Municipal Accounts Manual (NMAM) would be prepared and
circulated to all States/UTs to help them prepare their State-specific
Municipal Accounts Manual.
Ministry of Urban Development in cooperation with the Office of
C&AG of India has prepared NMAM and circulated to all States in
January, 2005. Amongst others, the NMAM provides for common
accounts manual for Municipal Corporations and Councils, segregation
of operating and/or recurring items from non-recurring items, financial
statements to throw up issues for policy formulation, etc.
Another National Workshop was also organized in Delhi in
February, 2005 to discuss the features of NMAM and impress upon
the States to draft their State-specific Municipal Accounts Manual for
adoption the double entry accounting system by the ULBs. As a follow-
up, almost all the States except Assam, Meghalaya and Nagaland have
initiated action for adoption of the provisions of NMAM.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.8)
The Committee note that almost a decade has elapsed since the
enactment of the Constitution (74th Amendment) Act with effect from

34
1.6.1993, however, a number of States are yet to constitute District
Planning Committees although this is a mandatory provision under
article 243ZD of the Constitution. In the circumstances, the Committee
are distressed over the fact that the constitutional obligation to
constitute the DPCs in the defaulting States has not been fulfilled. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Central Government
should urge such States, where DPC has not yet been constituted yet,
to form their respective DPCs within a specified time frame. If
necessary, suitable provisions in this regard should be incorporated in
the Constitution by bringing up the required amendment to the
Constitution. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
position in this regard. In case of UTs, the Government of India should
ensure immediate constitution of DPCs in all UTs.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that the subject of DPC has since been allocated to
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The above recommendation of the
Committee has been forwarded to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for
taking further necessary action.
As per information available, the DPCs have not been set up in
the States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Nagaland, Punjab,
Tripura and Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal & Pondicherry. These States
have been requested at the level of Chief Secretaries to constitute these
mandatory Committees at the earliest vide letter No. G-20011/1/2004-
UCD, dated 21.4.2005.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.9)
The Committee note that in order to assist the State Governments
to implement the provision of constitution of DPCs, the Ministry has
drafted the guidelines and issued the same to all State Governments.
These guidelines prescribe for composition and function of District
Planning Committees, integration of the plans prepared by the
Panchayats and Municipalities at the District level. The Committee
desire that the Union Government should persuade the State
Government to scrupulously implement the guidelines. The Committee
also desire that Government should also provide for association and
involvement of the NGOs, professionals, experts in the DPCs. The

35
Committee further urge the Union Government to make adequate
provisions by amending Article 243 ZD to secure the participation of
MPs and MLAs in DPCs.
Reply of the Government
As the subject of District Planning Committee (DPC) has been
allocated to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, the above recommendation
of the Committee has been forwarded to the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj. The issue raised above will now required to be look into by
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.10)
The Committee are informed that in some of the States, DPCs are
being chaired by Ministers in the State Governments. The Committee
fear that this may not be in consonance with the true aim and spirit
of the decentralization of responsibilities under the Constitution of
India.
Reply of the Government
As already mentioned, the subject of District Planning Committee
(DPC) has been allocated to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. Therefore,
the above suggestion made by the Committee is required to be looked
into by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
However, Article 243 ZD(2) (d) leave it to the State Legislature to
make provisions with respect to the manner in which the Chairperson
of the DPC shall be chosen. In view of this, there is no bar if a
Minister becomes the Chairman of the DPC provided such provision
exists in the relevant State Law.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.11)
The Committee note that article 243 ZD (3) stipulates that every
District Planning Committee (DPC) shall draft development plans and
also one of the main functions of the District Planning Committee is

36
in regard to formulation of the District Development Plans and
allocation of resources to local bodies for implementation of the local
level projects in urban areas. The Committee have been given to
understand that under the framework of the Constitution, the District
Development Plans, Metropolitan Plans would lead to formulation of
the State Plans. The Committee are distressed to find that in the absence
of the DPC in certain States, the Planning Process would lose the
intending meaning behind it. The Committee recommend that concerted
and earnest action should be initiated by the Union Government to
urge upon the States/UTs to formulate District Development plans so
as to benefit the people at large.
Reply of the Government
As already mentioned, the subject of District Planning Committee
(DPC) has been allocated to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The
recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj for further action.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.12)
The Committee note that as per article 243 ZD(3), draft
development plans of DPC should take into consideration, (i) the
matters of common interest between the Panchayats and the
Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and other,
physical and natural resources, the integrated development of
infrastructure and environmental conservation, (ii) the extent and type
of available resources whether financial or otherwise; and (iii) consult
such institution and organization as the Governor may, by order, specify.
Keeping in view the main aims and objectives of this said proviso of
Part IX A of Constitution, the Committee desire that the planning
process be completed with a positive perspective and by taking into
account of the following:-
(i) each level of plan must include measures for infrastructure
development and environment conservation;
(ii) these development plans must be flexible to provide for the
ever-growing and ever-expanding city boundaries and
provide quality life to its inhabitants;

37
(iii) People’s participation in formulation of perspective plans
be ensured through the elected bodies;
(iv) given the paucity of resources, proper measures are taken
to utilize strategic methods in selected urban areas as ‘Core’
development plans; and
(v) cost recovery methods of Urban Local Bodies are
strengthened. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the steps taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
As already stated, the subject of DPC has since been allocated to
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
As regards city planning process, the Mission Strategy of the
proposed NURM provides that every identified city will prepare a
urban perspective framework for a period of 20-25 years (with 5 yearly
updates) indicating policies, programmes and strategies of meeting fund
requirements. This perspective plan would be followed by preparation
of development plans, integrating land use with services, urban
transport and environment management for every 5 years plan period.
The plan so prepared by the city should be in consonance with the
District Development Plan as envisaged under the Constitution
(74th Amendment) Act. Further association of ULBs in city planning
process and passage of community participation law to institutionalise
citizen partnerships are mandatory reforms under proposed NURM.
Regarding cost recovery method, it is informed that it would be a
mandatory reform to be undertaken by the ULBs under proposed
NURM and UIDSSMT to levy reasonable user charges with the
objective that full cost of operation and maintenance is collected within
next five years. Introduction of independent regulators for urban
services which will be one of the mandatory reforms under the above
two new schemes will help strengthen cost recovery method of ULBs.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 5.3)
The Committee note that there are 35 urban agglomerations with
population of more than one million in the country and for these

38
areas, the Metropolitan Planning Committee (MPC) is a constitutional
requirement under article 243 ZE of the Constitution. The Committee
are dismayed to note that only State Government of Maharashtra have
made an Act for constitution of MPCs for Mumbai, Pune and Nagpur
till date but other States are lagging behind. The Committee take serious
note of it and feel that this amounts to serious infringement of
mandatory constitutional provisions. The Committee urge upon the
Union Government to ensure that in all remaining Urban
agglomerations with population of more than one million MPCs are
constituted within a stipulated time period. The Committee further
urge the Union Government to make adequate provisions by amending
Article 243 ZE to secure the participation of MPs and MLAs in MPCs.
Reply of the Government
As per information available, MPC has been set up in West Bengal
and the Government of Maharashtra have enacted the Maharashtra
Metropolitan Planning Committee (Constitution & Functions)
(Continuance of Provisions) Act, 1999. Delhi is exempted from setting
up of MPC. The six States (Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana,
Karnataka, Punjab and Tamil Nadu) have informed that the matter is
under their consideration. The Ministry is taking up the matter with
the State Governments at the level of Chief Minister for implementation
of all provisions of the 74
th CAA including setting up of MPC without
further delay.
Regarding amendment to Article 243 ZE to secure participation of
M.P .s and M.L.A.s in MPCs, it is submitted that a provision already
exists in Article 243-R. The State legislature may, by law, provide for
the representation of MPs and MLAs in a municipality. Since the
composition of MPCs is left to be decided by the State legislature,
there is no bar for the State legislature to provide for representation
of M.P .s and M.L.A.s in the MPCs. In view of this, no amendment is
considered necessary as recommended above.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 5.4)
The Committee note that one of the main aims of the MPC is to
formulate the Metropolitan Development Plans and to help the Planning
process so as to provide the various urban services to the urban

39
population. The Committee are, however, perturbed to find that the
due cognizance has not been given to the planning aspect of the ULBs/
Municipalities in most of the States/UTs in the country. The Committee
recommend that proper attention must be given towards the
formulation of development plans as district, metropolitan and State
levels so as to ensure local self-governance be an effective instrument
of economic and infrastructural growth in the urban areas.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry does not deal with the subject of formulation of plan
at the State level. This Ministry deals with the subject of local Self
Government in urban area i.e. ULBs. The Constitution
(74th Amendment) Act envisage preparation of District Development
Plan by the District Planning Committee and Metropolitan Development
Plan by the Metropolitan Planning Committee.  This Ministry has been
impressing upon the States for constitution of DPCs and MPCs.
It may be mentioned here that the subject of DPC has since been
allocated to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The above recommendation
has been forwarded to the State Governments vide letter No. N-11025/
48/2004-UCD dated 17.12.2004 for appropriate action.
To give impetus to the planning process at the city level, it is
envisaged under the proposed NURM, every identified city will prepare
a urban perspective framework for a period of 20-25 years (with 5
yearly updates) indicating policies, programmes and strategies of
meeting fund requirements. This perspective plan would be followed
by preparation of development plans, integrating land use with services,
urban transport and environment management for every 5 years plan
period.
After the NURM is approved and implemented, it is expected that
the process of formulation of development plans for the cities would
receive immediate attention of the State Governments as it would be
a pre-requisite for the ULBs to avail Central assistance under the
NURM.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.2)
The Committee note that to supplement the efforts of the State
Government and to provide needed training facilities to elected

40
members of Municipalities, the Ministry provides financial assistance
to certain training institutions. The Ministry has initiated a plan to
train women elected councillors of all municipalities and the Ministry
will provide 50 per cent of the total expenditure on training of elected
women councillors. The Committee are of the firm view that
potentiality of all the elected members of the Municipalities could be
enhanced by giving proper training. The Committee, therefore, desire
that concerted effects are made to provide for training by utilization
of latest training methods and computerization network for capacity
building of all the elected members of Municipalities.
Reply of the Government
As stated in the above recommendation, the Ministry has a scheme
to train all elected women Councillors of urban local bodies for which
financial assistance is being provided to the State Governments on
50:50 basis. So far Rs.158.65 lakh has been released to the 17 States/
UTs for imparting training to 15,354 elected women councillors. While
sanctioning the grants to the State Governments, efforts will be made
to ensure that training is provided to the women elected Councillors
by utilizing latest training methods. The above recommendation has
already been brought to the notice of all States/UTs vide letter No.
N-11025/48/2004-UCD dated 17.12.2004. Besides, four Regional Centres
for Urban and Environmental Studies (Mumbai, Hyderabad, Lucknow
and IIPA, Delhi) and National Institute of Urban Affairs also imparts
training programmes to various elected and official functionaries of
ULBs. There is a network of training institutions available under USAID
FIRE-D Project which is also engaged in providing various training
programmes to ULBs’ functionaries.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 7.4)
The Committee note that article 243 T(3) of the Constitution
recognizes the role of women in local self-governance and the
functioning of the Municipalities. In this regard, the Committee are of
the firm view that the women participation in ‘Municipalities’ being a
mandatory provision under the constitution, the Union Government
should issue guidelines to encourage and promote effective participation
of women in the deliberations and decision making process of
Municipalities.

41
Reply of the Government
To ensure that the elected women Councillors take effective
participation in the deliberation and decision making process of
municipalities, the Ministry has already undertaken a plan to provide
necessary financial assistance to State Governments on 50:50 basis for
providing training to them. So far, 17 States have availed of the benefit
of the scheme. With the remaining State Governments, the Ministry is
in touch to ensure that they also avail of the benefits of the scheme.
The training being provided under the above plan to elected women
councillor will enable them to take active part in the deliberation and
decision making process of local bodies.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]

42
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.9)
Regarding, the formulation of development plans the Committee
note that a three tier planning structure comprising of Municipal level/
District level, Metropolitan level and State level is envisaged in
74th CAA. Under this frame work, the Municipalities would prepare
plans for their area which would be consolidated at the District level
in the form of a District Development Plan. These District Development
Plans would lead to formulation of the State level plans. In this regard,
the Committee desire that comprehensive and coordinative efforts be
made by the Central Government to impress upon the States and
required UTs to formulate their development plans in time.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry does not deal with the subject of formulation of plan
at the State level. This Ministry deals with the subject of local Self
Government in urban area i.e.  ULBs. The Constitution
(74th Amendment) Act envisage preparation of District Development
Plan by the District Planning Committee and Metropolitan Development
Plan by the Metropolitan Planning Committee. This Ministry has been
impressing upon the States for constitution of DPCs and MPCs.
It may be mentioned here that the subject of DPC has since been
allocated to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The above recommendation
has been forwarded to the State Governments vide letter No. N-11025/
48/2004-UCD dated 17.12.2004 for appropriate action.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]

43
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Paragraph No.2.21)
The Committee definitely regard the Constitutional
(74th Amendment) Act, 1992 as a path-breaking piece of legislation by
which Constitution of India has been amended to incorporate a separate
Chapter on Urban Local Bodies (ULB) by emphasizing the deserved
significance of local self-governance in line with the democratic set-up
of the country. The 74
th CAA has redefined the role, power, function
and finances of “Municipalities” or ULBs across the country. The
Committee, therefore, are of the firm view that with the complete and
proper implementation of the provisions under Article 243P to 243ZG
of Part IX A of the Constitution, better control and effective working
of the Urban Local Bodies in passing on the economic benefits and
suitable urban infrastructure to the people at large, would be achieved.
The Committee also recommend that innovative and good governance
methods be adopted by Urban Local Bodies with proper information
and training inputs, data base, as required, for improving the living
conditions and quality of life of urban residents in the country.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has been taking up the issue of implementation of
Article 243P to 243ZG of Part IX A of the Constitution with the States
on a continuous basis. As a result different provisions of Part IX A
have been implemented by the States which include elections to urban
local bodies (except Jharkhand and Pondicherry) for a fixed term of
five years, devolution of functional and financial powers, reservation
of seats for SC/ST and women, setting up of State Finance Commission
etc. However, certain States like Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Jharkhand,
Nagaland, Punjab, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal & Pondicherry
are lagging behind in setting up of District Planning Committees (DPCs)
for which the Ministry of Urban Development has been pursuing. It
is, however, submitted that the subject of DPC has since been
transferred to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and the recommendation
of the Committee has been forwarded to them for further follow up.
Out of the 15 States having Metropolitan cities with a population of

44
10 lakh or more, Metropolitan Planning Committees (MPCs) have been
constituted in two States namely West Bengal and Maharashtra.
Similarly, Ward Committees (WCs) have been set up in 9 States/UTs,
as per the details placed at Annexure-I.
In order that governance in urban local bodies be improved further
and these bodies become more responsive, accountable and transparent,
the Ministry is proposing to launch a Mission Mode Project on
e-Governance in Municipalities. The main objective of the e-Governance
initiative is application of electronic means to improve efficiency and
effectiveness of urban local bodies in the interaction between local
government and its citizens as well as other interested groups.
This Ministry in coordination with the C&AG is pursuing reforms
in the field of Municipal Accounting System for which a National
Municipal Accounts Manual (NMAM) has already been circulated to
the State Governments to help them to develop State specific municipal
accounting manual.
Ministry of Urban Development has also circulated Model
Municipal Law (MML), which intends to assist urban local bodies in
the areas of accounting reforms, resource mobilization, levy of users
charges, entry of private sector partnership etc.
This Ministry proposes for launching National Urban Renewal
Mission (NURM) and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for
Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) in which, inter-alia, the following
reforms at the level of ULBs/States are being proposed to be made
mandatory to qualify for availing Central assistance:—
1. Adoption of modern, accrual-based double entry system of
accounting in urban local bodies.
2. Reform of property tax with GIS, so that it becomes major
source of revenue for urban local bodies.
3. Levy of reasonable user charges by urban local bodies with
the objective that full cost of operation and maintenance is
collected within next five years.
4. Implementation of decentralization measures as envisaged
in 74
th Constitution Amendment Act.
5. Introduction of independent regulators for urban services.
6. Assigning and associating elected urban local bodies as with
“City Planning function”.

45
The above initiatives of Ministry of Urban Development are
expected to enable ULBs to perform their assigned duties and
responsibilities in a more effective and efficient manner to improve
the living conditions and quality of life of urban residents.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated: 24.6.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 2.22)
The Committee note that the 74 th CAA aims at a Constitutional
guarantee to safeguard the interest of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to
enable them to function as effective, democratic and self-governing
institutions at grass root level. The Committee strongly emphasize that
suitable steps be taken to ensure the following:—
-r egularity in elections under the supervision of the State
Election Commission;
-a  clear tenure of five years for the elected body;
-p rotection for the elected body against arbitrary dissolution;
- Constitution of Ward Committees for greater proximity to
the citizens;
- mandate to State Legislature to endow the ULBs with such
powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them
to function as institution of self-Government;
- the functions enumerated in Twelfth Schedule are effectively
transferred to the Urban Local Bodies;
- the constitution of State Finance Commission (SFCs) to
review municipal finances and make recommendations
regarding distribution of the proceeds of State-level taxes
between the State Governments and the Urban Local Bodies
criteria for grants-in-aid, measures needed to improve the
financial position of the Urban Local Bodies and compliance
of the recommendations of the State Finance Commissions;
and
-u rgent formation of District Planning Committees (DPCs)
and Metropolitan Planning Committees (MPCs) for
integrated as well as coordinated planning for urban and
rural areas.

46
 Reply of the Government
The Ministry agrees with the above observations of the Committee.
The Ministry has been impressing upon the States to fully implement
the provisions of the Constitution (74th Amendment) Act. The latest
position with regard to the above observations is as under:—
I. Elections of the urban local bodies have been held in all
States and UTs except Jharkhand and Pondicherry. The
Government of Jharkhand and UT of Pondicherry have been
requested to conduct the elections of municipalities without
further delay.
II. Article 243U already provides for fixed terms of five years
for Municipalities and the States have made relevant
provisions in their municipal laws.
III. A provision already exists in the Constitution to give a
municipality a reasonable opportunity of being heard before
its dissolution.
IV . Ward Committees have been constituted in various States
where municipalities with population over 3 lakh exist. A
Statement showing position in this regard is placed at
Annexure-I.
V. As per Article 243W of the Constitution, it is for the
Legislature of State to devolve such powers and
responsibilities upon municipalities as necessary to enable
them to function as effective units of Local Self Government
including those listed in the Twelfth Schedule. A Statement
showing the status of devolution of functions listed in the
Twelfth Schedule of Constitution upon municipalities in
various States is placed at Annexure-II.
VI. State Finance Commissions (SFCs) have been set up by all
the States (Annexure-III). In four States/UTs namely Kerala,
Uttar Pradesh, Haryana & NCT of Delhi, third Finance
Commissions have also been set up. The Ministry is in
constant touch with the State Governments to ensure that
the recommendations of the SFCs are implemented
expeditiously. Gist of the recommendation of the SFCs and
action taken thereon, already annexed to the main report of
the Committee as Annexure-VIII (pages 96-111 of the report)
VII. For early setting up of DPCs and MPCs, the Government
of India is pursuing the matter with the concerned State

47
Governments. Chief Secretaries have been requested vide
letter No. G-20011/1/2004-UCD dated 21.4.2005 to take
suitable action in this regard. It is submitted that the subject
of DPC has since been allocated to the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj. Further follow-up action on DPC will be
taken by them.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. N-11025/48/2004-UCD,
Dated : 24.6.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report)

48
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—Nil—
 N EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM
29 July, 2005 Chairman,
7 Sravana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development

49
APPENDIX I
STATUS REPORT RECEIVED FROM STATES/UTs REGARDING
SETTING UP OF WARDS COMMITTEES
(1.6.2005)
Sl.No. Name of the Position Status of Wards Committees
State/UT
12 3 4
 1. Andhra Pradesh Yes
 2. Arunachal Pradesh NA
 3. Assam IA
 4. Bihar No Provision has been made in the State
Municipal Act. After making rules for
constitution of Wards Committees, the
same will be constituted.
 5. Chhattisgarh Yes Election to the Municipal Corporation
of Raipur has recently been conducted
and consitution of Wards Committees
is under Process. After election to the
Bhilai Municipal Corpn., Wards
Committees would also be constituted
there.
 6. Goa NA As no municipality with population
more than 3 lakh exist.
 7. Gujarat No
 8. Haryana No Rules have not been framed so far.
 9. Himachal Pradesh NA No corr esponding provisions have been
made in municipal law.
10. Jammu & Kashmir NA Not required. 74th CAA not applicable
in the State.
11. Jharkhand NE Elections are yet to be held.
12. Karnataka Yes Constituted in Bangalore and Gulbarga
Nagarpalikas. Action is being taken to
constitute such committees for the
remaining five Nagarpalikas of the State
having more than 3 lakh population.

50
12 3 4
13. Kerala Yes Wards Committees have been set up in
each municipality having population
more than one lakh.
14. Madhya Pradesh Yes Wards Committees have been
constituted in the municipalities having
population of 3 lakhs and above.
15. Maharashtra Yes
16. Manipur IA
17. Meghalaya NA
18. Mizoram NA No ULB exist.
19. Nagaland NA No ULB of population above 3 lakh.
20. Orissa No Provisions have been made in the State
Municipal Act for setting up of Wards
Committees. However, the State Govt.
has not mentioned whether any Wards
Committee has been constiuted.
21. Punjab No
22. Rajasthan UC The State Government is taking steps
for setting up of Wards Committees in
the State immediately.
23. Sikkim NA No ULB exist.
24. Tamil Nadu Yes Govt. orders have been issued for
constitution of 10 Wards Committees in
the Chennai Municipal Corporation and
4 Wards Committees each in Madurai,
Coimbatore, Tiruchirapalli, Tirunelveli
and Salem Municipal Corporations.
25. Tripura No Earlier there was no municipality of
population more than 3 lakh exist, so
Wards Committees not constituted.
Subsequently the area/population of
Agartala Municipal Council has been
extended. The State Govt. will take
action to constitute wards Committees.

51
12 3 4
26. Uttar Pradesh No
27. Uttaranchal No
28. West Bengal Yes Yes.
29. A&N Islands No The population of municipal area of
A&N Islands is only 1.5 lakh. Hence,
no wards Committee is required to be
set up.
30. Chandigarh No
31. Dadra & Nagar Haveli NA No ULB.
32. Daman & Diu NA No ULB of population above 3 lakh.
33. Delhi Yes Wards Committees have been
constituted at zonal level. There are 12
zones in MCD covering all the 134
wards.
34. Lakshadweep NA No ULB exist.
35. Pondicherry NE Elections are yet to be held.
Ward Committees constituted (Yes) — 9
Under Consideration (UC) — 1
Not set up due to non-election (NE) — 2
Not Constituted (No) — 10
No ULB of population above 3 lakh (NA) — 11
Information Awaited (IA) — 2
35

52
APPENDIX II
DEVOLUTION OF FUNCTIONAL POWERS ON URBAN LOCAL BODIES
Name of the 18 Functions enumerated at Twelfth Schedule of the ConstitutionState/UT 12
3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9
Andhra Pradesh
√
√√√√√
x
√√√√√√√√√√√
Arunachal Pradesh As reported by the State Government, there is no ULB in the State. Municipal Administration is intended to be 
introduced in the State by the
end of 2004.
Assam x
√
x
√√√
xxxxx
√
x
√√
x
√√
Bihar
√
√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√
Regulationof land-use
and constru-ction ofbuilding
Planning
for
economic& socialdevelop-ment
Roadsand bridges
Water
supply fordomestic,industrial
and commer-
cial
purposes
Publichealth,sanitationconser-vancy &solidwastemanage-ment
Fireservices
Urbanforestry,protectionof theenviron-ment &promotion
of
ecologicalaspects
Safeguar-ding theinterestsof weakersections ofsociety ,including
the handi-cappedand mentallyretarded
Slumimpro-vementand up-grada-tion
Urbanpovertyallevia-tion
Provi-sion ofurbanameni-ties andfacilitiessuch asparks,gardens,play-grounds
Promo-tion ofcultural,educat-ional &aestheticaspects
Burialsand burialgrounds,cremat-ions,crema-tiongrounds
&
electriccremato-riums
Cattlepounds;preven-tion ofcrueltyto
animals
Vital statis-tics inclu-dingregistra-tion ofbirths& deaths
Publicameni-ties inclu-dingstreetlighting,parkinglots,bus stops &publicconven-iences
Regula-tion ofslaugh-ter housesand tanne-ries
UrbanPlanningincludingtownplanning

53
Chhattisgarh
√
√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√
Goa
√√
x
√
xxx
√
x
√
x
√
x
√√√√√
Gujarat x x
√√√
x
√
xx
√
—xx
√√√
x
√
Haryana
√
√√√√√√√√√√√√
—————
Himachal Pradesh
√
No
√√√√
No
√√√√√√√√√√√
Jammu and Kashmir 74th Constitution Amendment Act is not applicable to the State of Jammu & Kashmir
.
Jharkhand Election to the ULBs is yet to be held in the State. Devolution of function will be taken up after the completion of t
he elections.
Karnataka x
√√√√√
x
√√√√√√√√√√√
Kerala
√
√√√√√
x
√√√√√√√√√√√
Madhya Pradesh x
√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√
Maharashtra x x
√
xxxx
√
x
√√
xxx
√
xx
√
Manipur The State Govt. have informed that they have yet to issue/publish the Powers & Functions enumerated in the XIIth schedul
e.
Meghalaya The State Govt. have informed that the State has been exempted fr
om purview of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act.
Mizoram The State Govt. have informed that ULbs have not been constituted so far in Mizoram.12
3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9

54
12
3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9
Nagaland x
√√
xx
√
x
√√
√
x
√√√√√√√
Orissa
√
x
√√
x
√
x
√√√√√√√√√√√
Punjab
√
√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√
Rajasthan
√√ √
xx
√√
xx
√√√
x
√√√√√
Sikkim The State Govt. have informed that there is no Urban Local Body in Sikkim.Tamil Nadu
√
√√√√√
x
√√√√√√√√√√√
Tripura
√
√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√
Uttaranchal The State Govt. have informed that functions related to 12th scheduled of the Constitution will be incorporated in t
he New 
Act and will
accordingly be devolved on ULBs.
Uttar Pradesh
√
√√√√√
xxxx
√√√√√√√√
West Bengal
√
√√√√√
x
√√√√√√√√√√√
A&N Islands x x x x
√√
xxx
√√√
x
√√√√
x
Chandigarh x x x x
√√√
xxx
√
xx
√√
xx
√
Dadar & Nagar Haveli UT of Dadar and Nagar Haveli does not have any Municipality
.
Daman & Diu
√
xx
√√√√
xxxxxxxxx
√
x

55
12
3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9
GNCT of DelhiMCD x x
√√
x
√
xx
√√
x
√√√√√√√
NDMC x x
√√√√
xx
√
xx
√√√√√√
x
Pondicherry The devolution of 18 functions enumerated in the schedule 12 of the Constitution is to be made after installation of
 Urban Local Bodies. However
,
devolution of these functions to desired levels is under examination of the Government.
Lakshadweep There is no ULBs in the UT of Lakshadweep. The entir
e UT is treated as Rural.
(√) = Functions devolved upon ULBs fully.(x) = Functions not devolved upon ULBs. (-) = Information not received in respect of these functions.

56
APPENDIX III
DETAILS OF STATE FINANCE COMMISSION
Name of State Date of Date of Date of
constitution of constitution  of constitution of
1st SFC 2nd SFC 3rd SFC
12 3 4
*Andhra Pradesh 22.6.1994 8.12.1998
Arunachal Pradesh 21.5.2003 Due in 2008
*Assam 23.6.1996 Constituted in 2001
*Bihar 23.4.1995 2.6.1999
Chhattisgarh 22.8.2003 Due in 2008
*Goa 22.4.1994 April, 1999
*Gujarat 15.9.1994 April, 1999
Haryana 31.5.1994 6.9.2000 31.5.2005
Himachal Pradesh 23.4.1994 25.5.1999
Jammu & Kashmir 2001 Due in 2005
Jharkhand 28.1.2004 Due in 2009
*Karnataka 10.6.1994 23.6.1999
Kerala 23.4.1994 23.6.1999 20.9.2004
Madhya Pradesh 17.6.1994 17.6.1999
Maharashtra 23.4.1994 22.6.1999
*Manipur 22.4.1994 3.1.2003
*Meghalaya Not applicable. 74th CAA is not applicable to the State
under Article 243ZC.
*Mizoram No ULB
Nagaland Not applicable. The State Government have not
constituted SFC.

57
12 3 4
Orissa 21.11.1996 & 5.6.2003
re-constituted
on 24.8.1998
Punjab 22.4.1994 21.9.2000
*Rajasthan 23.4.1994 7.5.1999
*Sikkim 22.7.1998 2003
*Tamil Nadu 23.4.1994 1.12.1999
*Tripura 23.4.1994 29.10.1999
*Uttaranchal 31.3.2001 Due in 2006
*Uttar Pradesh 22.10.1991 25.2.2000
West Bengal May, 1994 July, 2000 Constituted
A&N Islands 20.9.1995 28.8.2001
Chandigarh May, 1995 9.1.2001 Constituted
*Dadar & Nagar Haveli 8.9.1995 December, 2001
*Daman & Diu 8.9.1995 December, 2001
GNCT of Delhi April, 1995 2001 October 2004
Pondicherry 12.3.1997 5.1.2004
*Lakshadweep 8.9.1995 December, 2001
*Sources: The list as on 1.4.2004 collected from M/o Rural Development.
(The State of Meghalaya and Mizoram have also informed that SFC not constituted as
the 73rd CAA, 1992 under which the SFC is required to be set up, is not applicable to
these States).

58
APPENDIX IV
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVEOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY, 28 JULY 2005
The Committee sat from 15.00 hrs. to 16.00 hrs. in Room No. ‘139’
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
4. Shri Amitava Nandy
5. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
6. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
7. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
9. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
10. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
11. Shri Jayantilal Barot
12. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
13. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Assistant Director

59
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee first took up for consideration the
draft report on the subject ‘Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana’
(Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation). After
deliberation, the Committee adopted the draft report with slight
modifications.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration Memorandum
No. 4 regarding draft Report on the action taken by the Gvoernment
on the recommendations contained in the Third Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Implementation of Part IX A of the
Constitution’ (Ministry of Urban Development). After deliberation the
Committee adopted the draft report without any modifications.
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise both
the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Ministries and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
5. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked all the members of the
Committee and the Officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to
the Committee for their active cooperation and support extended by
them during the tenure of the Committee (2004-2005).
The Committee then adjourned.

60
APPENDIX V
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
THIRD REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (14th LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 26
II. Recommendations that have been accepted 23
by the Government
Para Nos. 2.23, 2.24, 2.25, 3.8, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12,
3.19, 3.20, 3.21, 3.22, 3,31, 3.32, 3.36, 4.8, 4.9,
4.10, 4.11, 4.12, 5.3, 5.4, 6.2, and 7.4.
Percentage to Total recommendations (88.46%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do 01
not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies
Para No. 3.9
Percentage to Total recommendations (3.86%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies 02
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
Para Nos. 2.21 and 2.22
Percentage to Total recommendations (7.68%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final NIL
replies of the Government are still awaited
Para Nos. NIL
Percentage to Total recommendations