12
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Seventh Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
2005-2006 of the Ministry of Urban Development]
TWELFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


TWELFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Seventh Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
2005-2006 of the Ministry of Urban Development]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ..............
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ..............
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2005/Kartika, 1927 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 12
Price : Rs. 32.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
ACRONYMS .................................................................................................. (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 25
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 47
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 51
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 62
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the 3rd sitting of the Committee
held on 28.10.2005 ................................................... 68
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the Seventh
Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ...... 70
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Pushp Jain
6. Shri P . Mohan
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Amitava Nandy
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
11. Shri L. Rajgopal
12. Shri D. Vittal Rao
13. Shri Sajjan Kumar
14. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Sugrib Singh
17. Shri K. Subbarayan
18. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
19. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
20. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
21. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vairender Singh Bajwa
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
25. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
26. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
27. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
28. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
29. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
30. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
31. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Joint Secretary
4. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
5. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
6. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Asst. Director
7. Shri G.C. Prasad — Committee Officer
(iv)

ACRONYMS
AUWSP Accelerated Urban Water Supply Programme
BE Budget Estimates
BSF Border Security Force
CGWB Central Ground Water Board
CISF Central Industrial Security Force
CMA Counter Magnet Areas
CPHEEO Central Public Health and Environmental
Engineering Organisation
CPWD Central Public Works Department
CRPF Central Reserve Police Force
DDA Delhi Development Authority
DIZ Area Delhi Imperial Zone Area
DMRC Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd.
DPR Detailed Project Report
DUAC Delhi Urban Arts Commission
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee
GAMS Government Accommodation Management System
GBS Gross Budgetary Support
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GNCTD Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
GPNRA General Pool Non-Residential Accommodation
GPOA General Pool Office Accommodation
GPRA General Pool Residential Accommodation
HUDCO Housing and Urban Development Corporation
IDSMT Integrated Development of Small and Medium
Towns
IEBR Internal Extra Budget Resources
IRBTP Integrated Rail & Bus Transport Project
ITBP Indo-Tibet Border Police
JBIC Japanese Bank for International Cooperation
L&DO Land and Development Office
(v)

LIG Lower Income Group
LPU Letter Press Unit
MIG Middle Income Group
MoUD Ministry of Urban Development
MRTS Metro Rail Transport System
NA Not Available
NBCC National Building Construction Corporation
NCR National Capital Region
NCRPB National Capital Region Planning Board
NEERI National Environmental Engineering Research
Institute
NIUD National Institute of Urban Development
NRSA National Remote Sensing Agency
NSSO National Sample Survey Organisation
NUDBI National Urban Data Bank and Indicators
NUIS National Urban Information System
NURM National Urban Renewal Mission
PLU Photo Litho Unit
PSUs Public Sector Undertakings
RE Revised Estimate
RITES Rail India Technical and Economic Services
SFS Self Financing Scheme
SLSCs State Level Sanctioning Committees
TA Travelling Allowance
TAGT echnology Advisory Group
TCPO Town and Country Planning Organization
UIDSSMT Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme of Small
& Medium Towns
ULB Urban Local Bodies
USIS Urban Spatial Information System
UTs Union Territories
WC Work Charged
(vi)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2005-06) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Twelfth Report on the action taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventh
Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban
Development on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Urban
Development.
2. The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 25 April,
2005.  The Replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 26 July, 2005.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
28th October, 2005.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2005-06) is given in Appendix-II.
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
9 November, 2005 Chairman,
18 Kartika, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
(vii)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The Report of the Committee on Urban Development (2005-06)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of
the Ministry of Urban Development which was presented to Lok Sabha
on 25 April, 2005.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 45 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.22, 2.33, 2.41, 2.42, 2.43, 2.71, 3.21, 3.22, 3.23,
3.24, 3.40, 3.41, 3.42, 3.43, 3.53, 3.55, 3.56, 3.66, 4.10, 4.20,
4.26, 4.28, 5.17, 5.29, 5.31, 5.35 and 5.36
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government replies:
Para Nos. 2.12, 2.14, 2.72 and 3.54
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.7, 2.11, 2.13, 2.19, 2.75, 3.65, 4.5, 4.15 and 4.22
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.28, 2.29, 2.52, 3.69 and 5.14
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations for which only interim replies have been given by
the Government should be furnished to the Committee within three
months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Overall Assessment of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry
of Urban Development for the year 2005-2006
Recommendation (Para No. 2.7)
5. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee note that the Budget Estimates (2005-06) depict a
steep decline in the Capital Section by (-) 45.47% as compared to the
BE (2004-05) in Demand Number: 100. In this regard, the Ministry of
Urban Development has reasoned that the decrease in the Capital
Section is mainly due to lump-sum allocation of 10% of GBS for the
North Eastern Region including Sikkim as Rs. 160 crore allocated to
NE Regions in 2005-06 has been transferred from the Revenue Section
to the Capital Section. On the question of the decrease in the allocations
made in BE (2005-06) over BE (2004-05) for the IDSMT, AUWSP and
Mega–City Schemes, the Committee have been given to understand
that the lesser allocations in 2005-06 are because these allocations are
now meant only for the On-Going Projects of the schemes. According
to the Ministry, the main reason for reduction of Rs. 38.76 crore in the
BE 2005-06 as compared to BE 2004-05 under Revenue Section of Major
Head 2215 is due to the proposal of Government to launch two new
schemes viz. (i) National Urban Renewal Mission (NURM) for selected
cities and (ii) Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and
Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) to cover all cities/towns excepting cities/
towns covered by NURM with the approval of competent authority in
lieu of the existing Schemes of AUWSP , IDSMT and Infrastructure
Development of Mega Cities. The Ministry have stated in their reply
that a budget allocation of Rs. 95.24 crore has been made for AUWSP
in the current year to meet the committed liability of ongoing approved
schemes, as AUWSP , IDSMT and Infrastructure Development of Mega
Cities would be discontinued and merged in a new scheme which is
being formulated. The Committee note that based on the similar
ideology, the allocations for IDSMT and Mega–City schemes have been
reduced by (-) 99.5% and (-) 70% in 2005-06 over BE (2004-05).
Although, the Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the
Government in launching the NURM and UIDSSMT schemes in 60
selected towns/cities; however the Committee are quite surprised to
find that new schemes are yet to be finalized and the allocations for
the instant urban development schemes have already been reduced in
BE (2005-06). The Committee are of the firm view that before making
any reduction under Major Head 2215, Water Supply & Sanitation and
the allocations for 2005-06 in IDSMT and Mega-City schemes, the
Government should have finalised the new schemes and guidelines

3
first and circulated them to all the States/UTs so as to commence the
projects under the NURM and UIDSSMT schemes in the beginning of
the coming financial year, itself. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that before starting on new Schemes, all the requisite
ground works should be first completed.
6. The Government have replied as below:
The Ministry shares the views of the Committee. National Urban
Renewal Mission (NURM) for select cities and Urban Infrastructure
Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) are
now awaiting approval of the competent authority. Both the schemes
are expected to be operationalised in 2005-06 itself.
7. The Committee appreciate that the Government share the
aforesaid observation of the Committee. Two new schemes viz.
NURM and UIDSSMT are still awaiting approval of the competent
authority. The Committee hope that the Government will stick to
the time frame given above for the operation of both the new
schemes so that the cities selected under the above schemes do not
suffer on account of delay in their implementation.
B. Urban Water Supply & Sanitation
Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)
8. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee are informed that a provision of Rs.1500 crore for
‘Viability Gap Funding’ for infrastructure projects has been announced
in 2005-06 along with the funding mechanism of Special Purpose
Vehicle (SPV). For ‘Viability Gap Funding’, the Ministry of UD has
been allocated a provision of Rs 600 crore. Further, a provision of
Rs. 5500 crore for NURM has been proposed by the Ministry. The
Committee observe that there is vast disparity between demand and
supply of ‘water supply and sanitation’ as far as finance is concerned.
While the Committee are happy to note the steps taken to bridge the
resource gap by making provisions under SPV , the Committee express
their anxiety over the fulfilment of the demands as far as the water
supply and sanitation in urban areas is concerned. The Ministry has
stated that as such these higher allocations of funds as compared to
the previous years is expected to address the problem of drinking
water and sanitation in urban areas. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that as committed above by the Ministry, all out efforts
are made by the Government in meeting the demands of the urban

4
water supply and sanitation in urban areas of the country. Also,
measures are taken so as to ensure adequate supply of potable drinking
water in the towns/cities and other urban areas.
9. The Government have replied as below:
Two new schemes, namely, National Urban Renewal Mission
(NURM) to cover select cities and Urban Infrastructure Development
Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (IDSSMT) for the cities / towns
with population upto 10 lakh (not covered by NURM) are under the
process of approval of the competent authority. These schemes are
expected to fill the gap in the availability of water in urban areas.
Pooled Finance Development Scheme (PFDS) once launched will
be able to leverage market funds for bankable water supply projects.
In addition, the proposed Viability Gap Funding scheme can also be
utilised for leveraging the marginally unviable water supply projects.
Moreover, Tax Free Municipal Bonds are also being used for funding
water supply projects.
10. The Committee note that more than half of the financial year
has already lapsed and the two new schemes namely NURM and
UIDSSMT are still awaiting approval of the competent authority.
The Committee are of the view that huge budgetary curtailment on
the ongoing schemes such as IDSMT and Mega City Schemes should
not have been done just because two new schemes viz. NURM and
UIDSSMT have been proposed and are awaiting approval. The
Ministry should have made a careful anticipation as to when the
newly proposed schemes would come into operation and only after
approval of the schemes, the budgetary curtailment on the ongoing
schemes should have been effected. In the event of delay in approval
of the new schemes, the huge amounts of allocations for the new
schemes would remain under-utilised and some vital ongoing
schemes of the Ministry would ultimately suffer. The Committee
reiterate that all out efforts at the highest level be made to get the
new schemes approved so that infrastructure projects & schemes are
carried out without any financial crunch.
C. Utilisation of funds proposed under new schemes
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)
11. The Committee had noted as below:
While these moves are optimistic about reducing the financial
crunch, they are yet to see the light of the day and are in a very

5
rudimentary stage. The Committee, therefore, feel that current resource
crunch cannot be ignored, by projecting a bright future which is yet
to fructify. The Committee, therefore, urge that the government should
address the present day inconveniences seriously instead of a
hypothetical bright affluence in terms of financial resources.
12. The Government have replied as below:
Plan funds for IDSMT and Mega City Schemes were significantly
enhanced in the 10th Plan in comparison with 9th Plan, as follows:—
(Rs. in crores)
9th Plan 10th Plan
(a) IDSMT 275 1304.65
(b) Mega City 500 1050.00
The enhanced allocations in the 10th Plan for existing schemes
would help to a great extent in meeting requirement of urban
infrastructure.
As stated in reply to para 2.11, National Urban Renewal Mission
(NURM) for select cities and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme
for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) are to be launched in 2005-
06 to address infrastructural problems of all cities/towns in the country.
For NURM for select cities and UIDSSMT, there is tentative allocation
of Rs. 2800 crore and Rs. 700 crore respectively in 2005-06. Efforts are
being made to launch Pooled Finance Development Scheme (PFDS) in
2005-06 to enable Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to access capital markets
for investment in bankable urban infrastructure projects.
13. The Committee note that while there is a huge allocation of
Rs. 2800 crore for NURM and Rs. 700 crore for UIDSSMT for the
year 2005-06, they express their apprehension that such a huge
amount may remain unspent, if these schemes do not become
operational within the time schedule specified. Even if these schemes
become operational, there could be huge under-spending at the end
of the financial year. The Committee recommend that all out efforts
should be made for proper utilisation of the funds.
D. Lump-sum Provision for North Eastern States including Sikkim
Recommendation (Para No. 2.19)
14. The Committee had recommended as below:
The Committee note that the total allocation for North Eastern Areas
including Sikkim during 2005-06 has been increased from Rs. 114 crore

6
to Rs.160 crore thus an increased allocation of Rs. 46 crore has been
made in the current year. They also observe that 67 projects are on-
going, while 75 proposals are under consideration, which are to be
completed in an allocation of Rs.160 crore. The Committee note ( see
the Appendix II) that only Rs. 57.54 crore could be utilized during the
last year as on January, 2005 in the NE Region. The Committee are of
the view that the Union should see that North Eastern States come
forward with their priority and if necessary required help may also be
extended so that there is no delay in executing projects by the
concerned States. The Committee would like to know the details of
those States, who have opted for NBCC’s role and those who want to
implement by themselves. By having the above figures, the Ministry
can look forward to better implementation of the projects and optimum
deployment of financial resources. In any case the Committee
recommend that all the money should be utilized during the year
2005-06 and all the physical and financial targets should be achieved
to avoid cost and time overrun.
15. The Government have replied as below:
Recommendation is accepted. As per past record this Ministry has
always been utilizing full amount allocated for North-Eastern Areas
including Sikkim.
16. The Committee do not find that the observation of the
Ministry is factually correct. The Committee note that in 2002-03,
only Rs. 76 crore was utilised out of Rs. 90 crore allocated to North-
Eastern States. Even in 2003-04, only Rs. 92 crore was spent out of
the total allocation of Rs. 160 crore to NE States. While in 2004-05,
Rs. 114.50 crore was allocated to North Eastern States and Sikkim,
only Rs. 57.54 crore could be utilised till January 2005. It is, therefore,
not clear as to how the Ministry have made a statement that they
have been utilising the full amount allocated for North Eastern States
and Sikkim. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation and stress that the funds allocated to North Eastern
States under Demand no. 100 should be fully utilised. The Committee
should be kept informed about the steps taken in this direction.
E. Launching of National Mission Mode IT Project
Recommendation (Para No. 2.42)
17. The Committee had recommended as below:
The Committee note that the Ministry has prepared a draft proposal
for ‘Mission Mode IT’ in 2005-06 and an allocation of Rs. 25 crore has

7
been earmarked under this scheme. During the course of evidence, the
Secretary (UD) has assured the Committee to launch this Mission Mode
IT scheme in August, 2005. The Committee desire that the Ministry
would effectively carry out the Mission Mode IT as promised to them.
18. The Government have replied as below:
A draft scheme on National Mission Mode Project on e-Governance
in Municipalities has been prepared by this Ministry. The Planning
Commission has given in-principle approval to this Scheme. Meanwhile,
this Ministry in coordination with the Department of Information
Technology and USAID (FIRE-D) is designing the project for launching
the project in 35 cities with million plus population during this year,
2005-06.
19. The Committee were happy to note that the National Mission
Mode Project has got the approval of the Planning Commission.
They desire that efforts should be stepped up in coordination with
the Department of Information Technology and USAID (FIRE-D) in
designing and launching the project immediately which would assist
in improved service delivery, decentralization, better information
management & transparency, citizen’s involvement in governance,
etc. The Committee would like to hear further in this regard.
F. Model Municipal Law
Recommendation (Para No. 2.71)
20. The Government had recommended as below:
The Committee note the measures taken by the Union Government
in the areas of Municipal Accounting Reforms and enactment of Model
Municipal Law for strengthening the Urban local bodies in pursuance
of 74th Constitution Amendment Act. While the aforesaid initiatives
are applauded, their proper implementation is also desired or otherwise
such initiatives may remain sterile. The Committee would, therefore,
like to know the considered views of the Union Government to ensure
their effective implementation.
21. The Government have replied as below:
This Ministry has been impressing upon the States/UTs for
implementation of the provisions of Model Municipal Law (MML) as
well as adoption of double entry accounting system by the urban
local bodies. To give an impetus to the implementation of the provisions

8
of MML, this Ministry has organized four Regional Workshops at Jaipur,
Kolkata, Hyderabad and Pune in Sept’ 04, Nov’ 04, Feb’ 05 and April’ 05.
As a follow up, majority of States, except Assam, Bihar, Haryana,
Jharkhand, Manipur, Meghalaya and U.P . have initiated necessary action
to incorporate various provisions of MML in their municipal acts.
Similarly, this Ministry is in constant touch with the State
Governments, impressing upon them to bring necessary reforms in the
accounting system being followed by urban local bodies by adopting
the double entry accounting system. Almost all the States except Assam,
Meghalaya and Nagaland have initiated necessary action for adoption
of double entry accounting system for their urban local bodies.
22. The Committee would like to be informed further about the
outcome of the initiatives taken for incorporation of various
provisions of Model Municipal Law in Municipalities by the
respective State Governments. Annual review of the implementation
of the aforesaid enactment should be made keeping in view how
some of the States have gone ahead in strengthening the Urban
Local Bodies and how some of them are lagging behind. The States
which are lagging behind could take a leaf from those States who
have gone ahead and accordingly move forward. These interactions
would greatly improve the implementation and help in achieving
the results. So far as double entry accounting system is concerned,
it is not specified why Assam, Meghalaya and Nagaland are yet to
initiate necessary action for adoption of the aforesaid system.
These States should be persuaded to do so by addressing their
difficulties.
G. Role of Ministry of Urban Development in Tsunami affected
areas
Recommendation (Para No. 2.75)
23. The Committee had recommended as below:
As regards, the re-construction of the Tsunami affected areas, the
Committee note that CPWD and NBCC have been assigned the task
for providing the permanent reconstruction in the two Union Territories
of Pondicherry and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The Committee
desire that the adequate funds are allocated for the purpose and the
re-construction works in the Tsunami affected areas are completed by
NBCC and CPWD in a time bound manner.

9
24. The Government have replied as below:
CPWD
Action Plan for the Construction of 6650 houses for tribal at Car
Nicobar and Southern Islands and 2700 houses for non-tribals at Little
Andamans and Great Nicobar Islands is being proposed in connection
with the A&N Administration and residents of the Islands.
NBCC
(i) Reconstruction and Restoration of Water Supply System in Port
Blair
MOUD, Govt. of India vide letter No.Z-14013/2/2004-PHE.1
dated 30.3.05 sanctioned and amount of Rs.10.50 crore for
Reconstruction and Restoration of Water Supply System in Port Blair.
An amount of Rs.4.00 crore was released to NBCC as advance for the
above work. NBCC has deputed a team of Senior Officers to Port
Blair to undertake these works. The team met Senior Officers of local
Administration such as Chief Secretary, Secretary (PWD), CE(APWD)
and Secretary, Port Blair Municipal Council for handing over of the
site to NBCC. Despite repeated requests the site was not handed over
to NBCC. In a meeting held on 24.6.05 Chaired by the Secretary , APWD,
it was informed that the local authorities have partially completed the
restoration work pertaining to Water Supply System from their own
resources and NBCC can take up the remaining work of construction
of OH Water tank for an amount of Rs.3.74 crore. The matter is required
to be sorted out immediately.
(ii) Post Tsunami Reconstruction Proposal
Based on the report for reconstruction submitted by Ministry of
Planning Commission in which NBCC has submitted a proposal for
construction of 1700 dwelling Units and 1000 dwelling units for non-
tribals in Hut Bay and Campbell Bay Area of each dwelling unit is
300 sft. (details available on NBCC web site www.nbccindia.com) NBCC
has erected pro-types with pre-fab technology at Hut Bay and Campbell
Bay. The Central Team visited the Islands in the first week of July
2005 for inspection of the prototype samples. The Central team had
approved the samples erected by NBCC. Approval is awaited for taking
up construction of the dwelling units.
25. The Committee are perturbed to note that a lot of time has
elapsed since the occurrence of Tsunami, however a large number of

10
dwelling units for those affected are yet to be constructed. CPWD is
still drawing up an action plan for construction of 6650 houses for
tribals at Car Nicobar and Southern Islands and 2700 houses for
non-tribals at little Andamans & Great Nicobar Islands. The
Committee note that although these areas have been severely affected
by the Tsunami, CPWD & NBCC are yet to begin construction of
dwelling units in these areas. The Committee desire that construction
of dwelling units be taken up by CPWD on top priority basis and
completed expeditiously so that people of the Islands do not suffer
on account of delay in the construction. NBCC should sort out the
construction of OH Water Tank Costing Rs. 3.74 crore at Port Blair
as early as possible. Further, the Committee recommend that NBCC
should step-up its activity for restoring the water supply and get the
construction of the dwelling units completed in the non-tribal areas.
Approval for the construction of the dwelling units by the Centre
should be given on top priority basis.
H. Accelerated Urban Water Supply Programme (AUWSP)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.53)
26. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee note that Rs.150 crore has been allocated in BE
(2004-05) which has been reduced to Rs.95.24 crore in BE (2005-06) for
the AUWSP Scheme. Out of Rs.150 crore allocated in 2004-05; a total
amount of Rs. 139.44 crore has been released to various States as
Central share for AUWSP projects. In this regard, the Ministry has
informed that the entire allocation of Rs.150 crore is expected to be
utilized. The Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry to stand by
above commitment.
27. The Government have replied as below:
The entire allocation of Rs. 150 crore for AUWSP was utilized
during 2005-06. Rs. 146 crore was released to different State
Governments for AUWSP works and Rs. 4 crore was released for
rehabilitation/reconstruction of water supply system in Tsumani affected
Port Blair, Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
28. While appreciating the full utilisation of Rs. 150 crore
allocated during the year 2004-05 the Committee express their
displeasure over the way it was carried forward during the year
2005-06. They, therefore, stress that the money allocated for a
particular year should invariably be utilised in that particular year

11
only. They are of the view that, had the Ministry of Urban
Development optimally utilised the allocated amount during the year
2004-05, perhaps the Planning Commission/Finance Ministry would
not have reduced the allocation under the head during the year
2005-06. The Committee therefore recommend that the implementation
process should be strengthened so that funds are optimally utilised
within the specified period.
I. Solid Waste Management & Drainage in Air Field Towns
Recommendation (Para No. 3.65)
29. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee observe that Rs. 99.34 crore has been allocated in
10th Plan for Solid Waste Management and Drainage in Air field towns.
The Committee is perturbed to note the utilisation of funds under the
project. Against an allocation of Rs. 5 crore in 2002-2003, the expenditure
was nil. In 2003-2004, the allocation was 5 crore, but the expenditure
was only Rs. 99 lakh. Similarly, in 2004-05, Rs. 40 crore was allocated,
but only Rs. 22.02 crore could be utilised. The Committee also note
that Rs. 55 crore has been allocated for the project in 2005-2006. Detailed
Project Reports (DPRs) of only 3 towns have been received for which
Central assistance of Rs. 27.19 crore, has been sanctioned. The DPRs in
respect of 4 towns is awaiting technical approval while in respect of
3 towns, they are yet to be received. The Committee recommend that
rigorous efforts should be made by the Government and the
municipalities and other urban local bodies are to be persuaded to
complete the projects of Solid Waste Management in selected Airfields
within six months of presentation of this Report to the House.
30. The Government have replied as below:
• The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) met on 8th March
2001 and directed to reframe the scheme based on the actual
ground condition with only capital cost to be borne by the
Government of India and O & M cost by State Government
with efforts to involve private sector participation.
• HUDCO was asked to prepare revised feasibility reports
based on actual ground condition through field studies. Since
field studies / investigations took some time, HUDCO could
submit the project reports in April 2002.
• The Departmental Expenditure Finance Committee approved
the scheme on 26th June 2002.

12
• Subsequently the scheme was approved by the Ministry of
Finance in December 2002 and Full Planning Commission
in October 2003 with a direction that DPR should be
prepared by HUDCO.
• Since the approval of Full Planning Commission was not
received before 31st March 2003, the funds of Rs.5 crore
earmarked during 2002-03 could not be utilized .
• HUDCO was requested to prepare DPRs based on actual
ground conditions and Rs.99.0 lakh only was released to
HUDCO during 2003-04 for preparation of DPRs.
• Since preparation of DPRs involves field surveys,
hydrogeological investigation at the site earmarked for
composting plant and sanitary landfill, it requires substantial
time for preparing DPRs.
• It took some time for preparation of DPRs because some
State Governments could not finalise land for landfills /
composting plants.
• DPRs for 5 towns namely Sirsa, Gwalior, Jodhpur, Pune &
Bareilly were approved during 2004-05 and funds to the
tune of Rs. 40.00 crore released as indicated below:-
 (Rs. in crore)
Name of the town Amount Date of Amount
technically sanction sanctioned
approved by as 1st
CPHEEO instalment/
part 1st
instalment
NBCC for preparation of DPRs - 4.11.04  0.25
Sirsa (Haryana)  7.93 12.1.05  6.64
Jodhpur (Rajasthan) 17.35 12.1.05 14.53
Gwalior (M.P .) 12.07 12.1.05  6.03
Pune (Maharashtra) 34.74 28.3.05  8.55
Bareilly (U.P .) 13.86 28.3.05  4.00
Total 85.95 - 40.00
• Rs. 55.00 crore is allocated for 2005-06.

13
• DPRs for Tejpur & Hindon were received and needed
modification. Hence these were returned to the State
Governments for necessary action.
• The modified scheme for Tejpur has been received recently
and is under scrutiny.
• Modified scheme for Hindon is yet to be received from
Government of U.P ./U.P . Jal Nigam.
• Land for Ambala & Dundigal has been identified and cleared
by IAF and work of preparation of DPRs is going on.
• Land for Adampur is yet to be cleared by Indian Air Force.
• As against the total cost of Rs. 85.95 crore for 5 schemes
approved up to March 2005, the Ministry has released
Rs. 40.00 crore only including Rs. 0.25 crore released to
NBCC for preparation for DPRs. Therefore the balance fund
of Rs. 46.20 crore for the ongoing schemes would be released
during the current year in addition to the schemes which
are yet to be approved. The Ministry would be able to
utilize the entire allocation made during the year 2005-06.
• In order to complete the scheme in shortest possible time,
the Ministry is pursuing the matter at the highest level.
State Govts. have been requested to activate State Level
Implementation Committee & District Level Monitoring
Committee. Penalty clause has been incorporated in the
Sanction letters of the Ministry in case of cost and time
over run.
• Secretary (UD) has conducted review meetings frequently
with the State Government officials to expedite the scheme.
In addition the matter is being pursued at Joint Secretary
and Director level through periodic meetings and also
through official visits to the airfield towns.
In the above mentioned background, it is evident that all-out efforts
are being made by the Ministry to complete the scheme as quickly as
possible with the active support of State Governments and Urban Local
Bodies (ULBs). The Ministry would also like to ensure that sincere
efforts would be made for achieving the desired objectives.
31. The Committee observe that funds are remaining unutilised
since 2002-03 due to some reason or the other. In 2004-05, out of the
10 selected IAF airfield towns, funds to the tune of Rs. 40 crore,

14
were released to only 5 IAF airfield towns. For the remaining 5
airfield towns whose DPRs are yet to be scrutinised or received due
to some reason or the other, the funds are yet to be released. Even
in 2005-06, an allocation of Rs. 55 crore has been made for the project.
The Committee find that problems exist at all levels with the State
Governments in identification of land, with HUDCO in preparation
of DPRs and in the IAF for clearing the land identified for the
project. Problems also exist with State Level Implementation
Committee & District Level Monitoring Committee in implementing
the scheme. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry
should pursue and coordinate the matter at the highest level namely
with the Chief Secretaries of the concerned States, Senior Officials
of IAF and HUDCO to get the project implemented in the remaining
5 airfield towns so as to avoid losing costly defence aircraft and
invaluable lives of trained pilots. The Committee were informed
that the scheme is being reframed. The Committee would like to
know how this will help in the implementation and utilisation of
allocated funds.
J. Central Public Works Department (CPWD)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.5)
32. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee observe that most of the work of CPWD are carried
out by contractors. They feel that execution of work through contractors
is a cumbersome and long drawn process and as such only in case of
major work, the work should be entrusted to contractors, but that too
under strict supervision of engineers of CPWD. The Committee feel
that contractors and their workers have become de facto  a parallel
inquiry office, unbridled and unchecked for quality control, aesthetic
sense and planned and coordinated work by CPWD. They, therefore,
recommend that in case of deficiency of service and quality control,
primarily the CPWD should be held liable.
33. The Government have replied as below:
Guidelines have already been issued for execution of major works
through call of composite tenders which reduces number of contracts
and also ensures total deliverance of Project in amore systematic and
defined manner. For maintenance works, the Annual Action Plan colony
wise in consultation with RWAs with focus on bigger and fewer
contracts has been implemented.

15
In respect of deficiency of services entrusted to CPWD & Quality
Control CPWD accepts the responsibility.
34. The Committee note that even to carry out minor works,
CPWD calls for tenders which only delays the works. Moreover,
when people approach the CPWD Enquiry Offices, they are asked
to meet the concerned contractor. The CPWD cannot wash off their
hands on account of delay or deficiency of service just by saying
that the particular work has been given on contract. Further, CPWD
engineers even fail to check the quality of work executed by the
contractors due to which the residents are made to suffer ultimately.
The Committee are of the view that all the works, whether minor or
major, should be supervised by a senior engineer from CPWD and
in case of any delay, deficiency in service or poor quality, the
Engineer concerned should be held responsible and subjected to
admissible punitive action. The Committee also stress that suitable
mechanism be drawn to establish the accountability of CPWD staff
towards each work carried out by them.
K. General upkeep and maintenance of Government Flats
Recommendation (Para No. 4.10)
35. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee express their concern over the lackadaisical manner
of working of the CPWD in maintenance of the CPWD built residential
accommodations in Delhi. While appreciating CPWD for bringing out
changes viz:- (i) Preparation of annual action programme category-
wise; (ii) club the items to lesser number of packages and (iii) initiating
a few annual contracts in the beginning of financial year with assessed
quantities for improving ability for quicker response, the Committee
recommend that maximum maintenance and repair work should be
carried out by departmental labour who should be properly trained
for carrying out such work.
36. The Government have replied as below:
Whenever Worked Charged (WC) staff is present in the Service
Centres, day to day maintenance is being entrusted to them only.
However, due to the fact of dwindling strength of W.C. staff on account
of ban on their recruitment possibilities are being explored for
out sourcing the maintenance.

16
37. The Committee note that most of the work, both electrical or
civil, is carried out by Work Charged (WC) staff and not by regular
CPWD staff. The Committee recommend that CPWD should first
engage its regular and departmental staff who are skilled and
especially trained to carry out the work. The Committee would also
like to be apprised about the initiatives taken by CPWD especially
in three areas namely (i) preparation of category-wise annual action
programme for residential accommodation (ii) clubbing the items to
lesser number of packages and (iii) initiating only a few annual
contracts in the beginning of the financial year for improving ability
and quicker response.
L. Functioning of CPWD Enquiry Offices
Recommendation (Para No. 4.15)
38. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee note with concern that functioning of CPWD with
respect to maintenance and repairs of Residential Accommodation is
not satisfactory. As stated by the representatives of the Ministry that
work of Enquiry Offices has to be improved and available fund has
not been put to the best use, the Committee recommend that
accountability of the quality of the work done and result oriented
methodology for redressal of complaints should be put into use. The
Committee note that CPWD has not displayed in their Notice Board
the time frame fixed for carrying out each work and the names of the
officers to whom the complainants would approach. They, therefore,
recommend that such important information should invariably be
displayed at Notice Boards of all the Enquiry offices and Resident
Welfare Associations should also be informed about the same. Time
schedule so drawn should be strictly observed and any delay or
departure need to be accounted for with punitive measures for those
responsible. The Government should see that this is done. Similarly,
the complaints should be responded to urgently by the officers
designated who should be available. Efforts should be made to
computerise this area to save time.
39. The Government have replied as below:
In view of Committee’s observations following actions have been
taken.
(a) Notice regarding display of time schedule for attending. No
delay complaints, minor complaints and major complaints
including names of officers to whom the complainant would
approach will be put on all enquiry offices w.e.f. 15.6.05.

17
(b) Directions have been issued for creating a nodal officer
under each Division who will interact with Area Welfare
Officer for receiving maintenance related inputs from
Resident Welfare Associations for CPWD colonies.
(c) Meetings with Resident Welfare Association for prioritizing
and thereafter framing of Annual Action Maintenance Plan
for the colonies has been put in place and being monitored
on monthly basis.
(d) Complaints receipt through Interactive Voice Response
System (IVRS) is already functional.
40.  The Committee note the steps taken by CPWD in pursuance
of their recommendation. The Committee in their 7th report had
recommended that the Enquiry Offices of CPWD be computerised
not only in Delhi but also at all the other stations, where CPWD
maintains Government residential accommodation. Besides names of
officers whom complainants should approach, and the time schedule
for attending to various complaints should be prominently displayed
on large boards at the entrance of the Enquiry Offices. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry should draw up a
mechanism so that accountability for not attending to various works
at Enquiry Offices can be fixed and appropriate action taken against
officials in the event of delay or laxity. Staff manning the Enquiry
Offices and the staff attending to the complaints may be trained to
be courteous while rendering their services. The Committee would
like to hear further in this regard.
M. Coordination with Urban Local Bodies
Recommendation (Para No. 4.20)
41. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee are deeply anguished to note that inspite of their
earlier recommendation made in their Second Report (14 Lok Sabha)
for proper coordination with NDMC/MCD and Delhi Jal Board etc.,
no nodal officer has been identified so far by them to coordinate with
Urban Local bodies and only preliminary discussions are going on.
The Committee are of the view that without the coordinated effort of
CPWD with ULBs, the ultimate objective of providing quick and
efficient, quality habitable services and other essential amenities to the
residents cannot be achieved. They therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation and hope that a final decision in this regard would
be taken very soon and Committee be apprised accordingly.

18
42. The Government have replied as below:
In pursuance to Committee’s Observation, meeting with Senior
Officers of MCD, NDMC, Delhi Jal Board was held on 19.5.06. It was
decided that initially colony-wise issues duly framed by concerned
Chief Engineer will be circulated to Local bodies and meeting will be
held in the first week of every month which will be chaired by the
Chief Engineer, CPWD and attended by concerned officer of local body
to take decision and sorting out inter departmental issues. First round
of this exercise is expected to be completed by the end of July’ 2005.
43. The Committee note that problems exist due to lack of
coordination of CPWD with local bodies. Residents are asked to
approach different authorities to get their complaints redressed, who
often shift responsibility on another Department. The Committee
are of the view that there should be a single window manned by
the Liaison Officer for redressal of complaints of the residents so
that complainants can approach him and it should be the Liasion
Officer’s responsibility to coordinate with the Urban Local Bodies to
get the complaints redressed.
N. Demand and Availability of Flats
Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)
44. The Committee have noted as below:
The Committee are dismayed to note that out of Demand of
Rs. 800 crore proposed for construction of 8561 residential
accommodation during Tenth Five Year Plan, the Government have
made a reduction of 50% in their Plan allocation and as such, only
3924 residential units could be completed so far. They therefore,
recommend to take up the matter with Ministry of Finance at the
highest level so as to fulfil the plan target. The Committee would
therefore, like to be apprised further in this regard.
45. The Government have replied as below:
For 2005-06, a target of 1435 GPRA has been kept for which an
allocation of Rs.100 crore has been made against demand of
119.40 Crore. The targets are being monitored for both physical and
financial achievements on quarterly basis.

19
46. The Committee note that in the past the physical targets
have not been achieved as a result of which reduction of 50% in the
Plan allocation has been made. The Committee hope that the target
indicated above will be realised within the specified time with the
intensified monitoring effort launched for physical and financial
achievements.
O. Directorate of Estates
Recommendation (Para No. 4.26)
47. The Committee have noted as below:
The Committee hope that Ministry of Urban Development would
take up the matter of computerisation of regional offices and other
offices of Directorate of Estate with National Informatic Centre (NIC)
expeditiously and with adequate funds so as to bring transparency in
their functioning. They hope that computerisation would help in the
quick delivery system and dispel any misgivings about the functioning
of Directorate of Estates. They would, therefore, like to be informed in
this regard further.
48. The Government have replied as below:
GAMS (Government Accommodation Management System) has
been developed and implemented in the Dte. of Estates from May,
2003 for the entire housing stock available with the Directorate.
It has been decided to computerize the allotment functions at eight
regional stations, directly under the administrative control of Dte. of
Estates. NIC has conducted the study of offices at these stations to
work out the requirement of hardware and software.
49.  The Committee desire that the computerisation of all the
eight regional offices of the Directorate of Estates be completed on
top priority basis so as to ensure transparent, hassle free and rule
based allotment of residential accommodation. Further, the eight
regional offices of the Directorate of Estates be linked to the
Headquarters through internet so as to ensure its close monitoring.
The Committee should be kept informed about the steps taken in
this direction.
P. General Pool Offices Accommodation (GPOA) in General Pool
Residential Accommodation (GPRA)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.28)
50. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee note that a large number of General Pool
Residential Accommodation (GPRA) have been allotted to General Pool

20
Office Accommodation (GPOA) in Delhi and Faridabad. The Committee
feel that GPRA are meant only for residential purpose of Central
Government Employees and hence these should not be converted into
GPOA by providing accommodation to various offices of public utilities
in view of the large number of persons awaiting for their turn to get
accommodation. They, therefore, recommend that CPWD should
construct requisite number of GPOA in the vicinity of GPRA so as to
provide utility services to residents instead of siphoning of residential
flats.
51. The Government have replied as below:
Directions have been issued to the ADG (Northern Region) to
prepare and send the case for construction of requisite number of
GPOA so that Residential Accommodation can be released for the
purpose they are meant to be and suitable office accommodation created
for housing offices of public utility in the vicinity.
52. The Committee note that identification of land, drawing up
of plan & budget estimates, execution of plan, etc. for construction
of GPOA and shifting offices out of residential flats to GPOA require
long term planning and are time taking process. The Committee are
of the view that earnest efforts should also be made to adjust the
offices occupying GPRA’s in places where the demand and pressure
on GPOA’s is less as in Faridabad and other regional offices.
Meanwhile, the Government should take-up the construction of
requisite number of GPOA’s on top priority basis so that GPRA’s
are released for the purpose they are meant for. The Committee
would like to hear further in this regard.
Q. Mid-Term Appraisal of Ninth Five Year Plan on NCR Planning
Board
Recommendation (Para No. 5.17)
53. The Committee have noted as below:
The Committee note with concern that the Mid-term Appraisal of
Ninth Five Year Plan about NCR Planning Board indicated that the
progress of expenditure by participating States and the Central
Ministries was not known. While noting the efforts made by NCRPB
to solve some of the issue as raised in the Mid-term Appraisal of
Ninth Five Year Plan, the Committee have their apprehension that
participating States would coordinate effectively in the policies and
programme of NCRPB. They feel until NCRPB is vested with some

21
powers binding upon all the participating States, nothing substantial
can be done to achieve the concept of NCRPB and NCR of Delhi.
54. The Government have replied as below:
As reported by the participating States/their implementing agencies
the expenditure incurred by them against the loan of Rs.1983.80 crores
released by the NCR Planning Board is Rs.3311.01 crores as on
31.3.2005. The details are given below:
Sub-region No. of Estimated Loan Loan Expenditure
projects cost (Rs. sanctioned released incurred
in crore) (Rs. in crore) (Rs. in crore) (Rs. in crore)
as on
31.3.2005
Delhi 2 520.56 310.00 90.00 40.11
Haryana 73 4,205.92 2,380.58 925.66 1619.63
Rajasthan 47 385.48 158.75 140.48 215.22
Uttar Pradesh 66 2,159.93 1,132.87 626.48 1105.22
Counter 12 775.76 271.52 201.18 330.83
Magnet Areas
Total 200 8,047.65 4,253.72 1,983.80 3311.01
The NCR Planning Board has not released any loan to the Central
Ministries.
As regards providing some powers to the NCR Planning Board
that will be binding upon all the participating States, it is stated that
as per the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985, the
Members of the NCR Planning Board, inter-alia, include the Chief
Ministers of Haryana, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi which are
the participating States. The Union Minister for Urban Development is
the Chairman of the Board. Decisions taken specially in respect of the
Regional Planning are discussed with the members in the Board
Meeting and therefore, have the concurrence of the concerned State
Governments. Hence the pace of development can be stepped up with
the available power and authority of the NCR Planning Board.
It may also be mentioned that the NCR Planning Board is basically
a planning body. The implementation of the policies and programmes
of the Regional Plan and the related plans is to be done by the

22
participating State Governments and the relevant Central Ministries.
The priorities of the State Government and the Central Ministries and
the competing demands on the available resources do have an impact
on implementation of the regional/town development programmes.
55. The Committee note that NCR Planning Board is only a
planning body while the task of implementing the policies and
programmes lies with the participating State Governments and the
relevant Central Ministries. The Committee recommend that the
participating State Governments should periodically apprise the
NCRPB of the status of the implementation of the schemes and
programmes and the problems faced by them if any, in its
implementation. A mechanism may be drawn so that those States
not furnishing the progress in expenditure and those States not
showing a desirable level of physical and financial progress are made
accountable. If participating States are unable to justify the reasons
for delay in implementation and the reasons for low physical and
financial progress of the schemes and projects, NCRPB should be
vested with necessary powers to sort out the matters.
R. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC)
Recommendation Para(No.5.29)
56. The Committee have noted as below:
The Committee note though funds for DMRC are allocated at BE
stage by projecting estimated requirement, the Ministry mostly takes
recourse to supplementary Grants for providing sufficient funds for
the DMRC Project. The Committee are of the view as the DMRC is an
important on-going project. Adequate funds must be allocated to
DMRC, if necessary, by releasing lump-sum amount of funds. The
Committee feel that taking recourse to supplementary grants of
substantial amounts to DMRC projects indicate lack of financial acumen
on the part of the Government.
57. The Government have replied as below:
The funds for the Delhi MRTS Project are provided through the
Budget. The matter regarding adequate funds was discussed in the
12th meeting of the Empowered Committee held on 10.3.2004 and it
decided that the requirement of the DMRC would be met through
supplementary provision in the budget. Accordingly, funds are being
provided for the project timely.

23
58.  The Committee note that taking recourse to supplementary
grants is not a solution to the persisting financial problem. A vital
on-going project such as DMRC should not be at the mercy of
supplementary grant every year. The Committee have been stressing
again and again that adequate funds be provided to the project at
the BE stage itself. The Ministry should take up the matter at the
highest level with the Finance Ministry and the Planning Commission
so that funds are allocated to the project at the BE stage itself.
S. Linking of Faridabad and Ghaziabad with Delhi Metro
Recommendation (Para No. 5.35)
59. The Committee have noted as below:
The Committee are of the view that in order to decongest Delhi
it is desirable to link Metro Rail with NCR towns viz. Gaziabad,
Faridabad and Gurgaon. They feel that DMRC should take up the
matter with Gaziabad Development Authority (GDA); Faridabad
Development Authority (FDA); and the Gurgaon Authorities in this
regard. Conversely, GDA; FDA and the other Gurgaon authorities
should come forward on the pattern of DDA as DDA has undertaken
the work of extension of Metro Rail from Dwarka to Dwarka sub-city.
They therefore recommend that Ministry of Urban Development take
up the matter with the concerned State Governments in this regard.
60. The Government have replied as below:
This Ministry is aware of the need to link the neighbouring NCR
towns with the Metro service. The issue of extending a Metro services
to Noida and Gurgaon also figured in the deliberations of the
Empowered Committee in its meeting held on 21.2.2005. It was decided
that the Planning Commission would discuss the issue with the
representatives of Government of Haryana and Government of U.P .
DMRC has prepared Detailed Project Reports (DPR) for extension
of Metro to Gurgaon and Noida. DPRs are with the respective State
Governments who are to examine and formulate a suitable proposal.
Discussions have been held with the representatives of the State
Governments of U.P . and Haryana.
61.  The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry
regarding the linking of some of the NCR towns like Gurgaon and
Noida with the Metro. The Committee desire that sincere efforts
may be made by the Ministry with the State Governments of Haryana

24
and Uttar Pradesh in linking Faridabad and Ghaziabad with the
Metro which would go a long way in decongesting Delhi.
T. Linking of commercially viable routes of DMRC
Recommendation Para(No.5.36)
62.  The Committee have noted as below:
The Committee feel as Dwarka is being linked with Dwarka sub
city by Metro Rail with the cooperation of DDA, in Phase I, similarly
other routes viz. Central Secretariat, Vishwa Vidyalaya should be
extended upto Guru Teg Bahadur Nagar in Phase I rather than join in
phase II to make the route commercially viable and popular as GTB
Nagar is easily approachable from all directions and is at present a
terminus.
63. The Government have replied as below:
Phase I of Delhi MRTS Project is at present in full swing and is
scheduled for completion by March, 2006. The extension to Guru Teg
Bahadur Nagar forms a part of Delhi MRTS Project Phase II, the work
on which will commence after due approvals. It will be difficult to
reopen the Phase-I for suggested modifications at this advance stage.
64. The Committee would like that necessary steps for approval
to phase II of the DMRTS project should be taken up on top priority
basis. While linking GTB Nagar with the Metro in Phase II, the
Committee desire that other nearby areas having heavy traffic and
commuters should also be linked to minimize the pressure on road
traffic of the area. It would also make the route popular and
commercially viable.

25
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No.2.22)
The Committee note that under Demand Number 101-Public Works
in RE (2004-05) the allocations were Rs 77.30 crore, but the BE
(2005-06) depicts a decrease by 1.98% i.e. to Rs 71.33 crore. The Ministry
has reasoned that this decrease is due to less demands projected by
the client Departments/other Ministries in their Annual Plans. In the
circumstance, the Committee are forced to believe that the decreasing
trend in the Demand No.101 (Public Works) is an indication that client
Departments/other Ministries are having no trust on the functioning
of CPWD, which is the main Civil Engineering Department of
Government of India. They, therefore, recommend that CPWD should
enhance their credibility so as to ensure better coordination in
functioning and timely execution of works to solicit demands from
client departments.
Reply of the Government
For credibility enhancement & thereby ensuring high work load
for CPWD in coming years, following actions have been initiated.
a) Closer coordination with clients which inter-alia include
regular meetings at the highest level of ADG & DG (W)
CPWD. This has resulted in procuring works like
construction of roads under PMGSY & RSVY in Bihar,
9 Nos. jetties in River Ganga & Braham Putra, procuring
works for upgradation of special area games center and
SA-I training centers throughout India.
b) Due to Regular Inter Departmental Meeting twice in a year
with Police Organizations like CRPF, BSF, CISF, ITBP CPWD
successfully executed works amounting to Rs.390 Crore for
them during 2004-05. This work load is expected to Cross
Rs.500 Crore in current Financial Year.
c) Monthly review meeting is taken by Secretary (UD) to
review progress of major Projects of GPRA & GPOA.

26
d) Rules and Procedures are being simplified for ensuring start
of work within 6 months of their sanction. Delayed works
are being put on closer monitoring system.
e) Putting urgent high value, concentrated projects under
project management mode by creating dedicated team under
a Project Manager. 9 Nos. Projects has so far been identified
being taken up under Project Management concept.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
Recoveries
The Committee express their concern over the fact that ‘Recoveries’
to the tune of about Rs. 296 crore are outstanding for the jobs
performed in the last several years from different Ministries/
Departments etc. The Committee are of the view that as the printing
presses are badly in the need of money for the modernization and
upgradation, the pending ‘Recovery’ of Rs. 296 crore only aggravates
the problem of finance for such modernization of Press. They, therefore,
recommend that recovery process should be expedited and taken up
at highest level for the survival and modernization of printing presses.
Reply of the Government
 (I) There is no link between recovery of printing charges and
availability of funds for modernization. Funds have
separately been provided from the Depreciation Reserve
Funds (DRF) for modernization of Presses. Recovered
printing charges do not go into this account.
(II) However, in order to minimize huge outstanding dues of
printing charges in Government of India Presses, following
action has been taken by the department:—
(a) Progress of bills raised by the Government of India Presses
and recovery of printing charges is being monitored
regularly by the Directorate of Printing as well as Ministry
of Urban Development.
(b) For expeditious settlement of outstanding dues of printing
charges, matter has been taken up by Joint Secretary (UD)
with Principal Secretary, Govt. of NCT Delhi vide letter dated
11.8.2004 and Addl. Director (Admn.), Dte. of Printing with

27
heads of the indenting departments vide letter dated
10.5.2005. Secretary (UD) has taken a meeting with the Joint
Secretaries etc. of the 10 top defaulting Ministries/
Departments on 05/07/2005 and decided that all pending
bills of post 1995 era may be reconciled within July, 2005
by the concerned Ministries/Departments with the
Directorate of Printing /concerned Government of India
Presses and the pre 1995 pending bills should be got
reconciled within three months  i.e. by September, 2005. The
reconciled amounts should be paid by the defaulting
Ministries/Departments in four installments.
(c) For implementation of Commercial Accounting System and
evolving pricing mechanism in Government of India Presses,
Consultant has been appointed. For amendment of security
deposit clause in the contract, Internal Finance Division of
the Ministry has suggested that matter may be taken up
with the firm to agree for 5% security deposit instead of
2%. Accordingly, firm is being requested to agree for 5%
security deposit. This will also facilitate one time billing
system in place of existing provisional and supplementary
billing system in Government of India Presses and will
minimize the pendency of printing charges.
(d) To formulate appropriate costing policy in Government of
India Presses, Director (Cost), Cost Accounts Branch,
M/o Finance has conducted a study on costing system of
Government of India Press, Nashik and Ring Road,
New Delhi and submitted its report with certain
recommendations/suggestions which will be provided to the
Consultant appointed for incorporating the same in their
costing software to facilitate one time billing system in
Government of India Presses.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July  2005)
Recommendation (Para No.2.41)
Strengthening of Urban Local Bodies
(i) e-Governance in Municipalities
The Committee are happy to learn that the Ministry has taken
certain initiatives for strengthening urban local bodies and

28
e-governance. In 2005-06, the Ministry has allocated Rs. 25 crore for
‘Urban Information System’ as against the Rs.5 crore earlier allocated
in 2004-05. The Committee expect that with an allocation of
Rs. 25 crore in this financial year, the Ministry will ensure that
computerization of the Municipal bodies is carried out within a specific
time frame. The Committee needs hardly to emphasize that the centrally
sponsored urban development schemes can only be effectively
implemented with the active participation of Municipalities/urban local
bodies and for this purpose strengthening the Municipalities is of
utmost importance. The Committee desire that effective measures are
taken to make the municipal bodies etc. result oriented, people’s
friendly, transparent and financially sound.
Reply of the Government
As already stated, there is a proposal to set up National Urban
Renewal Mission (NURM) for select cities and Urban Infrastructure
Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) for
towns/cities, not covered under the NURM. Under the proposed
schemes, central assistance would be linked to implementation of
identified reforms at ULB and State level. The reforms at ULBs level
seek to strengthen ULBs by making their functioning transparent
(Accounting Reforms), improve inter-face with people (e-governance)
and improve their financial position (levy of reasonable user charges,
reform of property tax). Whereas, at the State level, Acts of legislatures
are to be enacted to (i) decentralize functions as envisaged in
74th Constitutional Amendment Act, (ii) ensure preparation of medium
term fiscal plan of ULBs and release of quarterly performance
information to all stakeholders, (iii) to institutionalize citizen
participation and introduction of the concept of Area Sabha in Urban
areas and (iv) assigning elected ULBs with city planning functions,
etc.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.42)
The Committee note that the Ministry has prepared a draft proposal
for ‘Mission Mode IT’ in 2005-06 and an allocation of Rs.25 crore has
been earmarked under this scheme. During the course of evidence, the
Secretary (UD) has assured the Committee to launch this Mission Mode
IT scheme in August, 2005. The Committee desire that the
Ministry would effectively carry out the Mission Mode IT as promised
to them.

29
Reply of the Government
A draft scheme on National Mission Mode Project on e-Governance
in Municipalities has been prepared by this Ministry. The Planning
Commission has given in-principle approval to this Scheme. Meanwhile,
this Ministry in coordination with the Department of Information
Technology and USAID (FIRE-D) is designing the project for launching
the project in 35 cities with million plus population during this year,
2005-06.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.43)
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should persuade
the State Government/UTs to set up ‘Computerized Facilitation Centres’
by the Municipal bodies for the use of the public at large. The
Committee are of the view that such Facilitation Centres would help
in tax collection by the municipalities, issuing Tax Free Municipal Bonds
thereby increasing the revenue earned by them. At the same time,
devising of computerized techniques would bring transparency in
financial and administrative matters of the local municipal bodies and
reduce malpractices and delay.
Reply of the Government
The Mission Mode Project which is being prepared for
implementation in urban local bodies is aimed at improving the overall
work culture of municipal bodies. It would cover eight services/
management functions including payment of property tax and other
utility bills. The suggestion of the Committee regarding setting up of
computerized facilitation counters is accepted and shall be incorporated
in the scheme.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.71)
(v) Model Municipal Law
The Committee note the measures taken by the Union Government
in the areas of Municipal Accounting Reforms and enactment of Model

30
Municipal Law for strengthening the Urban local bodies in pursuance
of 74th Constitution Amendment Act. While the aforesaid initiatives
are applauded, their proper implementation is also desired or otherwise
such initiatives may remain sterile. The Committee would, therefore,
like to know the considered views of the Union government to ensure
their effective implementation.
Reply of the Government
This Ministry has been impressing upon the States/UTs for
implementation of the provisions of Model Municipal Law (MML) as
well as adoption of double entry accounting system by the urban
local bodies. To give an impetus to the implementation of the provisions
of MML, this Ministry has organized four Regional Workshops at Jaipur,
Kolkata, Hyderabad and Pune in Sept’04, Nov’04, Feb’05 and April’05.
As a follow up, majority of States, except Assam, Bihar, Haryana,
Jharkhand, Manipur, Meghalaya and U.P . have initiated necessary action
to incorporate various provisions of MML in their municipal acts.
2. Similarly, this Ministry is in constant touch with the State
Governments, impressing upon them to bring necessary reforms in the
accounting system being followed by urban local bodies by adopting
the double entry accounting system. Almost all the States except Assam,
Meghalaya and Nagaland have initiated necessary action for adoption
of double entry accounting system for their urban local bodies.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.22 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.21)
Integrated Development of Small and Medium Towns (IDSMT)
The Committee note that the allocations for the IDSMT scheme in
BE (2005-06) has been reduced to Rs.100 crore over the BE (2004-05),
which amounted to Rs.200 crore. The Ministry has informed that the
allocations made in BE (2005-2006) have been reduced because it is
meant only for the On-Going projects under the scheme. The Committee
also note that the IDSMT scheme is also proposed to be subsumed
under the new UIDSSMT scheme of the Ministry, which is yet to be
finalized. While it would be pre-mature to comment on the new

31
UIDSSMT scheme, the Committee are of the view that the main
objectives of the Government for providing adequate urban
infrastructure and facilities in the towns/cities/urban areas  per-se
remains the same. The Committee, therefore, desire that focused efforts
must be made to provide the needed urban infrastructures and
development to the small & medium towns and all other urban areas
in a planned and systematic manner. The Committee hope that the
difficulties faced in implementation of the IDSMT scheme in the past
and the limited scope of coverage of towns /cities under the IDSMT
scheme will be rectified in the new UIDSSMT or NURM schemes of
the Government.
Reply of the Government
In order to provide impetus to investment in urban infrastructure,
there is a proposal to set up NURM for select cities and UIDSSMT for
town/cities not covered under the NURM. In 2005-06, there is tentative
allocation of Rs.3500/- crore for both the schemes for upgradation of
urban infrastructure in all cities/towns in the country . Under the
UIDSSMT, State Governments may have to prioritize towns for
development of urban infrastructure. Central assistance would be linked
to implementation of identified reforms at State and ULB level. Greater
central assistance coupled with implementation of reforms is expected
to lead to development of urban infrastructure speedily. The difficulties
faced in implementing the Integrated Development of Small and
Medium Towns (IDSMT) scheme have been taken into account while
preparing guidelines for the proposed UIDSSMT.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.22)
In regard to the past performance of the IDSMT scheme, the
Committee note that out of BE (2004-05) of Rs. 200 crore; an amount
of Rs. 137.25 crore has been released so far. This budget amount has
been released for 197 new towns; On—Going project in 109 towns as
against the target of 215 towns. Regarding under-utilization of the
funds allocated in BE (2004-05); the Ministry has stated that many
States and the NER States did not come forward in time with eligible
proposals for funding in IDSMT scheme despite reminders sent by the
Ministry to this effect. These defaulting States are Arunachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa,
Haryana, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal and West Bengal. The

32
Committee note that 19 States had not come forward with projects in
IDSMT scheme in 2004-05, therefore, in March 2005 an amount of
Rs. 50 crore has been re-appropriated to Mega-City Scheme from
IDSMT. Hence, out of the proposed final requirement for 2004-05
amounting to Rs. 148.27 crore a balance of Rs. 10.65 crore is to be
released by the end of the financial year. The Committee are unhappy
to note that even after re-appropriation of funds  to the tune of
Rs. 50 crore from IDSMT scheme, a balance of Rs. 10.65 crore is yet
to be utilized in the fag end of financial year, 2004-05. The Committee
cannot but hope that these funds are utilized prudently by the
executing agencies. The latest position in the matter may be given to
the Committee.
Reply of the Government
Entire amount of Rs. 10.65 crore was released to the States before
31.03.2005. It shall be ensured through monitoring that the executing
agencies/States utilize the amount released in a prudent manner.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.23)
As per the 2001 Census; 5092 number of towns having population
upto 5 lakh had been projected to be covered under the IDSMT scheme.
The Committee are, however, distressed to find that the towns and
urban areas which took the  benefits of the IDSMT  is far less than the
actual number of towns identified to be covered. This scheme has
showed poor performance and under-utilization of funds allocated in
the budgetary demands. Moreover, due to inability of the implementing
agencies to tap Institutional Finance; some of the approved components
of the projects under IDSMT in various towns remained
unimplemented. The Committee expect that the implementing agencies
are motivated to execute the projects of development in all small and
medium towns in a specific time frame as the urban population
residing in these areas are yet to see the light of the day.
Reply of the Government
Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for
compliance. This Ministry has been exhorting upon the States from
time to time to submit proposals for the development of small and
medium towns in time. For this purpose, in addition to letters
written to the States, meetings are held by Joint Secretary (UD) and
Secretary (UD) with all the State Govts. to impress upon them to send
proposals expeditiously.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt
Dated: 26th July 2005)

33
Recommendation (Para No. 3.24)
The Committee note that the Ministry has dropped the scheme of
‘Rejuvenating Culturally Significant Cities’ as the Planning Commission
suggested that there was no need to have the scheme for culturally
significant cities. During the course of evidence, the Secretary (UD)
has stated that under the NURM any city can be taken up and if a
particular State Government wants to give priority to a ‘Culturally
Significant City’, it could do so. The Ministry will be guided by the
State Government’s recommendations in this regard. The Committee
expect that concrete steps are taken so as to ensure that culturally
significant cities as identified by the respective State Governments do
not suffer and are developed by releasing the required funds for the
same.
Reply of the Government
As suggested by Planning Commission, Ministry has decided to
drop the proposed Scheme of “Rejuvenation of Culturally Significant
Cities”. In view of the proposed National Urban Renewal Mission
(NURM) and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme of Small and
Medium Towns (UIDSSMT), there seems to be no justification for
formulation and operationlisation of the Scheme. All the State
Governments will be able to seek funds for culturally significant cities
under these schemes.
2. Moreover, under the proposed NURM for select cities, some
culturally significant cities have been included. If any State Government
desires to replace these cities with other cities, it would be considered
for acceptance.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.40)
Progress made under the Mega-City Scheme
The Committee note that as the Mega City Scheme is an area
development scheme, no specific physical and financial targets have
been fixed for this scheme. However, the project under the Mega City
Scheme are sanctioned by State Level Project Sanctioning Committee.
This State Level Committee has so far approved 648 projects in the
Five Mega Cities viz. Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore and
Hyderabad. The State Level Committee sanctioned projects six times

34
the Central share. Rs. 7521.96 crore is the total estimated cost of
648 projects including the Central and State’s share. The Committee
also note that an expenditure of Rs. 3364.29 crore has been incurred
on 381 completed projects and 162 on-going projects. At present, an
amount of Rs. 4157.67 crore is yet to be utilized in 267 projects out of
which 162 are on-going projects and 105 are yet to commence.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that Rs. 7521.96 crore is the estimated cost of the
projects sanctioned in five mega cities. This amount is not available
with the nodal/implementing agencies. Funds are released each year
as per provisions in the Central Budget. As such, it may not be correct
to state that Rs. 4157.67 crore is yet to be utilised for on-going projects
and projects that are yet to start. It represents the total amount required
to complete the above mentioned 267 projects.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.41)
The Committee note in BE (2004-05), an amount of Rs. 220 crore
has been allocated to the Mega-City Scheme. Further, by way of re-
appropriation of Rs. 50 crore from IDSMT and Rs. 30 crore from City
Challenge Fund Scheme; the total allocation for 2004-05 amount to
Rs. 300 crore for Mega City Scheme. The Committee are given to
understand that this amount of Rs. 300 crore would be utilized for the
267 unfinished projects of Mega City Scheme. The Committee expect
these funds are properly utilized as assured by the Ministry.
Reply of the Government
Yes, the funds shall be properly utilised as directed by the
Committee.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July  2005)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.42)
The Committee express their concern that the 105 projects under
the Mega City Scheme are yet to commence. The Ministry in their
written reply has informed that specific reasons for non-commencement
of 105 projects have been sought from the nodal agencies. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the required information about
the reasons for non-implementation of the remaining 105 projects should
be intimated to the Committee, expeditiously.

35
Reply of the Government
Information as received from nodal agencies of Chennai, Kolkata, Bangalore is as under:S.No. Question Chennai Kolkata Bangalore Mumbai Hyderabad
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Precise reasons for non-
commencement of remaining 105 projects
2.
Whether 105 projectswould be launched in near future? If not, why?
(a) Statutory clearances.These involve, at times, modifications of theplans(b) Lack of coordi- nation (when more than one department is involved in a project) (c) Land (where title toland is in dispute, orlanduse of the area) (d) Local politicsOf the 14 projects, 3have been dropped. Allother projects wouldbe launched before June, 2005.
(a) Revision of Plans(b) Re-examination of fundingarrangement(c) Change in mode of implementation All projects, excepting the ones beingconsidered for taking out of MCS-3would be launched in 2005-06.
(a) Delay in obtainingGovernment approval in some cases by implementing agencies(b) Delay due totendering and award of works to be done by following Transparency Act(c) Most works willcommence in 2005All projects to belaunched in 2005-06 after following theprocedure.
There is no projectwhere work is yet to commence There is no projectwhere work is yet to commence.
Out of the 105 projects, 48projects could not take off due to land disputes, court cases etc. The remaining 57 projects arecurrently under implementation. Out of 105 projects, 57 projectshave been launched and areunder progress. The remainingprojects can be started in future as and when land disputes and court cases are sorted out.

36
12 3 4 5 6 7
User charge-5*Basic services-1*Remunerative-2 *Being taken out of Mega City packageYes. Progress not upto desired level dueto non-receipt of adequate funds fromthe Central Gvoernment.Note: Central Government allocatesfunds among Mega Cities on the basisof formula and with reference to budgetprovisions. States can always contributefunds over and above central funds.
Remunerative-5User Charge-5 Basic services-2 Most of the on-goingprojects are likely tobe completed by theend of current year.
There is no projectwhere work is yet tocommence. There is no projectwhere work is yet to commence.
Out of 105, 15 projects areremunerative (Category A). 8 areuser charges based (Category B)and 82 projects are those providing Basic Services(Category C).All the Implementing Agencieshave been instructed to completeall ongoing projects under MegaCity Scheme by the end of nextfinancial year i.e. 2006-07.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/2/2005-Bt. Dated : 26th July, 2005)
3. Are these 105 projects
remunerative, usercharge based or basicprojects? Please explain.
4.
Whether any cut-offperiod has been set inregard to implemen-tation of on-goingprojects.
User Charge Projects-2Basic projects-9 Yes. All projects wouldbe completed by March, 2006.

37
Recommendation (Para No. 3.43)
The Committee note that the BE (2005-06) allocates an amount of
Rs. 150 crore for Mega-City Scheme, which is almost half of the total
allocations for 2004-05 of Rs.300 crore. The Ministry has informed that
the Rs.150 crore provided in BE (2005-06) are to be utilized, exclusively,
for the on-going schemes as a new NURM scheme is in the pipe-line.
The Committee desire that earnest efforts should be made to ensure
that the allocation made for the projects in the Mega-City Scheme are
fruitfully utilized.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for
compliance.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.53)
Accelerated Urban Water Supply Programme(AUWSP)
The Committee note that Rs.150 crore has been allocated in BE
(2004-05) which has been reduced to Rs.95.24 crore in BE (2005-06) for
the AUWSP Scheme. Out of Rs.150 crore allocated in 2004-05; a total
amount of Rs.139.44 crore has been released to various States as Central
share for AUWSP projects. In this regard, the Ministry has informed
that the entire allocation of Rs.150 crore is expected to be utilized. The
Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry to stand by above
commitment.
Reply of the Government
The entire allocation of Rs.150 crore for AUWSP was utilized during
2005-06. Rs.146 crore was released to different State Governments for
AUWSP works and Rs.4 crore was released for rehabilitation /
reconstruction of water supply system in Tsunami affected Port Blair,
Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.28 of Chapter-I of the Report)

38
Recommendation (Para No. 3.55)
The Committee note that Rs.95.24 crore in BE(2005-06) has been
allocated for utilization in the on-going schemes as the AUWSP scheme
is to be subsumed in the new NURM and UIDSSMT schemes. The
Committee hope that the expenditures on the on-going schemes are
made scrupulously and the on-going schemes are completed in a
specific time frame.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry will ensure that expenditure on the on-going schemes
is made scrupulously. All-out efforts will be made for speedy
completion of schemes. The following measures in this direction have
been undertaken:-
(i) The Monitoring Committee set up in the Ministry under
the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (UD) monitors the
progress of the Centrally sponsored schemes on quarterly
basis.
(ii) Besides, Nodal Officers have been appointed within the
Ministry for field inspections / monitoring of the schemes.
(iii) The State Govts. have been requested by this Ministry to
carry out strict monitoring and supervision of the schemes
by appointing Nodal Officers for each Scheme, for their
timely completion.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.56)
The Committee note that as per 2001, Census, there are 2854 small
towns of which 936 towns have been covered under AUWSP as on
23.3.2005. The Committee also note that 1918 towns are yet to be
given the water supply facilities which have been pending under the
AUWSP Scheme. The Committee are informed that the new scheme of
UIDSSMT, all excepting cities/towns covered by NURM, would be
considered for financial assistance for implementation of water supply
and sanitation schemes. The Committee recommend that all the
remaining towns/cities which remained uncovered under the AUWSP
scheme should be provided the Water Supply and Sanitation facilities
under the new UIDSSMT Scheme in 2005-2006. The Committee would
like to be apprised about the position in this regard.

39
Reply of the Government
Under the proposed new schemes, namely, National Urban Renewal
Mission (NURM) and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for
Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT), water supply will be accorded
highest priority. Under UIDSSMT all the cities / towns upto 10 lakh
population are planned to be covered.
In addition to above, funds would be available through the
following facilities:-
(a) Pooled Finance Development Scheme (PFDS) once launched
will be able to leverage market funds for bankable water
supply projects.
(b) In addition, the proposed Viability Gap Funding scheme
can also be utilised for leveraging the marginally unviable
water supply projects.
(c) Moreover, Tax Free Municipal Bonds are also being used
for funding water supply projects.
These schemes are expected to make it possible to cover all the
uncovered cities / towns with water supply in the foreseeable future.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.66)
The Committee are of the firm view that since garbage and left-
overs of food attract birds/scavenges in the nearby areas of the
Airfields, there is a growing risk to the air transport by incidence of
bird hit. The Committee, therefore, desire that the scheme of Solid
Waste Management should be given the needful priority.
Reply of the Government
The scheme is being given its due priority in the Ministry. This
Ministry is reviewing the scheme periodically and is in constant touch
with the State Government, Indian Air Force Authorities, concerned
Municipalities in regard to the implementation of the programme. Visits
to the identified towns are also being made to impress upon the ULBs
regarding the urgency of the scheme.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)

40
Recommendation (Para No. 4.10)
General upkeep and maintenance of Government Flats.
The Committee express their concern over the lackadaisical manner
of working of the CPWD in maintenance of the CPWD built residential
accommodations in Delhi. While appreciating CPWD for bringing out
changes viz:- (i) Preparation of annual action programme category-
wise; (ii) club the items to lesser number of packages and (iii) initiating
a few annual contracts in the beginning of financial year with assessed
quantities for improving ability for quicker response, the Committee
recommend that maximum maintenance and repair work should be
carried out by departmental labour who should be properly trained
for carrying out such work.
Reply of the Government
Whenever Worked Charged (WC) staff is present in the Service
Centres, day to day maintenance is being entrusted to them only.
However, due to the fact of dwindling strength of W.C. staff on account
of ban on their recruitment possibilities are being explored for out
sourcing the maintenance.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.37 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.20)
Coordination with Urban Local Bodies
The Committee are deeply anguished to note that inspite of their
earlier recommendation made in their Second Report (14 Lok Sabha)
for proper coordination with NDMC/MCD and Delhi Jal Board etc.,
no nodal officer has been identified so far by them to coordinate with
Urban Local bodies and only preliminary discussions are going on.
The Committee are of the view that without the coordinated effort of
CPWD with ULBs, the ultimate objective of providing quick and
efficient, quality habitable services and other essential amenities to the
residents cannot be achieved. They therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation and hope that a final decision in this regard would
be taken very soon and Committee be apprised accordingly.

41
Reply of the Government
In pursuance to Committee’s Observation, meeting with Senior
Officers of MCD, NDMC, Delhi Jal Board was held on 19.5.06. It was
decided that initially colony-wise issues duly framed by concerned
Chief Engineer will be circulated to local bodies and meeting will be
held in the first week of every month which will be chaired by the
Chief Engineer, CPWD and attended by concerned officer of local body
to take decision and sorting out inter-departmental issues. First round
of this exercise is expected to be completed by the end of July , 2005.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 43 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.26)
Directorate of Estates
The Committee hope that Ministry of Urban Development would
take up the matter of computerisation of regional offices and other
offices of Directorate of Estate with National Informatic Centre (NIC)
expeditiously and with adequate funds so as to bring transparency in
their functioning. They hope that computerisation would help in the
quick delivery system and dispel any misgivings about the functioning
of Directorate of Estates. They would, therefore, like to be informed in
this regard further.
Reply of the Government
GAMS (Government Accommodation Management System) has
been developed and implemented in the Dte. of Estates from May,
2003 for the entire housing stock available with the Directorate.
It has been decided to computerize the allotment functions at eight
regional stations, directly under the administrative control of Dte. of
Estates. NIC has conducted the study of offices at these stations to
work out the requirement of hardware and software.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 49 of Chapter-I of the Report)

42
Recommendation (Para No. 4.28)
General Pool Offices Accommodation in General Pool Residential
Accommodation
The Committee note that a large number of General Pool
Residential Accommodation (GPRA) have been allotted to General Pool
Office Accommodation (GPOA) in Delhi and Faridabad. The Committee
feel that GPRA are meant only for residential purpose of Central
Government Employees and hence these should  not be converted into
GPOA by providing accommodation to various offices of public utilities
in view of the large number of persons awaiting for their turn to get
accommodation. They, therefore, recommend that CPWD should
construct requisite number of GPOA in the vicinity of GPRA so as to
provide utility services to residents instead of siphoning of residential
flats.
Reply of the Government
Directions have been issued to the ADG (Northern Region) to
prepare and send the case for construction of requisite number of
GPOA so that Residential Accommodation can be released for the
purpose they are meant to be and suitable office accommodation created
for housing offices of public utility in the vicinity.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 52 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.17)
Mid-Term Appraisal of Ninth Five Year Plan on NCR Planning Board
The Committee note with concern that the Mid-Term Appraisal of
Ninth Five Year Plan about NCR Planning Board indicated that the
progress of expenditure by participating States and the Central
Ministries was not known. While noting the efforts made by NCRPB
to solve some of the issues as raised in the Mid-term Appraisal of
Ninth Five Year Plan, the Committee have their apprehension that
participating States would coordinate effectively in the policies and
programme of NCRPB. They feel until NCRPB is vested with some
powers binding upon all the participating States, nothing substantial
can be done to achieve the concept of NCRPB and NCR of Delhi.

43
Reply of the Government
As reported by the participating States/their implementing agencies
the expenditure incurred by them against the loan of Rs. 1983.80 crores
released by the NCR Planning Board is Rs. 3311.01 crores as on
31.3.2005. The details are given below:—
Sub-region No. of Estimated Loan Loan Expenditure
projects cost (Rs. sanctioned released incurred
in crore) (Rs. in crore) (Rs. in crore) (Rs. in crore)
as on
31.3.2005
Delhi 2 520.56 310.00 90.00 40.11
Haryana 73 4,205.92 2,380.58 925.66 1619.63
Rajasthan 47 385.48 158.75 140.48 215.22
Uttar Pradesh 66 2,159.93 1,132.87 626.48 1105.22
Counter 12 775.76 271.52 201.18 330.83
Magnet Areas
Total 200 8,047.65 4,253.72 1,983.80 3311.01
The NCR Planning Board has not released any loan to the Central
Ministries.
As regards providing some powers to the NCR Planning Board
that will be binding upon all the participating States, it is stated that
as per the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985, the
Members of the NCR Planning Board, inter-alia, include the Chief
Ministers of Haryana, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi which are
the participating States. The Union Minister for Urban Development is
the Chairman of the Board. Decisions taken specially in respect of the
Regional Planning are discussed with the members in the Board
Meeting and therefore, have the concurrence of the concerned State
Govt. Hence the pace of development can be stepped up with the
available power and authority of the NCR Planning Board.
It may also be mentioned that the NCR Planning Board is basically
a planning body. The implementation of the policies and programmes
of the Regional Plan and the related plans is to be done by the
participating State Governments and the relevant Central Ministries.
The priorities of the State Government and the Central Ministries and

44
the competing demands on the available resources do have an impact
on implementation of the regional/town development programmes.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 55 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.29)
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC)
The Committee note though funds for DMRC are allocated at BE
stage by projecting estimated requirement, the Ministry mostly takes
recourse to Supplementary Grants for providing sufficient funds for
the DMRC Project. The Committee are of the view as the DMRC is an
important on-going project. Adequate funds must be allocated to
DMRC, if necessary, by releasing lump-sum amount of funds. The
Committee feel that taking recourse to supplementary grants of
substantial amounts to DMRC projects indicate lack of financial acumen
on the part of the Government.
Reply of the Government
The funds for the Delhi MRTS Project are provided through the
Budget. The matter regarding adequate funds was discussed in the
12th meeting of the Empowered Committee held on 10.3.2004 and it
decided that the requirement of the DMRC would be met through
supplementary provision in the budget. Accordingly, funds are being
provided for the project timely.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/2/2005-Bt
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 58 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.31)
The Committee note that Fare Structures of DMRC are at higher
side. The Committee feel that in order to encourage more and more
people to use Metro Rail, the existing fare in the distance Zone of
0 – to less than < 2 should be made half. Corresponding reduction in

45
fare should also be made in the distance zone of 2 -<4 and 4-<6
respectively. The Committee should be kept informed about the action
taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The fares for DMRC are determined by a Fare Fixation Committee
appointed by the Government of India (GoI) chaired by a retired Judge
of the High Court and comprising representatives of GoI and GNCTD.
The Fare Fixation Committee has tried to define a fare structure keeping
in mind the factors of affordability to the commuters and financial
viability of the system in medium to long-term. The Committee has
tried to ensure that the system would not just be able to survive but
also expand in the long run without unduly burdening the exchequer.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.35)
The Committee are of the view that in order to decongest Delhi
it is desirable to link Metro Rail with NCR towns viz. Ghaziabad,
Faridabad and Gurgaon. They feel that DMRC should take up the
matter with Ghaziabad Development Authority (GDA); Faridabad
Development Authority (FDA); and the Gurgaon Authorities in  this
regard. Conversely, GDA, FDA and the other Gurgaon authorities
should come forward on the pattern of DDA as DDA has undertaken
the work of extension of Metro Rail from Dwarka to Dwarka sub-city.
They therefore recommend that Ministry of Urban Development take
up the matter with the concerned State Governments in this regard.
Reply of the Government
This Ministry is aware of the need to link the neighbouring NCR
towns with the Metro service. The issue of extending Metro services
to NOIDA and Gurgaon also figured in the deliberations of the
Empowered Committee in its meeting held on 21.2.2005. It was decided
that the Planning Commission would discuss the issue with the
representatives of Government of Haryana and Government of U.P .
DMRC has prepared Detailed Project Reports (DPR) for extension
of Metro to Gurgaon and NOIDA. DPRs are with the respective State
Governments who are to examine and formulate a suitable proposal.
Discussions have been held with the representatives of the State
Governments of U.P . and Haryana.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)

46
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.61 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No.5.36)
The Committee feel as Dwarka is being linked with Dwarka sub
city by Metro Rail with the cooperation of DDA, in Phase I, similarly
other routes viz. Central Secretariat, Vishwa Vidyalaya should be
extended upto Guru Teg Bahadur Nagar in Phase I rather than join in
phase II to make the route commercially viable and popular as GTB
Nagar is easily approachable from all directions and is at present a
terminus.
Reply of the Government
Phase I of Delhi MRTS Project is at present in full swing and is
scheduled for completion by March, 2006. The extension to Guru Teg
Bahadur Nagar forms a part of Delhi MRTS Project Phase II, the work
on which will commence after due approvals. It will be difficult to
reopen the Phase-I for suggested modifications at this advance stage.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.64 of Chapter-I of the Report)

47
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note that Pooled Finance Development Scheme is
also likely to be launched during 2005-06 to help mobilize funds from
capital market for infrastructural projects. As per the Ministry’s reply,
all these efforts are expected to go a long way to address the financial
crunch to a great extent.
Reply of the Government
Every possible effort is being made to launch the Scheme in
2005-06.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No.2.14)
The Committee are not convinced by the reply of the Ministry as
unless the end-use of the funds is not verified in time, the urban
development schemes may not be effectively implemented by the
various executing agencies and the urban local bodies/ municipalities.
The Committee desire that the Union Ministry of UD must take
befitting steps in consultation with the State Governments so as to
impart proper training, professional support and knowledge for sighting
and taking up of bankable urban infrastructure projects. The Committee
also recommend that proper checks are carried out to ensure proper
end-use of funds allocated to the Schemes of urban development and
the Municipality’s know-how is strengthened in taking-up viable
projects.
Reply of the Government
Under the Mega City Scheme funds are released to each mega city
for preparation of mega city development plans/feasibility study/
research in connection with implementation of the scheme. Similarly,

48
under IDSMT funds are provided for preparation of Detailed Project
Reports.
2. The new schemes proposed viz. National Urban Renewal
Mission (NURM) for select cities and Urban Infrastructure Development
Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) would provide for
release of grant (central and state) to the extent of 5% or the actual
requirement, whichever is less for preparing Detailed Project Reports
(DPRs), training and capacity building, community participation,
information, education and communication (IEC). This is expected to
enhance capacity building of the ULBs.
3. State Level Sanctioning Committee for each Mega City monitors
and reviews the physical and financial progress of projects sanctioned
under the Mega City Scheme. In addition, Ministry of Urban
Development reviews each quarter progress of Centrally sponsored
Schemes. Officers from the Ministry are also deputed to review the
physical and financial progress of projects sanctioned under the
schemes.
4. Under the proposed NURM, it is envisaged that progress of
projects would be monitored, as follows:—
(i) Ministry of Urban Development will periodically monitor
the scheme through designated Officers of this Ministry for
each State/ UT.
(ii) State level nodal agency would send quarterly progress
report to the Ministry of Urban Development.
(iii) Upon completion of the project, nodal agency through the
State Government would submit complete report in this
regard.
(iv) Central Sanctioning & Monitoring Committee may meet as
often as required to sanction and review/monitor the
progress of projects sanctioned under the Mission.
(v) Monitoring of progress of implementation of reforms would
be outsourced to specialized/technical agencies.
5. Whereas, under the proposed UIDSSMT, the following
monitoring mechanism has been envisaged:—
(i) Ministry of Urban Development will periodically monitor
the scheme through designated Officer of this Ministry for
each State/UT.

49
(ii) State level nodal agency would send quarterly progress
report to the Ministry of Urban Development through TPCO.
(iii) SLSC would ensure quarterly monitoring of various projects
sanctioned under the programme.
(iv) A Monitoring Committee under the chairmanship of Joint
Secretary (Urban Development) in the Ministry of Urban
Development would monitor the progress every quarter.
(v) Secretary (UD) would review progress of the programme
twice a year.
(vi) TCPO will be responsible for preparing a status report on
the scheme in consultation with MOUD every year (by 31st
May).
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Recommendation (Para No.2.72)
The Committee recommend that Municipal Accounting Reforms
and Model Municipal Law should be implemented by all the States/
UTs. Union Government should try their level best to provide
professional assistance to States/Municipalities in this regard. They
would, like to be kept informed about the steps taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
For effective implementation of Model Municipal Law and
Municipal Accounting Reforms, this Ministry has been organizing
workshops to help the States understand the benefits of these initiatives.
Technical support is also being provided under the USAID FIRE-D
Project to those States who have requested for the same. To assist the
States further to prepare State-specific Municipal Accounts Manual,
this Ministry in cooperation with the Office of C&AG of India has
prepared a National Municipal Accounts Manual and circulated to all
the States in January, 2005. Besides, a Model Municipal Accounts
Training Module is being prepared by this Ministry to help States
provide necessary training to the Municipal Accounts personnel. It has
also been decided to develop Municipal Accounts Software by this
Ministry for use by the urban local bodies in the country.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)

50
Recommendation (Para No. 3.54)
The Committee appreciate that as against the physical target of
200 towns under AUWSP during 2004-05, 199 water supply schemes
for 199 towns have been sanctioned as on 23.3.2005.
Reply of the Government
As on 31.3.2005, water supply schemes for 207 towns were
sanctioned against the target of 200 towns.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)

51
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.7)
Overall Assessment of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Urban Development for the Year 2005-2006.
The Committee note that the Budget Estimates (2005-06) depict a
steep decline in the Capital Section by (-) 45.47% as compared to the
BE (2004-05) in Demand Number 100. In this regard, the Ministry of
Urban Development has reasoned that the decrease in the Capital
Section is mainly due to lump-sum allocation of 10% of GBS for the
North Eastern Region including Sikkim as Rs. 160 crore allocated to
NE Regions in 2005-06 has been transferred from the Revenue Section
to the Capital Section. On the question of the decrease in the allocations
made in BE (2005-06) over BE (2004-05) for the IDSMT, AUWSP and
Mega–City Schemes, the Committee have been given to understand
that the lesser allocations in 2005-06 are because these allocations are
now meant only for the On-Going Projects of the schemes. According
to the Ministry, the main reason for reduction of Rs.38.76 crore in the
BE 2005-06 as compared to BE 2004-05 under Revenue Section of Major
Head 2215 is due to the proposal of Government to launch two new
schemes viz. (i)National Urban Renewal Mission (NURM) for selected
cities and (ii) Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and
Medium Towns(UIDSSMT) to cover all cities/towns excepting cities/
towns covered by NURM with the approval of competent authority in
lieu of the existing Schemes of AUWSP , IDSMT and Infrastructure
Development of Mega Cities. The Ministry have stated in their reply
that a budget allocation of Rs.95.24 crore has been made for AUWSP
in the current year to meet the committed liability of ongoing approved
schemes, as AUWSP , IDSMT and infrastructure Development of Mega
Cities would be discontinued and merged in a new scheme which is
being formulated. The Committee note that based on the similar
ideology, the allocations for IDSMT and Mega–City schemes have been
reduced by (-) 99.5% and (-) 70% in 2005-06 over BE (2004-05).
Although, the Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the
Government in launching the NURM and UIDSSMT schemes in 60
selected towns/cities; however the Committee are quite surprised to
find that new schemes are yet to be finalized and the allocations for
the instant urban development schemes have already been reduced in

52
BE (2005-06). The Committee are of the firm view that before making
any reduction under Major Head 2215, Water Supply & Sanitation and
the allocations for 2005-06 in IDSMT and Mega-City schemes, the
Government should have finalised the new schemes and guidelines
first and circulated them to all the States/UTs so as to commence the
projects under the NURM and UIDSSMT schemes in the beginning of
the coming financial year, itself. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that before starting on new Schemes, all the requisite
ground works should be first completed.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry shares the views of the Committee. National Urban
Renewal Mission (NURM) for select cities and Urban Infrastructure
Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) are
now awaiting approval of the competent authority. Both the schemes
are expected to be operationalised in 2005-06 itself.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report )
Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)
Urban Water Supply & Sanitation
The Committee are informed that a provision of Rs.1500 crore for
‘Viability Gap Funding’ for infrastructure projects has been announced
in 2005-06 along with the funding mechanism of Special Purpose
Vehicle (SPV). For ‘Viability Gap Funding’, the Ministry of UD has
been allocated a provision of Rs. 600 crore. Further, a provision of
Rs. 5500 crore for NURM has been proposed by the Ministry. The
Committee observe that there is vast disparity between demand and
supply of ‘water supply and sanitation’ as far as finance is concerned.
While the Committee are happy to note the steps taken to bridge the
resource gap by making provisions under SPV , the Committee express
their anxiety over the fulfillment of the demands as far as the water
supply and sanitation in urban areas is concerned. The Ministry has
stated that as such these higher allocations of funds as compared to
the previous years is expected to address the problem of drinking
water and sanitation in urban areas. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that as committed above by the Ministry, all out efforts
are made by the Government in meeting the demands of the urban
water supply and sanitation in urban areas of the country. Also,
measures are taken so as to ensure adequate supply of potable drinking
water in the towns/cities and other urban areas.

53
Reply of the Government
Two new schemes, namely, National Urban Renewal Mission
(NURM) to cover select cities and Urban Infrastructure Development
Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (IDSSMT) for the cities/towns
with population upto 10 lakh (not covered by NURM) are under the
process of approval of the competent authority. These schemes are
expected to fill the gap in the availability of water in urban areas.
Pooled Finance Development Scheme (PFDS) once launched will
be able to leverage market funds for bankable water supply projects.
In addition, the proposed Viability Gap Funding scheme can also be
utilised for leveraging the marginally unviable water supply projects.
Moreover, Tax Free Municipal Bonds are also being used for funding
water supply projects.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt Dated:
26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation ( Para No. 2.13)
While these moves are optimistic about reducing the financial
crunch, they are yet to see the light of the day and are in a very
rudimentary stage. The Committee, therefore, feel that current resource
crunch cannot be ignored, by projecting a bright future which is yet
to fructify. The Committee, therefore, urge that the Government should
address the present day inconveniences seriously instead of a
hypothetical bright affluence in terms of financial resources.
Reply of the Government
Plan funds for IDSMT and Mega City Schemes were significantly
enhanced in the 10th Plan in comparison with 9th Plan, as follows:—
Rs. in crores
9th Plan 10th Plan
(a) IDSMT 275 1304.65
(b) Mega City 500 1050.00
The enhanced allocations in the 10th Plan for existing schemes
would help to a great extent in meeting requirement of urban
infrastructure.

54
As stated in reply to para 2.11, National Urban Renewal Mission
(NURM) for select cities and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme
for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) are to be launched in
2005-06 to address infrastructural problems of all cities/towns in the
country. For NURM for select cities and UIDSSMT, there is tentative
allocation of Rs. 2800 crore and Rs. 700 crore respectively in 2005-06.
Efforts are being made to launch Pooled Finance Development Scheme
(PFDS) in 2005-06 to enable Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to access capital
markets for investment in bankable urban infrastructure projects.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.19)
The Committee note that the total allocation for North Eastern
Areas including Sikkim during 2005-06 has been increased from
Rs. 114 crore to Rs.160 crore thus an increased allocation of
Rs. 46 crore has been made in the current year. They also observe that
67 projects are on-going, while 75 proposals are under consideration,
which are to be completed in an allocation of Rs. 160 crore. The
Committee note ( see the Appendix II) that only Rs. 57.54 crore could
be utilized during the last year as on January, 2005 in the NE Region.
The Committee are of the view that the Union should see that North
Eastern States come forward with their priority and if necessary
required help may also be extended so that there is no delay in
executing projects by the concerned States. The Committee would like
to know the details of those States, who have opted for NBCC’s role
and those who want to implement by themselves. By having the above
figures, the Ministry can look forward to better implementation of the
projects and optimum deployment of financial resources. In any case
the Committee recommend that all the money should be utilized during
the year 2005-06 and all the physical and financial targets should be
achieved to avoid cost and time overrun.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation is accepted. As per past record this Ministry has
always been utilizing full amount allocated for North-Eastern Areas
including Sikkim.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)

55
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.75)
Role of Ministry of Urban Development in Tsunami affected areas
As regards, the re-construction of the Tsunami affected areas, the
Committee note that CPWD and NBCC have been assigned the task
for providing the permanent reconstruction in the two Union Territories
of Pondicherry and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The Committee
desire that the adequate funds are allocated for the purpose and the
re-construction works in the Tsunami affected areas are completed by
NBCC and CPWD in a time bound manner.
Reply of the Government
CPWD
Action Plan for the Construction of 6650 houses for tribal at Car
Nicobar and Southern Islands and 2700 houses for non-tribals at Little
Andamans and Great Nicobar Islands is being proposed in connection
with the A&N Administration and residents of the Islands.
C. NBCC
A. Reconstruction and Restoration of Water Supply System in Port
Blair
MoUD, Govt. of India vide letter No.Z-14013/2/2004-PHE.1 dated
30.3.05 sanctioned an amount of Rs.10.50 crore for Reconstruction and
Restoration of Water Supply System in Port Blair. An amount of
Rs. 4.00 crore was released to NBCC as advance for the above work.
NBCC has deputed a team of Senior Officers to Port Blair to undertake
these works. The team met Senior Officers of local Administration
such as Chief Secretary , Secretary (PWD), CE(APWD) and Secretary,
Port Blair Municipal Council for handing over of the site to NBCC.
Despite repeated requests the site was not handed over to NBCC. In
a meeting held on 24.6.05 Chaired by the Secretary, APWD, it was
informed that the local authorities have partially completed the
restoration work pertaining to Water Supply System from their own
resources and NBCC can take up the remaining work of construction

56
of OH Water tank for an amount of Rs.3.74 crore. The matter is required
to be sorted out immediately.
B. Post Tsunami Reconstruction proposal
Based on the report for reconstruction submitted by Ministry of
Planning Commission in which NBCC has submitted a proposal for
construction of 1700 dwelling Units and 1000 dwelling units for non-
tribals in Hut Bay and Campbell Bay Area of each dwelling unit is
300 sft. (details available on NBCC web site www.nbccindia.com) NBCC
has erected pro-types with pre-fab technology at Hut Bay and Campbell
Bay. The Central Team visited the Islands in the first week of July 05
for inspection of the prototype samples. The central team had approved
the samples erected by NBCC. Approval is awaited for taking up
construction of the dwelling units.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.65)
Solid Waste Management & Drainage in Air Field Towns
The Committee observe that Rs. 99.34 crore has been allocated in
10th Plan for Solid Waste Management and Drainage in Air filed towns.
The Committee is perturbed to note the utilisation of funds under the
project. Against an allocation of Rs. 5 crore in 2002-2003, the expenditure
was nil. In 2003-2004, the allocation was 5 crore, but the expenditure
was only Rs. 99 Lakh. Similarly, in 2004-05, Rs. 40 crore was allocated,
but only Rs. 22.02 crore could be utilised. The Committee also note
that Rs. 55 crore has been allocated for the project in 2005-2006. Detailed
Project Reports (DPRs) of only 3 towns have been received for which
central assistance of Rs. 27.19 crore, has been sanctioned. The DPRs in
respect of 4 towns is awaiting technical approval while in respect of
3 towns, they are yet to be received. The Committee recommend that
rigorous efforts should be made by the Government and the
municipalities and other urban local bodies are to be persuaded to
complete the projects of Solid Waste Management in selected Airfields
within six months of presentation of this Report to the House.

57
Reply of the Government
• The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) met on 8th March
2001 and directed to reframe the scheme based on the actual
ground condition with only capital cost to be borne by the
Government of India and O & M cost by State Government
with efforts to involve private sector participation.
• HUDCO was asked to prepare revised feasibility reports
based on actual ground condition through field studies. Since
field studies / investigations took some time, HUDCO could
submit the project reports in April 2002.
• The Departmental Expenditure Finance Committee approved
the scheme on 26th June 2002.
• Subsequently the scheme was approved by the Ministry of
Finance in December 2002 and Full Planning Commission
in October 2003 with a direction that DPR should be
prepared by HUDCO.
• Since the approval of Full Planning Commission was not
received before 31st March 2003, the funds of Rs.5 crore
earmarked during 2002-03 could not be utilized .
• HUDCO was requested to prepare DPRs based on actual
ground conditions and Rs.99.0 lakh only was released to
HUDCO during 2003-04 for preparation of DPRs.
• Since preparation of DPRs involves field surveys,
hydrogeological investigation at the site earmarked for
composting plant and sanitary landfill, it requires substantial
time for preparing DPRs.
• It took some time for preparation of DPRs because some
State Governments could not finalise land for landfills/
composting plants.
• DPRs for 5 towns namely Sirsa, Gwalior, Jodhpur, Pune &
Bareilly were approved during 2004-05 and funds to the
tune of Rs. 40.00 crore released as indicated below:-

58
 (Rs. in crore)
Name of the town Amount Date of Amount
technically sanction sanctioned
approved by as 1st
CPHEEO instalment/
part 1st
instalment
NBCC for preparation of DPRs - 4.11.04  0.25
Sirsa (Haryana)  7.93 12.1.05  6.64
Jodhpur (Rajasthan) 17.35 12.1.05 14.53
Gwalior (M.P .) 12.07 12.1.05  6.03
Pune (Maharashtra) 34.74 28.3.05  8.55
Bareilly (U.P .) 13.86 28.3.05  4.00
Total 85.95 - 40.00
• Rs. 55.00 crore is allocated for 2005-06.
• DPRs for Tejpur & Hindon were received and needed
modification. Hence these were returned to the State
Governments for necessary action.
• The modified scheme for Tejpur has been received recently
and is under scrutiny.
• Modified scheme for Hindon is yet to be received from
Government of U.P . / U.P . Jal Nigam.
• Land for Ambala & Dundigal has been identified and cleared
by IAF and work of preparation of DPRs is going on.
• Land for Adampur is yet to be cleared by Indian Air Force.
• As against the total cost of Rs. 85.95 crore for 5 schemes
approved up to March 2005, the Ministry has released
Rs. 40.00 crore only including Rs. 0.25 crore released to
NBCC for preparation for DPRs. Therefore the balance fund
of Rs. 46.20 crore for the ongoing schemes would be released
during the current year in addition to the schemes which
are yet to be approved. The Ministry would be able to
utilize the entire allocation made during the year 2005-06.

59
• In order to complete the scheme in shortest possible time,
the Ministry is pursuing the matter at the highest level.
State Govts. have been requested to activate State Level
Implementation Committee & District Level Monitoring
Committee. Penalty clause has been incorporated in the
Sanction letters of the Ministry in case of cost and time
overrun.
• Secretary (UD) has conducted review meetings frequently
with the State Government officials to expedite the scheme.
In addition the matter is being pursued at Joint Secretary
and Director level through periodic meetings and also
through official visits to the airfield towns.
In the above mentioned background, it is evident that all-out efforts
are being made by the Ministry to complete the scheme as quickly as
possible with the active support of State Governments and Urban Local
Bodies (ULBs). The Ministry would also like to ensure that sincere
efforts would be made for achieving the desired objectives.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 31 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No.4.5)
(i) Central Public Works Department (CPWD)
The Committee observe that most of the work of CPWD are carried
out by contractors. They feel that execution of work through contractors
is a cumbersome and long drawn process and as such only in case of
major work, the work should be entrusted to contractors, but that too
under strict supervision of engineers of CPWD. The Committee feel
that contractors and their workers have become de facto  a parallel
inquiry office, unbridled and unchecked for quality control, aesthetic
sense and planned and coordinated work by CPWD. They, therefore,
recommend that in case of deficiency of service and quality control,
primarily the CPWD should be held liable.
Reply of the Government
Guidelines have already been issued for execution of major works
through call of composite tenders which reduces number of contracts

60
and also ensures total deliverance of project in a more systematic and
defined manner. For maintenance works, the Annual Action Plan
colony-wise in consultation with RWAs with focus on bigger and fewer
contracts has been implemented.
2. In respect of deficiency of services entrusted to CPWD &
quality Control CPWD accepts the responsibility.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 34 of Chapter-I of the Report )
Recommendation (Para No.4.15)
The Committee note with concern that functioning of CPWD with
respect to maintenance and repairs of Residential Accommodation is
not satisfactory. As stated by the representatives of the Ministry that
work of Enquiry Offices has to be improved and available fund has
not been put to the best use, the Committee recommend that
accountability of the quality of the work done and result oriented
methodology for redressal of complaints should be put into use. The
Committee note that CPWD has not displayed in their Notice Board
the time frame fixed for carrying out each work and the names of the
officers to whom the complainants would approach. They, therefore,
recommend that such important information should invariably be
displayed at Notice Boards of all the Enquiry offices and Resident
Welfare Associations should also be informed about the same. Time
schedule so drawn should be strictly observed and any delay or
departure need to be accounted for with punitive measures for those
responsible. The Government should see that this is done. Similarly
the complaints should be responded to urgently by the officers
designated who should be available. Efforts should be made to
computerise this area to save time.
Reply of the Government
In view of Committee’s observations following actions have been taken.
(a) Notice regarding display of time schedule for attending. No
delay complaints, minor complaints and major complaints
including names of officers to whom the complainant would
approach will be put on all enquiry offices w.e.f. 15.6.05.

61
(b) Directions have been issued for creating a nodal officer
under each Division who will interact with Area Welfare
Officer for receiving maintenance related inputs from
Resident Welfare Associations for CPWD colonies.
(c) Meetings with Resident Welfare Association for prioritizing
and thereafter framing of Annual Action Maintenance Plan
for the colonies has been put in place and being monitored
on monthly basis.
(d) Complaints receipt through Interactive Voice Response
System (IVRS) is already functional.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 40 of Chapter-I )
Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)
Demand and Availability of Flats
The Committee are dismayed to note that out of Demand of
Rs. 800 crore proposed for construction of 8561 residential
accommodation during Tenth Five Year Plan, the Government have
made a reduction of 50% in their Plan allocation  and as such,  only
3924 residential units could be completed so far. They therefore,
recommend to take up the matter with Ministry of Finance at the
highest level so as to fulfil the plan target. The Committee would
therefore, like to be apprised further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
For 2005-06, a target of 1435 GPRA has been kept for which an
allocation of Rs.100 Crore has been made against demand of Rs. 119.40 crore.
The targets are being monitored for both physical and financial
achievements on quarterly basis.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 46 of Chapter-I of the Report)

62
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 2.28)
Stationery & Printing
As regards, Demand Number 102—Stationery and Printing, the
Committee note that there is a total increase of 3.12% in BE (2005-06)
over the BE (2004-05) on the Revenue plus Capital Section. In the
Capital Section alone, there is an increase in BE (2005-06) by 75% as
the BE (2004-05) is Rs. 0.20 crore and the BE (2005-06) is Rs. 0.35 crore.
On the increase in the Revenue Section, the Ministry has stated this
increase is to meet the (i) enhancement of Dearness Allowance and
annual increment in Pay and Allowances; and (ii) likely increase in
tariff of electricity, water charges and other stationery items/office
equipment. The Committee recommend that all the civil & electrical
works and the installation of new machinery should be completed
and made functional in a time bound manner. During the course of
evidence before the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Development has admitted that there has been a delay in procurement
of machinery and the modernization of the printing presses. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that suitable procedures may be
evolved so as to minimize incessant delays in procurement of the
machineries/ equipment. The Committee are informed that lot of
money has been invested on modernisation of printing press at Calcutta
but the machineries for this purpose are lying idle. This is a great loss
to the nation and the nation cannot afford to bear such loss. Why
such a situation arose, the committee wants to know. A report in this
regard is earnestly required and the responsibility should be fixed.
Reply of the Government
 (i) To minimize delays in procurement of machines, various
steps have been taken including restricting the use of
demonstration clause in technical evaluation of tenders and
authorizing the Press Managers to procure low value items
at their end to expedite decision making. These cases are
now being reviewed regularly .
(ii) Government of India Press, Temple Street, Kolkata:
Two Desk Top Publishing Systems and one printer costing
about Rs.1,92,000/- were procured but could not be installed
due to pending electrical and air-conditioning work in the
DTP Room by CPWD. Above machines were received by

63
the Press in the month of April/May,2004. The Civil and
Electrical works have been started recently by CPWD and
likely to be completed by the end of July, 2005.
(iii) Government of India Press, Santragachi, Howrah:
Under modernization programme, six DTP and two printers
have been procured and are being used. Two nos. double
colour offset printing machines have been installed and are
under trial run. Three nos. semi-auto cutting machines have
been received and installed. Due to limited manufacturers
and less participation in the tender, Internal Finance has
advised to scrap the tenders. Most of the items have already
been re-tendered and are under final stages of procurement.
Training of the staff for these machines has already been
done and the machines are under use. One spiral binding
machine has also been commissioned. Due to impending
review of Cabinet decision dated 16.8.2002, adequate staff
strength has not been achieved which has resulted in
under utilization of new machines. Hence no responsibility
can be fixed for this.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph no. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.29)
The Committee recommend that earnest efforts are made at the
State as well as the Central level to ensure that the modernization of
Printing Presses is completed and the workers handling such
machineries are adequately trained to efficiently utilize these State-of-
the-Art machines.
Reply of the Government
(i) As pointed out in Para 2.28 above, to minimize delays in
procurement of machines, various steps have been taken including
restricting the use of demonstration clause in technical evaluation of
tenders and authorizing the Press Managers to procure low value items
at their end to expedite decision-making. These cases are now being
reviewed regularly.
(ii) Proposal for filling up of 115 posts by direct recruitment, 578
by redeployment and 464 critical vacant posts for 11 Government of
India Presses under modernization have not been approved by Ministry
of Finance due to impending review of Cabinet decision of 16.8.2002.
Till proposed staff strength of the Presses under modernization is

64
approved, the employees can not be selected for redeployment and
training. However, to the extent possible staff are being trained for
operating new machines.
(iii) Out of 11 Presses under modernization, renovation of building
including electrical work of 7 Presses have already been completed.
Work in 4 Presses is in progress and likely to be completed by the
end of July 2005.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph no. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.52)
(ii) Empowerment of Women in Urban Local Bodies
The Committee were informed that as many as fifteen States have
been provided with financial assistance for training purpose. The
Committee also note that a considerable amount of unspent balances
still remain to be utilised. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the performance of other States also for training of women
councillors, the quality thereof and the deployment of the funds
released so far. It appears that only first instalment has been released
or that too has not been fully utilised. This shows lack of enthusiasm
due to some reasons or other. Besides, many States have not come
forward for seeking financial assistance from Union Government for
training their women councillors. This further shows that the scheme
has not taken off. The Committee would like the Government to
identify the reasons why the States are unenthusiastic about the training
programme. In the circumstances, they recommend that Union
Government should directly interact with the Municipal bodies of these
States who are not forthcoming. They also desire that an institutional
mechanism should be evolved for motivating the women councillors
to actively participate in the local bodies and not to depend on other
persons who attend the meetings of the municipal or local bodies on
their behalf.
Reply of the Government
As many as 21 States/UTs have come forward so far for organizing
training programmes for elected women councillors in the urban local
bodies through a State-level training institute. Five States/UTs, viz.
Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Lakshadweep and Dadra &
Nagar Haveli have no urban local bodies. Elections to the urban local
bodies of Jharkhand and Pondicherry are yet to be held. Thus, only
seven States/UTs, viz. Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh,

65
Bihar, Daman & Diu, Manipur, Meghalaya and Nagaland are yet to
come forward to seek Central Assistance to conduct the training
programmes for women councillors. These States/UTs are being
reminded from time to time to submit their proposals vide letters
No.N-11025/23/2002-UCD, dated October 11 & November 22, 2002;
February 14, May 28, July 31 & Nov 14, 2003; January 6, February 23,
June 3, July 14, July 30, Oct 11, Oct 28 & December 3, 2004; and
January 19, March 7 & June 27, 2005.
2. As regards unspent balance, it is stated that Chhattisgarh,
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Uttaranchal
have furnished utilization certificates after conducting the requisite
training programmes. Governments of Karnataka and Chhattisgarh have
been provided the 2nd instalment and the request of Himachal Pradesh
for release of 2nd instalment is under consideration. In other States
training programmes are in progress.
3. As regards interacting with the municipal bodies directly, it is
stated that as per Entry 5 of the State List of the Seventh Schedule of
the Constitution, ‘local government’ is a State subject. This Ministry
has, therefore, been persuading the States to come forward with
requisite proposals for providing training to all elected women
Councillors.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph no. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.69)
Desalination Plant in Chennai
The Committee note that a provision of Rs. 5 crore as
‘Supplementary Grant’ has been made in September, 2004 for the
‘Desalination Plant in Chennai’. However, the project of ‘Desalination
Plant in Chennai’ is yet to take off. The Committee desire that this
project must be implemented, expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
The Government of Tamil Nadu has informed vide their letter
dated 29th April, 2005 that evaluation of technical bids received from
bidders is still in progress. A total of 4 bids had been received for
100 mld capacity plants and 3 bids for 200 mld capacity bids. On
completion of the technical evaluation, the price bids of the technically
responsive bidders will be opened and evaluated.

66
Government of Tamil Nadu has further stated that although it is
not possible to exactly anticipate the time by which the work order
for the project can be awarded, they are keen to finalize the project
expeditiously so that Chennai city’s water supply can be effectively
augmented at the earliest.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph no. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.14)
NCR Planning Board
The Committee are concerned to note that objectives of Regional
Plan 2001 for achieving a manageable Delhi by 2001 could not be
achieved due to the lack of infrastructure in NCR. They are also
concerned to note that infrastructure development in ‘Counter-Magnet
Areas’ has not been adequate enough to curb the flow of migratory
population into Delhi. They could not become Centres of growth as
no integrated work was done. The Committee are concerned that at
the initial stage, there are failures. Such an ambitious programme
require thorough planning and scrutiny with the prospect of viability.
The project is just beginning and hence need to be corrected. The
Committee would like to know the details of ailments which precluded
these from becoming centres of growth. The Committee feel that a lot
is required to be done in NCR towns and counter magnet areas to
achieve the objective of NCR. The Committee find that the Regional
Plan 2021 is being finalised by NCRPB so as to carry forward the
tasks set out in Regional Plan 2001. The Committee recommend that
the Regional Plan 2021 should be finalized, expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
With a view to achieve manageable Delhi by 2001, the NCR
Planning Board had taken the following action:—
-P reparation of a Regional Plan 2001 which is being
implemented by the NCR States and the Central Ministries.
-P reparation of 4 Functional Plans relating to Transportation,
Telecommunication, Industry and Power.
- Extension of loan facilities to State Governments/agencies
to create infrastructure in the NCR area.

67
The realization of the concept of NCR is a long drawn process
and the real impact of implementation of its plans/policies is
perceptible only over a long period. However, the impact of the
implementation of the Regional Plan 2001, functional plans, sub-regional
plans, development of Counter Magnet Areas and the loan assistance
provided by NCR Planning Board may be deduced from the decline
in the decadal population growth of NCT Delhi. The growth of
population in NCT Delhi has declined to 47.02% in the decade
1991-2001, as compared to growth of population since 1951 recording
a decennial growth rate of 52.44%, 52.93% and 51.45% for the decades
1951-61, 1961-71, 1971-81 and 1981-91 respectively.
As part of the regional planning process, the development of
Counter Magnet Areas has been envisaged so that they can play the
role of future interceptors of migratory flows and function as regional
growth centres in the region. However, the results of development of
these areas are not distinctly perceptible in view of limited investment
and also the fact that the impact of planning and development in
these areas can be estimated only over a long period of time. In order
to analyse the shortfalls/gaps in achieving the objectives of the Counter
Magnet Areas and to work out a strategy for development of these
areas, the NCR Planning Board has instituted a study to take corrective
measures so as to achieve the desired results.
As far as the draft Regional Plan 2021 is concerned, the public
notice was published and objections/suggestions have also been
received by the NCR Planning Board. These have been examined in
detail by the Planning Committee of the Board. The Draft Regional
Plan 2021, incorporating the suggestions etc. wherever possible, will
now be placed in the next meeting of the NCR Planning Board.
(Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.H-11013/2/2005-Bt.
Dated: 26th July 2005)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
9 November, 2005 Chairman,
18 Kartika, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

68
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
EXTRACT OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, 28 OCTOBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room
‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
3. Shri Pushp Jain
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Shri Amitava Nandy
6. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
7. Shri K. Subbarayan
8. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
9. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
11. Shri Jayantilal Barot
12. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
13. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
14. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Assistant Director

69
2. *** *** ***
3. *** *** ***
4. The Committee also took up for consideration Memorandum
No. 3 regarding draft report on Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of Urban
Development. The Committee adopted the draft Report with slight
modifications.
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
Reports.
6. *** *** ***
7. The Committee also decided to hold the next sitting of the
Committee in the second week of November 2005.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

70
APPENDIX II
[vide para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 45
II. Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.22, 2.33, 2.41, 2.42, 2.43, 2.71, 3.21, 3.22, 27
3.23, 3.24, 3.40, 3.41, 3.42, 3.43, 3.53, 3.55, 3.56, 3.66,
4.10, 4.20, 4.26, 4.28, 5.17, 5.29, 5.31, 5.35 and 5.36
Percentage of total recommendations  60%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government replies:
Para Nos. 2.12, 2.14, 2.72 and 3.54 4
Percentage of total recommendations  8.88%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para Nos. 2.7, 2.11, 2.13, 2.19, 2.75, 3.65, 4.5,
4.15 and 4.22 9
Percentage of total recommendations  20%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.28, 2.29, 2.52, 3.69 and 5.14 5
Percentage of total recommendations  11.11%