4
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT AND
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
First Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 2004-2005 of the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation]
FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT AND
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
First Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 2004-2005 of the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.3.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 11.3.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 11
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 32
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 33
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 38
APPENDICES
I. Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana—Comm-
unity Structure—No. of towns where houses to
house Survey conducted (IA and IB) ................... 42
II. Minutes of the 10th sitting of the Committee
held on 02.03.2005 .................................................... 46
III. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the First
Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha). ..... 48

(iii)
*Nominated w.e.f. 27 October 2004.
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Pushp Jain
*6. Shri P . Mohan
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Amitava Nandy
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
11. Shri L. Rajgopal
12. Shri D. Vittal Rao
13. Shri Sajjan Kumar
14. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Sugrib Singh
17. Shri K. Subbarayan
18. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
19. Shri Suresh Ganpat Wagmare
20. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
21. Shri Baleshwar Yadav

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
24. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
25. Shri Jayantilal Barot
26. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
27. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
28. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
29. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
*30. Vacant
31. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
4. Shrimati Neera Singh — Under Secretary
*Shri Vidya Niwas Mishra ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 5 September,
2004 consequent upon his nomination to the Committee on Home Affairs.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Fourth Report on the action taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the First
Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban
Development on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation.
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23 August
2004. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 31 December 2004.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
2 March 2005.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee (2004-2005) is given in Appendix III .
   N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
 9 March, 2005 Chairman,
18 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Urban Development.

REPORT
CHAPTER I
The Report of the Committee on Urban Development (2004-2005)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their First Report on Demands for Grants 2004-2005 of
the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation which
was presented to Lok Sabha on 23rd August 2004.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 38 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.8, 2.9, 2.11, 3.6, 3.7, 3.12, 3.34, 3.35, 3.36, 3.37,
3.38, 3.39, 3.40, 3.43, 3.55, 3.56, 3.57, 3.58, 3.59, 3.81, 3.82,
3.98, 3.106, 3.107, 4.7, 4.13 and 5.8
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para No. 2.10.
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.12, 3.41, 3.42, 3.70, 3.99 and 3.100
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 3.89, 3.90, 3.91 and 3.92
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations for which only interim replies have been given by
the Government should be furnished to the Committee within three
months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Adequate allocation for Urban Poverty Alleviation (UPA) Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 2.8)
5. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee find that under the jurisdiction of the Ministry
there are two major Schemes viz. VAMBAY and SJSRY to tackle
the problem of urban slums and to provide self-employment to
urban poor. The detailed analysis of the aforesaid Schemes has
been made in the subsequent chapters of the Report. Here the
Committee would like to note that the allocation under the two
aforesaid Schemes i.e. Rs. 280.58 crore and Rs. 103 crore during
2004-05 is not adequate. The Committee note that there are big
challenges before the Ministry in the areas of addressing various
problems relating to slum population and employment to urban
poor. They feel that the allocation of the Ministry is too meagre.
The Committee strongly recommend to the Government to provide
adequate allocation under the respective Schemes of the Ministry.
While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee would also
like that the Ministry should first of all do the proper homework
before going to the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for
higher allocation.”
6. The Government have replied as below:
“This Ministry has already approached the Planning Commission
for additional allocation of funds for the Schemes like V AMBAY,
SJSRY, Dharavi etc. However, Planning Commission has not agreed
to this Ministry’s proposal for enhancement of allocation for
VAMBAY and SJSRY. Regarding the Dharavi Development Plan,
the in principle’ approval of Planning Commission is still awaited
and, therefore, no amount could be utilized from this year’s Budget
allocation so far.”
7. The Committee are of the firm view that for successful
implementation of various Urban Poverty Alleviation Schemes, the
much required funds for these programmes must be adequate and
timely allocated. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation should take the matter
of enhancement of funds for various UPA schemes with the Ministry
of Finance and the Planning Commission with convincing reasons
at the highest level and the Committee should be apprised
accordingly in this regard.

3
B. Release of funds under Centrally Sponsored Urban Poverty
Alleviation Scheme.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
8. The Committee had noted as below:
The Committee express their deep concern about the continuous
nature of unspent balances of funds lying with the State
Governments, which were released by the Centre for
implementation of various poverty alleviation schemes depicting
the incomplete implementation of the schemes/programmes. The
Committee need hardly emphasize that inordinate delay in release
of Central share of funds to the States gives very less time to the
State Government and ULBs for the implementation of a
programme, thereby defeating the main purpose behind each of
these poverty alleviation programmes/schemes. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that comprehensive monitoring
should be done at the Central level and periodical and timely
review of the functioning of the programmes under implementation
should be made by a high level body of the Ministry of Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviation so as a ensure proper
implementation of the schemes. The Committee also recommend
that concrete steps must be taken to obviate incidences of rush
hour spending or release of funds towards the fag end of a financial
year so that the allocated budgetary funds are utilized
constructively . The Ministry should chalk out a time-frame
regarding releases of funds under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme
of their Ministry to States/UTs.
9. The Government have replied as below:
“This Ministry has devised a mechanism of release of funds to the
States/UTs under the Centrally sponsored schemes like SJSRY.
Under this, funds are released to the States/UTs during whole
year on the basis of receipt of Utilisation Certificates for the earlier
releases and the contribution of the matching State share by the
respective State Government. As soon as a State becomes eligible
under this criteria, funds are released to that State/UT irrespective
of the fact that it is the fag end of the year on not. As, under the
system, this Ministry has to stress upon the receipt of UCs from
the States/UTs for earlier releases in view of the Ministry of Finance
instructions, no other mechanism for the release of funds to States/
UTs can be relied upon.

4
The Hon’ble Committee, views about comprehensive monitoring
at central level have been noted and periodic monitoring is being
done at the central level.”
10. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the
Ministry that no other mechanism for the release of funds to State/
UTs under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme like SJSRY can be relied
upon. The Committee reiterate their recommendation that for better
implementation of Centrally sponsored Scheme like SJSRY concrete
steps should be taken to avoid ‘March rush’ spending so that the
allocated budgetary funds are utilised effectively. The Ministry should
chalk out a time frame regarding release of funds under the Centrally
sponsored Schemes so that the main purpose behind each of the
Centrally Sponsored Urban Poverty Alleviation Schemes could be
achieved properly.
E. Evaluation/Modification of SJSRY Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 3.35 and 3.36)
11. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee recommend that earnest efforts be made by the
Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation to provide
an appropriate monitoring mechanism to ensure timely and full
implementation of SJSRY Scheme. During the course of evidence,
the representatives of the Ministry apprised the Committee that
most of the Schemes are being implemented by the States and
ULBs. The Ministry is trying for a joint monitoring mechanism
with the State Government and admitted that monitoring has to
be stepped up and evaluation of the Schemes has not been done.
For under-spending, it has been stated that States share has not
been given in certain cases due to financial difficulties or inadequate
funds. As assured by the Ministry, the Committee expect that
effective monitoring mechanism is formulated in a specific time
frame and the position is apprised to the Committee.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.35)
12. The Committee note that SJSRY scheme is being monitored
through quarterly progress report and periodical review meetings under
the Chairmanship of Minister/Secretary/Joint Secretary/Deputy
Secretary of the Ministry. To further improve the implementation of
the scheme, a proposal to notify the guidelines of the scheme is under

5
consideration of the Government on the basis of the problems faced
by the States/UTs. The revised guidelines are likely to be implemented
in due course. The Committee desire that keeping in view the slow
progress of the SJSRY the Ministry should strengthen the monitoring
of the Scheme at both the Central and State levels by conducting field
visits of the senior officers of the Ministry to have first hand
information about the actual implementation of the scheme. The
Committee note that the Ministry is in the process of revising the
guidelines of SJSRY. They would like that the various issues resulting
in ineffective implementation of the programme should be analyzed
threadbare after consultation with State Governments, Reserve Bank of
India and other, respective Banks viz. Commercial, Cooperative Banks
involved with the Scheme, Urban Local Bodies and NGOs, through
them the public at large. The Committee would also like that the
various issues raised by the erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban
and Rural Development with regard to SJSRY, should also be taken
into consideration while finalizing the guidelines of the Scheme. The
Committee hope that the revised guidelines of the Scheme would be
finalised at the earliest. The Committee also hope that the revised/
modified guidelines of the Scheme will expand the scope of SJSRY
scheme to cater to the requirements of the urban poor to a greater
extent including street vendors and hawkers.”
(Recommendation (Para No. 3.36)
13. The Government have replied as below:
“The Scheme of SJSRY is being evaluated by this Ministry through
Human Settlement Management Institute (HSMI), New Delhi, on
all India basis. The outcome of the evaluation is expected by the
next year. It is expected that the study will point out the measures,
which should be implemented to strengthen the monitoring
mechanism under the scheme.”
14. “The considered views of the Hon’ble Committee have been
noted. The Guidelines of the Scheme are under revision and it is
expected that the revised guidelines will be able to cater to the needs
of the urban poor to large extent.”
15. The Committee note that SJSRY scheme is being evaluated
by the Ministry of UEPA through Human Settlement Management
Institute (HSMI). The Committee desire that the revised guidelines
on SJSRY are finalized and implemented by the Government at the
earliest. The Committee hope that all the concerned Government

6
agencies would implement the revised guidelines of the SJSRY
scheme which would be able to cater the needs of the urban poor
to a large extent.
D. Education qualification under the Urban Self Employment
Programme (USEP)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.41 and 3.42)
16. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee note that as per the guidelines of the Urban Self
Employment Programme (USEP) there is no minimum educational
qualifications for beneficiaries under the programme. However, this
scheme is not applicable to the person educated beyond the 9th
Standard.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.41)
17. “The Committee feel that as per the guidelines, the higher
education beyond 9th Standard acts as an disincentive to urban poor
as he is not entitled to avail of the benefit of the Scheme. The
Committee feel that there is a need to review the said condition. The
benefit under the scheme should be available to urban poor irrespective
of his educational qualification so that more and more young poor
can come forward and by getting the benefits of the Scheme cross the
poverty line.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.42)
18. The Government have replied as below:
“The proposed modification of the guidelines of SJSRY stipulate
this educational qualification limit as 10+2 level. However, making
the scheme available to all irrespective of educational qualification
may not serve its purpose of helping the poorest of the poor.”
19. The Committee reiterate their recommendation that there is
a need to review the educational qualification stipulation under the
USEP so that the benefits under the Scheme could be made available
to urban poor irrespective of his or her educational qualifications.
The Committee are of the firm view that keeping in view the increase
in literacy rate and also the rise in unemployment rate in urban
areas, particularly in States like Kerala, there is an urgent need to

7
review the educational qualification stipulation under USEP
component of SJSRY scheme so that more urban unemployed youth
could be benefited.
E. Eradication of manual scavenging
Recommendation (Para No. 3.70)
20. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee are constrained to note the slow financial and
physical progress of Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCS
Scheme).The Scheme is infested with numerous problems. The
committees express their doubt as to whether manual scavenging
could be eradicated by 2007 as envisaged by in the National Action
Plan for Total Eradication of Manual Scavengers given the present
state of functioning of this scheme. The Committee feel that it is
a matter of shame for the country that after 50 years of planned
development, abolition of manual scavenging is still a distant
dream. manual Scavenging need to be eradicated at any cost. It is
an insult to the humanity and in no way can be tolerated. The
Government should make earnest efforts and persuade the States
where the scheme has not been successful. An earnest effort is
required with proper motivation and action. Periodical review of
the Scheme is necessary with proper punitive legal action against
those who are indulgent. The Committee deprecate the continuous
inhuman use of manual scavengers and desire that urgent corrective
measures be made in this regard. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should review the existing
guidelines of the Scheme and modify the terms of reference of the
Scheme so as to make it feasible and liberate the Scavengers from
the obnoxious practice of manual scavenging. The Committee also
recommend that liberation and rehabilitation of Schemes for
scavengers should also be integrated with this Scheme for effective
implementation and proper monitoring so that better results could
be achieved and manual scavenging is eradicating by 2007”.
21. The Government have replied as below:
The State Governments are being persuade to set milestones in
achieving the ultimate goal of declaring their State as scavengers
free. Officers from the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty
Alleviation also make visits to the States to impress upon them to
implement the scheme in a time bound manner. The States/UTs of

8
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Dadra & Nagar Haveli,
Pondicherry, Chandigarh, Delhi, Goa, Sikkim, Mizoram, Orissa,
Tripura, Gujarat, Kerala and Manipur have reported that there are
no scavengers. Revision of guidelines is a continuous ongoing
process. So far as integrating ILCS and National Scheme for
Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers (NSLRS) is concerned,
it is submitted that the focus of the two schemes are entirely
different. While the ILCS is infrastructure related, NSLRS is for
rehabilitation of scavengers by training them in different identified
professional trades.
22. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry
that the State Government are being persuade to set milestones in
achieving the ultimate goal of declaring their State as Scavengers
free. The Committee are of the firm opinion that the Government of
India should take some concrete steps for complete eradication of
manual scavenging. The Committee once again deprecates the
continuation of inhuman practice of manual scavenging and
recommend that strict legal action should be taken against those
who are indulgent and are not taking concrete steps for eradication
of manual scavenging.
F. Enhancement of funds under National Slum Development
Programme (NSDP)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.99)
23. “The Committee are constrained to note the poor performance
of National Slum Development Programme. Upto 30 June, 2004 a total
of Rs. 2,475.85 crore has been released by the Central Government and
about 3.74 crore slum dwellers have been benefited from the
programme which means that on an average about Rs. 662 per head
was spent during the last eight years on slum dwellers whereas
according to the 2001 Census, there are 40.6 million persons living in
slums in 607 towns/cities in the entire country . The Committee desires
that the Government should enhance the release of funds to the States
under this Programme and should ensure that release should be made
for specific projects with adequate and proper Central monitoring of
the projects under the Programme.”
24. The Government have replied as below:
“The issue regarding enhancement of allocation of funds under
National Slum Development Programme (NSDP) was taken up with

9
the Planning Commission as recently as in December, 2003 as also
in the past, but they did not agree for same. However, the
Committee's above observations and concern in the matter will
once again be brought to the notice of the Planning Commission.”
25. The Committee desire that the Ministry should take up the
matter regarding enhancement of allocation of fund under NSDP
with the Planning Commission at the highest level and impress upon
the Planning Commission to enhance the funds under the NSDP .
The Committee reiterate their recommendation that the Government
should ensure that releases under NSDP are made for specific
projects with adequate and proper Central monitoring of the projects.
G. Draft National Slum Policy
Recommendation (Para No. 3.100)
26. The Committee had recommended as below:
“3.100 The Committee further note that draft National Slum Policy
is under the consideration of the Ministry. Draft National Slum
Policy inter-alia envisages an inclusive approach for slum dwellers
and granting land tenure to them as tenable sites either in situ  or
by reallocations. The Committee desire that draft National Slum
Policy should be finalized and implemented at the earliest as such
policy could bring an attitudinal change among the Government
bodies and general public including slum dwellers, regarding
measures to improve the quality of life of slum dwellers.”
27. The Government have replied as below:
“The draft policy was circulated to all States, UTs, various NGOs
in December 1999. The comments have since been received from
State Governments, UTs, NGOs and concerned Ministries. Keeping
in view the observations/comments received from various States/
Central Ministries, etc., the draft of the Policy has been prepared.
After getting it vetted from Ministry of Law, the Cabinet Note on
the National Slum Policy has been sent to the Cabinet Secretariat
on 17.1.2004 for consideration. This was listed for consideration in
the meeting of the Cabinet held on 20.1.2004. However, it was
deferred as informed by the Cabinet Secretariat.”
28. The Committee are of the opinion that keeping in view the
increase in slum population in the country, there is a need to address

10
this issue on priority basis. The Ministry should place this concern
of the Committee before the Cabinet Secretariat and the Government
should finalise and implement the draft National Slum Policy at the
earliest.
H. Future Operations of Hindustan Prefab Limited (HPL)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.8)
29. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee had examined the issue of dilapidated conditions
of Hindustan Prefab Limited in their earlier Reports on Demands
for Grants and recommended that Government should take an
early decision about the future operations of HPL. They note that
the issue is yet to be finalized. The Committee while reiterating
their earlier recommendation desire that the issue should be
finalized within a stipulated time-frame.”
“The Hindustan Prefab Limited has submitted a detailed note
containing five proposals in respect of revival of Hindustan Prefab
Limited. The proposals submitted by Hindustan Prefab Limited
are under consideration of the Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation.
Meanwhile, HPL has been asked to engage a consultant to prepare
a detailed project report for revival of the Company.”
31. The Committee reiterate their recommendation that an early
action on the future operation of HPL would be appreciated.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.8)
The Committee find that under the jurisdiction of the Ministry
there are two major Schemes, viz. VAMBAY and SJSRY to tackle the
problem of urban slums and to provide self-employment to urban
poor. The detailed analysis of the aforesaid Schemes has been made in
the subsequent chapters of the Report. Here the Committee would
like to note that the allocation under the two aforesaid Schemes,
i.e. Rs. 280.58 crore and Rs. 103 crore during 2004-05 is not adequate.
The Committee note that there are big challenges before the Ministry
in the areas of addressing various problems relating to slum population
and employment to urban poor. They feel that the allocation of the
Ministry is too meagre. The Committee strongly recommend to the
Government to provide adequate allocation under the respective
Schemes of the Ministry. While recommending for higher outlay, the
Committee would also like that the Ministry should first of all do the
proper homework before going to the Planning Commission/Ministry
of Finance for higher allocation.
Reply of the Government
This Ministry has already approached the Planning Commission
for additional allocation of funds for the Schemes like VAMBAY, SJSRY,
Dharavi etc. However, Planning Commission has not agreed to this
Ministry’s proposal for enhancement of allocation for VAMBAY and
SJSRY. Regarding the Dharavi Development Plan, the ‘in principle’
approval of Planning Commission is still awaited and, therefore, no
amount could be utilized from this year’s Budget Allocation so far.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report.)
11

12
Recommendation (Para No. 2.9)
The Committee find that although the UPA Government has
assured 100 days wage employment to the bread earner in each family
at the minimum wage, there is no clear cut strategy on the part of the
Government to achieve the said targets. The Committee note that one
of the major employment Scheme, SJSRY is under the jurisdiction of
the Ministry. They also find that the Yojana is plagued with various
bottlenecks resulting in ineffective implementation of the programme.
While the Yojana has been dealt with in detail in the subsequent
chapter, the Committee would like to highlight that it is high time
that the Ministry revise the guidelines of the Yojana, after consultation
with the State Governments, urban local bodies and all concerned.
After doing the proper planning they should increase the targets.
Reply of the Government
The revision of the Guidelines of SJSRY is under active
consideration of the Ministry. It may be pointed out here that the
100 days wage employment scheme of the Government is for the rural
areas. However, for the urban areas also, the wage component of SJSRY
i.e. UWEP is being given due importance and additional funds are
allocated to the State/UTs where such demand had arisen.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)
The Committee note from the budget allocations that the Ministry
of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation have been allocated an
overall B.E. 2004-2005 amounting to Rs. 841.68 crore (Gross) which
includes both Plan and Non-Plan. The respective provisions on the
Revenue and Capital sides are Rs. 530.13 crore and Rs. 311.55 crore,
respectively. The break-up of Plan and Non-Plan provision is Rs. 830.00
crore and Rs. 11.68 crore, respectively. The Committee also note that in
the Revenue Section the budgetary allocation in the Plan section in
year 2003-2004 amounted to Rs. 347.90 crore but it has increased to
Rs. 523 crore in year 2004-2005, marking almost 50.33% increase in
planned allocations in the present financial year. Certain schemes have
been added to the portfolio of the Ministry of Urban Employment &
Poverty Alleviation as the Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme for
Liberation of Scavengers (ILCS) and National Scheme for Liberation
and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their dependents (NSLRS) were

13
transferred from the Ministry of Urban Development and Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment, respectively. Further, a new scheme
for resettlement of slums in Dharavi, Mumbai has been launched for
which a provision of Rs. 75 crore has been made in the BE 2004-2005.
Although with the addition of the said schemes, the 50.33% increase
in the Revenue Section attributes to be notional for the required
ongoing expenses. The Committee are of the firm view that the
increased allocation of funds be utilized in the right perspective.
Reply of the Government
The observations are based on factual information. The considered
views of the Hon’ble Committee regarding utilization have been noted.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.6)
The Committee note that in 1993-94, the urban poverty ratio was
32.4% and it came down to 23.6% in 1999-2000 i.e. a decrease of 8.8%.
The Committee are, however, not at all convinced by the stand taken
by the Ministry that this decrease in poverty ratio is attributed to the
impact and effective implementation of the various urban poverty
alleviation programmes of the Government as they are of the firm
view that the Government have yet to go a long way in tackling the
problem of poverty alleviation and effective implementation of
schemes/programmes earmarked for upliftment of the urban poor
population. The Committee endorse the observation made in the
10th Plan Document that the implementation of programmes for the
urban poor is beset with enormous problems and the problem of
inadequate funding has been compounded by under-utilisation of
Central funds, diversion of funds released for specific programmes,
and infructuous expenditure. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that concerted efforts be made by the Central as well as the State
Governments in line with the planned objectives of poverty eradication
by way of efficient monitoring at the Central level and involvement of
State level coordinators, urban local bodies and NGOs.
Reply of the Government
The Scheme is being monitored at the National level through
Quarterly Progress Reports, Review meetings and field visits by senior

14
officers of the Ministry. No such serious incidence of diversion/
infructuous expenditure of funds under the scheme has been noticed
from any State/UTs. However, the considered views of Hon’ble
Committee have been noted upon for strict compliance.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.7)
The Committee note that the Ministry’s contention is that the funds
allocated to the poverty alleviation scheme are inadequate to meet the
requirements of about 67.1 million urban poor population. In this
respect, the Committee would like to emphasize that ongoing poverty
and employment schemes should be fully and effectively implemented
at first in the States and periodic and timely monitoring of the schemes
should be carried out at Central level. The Committee are also of the
firm view that appropriate punitive measures must be taken at the
Ministerial level in cases where misuse and diversion of funds has
come to the notice. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
steps taken in this direction at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
As already explained, no serious incidence of diversion/
misutilisation of funds under the scheme has been noticed from any
State/UTs. States/UTs have been directed to strictly follow the
guidelines of the Scheme in utilisation of the funds.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.12)
The Committee note that consequent to a decision taken in 2001
by the Government 10% of the total budget provision of the Ministries/
Departments is liable to be spent for the development projects in North
Eastern States including Sikkim. The Ministry of Urban Employment
& Poverty Alleviation also implements the schemes/programmes related
to following areas viz. (i) Housing projects predominantly for the urban
poor; (ii) Poverty alleviation projects and (iii) Slum improvement/up-
gradation projects. The financial allocations for the year 2002-2003
amounted to Rs. 62.50 crore and the Actual expenditure amounted to
Rs. 44.17 crore and for the year 2003-2004, the budget allocation

15
amounted to Rs. 62.5 crore but the actual expenditure amounted to
Rs. 51 crore. Regarding the year 2004-2005, the budget estimate is
equal to Rs. 83 crore. On the question of under-spending and existing
variations in budget estimate, revised estimates and actual expenditure
during 2002-2003 and 2003-2004, Ministry have explained that North
Eastern States and Sikkim had furnished their Project Proposals very
late during the year 2002-2003. On receipt of these Project Proposals,
these were got appraised through National Building Construction
Corporation (NBCC). NBCC also took some time in the appraisal of
these Reports as it involved site visits and detailed consultations with
the concerned State Government Officials. Therefore, the Ministry could
release Central funds to the Executing Agencies in the last Quarter of
the financial year. The Committee deprecate that the Central funds
had been released to the executing agencies in the last quarter of the
Financial year, thereby leaving ample possibility for incidence of
unspent balances. The Committee recommend that proper efforts should
be made by the Ministry to address the North Eastern State
Governments to expedite their submission of project proposals for
timely release of funds and concerted measures be also taken by NBCC
in the appraisal of the proposals received from the States so that the
schemes/programmes could be implemented in a time bound manner.
Reply of the Government
This Ministry keeps on reminding States from the NER to submit
proposals timely after getting it appraised by a designated agency.
NBCC is also instructed to expedite the projects in time. During the
current year, enough projects have been submitted by States/NBCC
and it is expected to utilise full allocation for the year.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.34)
The Committee are constrained to note that about 50 per cent of
allocation during the 9th Plan period had been made available for the
SJSRY scheme, however, the unspent balances of the Scheme in the
9th Plan was to the tune of more than 553 crore. As on 30th June,
2004, the unspent balance amounting to Rs. 271.55 crore exists with
the States/UTs. Since a tangible amount of unspent balances including
the Centre and State shares persist to remain with the States/UTs, the
Committee are of the firm view that urgent attention should be given
by the concerned States/UTs towards this unspent balance.

16
Reply of the Government
The unspent balance of Rs. 271.55 crore include the amount released
to States/UTs during 1997-2004 for the implementation of the scheme.
As this is an ongoing scheme, funds are carried forward to next year
for utilisation. States are requested from time to time to utilise the
balance funds and send UCs to this Ministry so that further funds can
be released to them. The unspent balances are now being closely
monitored to comply with the disclosure requirements under the Fiscal
Responsibility and Budgetary Management Act, 2003.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.35)
The Committee recommend that earnest efforts be made by the
Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation to provide an
appropriate monitoring mechanism to ensure timely and full
implementation of SJSRY Scheme. During the course of evidence, the
representatives of the Ministry apprised the Committee that most of
the Schemes are being implemented by the States and ULBs. The
Ministry is trying for a joint monitoring mechanism with the State
Governments and admitted that monitoring has to be stepped up and
evaluation of the Schemes has not been done. For under-spending, it
has been stated that States share has not been given in certain cases
due to financial difficulties or inadequate funds. As assured by the
Ministry, the Committee expect that effective monitoring mechanism is
formulated in a specific time frame and the position is apprised to the
Committee.
Reply of the Government
The Scheme of SJSRY is being evaluated by this Ministry through
Human Settlement Management Institute (HSMI), New Delhi, on all
India basis. The outcome of the evaluation is expected by the next
year. It is expected that the study will point out the measures, which
should be implemented to strengthen the monitoring mechanism under
the scheme.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report)

17
Recommendation (Para No. 3.36)
The Committee note that SJSRY scheme is being monitored through
quarterly progress report and periodical review meetings under the
Chairmanship of Minister/Secretary/Joint Secretary/Deputy Secretary
of the Ministry. To further improve the implementation of the scheme,
a proposal to notify the guidelines of the scheme is under consideration
of the Government on the basis of the problems faced by the States/
UTs. The revised guidelines are likely to be implemented in due course.
The Committee desire that keeping in view the slow progress of the
SJSRY the Ministry should strengthen the monitoring of the Scheme at
both the Central and State levels by conducting field visits of the
senior officers of the Ministry to have first hand information about the
actual implementation of the scheme. The Committee note that the
Ministry is in the process of revising the guidelines of SJSRY. They
would like that the various issues resulting in ineffective
implementation of the programme should be analyzed threadbare after
consultation with State Governments, Reserve Bank of India and other,
respective Banks viz. Commercial, Cooperative Banks involved with
the Scheme, Urban Local Bodies and NGOs, through them the public
at large. The Committee would also like that the various issues raised
by the erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural Development
with regard to SJSRY, should also be taken into consideration while
finalizing the guidelines of the Scheme. The Committee hope that the
revised guidelines of the Scheme would be finalised at the earliest.
The Committee also hope that the revised/modified guidelines of the
Scheme will expand the scope of SJSRY scheme to cater to the
requirements of the urban poor to a greater extent including street
vendors and hawkers.
Reply of the Government
The considered views of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
The Guidelines of the Scheme are under revision and it is expected
that the revised guidelines will be able to cater to the needs of the
urban poor to large extent.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report)

18
Recommendation (Para No. 3.37)
The Committee are informed that during the 9th Plan, no physical
targets were fixed under the SJSRY schemes and it was left to the
State/UTs concerned to fix the targets at State level as per their needs.
However, in 10th Plan under SJSRY target of 4 lakh self-employment
benefits and skill development training to 5 lakh BPL persons have
been fixed. The Committee are of the view that without fixing targets
for a scheme, it is very difficult to assess the success of a scheme. The
Committee hope that all out efforts will be made to meet the targets
as set forth by the Government.
Reply of the Government
States/UTs have been intimated about the targets under the Scheme
and on that basis, State-wise targets have been fixed. States are being
geared up to meet the targets and implement the scheme to the
maximum possible.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.38)
It may be pointed out that the Committee (2003) had conducted
an on-the-spot study visit to Aurangabad on 11 September, 2003 and
they found that SJSRY was being implemented in a novel way . Under
the Scheme, two Lok Seva Kendras were established. The Kendras
were acting as a service provider to meet the day today needs of
plumbing, electrical, masonry works of the local residents. The youth
trained in various such trades were enrolled with the Kendras—
Municipal Corporation had provided telephone instruments and
furniture worth Rs. 12,000 for each of the Kendra. Wide publicity was
also given by the Municipal Corporation. The Committee found it a
novel way of providing employment to unemployed youths as well as
providing the basic services to the local residents. The Committee
desires that the Government should explore the feasibility of adopting
the above novel model on all India basis so as to provide gainful
employment to unemployed trained youths.
Reply of the Government
The documentation of best practices under the Scheme has been
one of the major part of the implementation of the scheme. The State

19
Government of Maharashtra has been requested to document this novel
approach under SJSRY, so that this can be circulated to other States/
UTs also and other States are motivated to share this success story.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.39)
The Committee note under the Community structures component
of SJSRY schemes house to house survey is yet to be conducted in 242
towns. The break-up of 242 towns is as given below:
Assam 1
Bihar 103
Chhattisgarh 35
Jammu & Kashmir 45
Jharkhand 47
Madhya Pradesh 2
Punjab 3
West Bengal 6
Total 242
Recommendation (Para No. 3.40)
The Committee are surprised to find that during the examination
of Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the erstwhile Department of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation, the Department had
furnished a figure of 230 towns where house to house survey was yet
to be conducted. Now this year the Ministry has informed the
Committee that house to house survey under the Scheme is yet to be
conducted in 242 towns. The Committee desire that the Ministry should
verify the accurate number of towns where house to house survey is
yet to be conducted and hope that in future the Ministry would furnish
accurate data to the Committee. The Committee would like to
emphasise that Ministry should complete the first stage of the
programme i.e. identification of beneficiaries by conducting house to
house survey in remaining towns where house to house survey is yet
to be conducted as without the identification of beneficiaries it is very

20
difficult to fix the physical targets and assess the achievement of the
Scheme. The Committee hope that the Government would impress
upon the State Governments to conduct house to house survey in the
remaining 242 towns at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The details were furnished to the Hon’ble Committee on the basis
of the reports received from the State/UT Governments. As is evident
from the enclosed Statements (Annexure I-A & I-B), there is an increase
in the total number of towns in the States/UTs and therefore there is
difference in both figures of no. of towns where house to house survey
has not been conducted. This Ministry has written to these States
(Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Nagaland, Punjab, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh
and Jharkhand) for conducting house to house survey at the earliest
in order to identify the genuine beneficiaries under the Scheme.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.43)
The Committee note that the erstwhile Nehru Rozgar Yojana meant
to provide employment to poor urban youth was restructured as SJSRY.
The Committee conclude from what has been stated above that there
are serious problems being faced in the implementation of the Scheme
as has been admitted by the Ministry itself. There is no proper
monitoring mechanism, Union Government is dependent upon the State
Governments for monitoring. Further, even the survey for identification
of beneficiaries that is the first stage of implementation is underway.
Beyond this there is the problem of non-cooperation of Banks. The
Committee feel that at the field level there are certain type of problems
viz. Huge gap between the number of applicants and the sanction and
disbursement of loan, the applications are rejected on flimsy ground.
All the issues related to the Banks should be sorted out after interaction
with the Ministry of Finance, RBI and the concerned Banks. There
should be a mechanism to hold the regular meeting with RBI and
Banks and the necessary follow-up action should be taken to make
the programme effective. Not only that there is a need to improve the
delivery mechanism of the Scheme through augmenting training and
proper monitoring. Further stress should be on Self Help Groups by
providing them forward and backward linkages. The Ministry should
think of providing better market facilities to enable SHGs to sell their
products. Besides, the products made by SHGs should be sold through

21
various Shilp Melas like Saras being organized at Delhi International
Trade Fair. Such melas should be organized in other big cities also of
the country. Besides, like Delhi Haat, in other cities too such Haats
should be opened and the products produced by SHGs should be
sold. Wide publicity should also be given to the products produced
by the SHGs so as to encourage them. Another area of concern is to
make the products produced by Self Help Groups (SHGs) competitive.
There is a need to provide training to improve the quality of the
products. More and more NGOs should be involved in the task. SHGs
should be involved in the trade according to the local needs of the
area where these are manufactured so as to ensure the viability of
SHGs. Once SHGs are viable and are engaged in profit making activity,
there will not be any problem of Bank loan. Banks would come forward
themselves to provide loan under the Scheme. In view of the aforesaid
position there is an urgent need to take all the corrective steps as
given above so as to make the programme more effective.
Reply of the Government
Banking related problems had contributed to the sluggish progress
in the implementation of the SJSRY in its initial years. This Ministry
had regularly interacted with RBI/banks/State Governments in the
matter. As a result there has been considerable improvement in the
situation. However, still a lot has to be done. Regarding the formation
of Self Help Groups, it is felt that such a move would be in the right
direction in the implementation of SJSRY provided adequate
infrastructure are created to promote and support the SHGs. The
Ministry is in the process of chalking out a viable mechanism for
providing micro credit to the urban poor/informal sector. In this regard
views of banks/financial institutions/NGOs are being sought. A task
force is also proposed to be set-up under Secretary (UEPA) to look
into the matter. The recommendations of Hon’ble Committee will be
taken into consideration while finalising the terms of reference of the
Task Force.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.55)
The Committee note that main purpose behind VAMBAY scheme
is to provide shelter or upgrade the existing shelter for BPL persons
living in urban slums of the country. This scheme, launched in
2001-2002 has been allocated funds amounting to Rs. 2,040 crore in

22
the Tenth Plan period. The financial allocation in 2002-2003 amounted
to Rs. 256.85 crore and in 2003-2004 the allocation was to the tune of
Rs. 238.50 crore. Out of the total allocation of Rs. 256.85 crore for the
year 2002-2003 under VAMBAY, Central subsidy of Rs. 218.35 crore
was released for construction of 1,10,388 dwelling units (more than
the target set i.e. 1,00,000) and 21,488 community toilets. However,
15% of the allocated amount could not be utilized due to non-receipt
of proposals from the State Governments in some of the components
of VAMBAY though in shelter component, the demand was enough to
utilize all the allotted amount. In such circumstances, the Committee
cannot but express their distress about the sorry state of affairs of
implementation of the VAMBAY scheme. The Committee are compelled
to re-emphasise that the delivery mechanism of the Ministry needs to
be really beefed up on coordination with the concerned State
Governments and ULBs. The Committee recommend that an
accountable system of checks should be chalked out so as to ensure
timely release of funds and full implementation of VAMBAY
programme. The Committee would like to be apprised about the steps
taken in this regard in due course.
Reply of the Government
Since the launch of the scheme in December 2001, in the financial
year 2001-2002, Rs. 69.00 Crore was allocated and in the year
2002-2003, Rs. 256.85 Crore was allocated. Out of the above, Rs. 69.67 Crore
(revised) was released during 2001-02 (Rs. 60.46 Crore for Housing
and Rs. 9.21 Crore for providing toilets in the slums). For the year
2002-03, Rs. 217.29 Crore (revised) was released (Rs. 182.04 Crore for
Housing and Rs. 35.25 Crore for toilets). It indicates that there is
substantial demand for shelter component of the scheme among various
States. However, demand for toilet component under Nirmal Bharat
Abhiyan (NBA) has not been very encouraging, right from the
beginning. The dwelling units proposed to be constructed by the States
under the Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY) scheme are
complete units i.e. each dwelling unit has a toilet attached to it,
therefore, there is a poor demand from the States implementing
VAMBAY scheme for community toilets in the slums. The reasons are
non-availability of suitable land for the toilet complex, its maintenance,
arranging State share etc.
Some of the main reasons for slow utilisation of funds under the
scheme are:
(1) Non-submission of Utilisation Certificates by the
implementing agencies

23
(2) Non availability of land
(3) Change of beneficiaries/selection of beneficiaries
(4) Non release of funds to the agencies which are not in
default, but State is in default due to other agencies.
Government of India has already requested States to constitute
State Level Coordination Committee (SLCC) for effective monitoring
and implementation of the VAMBAY scheme. Periodical review
meetings at various levels and site visits are also undertaken; as a
result of which the scheme has now geared up. The scheme was also
reviewed in the State Housing Minister’s Conference recently held on
29-30th November 2004.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.56)
The Committee find that VAMBAY was started in the year 2001.
They note that under Nirmal Abhiyan Component of VAMBAY,
sufficient demand was not received during 2002-2003 and 2003-2004.
The Committee note that almost three years have elapsed since the
Scheme was started. The Ministry should review the various
components of the Scheme in consultation with State Governments
and Urban Local Bodies so that projections for the different components
of VAMBAY can be made. After a review of various components and
after proper analysis the Government should revise the guidelines.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for
compliance.
The proposed modification in VAMBAY scheme guidelines
including revision in ceiling limit, following cluster approach etc., in
consultation with the stakeholders including State Governments,
implementing agencies, NGOs, etc., is under active consideration of
the Ministry.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]

24
Recommendation (Para No. 3.57)
The Committee are contented to note that V AMBAY being a
demand driven scheme, a target of construction of 1.12 lakh dwelling
units has been set internally by Ministry for the current financial year
2004-2005. The Committee are of the firm view that it is essential to
have a target for achieving as well as assessment of implementation of
a scheme like VAMBAY which is the only scheme for providing shelter
or upgrading the existing shelter for slum dwellers in urban slums.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for
compliance.
The target is being fixed taking into account the allocation of funds
and the average unit cost of dwelling units.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.58)
The Committee note that under VAMBAY Central subsidy is
granted for construction of dwelling unit @ Rs. 20,000 for general
cities, Rs. 25,000 for Metro Cities and Rs. 30,000 for mega cities. Some
States like Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh etc. have requested to enhance
the existing cost of construction/central subsidy of a dwelling unit.
The Committee have been given to understand that the funding pattern
under VAMBAY between Central and State Governments is on 50:50
basis. In regard to unit cost of dwelling unit as given above, the
Committee are of the opinion that meaningful amount of Central
subsidy should be granted to the State Governments for construction
of dwelling units keeping in view that current market prices and cost
of construction involved in the units. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that comprehensive State-wise assessment of escalation of
cost of construction of units under the VAMBAY scheme should be
made and the central subsidy for VAMBAY projects be enhanced,
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Based on the recommendation of the States and other stakeholders,
modifications in VAMBAY guidelines are being processed.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]

25
Recommendation (Para No. 3.59)
The Committee note that initially Core Groups were formed in
HUDCO to over-see the implementation of VAMBAY in the States
where projects were being implemented. However, orders were issued
by the Ministry formally for constitution of State Level Co-ordination
Committee (SLCC) comprising of State Government/agency officials,
representatives of the Ministry, HUDCO and NGOs to monitor the
progress of VAMBAY scheme in the States. In this regard, the
Committee are of the firm view that State Level Co-ordination
Committees should involve local representatives and also end
beneficiaries for monitoring the implementation of VAMBAY at the
State level to plug the loopholes or lacunae in implementation of the
Scheme at the grass-root level. The Committee also desire that for
further strengthening the monitoring of the Scheme at both the Centre
and State level, regular field visits should be made by the Senior
Officers of the Ministry/HUDCO to have the first hand information of
the scheme so as to ensure that the benefits of VAMBAY reach the
genuine beneficiaries.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for
compliance.
For effective monitoring and implementation of VAMBAY State
Level Coordination Committee (SLCC) has been formed in various
States as per the orders issued by the Ministry of Urban employment
and Poverty Alleviation. The SLCCs have to include two non-official
members representing social workers/NGOs/Urban Local Bodies/local
persons of prominence etc., in order to monitor the scheme at grass
root level. HUDCO/Ministry Officials do make periodical site
inspections.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.81)
The Committee appreciate that the two schemes viz. Integrated
Low Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCS) and National Scheme for Liberation
and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their dependents (NSLRS) dealing
with the issue liberating the Scavengers from the manual scavenging
in different States and rehabilitation of the liberated Scavengers have

26
been brought under one umbrella. The said schemes have been
transferred to the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation from the Ministries of Urban Development and Social Justice
and Empowerment respectively. The Committee hope that there will
be better coordination between the two issue viz. liberation and
rehabilitation of scavengers and the country would be able to get rid
of the obnoxious task of manual scavenging expeditiously”.
Reply of the Government
States have been requested to make efforts to ensure that the
Scavengers are liberated and rehabilitated.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation, O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt., Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.82)
“The Committee note that the main reasons for slow progress of
the NSLRS scheme are huge unspent balances with State Scheduled
Caste Development Corporation (SCDCs), lack of new schemes/
proposals sent by the States/SCDCs and non-submission of utilization
certificates by the State on time. The Committee take a serious view
over the lack of response from the States and the fact that huge unspent
balances with the SCDCs exists. The Committee desire that the Ministry
should impress upon the State Governments to minimize the unspent
balances under the scheme by effective implementation and submit
the utilisation certificates on time”.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of UE&PA has requested States/UTs to take measures
for effective implementation and monitoring of the Scheme and
furnishing utilization certificates. Central representatives from M/o
UE&PA were deputed to some States to get the UCs expedited. A
meeting was convened by Secretary (UEPA) on 22.11.2004 with Social
Welfare Secretaries of States/UTs to discuss various issues including
the submission of new schemes/proposals and utilising the unspent
balances with them.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation, O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt., Dated: December 30, 2004]

27
Recommendation (Para No. 3.98)
The Committee note that as per study conducted by TCPO slum
population which was 148.249 lakh during 1981 increased to 188.659
lakh during the 1990-1991 and further increased to 254.811 lakh during
2001. The Committee further find that different data of slum population
have been indicated by two different studies conducted by TCPO and
census studies. As per TCPO the slum population during 2001 in 26
big cities is 254.811 lakh but as per Census of India based on the
Registrar Census of India, slum population in 26 big cities is 165.65
lakh. The Committee feel that sincere efforts have not been made to
know the slum population in the country. The Committee recommend
that the Ministry should first of all conduct a study to know about
the slum population in all the big cities of the country in order to
arrive at the correct estimate of State/UTs. Besides there should be
some mechanism to review the data with regard to slum population
after a fixed period of time say five years. Such a data is required for
formulating plan for tackling the various issues like rehabilitation,
relocation and providing infrastructure and hygienic conditions in urban
slums. Besides for urban planning as well as finalisation of Urban
Policy, such a data is necessary input.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee have been noted. Even
though the issue of slum upgradation falls under the purview of the
State List, all out efforts have been made and are being made in the
matter to address the slum problem.
It is also submitted that the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Demands for Grants for the year 2002-03 vide recommendation Para-
4.10 while taking note that Registrar General of India (RGI) has made
a survey about the slum population in the country in Census-2001,
according to which the total slum population in cities having more
than 50,000 population is 4.02 crore, desired that similar survey in
respect of other cities having less than 50,000 population, also be carried
out and Committee be appraised accordingly. Hence, in compliance of
the Committee’s recommendation the matter is already under active
consideration with RGI and Planning Commission.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation, O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt., Dated: December 30, 2004]

28
Recommendation (Para No. 3.106)
The Committee note that the objectives of the Urban Reforms
Incentive Fund (URIF) is to provide reform linked assistance to States
so as to provide required incentives and accelerate the process of urban
reforms identified by the Government. An allocation of Rs. 500 crore
is divided amount the States/UTs on the basis of their percentage of
urban population to the total urban population of the Country. The
incentives are given as Additional Central Assistance (ACA) and the
outlay is released as 100 per cent grant by the Ministry of Finance on
the recommendation of the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty
Alleviation. For availing benefits under the Scheme, States/UTs are
required to enter into a prescribed Memorandum of Agreement (MoA)
with the Central Government. Releases for the year 2004-2005 onwards
would depend upon the achievement of milestone for that year as
detailed in Memorandum of Agreement. The Committee further note
that before implementing the Urban Reforms Incentive Fund (URIF)
scheme, the same was brought to the notice of all State Governments.
Draft Memorandum of Agreement (to be signed with them) was also
circulated to them. This issue was also deliberated in Housing Ministers
Conference held on 12.9.2002. The Committee also note that most of
the States suggested that it may not be possible for them to sign
Memorandum of Agreement in respect of all the seven reform area
and carry out all the reforms in one go. Simultaneously , it was
therefore, decided by the Government that weightage may be given to
each reform area and truncated Memorandum of Agreement may be
allowed to be signed so that releases may be made as per the weightage
given to the agreed reform areas and as per the achievement of the
milestone in each reform area separately. Till 31st March, 2004,
21 States and 3 UTs have signed Memorandum of Agreement/Truncated
Memorandum of Agreement with the Ministry.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.107)
The Committee are of the firm view that before lunching any
scheme Government should first take the concurrence and approval of
the scheme from States and should also examine whether adequate
infrastructure exist with States/UTs to launch such scheme. Merely by
indicating all the States Government regarding launching of scheme
do not serve the purpose. Without proper follow-up measure the targets
can not be achieved. The Committee apprehend that the poor progress
in Urban Reforms Incentive Fund (URIF) Scheme is due to lack of
Coordination and poor response of the State Governments. The

29
Committee recommend that the Government at this stage should adopt
holistic approach and the Guidelines of the Urban Reforms Incentive
Fund (URIF) scheme be modified in order to make it more viable so
that the remaining States/UTs concede to sign Memorandum of
Agreements in respect of all reform areas with the Ministry so that
process of urban reform could be accelerated. Schemes should not be
launched superficially without finding its relevance and whether the
same can take off. In the above case, this was not done. A perfunctory
approach may lead to waste of time, money, material and human
resources. Such casual move on the part of the Ministry is deprecated
and they should be careful in future before resorting to such puerile
approach. The Ministry should reanalyse the above scheme with
feasibilities and spell out the steps which could lead to its success.
Reply of the Government
The Scheme was formulated in consultation with States, Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance. Since the Scheme is new, it is
difficult to assess the success or otherwise. However, a study is being
considered to find out the exact impact of the proposed reforms in
each State. The Scheme will be revised after getting feed back from
States.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation, O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt., Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.7)
The Committee note that housing and human settlement is a State
subject. Each State prepares its own action plan. As per the National
Housing and Habitat Policy, 1998, the role of the Central Government
is that of an enable and not of a provider. However, various schemes
for housing and human settlement implemented by the Government,
provide additional funds to the States Governments by way of grants/
loan to boost their efforts. The Committee further note that the National
Agenda for Governance focuses on ‘Housing for All’ as priority area
with particular emphasis on the needs of the Economically Weaker
Sections and Low Income Group Category. The working Group on
Housing estimated shortage of 22.44 million houses during the
10th Plan. 90 per cent of housing shortage pertains to the weaker
sections. The Committee feel that keeping in view the shortage of
22.44 million houses during the 10th Plan and 90 per cent of shortage
pertaining to the weaker sections there is an urgent need to increase
the supply of affordable houses to the Economically Weaker Sections

30
and Low Income Group category through a holistic programme of
allocation of land, extension of funding assistance and provision of
loan on low interest rate for construction of houses for EWS category.
The Committee also feels that to boost the housing construction
activities in the country, there is a need to encourage and enlarge the
participation of private sector, public sector, cooperative and individuals
in this priority sector. The Committee further feels that to overcome
the enormous shortage of housing in the country there is a need to
encourage rental housing which requires legislative changes in existing
rent control laws. The Government should think it over and come out
with a proposal.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee regarding the
Legislative changes in existing rent control law, pertains to Ministry of
Urban Development. The Ministry of Urban Development has been
requested to consider the recommendation of the Committee.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation, O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt., Dated: December 30, 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13)
The Committee note the main objective of providing equity support
to HUDCO has been reasonable provision of subsidised loan for EWS
housing programmes in the States through cross subsidisation. A sum
of Rs. 225 crore have been allocated during the year 2004-2005 to
HUDCO for equity support. Cumulatively till 31st March, 2004,
HUDCO has sanctioned 15,275 schemes involving a total project cost
of Rs. 119121 crore with loan component of Rs. 63,472 crore. An amount
of Rs. 43,663 crore has been released. HUDCO assistance has helped
in the construction of 143 lakh residential units. The Committee cannot
but express their hope that with the equity support from Government,
HUDCO would help in reducing the 90 per cent of housing shortage
pertaining to the weaker sections. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the progress made by HUDCO in this regard in due
course.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for
compliance.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation, O.M.
No. H-11013/7/2004-Bt., Dated: December 30, 2004]

31
Recommendation (Para No. 5.8)
The Committee had examined the issue of dilapidated conditions
of Hindustan Prefab Limited in their earlier Reports on Demands for
Grants and recommended that Government should take an early
decision about the future operations of HPL. They note that the issue
is yet to be finalized. The Committee while reiterating their earlier
recommendation desire that the issue should be finalized within a
stipulated time frame.
Reply of the Government
The Hindustan Prefab Limited has submitted a detailed note
containing five proposals in respect of revival of Hindustan Prefab
Limited. The proposals submitted by Hindustan Prefab Limited are
under consideration of the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation.
Meanwhile, HPL has been asked to engage a consultant to prepare
a detailed project report for revival of the Company.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 31 of Chapter-I of the Report)

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10)
As the name of the Ministry suggest the main task of the Ministry
is to tackle the issue of urban employment. To enable the Government
to fulfil the promise of providing 100 days wage employment to the
bread earner in each family, the major task before the Ministry is to
have the clear-cut data of urban unemployed. Besides in consultation
with the State Governments and all the Union Ministries concerned
with providing employment in urban areas a clear cut strategy should
be chalked out so that the promises made by the Government are
translated into reality. The Committee should be informed accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The objective of the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty
Alleviation is to alleviate the poverty in urban areas through providing
employment to the urban poor living below the poverty line. Therefore,
this Ministry is basically concerned with alleviation of urban poverty
instead of tackling the problem of urban unemployment which is a
vast subject and which includes both poor and non-poor person. The
data on urban unemployed may be maintained by the Ministry of
Labour & Employment, which is the nodal Ministry for the subject
“employment in urban areas”.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
32

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
The Committee express their deep concern about the continuous
nature of unspent balances of funds lying with the State Governments,
which were released by the Centre for implementation of various
poverty alleviation schemes depicting the incomplete implementation
of the schemes/programmes. The Committee need hardly emphasize
that inordinate delay in release of Central share of funds to the States
gives very less time to the State Government and ULBs for the
implementation of a programme, thereby defeating the main purpose
behind each of these poverty alleviation programmes/schemes. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that comprehensive
monitoring should be done at the Central level and periodical and
timely review of the functioning of the programmes under
implementation should be made by a high level body of the Ministry
of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation so as to ensure proper
implementation of the schemes. The Committee also recommends that
concrete steps must be taken to obviate incidences of rush hour
spending or release of funds towards the fag end of a financial year
so that the allocated budgetary funds are utilized constructively. The
Ministry should chalk out a time-frame regarding releases of funds
under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of their Ministry to States/
UTs.
Reply of the Government
This Ministry has devised a mechanism of release of funds to the
States/UTs under the Centrally sponsored schemes like SJSRY. Under
this, funds are released to the States/UTs during whole year on the
basis of receipt of Utilisation Certificates for the earlier releases and
the contribution of the matching State share by the respective State
Government. As soon as a State becomes eligible under this criteria,
funds are released to that State/UT irrespective of the fact that it is
the fag end of the year or not. As, under the system, this Ministry has
to stress upon the receipt of UCs from the States/UTs for earlier releases
33

34
in view of the Ministry of Finance instructions, no other mechanism
for the release of funds to States/UTs can be relied upon.
The Hon’ble Committee, views about comprehensive monitoring
at Central level have been noted and periodic monitoring is being
done at the Central level.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.41)
The Committee note that as per the guidelines of the Urban Self
Employment Programme (USEP) there is no minimum educational
qualifications for beneficiaries under the progrmme. However, this
scheme is not applicable to the person educated beyond the 9th
Standard.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.42)
The Committee feel that as per the guidelines, the higher education
beyond 9th Standard acts as an disincentive to urban poor as he is
not entitled to avail of the benefits of the Scheme. The Committee feel
that there is a need to review the said condition. The benefit under
the scheme should be available to urban poor irrespective of his
educational qualification so that more and more young poor can come
forward and by getting the benefits of the Scheme cross the poverty
line.
Reply of the Government
The proposed modification of the guidelines of SJSRY stipulate
this educational qualification limit as 10+2 level. However, making the
scheme available to all irrespective of educational qualification may
not serve its purpose of helping the poorest of the poor.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)

35
Recommendation (Para No. 3.70)
“The Committee are constrained to note the slow financial and
physical progress of ILCS Scheme. The Scheme is infested with
numerous problems. The committees express their doubt as to whether
manual scavenging could be eradicated by 2007 as envisaged by in
the National Action Plan for Total Eradication of Manual Scavengers
given the present state of functioning of this scheme. The Committee
feel that it is a matter of shame for the country that after 50 years of
planned development, abolition of manual scavenging is still a distant
dream. Manual Scavenging need to be eradicated at any cost. It is an
insult to the humanity and in no way can be tolerated. The Government
should make earnest efforts and persuade the States where the scheme
has not been successful. An earnest effort is required with proper
motivation and action. Periodical review of the Scheme is necessary
with proper punitive legal action against those who are indulgent.
The Committee deprecate the continuous inhuman use of manual
scavengers and desire that urgent corrective measures be made in this
regard. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government
should review the existing guidelines of the Scheme and modify the
terms of reference of the Scheme so as to make it feasible and liberate
the Scavengers from the obnoxious practice of manual scavenging.
The Committee also recommend that liberation and rehabilitation of
Schemes for scavengers should also be integrated with this Scheme
for effective implementation and proper monitoring so that better results
could be achieved and manual scavenging is eradicated by 2007”.
Reply of the Government
The State Governments are being persuade to set milestones in
achieving the ultimate goal of declaring their State as scavengers free.
Officers from the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation
also make visits to the States to impress upon them to implement the
scheme in a time bound manner. The States/UTs of Andaman &
Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Pondicherry,
Chandigarh, Delhi, Goa, Sikkim, Mizoram, Orissa, Tripura, Gujarat,
Kerala and Manipur have reported that there are no scavengers.
Revision of guidelines is a continuous ongoing process. So far as
integrating ILCS and NSLRS is concerned, it is submitted that the
focus of the two schemes are entirely different. While the ILCS is
infrastructure related, NSLRS is for rehabilitation of scavengers by
training them in different identified professional trades.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]

36
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.99)
The Committee are constrained to note the poor performance of
National Slum Development Programme. Upto 30 June, 2004 a total of
Rs. 2,475.85 crore has been released by the Central Government and
about 3.74 crore slum dwellers have been benefited from the
programme which means that on an average about Rs. 662 per head
was spent during the last eight years on slum dwellers whereas
according to the 2001 Census, there are 40.6 million persons living in
slums in 607 towns/cities in the entire country . The Committee desires
that the Government should enhance the release of funds to the States
under this Programme and should ensure that release should be made
for specific projects with adequate and proper Central monitoring of
the projects under the Programme.
Reply of the Government
The issue regarding enhancement of allocation of funds under
National Slum Development Programme (NSDP) was taken up with
the Planning Commission as recently as in December, 2003 as also in
the past, but they did not agree for same. However, the Committee’s
above observations and concern in the matter will once again be
brought to the notice of the Planning Commission.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.100)
“3.100 The Committee further note that Draft National Slum Policy
is under the consideration of the Ministry. Draft National Slum Policy
inter-alia envisages an inclusive approach for slum dwellers and
granting land tenure to them as tenable sites either insitu or by
relocations. The Committee desire that Draft National Slum Policy
should be finalized and implemented at the earliest as such policy
could bring an attitudinal change among the Government bodies and

37
general public including slum dwellers, regarding measures to improve
the quality of life of slum dwellers.
Reply of the Government
The draft policy was circulated to all States, UTs, various NGOs in
December 1999. The comments have since been received from State
Governments, UTs, NGOs and concerned Ministries. Keeping in view
the observations/comments received from various States/Central
Ministries, etc., the draft of the Policy has been prepared. After getting
it vetted from Ministry of Law, the Cabinet Note on the National
Slum Policy has been sent to the Cabinet Secretariat on 17.1.2004 for
consideration. This was listed for consideration in the meeting of the
Cabinet held on 20.1.2004. However, it was deferred as informed by
the Cabinet Secretariat.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 28 of Chapter-I of the Report)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 3.89)
The Committee note that the Night Shelter Scheme was launched
in 1988-89 to ameliorate the shelter condition of absolutely shelter less
and pavement dwellers in metropolitan cities. Since 1990-91, this
Scheme is being implemented through HUDCO. In the light of various
suggestions from the implementing agencies, the Scheme was modified
in 1992 and again in 2002 in consultation with the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance. The present scheme is now
limited to construction of Night Shelter with community toilets and
baths with Central Subsidy for construction of composite Night shelter
@ 50% of the cost of construction subject to the cost ceiling of
Rs. 20,000 per bed for night shelter. HUDCO or any other organization
bears the balance portion of funds by way of extending of loans. The
Committee also note that the component of independent pay & use
toilets has since been decided to be merged with VAMBAY.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.90)
The Committee informed that as on 9.7.2004, HUDCO has
sanctioned 99 Night Shelters/Pay and Use Toilets schemes. On
completion, these projects would provide 17,599 beds, 17,279 WCs,
2671 baths and 2422 urinals. A subsidy of Rs. 1580.21 lakh has been
released by HUDCO for these schemes apart from loan release of
Rs. 1053.05 lakh. Under Night Shelter Scheme, Government’s financial
assistance is for construction of the Night Shelter building structure/
compound. As per procedure, individual persons are not financially
assisted under the scheme, as the shelters are normally run by local
bodies/organizations. The Committee note that the total outlay in the
10th plan period for this scheme is Rs. 30.97 crore and the Budget
Estimates for the year 2004-2005 is Rs. 4 crore. The Committee are
surprised to learn that the Government subsidy in 2001-2002 amounting
to Rs. 544.6 lakh had been sanctioned but only Rs. 65.10 lakh were
38

39
actually released and HUDCO advanced a loan of Rs. 444.9 lakh but
released no amount in 2001-2002. In their 45th Report the Standing
Committee on Urban and Rural Development had also expressed their
deep displeasure that during the year 2001-2002 no expenditure was
incurred on the Night Shelter Scheme as the scheme was not attractive.
In 2002-2003, the Government subsidy as released for this scheme
amounts to Rs. 345.8 lakh and the HUDCO loan is to the tune of
Rs. 190.66 lakh. Further, the Government subsidy in 2004-2005 is
equivalent to Rs. 195.28 lakh and HUDCO loan as released is
Rs. 64.36 lakh. The Committee are unable to concur that on the one
hand the Ministry had stated that the Night Shelter scheme was
unattractive due to which fund had not been released in 2001-2002
and on the other hand subsidy and loans have been released,
consequently in 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 for the same scheme. In the
circumstances, the Committee are compelled to hold that the Ministry
seems to resort to flimsy pleas for the poor performance of the Night
Shelter Schemes.
Reply of the Government
Efforts have been made to improve the performance under Night
Shelter scheme. The guidelines of Shelter & Sanitation Facilities for
Footpath dwellers were modified during the financial year 2002-03 for
making them more practicable and viable. The scheme was renamed
as “Night Shelter for Urban Shelterless” for construction of composite
Night Shelters with toilets and baths for urban shelterless and the
component of independent pay & use toilets had since been decided
to be merged with VAMBAY.
Since the desired improvement could not be attained the scheme
was again being considered for revision in consultation with the
concerned agencies including State Governments/NGOs to make the
Schemes more attractive.
However, under implementation of the National Common
Minimum Programme (NCMP), the matter for transfer of Centrally
Sponsored Schemes under the jurisdiction of this Ministry was
examined and it was proposed to Planning Commission on 14.9.2004
that Night Shelter Scheme may be transferred to the States.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]

40
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.91)
The Committee note that the guidelines stipulate that ULBs, NGOs,
Charitable Institutions, Public Sector Undertakings etc. be involved in
implementation of the Night Shelter Scheme. The present scheme is
under revision in consultation with the concerned agencies including
State Governments/NGOs to make the Schemes more attractive. This
may lead to an increased role for NGOs. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the modified guidelines for Night Shelter Scheme be
finalized at an early date and the role of NGOs in implementation of
the Scheme be clearly demarcated so as to make the implementation
of the scheme in a smooth and timely manner.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.92)
As regards adequate provision of funds for the scheme, the
Committee desire that realistic assessment of budget estimates be put
forth and HUDCO be advised to release/sanction loans/advances to
cooperative societies/organisations/NGOs etc. by modification of
eligibility conditions etc., if required, so that the facility of Night
Shelters is provided to the destitute and beneficiaries.
Reply of the Government
Efforts have been made to improve the performance under Night
Shelter scheme. The guidelines of Shelter & Sanitation Facilities for
Footpath dwellers were modified during the financial year 2002-03 for
making them more practicable and viable. The scheme was renamed
as “Night Shelter for Urban Shelterless” for construction of composite
Night Shelters with toilets and baths for urban shelterless and the
component of independent pay & use toilets had since been decided
to be merged with VAMBAY.
Since the desired improvement could not be attained the scheme
was again being considered for revision in consultation with the
concerned agencies including State Governments/NGOs to make the
Schemes more attractive.

41
However, under implementation of the National Common
Minimum Programme (NCMP), the matter for transfer of Centrally
Sponsored Schemes under the jurisdiction of this Ministry was
examined and it was proposed to Planning Commission on 14.9.2004
that Night Shelter Scheme may be transferred to the States.
[Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/7/2004-Bt. Dated: December 30, 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
9 March, 2005 Chairman,
18 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban
Development.

APPENDIX-IA
SWARNA JAYANTI SHAHARI ROZGAR YOJANA (SJSRY)
COMMUNITY STRUCTURE-NO. OF TOWNS WHERE HOUSE TO
HOUSE SURVEY CONDUCTED
Sl.No. Name of the No. of towns in No. of towns No. of towns
State/UT. the State whose house-to- yet to
house survey be covered
conducted
12 3 4 5
1. Andhra Pradesh 117 117 —
2. Arunachal Pradesh 17 17 —
3. Assam 83 83 —
4. Bihar 123 20 103
5. Goa 13 13 —
6. Gujarat 149 149 —
7. Haryana 68 68 —
8. Himachal Pradesh 53 53 —
9. Jammu & Kashmir 70 25 45
10. Karnataka 215 215 —
11. Kerala 58 58 —
12. Madhya Pradesh 336 336 —
13. Maharashtra 245 245 —
14. Manipur 28 28 —
15. Meghalaya 6 6 —
16. Mizoram 3 3 —
17. Nagaland 9 8 1
18. Orissa 103 103 —
42

43
12 3 4 5
19. Punjab 133 130 3
20. Rajasthan 183 183 —
21. Sikkim 46 46 —
22. Tamil Nadu 719 719 —
23. Tripura 13 13 —
24. Uttar Pradesh 623 623 —
25. West Bengal 126 115 11
26. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 1 1 —
27. Chandigarh 1 1 —
28. Dadar & Nagar Haveli 2 2 —
29. Daman & Diu 2 2 —
30. Delhi 1 1 —
31. Pondicherry 5 5 —
32. Chhattisgarh 95 75 20
33. Jharkhand 47 — 47
34. Uttaranchal 64 64 —

APPENDIX-IB
SWARNA JAYANTI SHAHARI ROZGAR YOJANA (SJSRY)
COMMUNITY STRUCTURE—NO. OF TOWNS WHERE HOUSE TO
HOUSE SURVEY CONDUCTED
Sl.No. Name of the No. of towns in No. of towns No. of towns
State/UT. the States where house-to- yet to be
house survey covered
conducted
12 3 4 5
1. Andhra Pradesh 117 117 —
2. Arunachal Pradesh 17 17 —
3. Assam 84 83 1
4. Bihar 123 20 103
5. Goa 13 13 —
6. Gujarat 149 149 —
7. Haryana 68 68 —
8. Himachal Pradesh 49 49 —
9. Jammu & Kashmir 70 25 45
10. Karnataka 215 215 —
11. Kerala 58 58 —
12. Madhya Pradesh 336 334 2
13. Maharashtra 245 245 —
14. Manipur 28 28 —
15. Meghalaya 6 6 —
16. Mizoram 3 3 —
17. Nagaland 11 11 —
18. Orissa 103 103 —
44

45
12 3 4 5
19. Punjab 133 130 3
20. Rajasthan 183 183 —
21. Sikkim 46 46 —
22. Tamil Nadu 719 719 —
23. Tripura 13 13 —
24. Uttar Pradesh 623 623 —
25. West Bengal 126 120 6
26. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 1 1 —
27. Chandigarh 1 1 —
28. Dadar & Nagar Haveli 2 2 —
29. Daman & Diu 2 2 —
30. Delhi 1 1 —
31. Pondicherry 5 5 —
32. Chhattisgarh 110 75 35
33. Jharkhand 47 0 47
34. Uttaranchal 63 63 —

APPENDIX-II
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON WEDNESDAY, 2ND MARCH, 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
3. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
4. Shri Amitava Nandy
5. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
6. Shri L. Rajgopal
7. Shri D. Vittal Rao
8. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
9. Shri Sugrib Singh
10. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
11. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
13. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
14. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
15. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
46

47
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
Memorandum No. 2 regarding Action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the First Report of the Committee
on Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2004-2005) of Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation.
After deliberations the Committee adopted the draft Report with slight
modifications.
The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
Report and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX-III
[vide para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 38
II. Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government: 27
Para Nos. 2.8, 2.9, 2.11, 3.6, 3.7, 3.12, 3.34, 3.35,
3.36, 3.37, 3.38, 3.39, 3.40, 3.43, 3.55, 3.56, 3.57,
3.58, 3.59, 3.81, 3.82, 3.98, 3.106, 3.107, 4.7, 4.13
and 5.8.
Percentage to total recommendations (71.07%)
II. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 1
replies:
Para No. 2.10.
Percentage to total recommendations (2.63%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee. 6
Para Nos. 2.12, 3.41, 3.42, 3.70, 3.99 and 3.100.
Percentage to total recommendations (15.78%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited. 4
Para Nos. 3.89, 3.90, 3.91 and 3.92
Percentage to total recommendations (10.52%)
48

C.U.D. No. 04
Price : Rs. 22.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.