CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2007-2008) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in their Twenty First Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation which was presented to Lok Sabha on 27th April, 2007.
2. Out of 22 recommendations, action taken notes in respect of
all the recommendations have been received from the Government which
have been categorized as follows:–
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.16, 2.17, 2.18, 2.19, 2.20, 3.29, 3.30, 3.31, 3.32, 3.47,
3.54, 3.76, 3.77, 4.22
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 3.48, 3.49, 3.75.
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para No. 4.21
(iv) R ecommendations in respect of which final replies of
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 3.26, 3.27, 3.28, 4.23
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes in
Chapter IV and Chapter V of the Report may by furnished to them within
three months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
Viability/Feasibility of Urban Poverty Alleviation Schemes
Recommendation (Para No. 2.20)
5. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The overall trend, in the opinion of the Committee shows that
over the years, schemes and programmes, devised from time
to time to  combat poverty, have not borne the desired results.
Many of the urban poverty alleviation Schemes/Programmes
implemented by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation have been named, renamed, restructured combined
or merged with other Schemes leading to bureaucratic and
administrative confusion and delay in their implementation.
Though the schemes have been targeted at different target
groups and redefined at the State level to suit to local needs
and aspirations, the fact still remains that these schemes have
failed to reduce the level of urban poverty to the desired extent.
This, the Committee feel, is more so due to the lack of a
broader, all inclusive national strategy to tackle urban poverty.
The onus is on the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation, being the nodal Ministry for eradication of Poverty
in the urban areas, to check the rapid growth in the number
of urban poor and also to provide basic services to them so
as to bring a qualitative change in their lives. Keeping this in
perspective, the Committee recommend the Ministry to shift
their focus from mere outlay and take a hard look at outcomes
so as to realize the desired impact of various schemes/
programmes”.
6. In response, the Ministry has replied as under:—
“The considered views of the Hon’ble Committee have been
noted. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
will strive hard to come upto expectations in removing urban
poverty in the country and providing basic amenities to the
urban poor living in slums. The launching of Basic Services
to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated Housing and Slum
Development Programme (IHSDP) under Jawaharlal Nehru
National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) since

3
3rd December 2005 and also the proposed revamping of the
Scheme of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) are
major steps in this direction.”
7. The Committee are not convinced by the stereotyped reply
of the Ministry which merely mentions the launching of BSUP and
IHSDP under JNNURM and revision of SJSRY, which has not been
completed as yet. The Ministry obviously have not gone into the
spirit of the Committee’s recommendations which emanates from
the very fact that despite the presence of poverty alleviation schemes,
there are just a handful of State Governments which have made
it a priority to provide basic services, employment opportunities,
housing etc. to suit the needs of the Urban poor. What is critical
at this juncture is that the implementation agencies should adapt
to the new challenges that the rapid urban growth presents today.
As per Census 2001, the slum population was estimated to be around
61.8 million. In the Committee’s opinion, it is not difficult to assess
the situation in the current year. Therefore, it is of utmost importance
that the Schemes aimed at Urban poor are constantly monitored with
the larger interest of providing outcomes and of achieving the
physical targets. During their on-the-spot study visits also, the
Committee have gathered the impression that the progress of the
Schemes in certain States is not satisfactory. In these States and
Union Territories, the benefits of the Schemes are yet to reach the
targeted beneficiaries due to several factors, such as, lack of
administrative will, apathy among ULBs and implementing agencies
etc. The Committee would therefore like the Ministry of strive hard
to tie all the loose ends and pursue with the defaulting State
Governments, at the highest level, so as to bring a qualitative change
in the lives of urban poor through the expeditious implementation
of the JNNURM.
Early Finalization of Modified Guidelines of Swarna Jayanti ShahariEarly Finalization of Modified Guidelines of Swarna Jayanti ShahariEarly Finalization of Modified Guidelines of Swarna Jayanti ShahariEarly Finalization of Modified Guidelines of Swarna Jayanti ShahariEarly Finalization of Modified Guidelines of Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rojgar YojanaRojgar YojanaRojgar YojanaRojgar YojanaRojgar Yojana
Recommendation (Para No. 3.26)
8. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee observe that there is a substantial delay in
the adoption of the modified guidelines with regard to the

4
Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) scheme. The
Committee in their 6th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-
2006), 9th Report on Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
(SJSRY) presented on 2.8.2005 and 15th Report on Demands
for Grants (2006-2007) had recommended for early finalization
of the revised guidelines of the scheme. However, the Ministry
have informed the Committee that they are still in the process
of modifying the guidelines of the scheme. The Committee take
note of this and recommend that the Ministry should be ready
with the modified guidelines well before the launching of the
11th Five Year Plan. The Committee also sincerely hope that
in-built flexibility in these guidelines are ensured in SJSRY,
as this is the only employment generation scheme for the
urban poor. The Committee desire that the guidelines should
enable the expansion of the scope and coverage of the scheme
keeping in view the specific requirements of the States and
Union Territories.”
9. In response, the Ministry has replied as under:—
“The proposals for the modifications in the Guidelines of the
Scheme of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) are
under active consideration in the Ministry and this will be
placed before the competent authorities for appraisal/approval
very shortly.”
10. The Committee are anguished to note that despite
continuously urging the Ministry for early finalisation of the SJSRY
Scheme in their 6th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006),
9th Report on Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana, 15th Report
on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) and 21st Report on Demands
for Grants (2007-2008), the Ministry has not finalised the Scheme
so far. The Ministry have merely indicated that the guidelines would
be placed before the competent authorities for appraisal/approval
‘very shortly’. The Committee find it very vague as even now no
date has been specified for its finalisation. The Committee would
like to know the specific reasons for the undue delay, particularly
when the Ministry itself considers revamping of SJSRY as one of

5
the major steps to empower the urban poor. The Committee desire
that a specific time frame should be fixed for the finalisation of
the Scheme at least now.
Unspent Balances Under the SJSRY Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 3.29)
11. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee note that as on 19.3.2007, an amount of
Rs. 25.21 crore are still lying with the Ministry for release.
Similarly at the State level, Central funds amounting to
Rs. 260.95 crore are lying with the States/UTs as unutilized.
The Committee are not convinced with the explanation that
this released amount included the funds released even during
the current year as well as previous years, for which utilization
certificates are not due and the actual accumulated unspent
funds under the scheme are less than this. Nonetheless, the
Committee can not but conclude that the implementation of
the scheme in the States have been very sluggish and there
is a laxity on the part of the States and the Implementing
Agencies, as far as the implementation of the scheme is
concerned. The Committee are of the strong view that the
Ministry should strengthen the mechanism for tight monitor-
ing of the scheme at both Central and State levels. The Ministry
may also think of establishing a standing Monitoring
Committee to oversee and monitor the effective implementa-
tion of the scheme.”
12. In response, the Ministry has replied as under:—
“In case of the unspent funds under the Schemes of Swarna
Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), as explained earlier
to the Hon’ble Committee, the unspent balances reflected in
the Reports are calculated by deducting the expenditure
reported by the States/UTs as on date, from the total funds
released under the Schemes as on date. However, as this

6
released amount includes the funds released even during the
previous year, for which UCs are not due, the actual
accumulated unspent funds under the Scheme are quite less
than reflected in the Statements. However the considered views
of the Hon’ble Committee regarding strengthening the
monitoring of the Schemes are noted and the Ministry has
already started pursuing more vigorously with the States/UTs
which are lagging behind in effective implementation of the
Scheme.
Regarding standing Monitoring Committee, a High Level
Monitoring Committee (HLMC), headed by the Secretary
(Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation) in the Ministry and
comprising other stakeholders such as Ministry of Finance,
Reserve Bank of India, and a few States/UT Governments, as
Members already exists. The HLMC meets from time to time
to take stock of the progress of the Scheme. The revamped
Guidelines of the Scheme may also strengthen this mecha-
nism, so as to monitor the Scheme more effectively.”
13. The Committee are satisfied to note that the Ministry has
started pursuing more vigorously with the States/Union Territories
which are lagging behind in the effective implementation of SJSRY.
The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of any
mid-term appraisal/review of the Scheme done at State levels. As
regards monitoring of the Scheme, the Committee note that a High
Level Monitoring Committee already exists. They are of the view
that it should play a proactive role to make the administration of
the Scheme more effective. The Committee have no indication as
to whether the Monitoring Committee meets at regular intervals.
The Committee, therefore, would urge the Ministry to follow the
directives of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management
(FRBM) Act, which states that the expenditure is required to be
monitored by the Ministry on a quarterly basis ensuring appropriate
utilization of allotted funds. The Committee also desire that a
clearer picture of the unspent balances under various Schemes of

7
Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) vis-a-vis the funds
released in a financial year needs to be given by the Ministry in
their budgetary papers for the perusal of the Committee. Regarding
the utilization of funds by the States/UTs for the projects under
SJSRY, the Committee desire that the Ministry must take its role
as facilitator and coordinator in all seriousness so as to encourage
all the States/UTs to furnish their Utilization Certificates (UCs)
within specified time so that the implementation process of the
Scheme does not suffer from setbacks. The Committee reiterate that
the matter be taken up with the Banking Division, Ministry
of Finance so that the Banks cooperate in the implementation of
SJSRY.
Poor Performance under the Two Million–Housing Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 4.21)
14. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee hardly need to stress that shelter, being one
of the basic human needs just next to food and clothing, is
a major growing requirement in urban areas. Due to the rapid
pace of urbanization, increased migration from rural to urban
centres in search of livelihood, mismatch between demand
and supply of sites and services and dwelling units at
affordable cost and the inability of poor urban settlers to
afford houses, a non-sustainable situation has emerged in our
cities which needs urgent attention. The Committee have been
given to understand that the aim of the Government is to
ensure that the basic need of ‘Shelter-to-all’ is fulfilled through
schemes like the Two Million Housing programme has not
been satisfactory. To cite an instance, the number of Dwelling
Units constructed under the scheme for the year 2006-2007
remained as low as 13,796 as against the annual target of
7,00,000. In this regard, they are not convinced with the
justification forwarded by the Ministry that the achievement
under this scheme is low because fulfilment of physical

8
targets under the scheme rests basically with the State
Governments, while HUDCO and other agencies simply
provide the loans and funds. The Committee are of the firm
view that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation, being the nodal ministry in the housing sector,
has the prime responsibility to ensure that the physical targets
set for completion in a year are met by all the State
Governments. It is only this way that the housing and shelter
needs of the urban poor can be fulfilled and the housing
shortage in the country can be brought down to the
minimum.”
15. In response, the Ministry has replied as under:—
“To speed up construction and development activities, the
Government of India has launched additional Two Million
Housing Programme in 1998-99, which was designed specifi-
cally to meet the shelter needs of EWS and LIG categories.
Under the programme, it was envisaged to construct 13 lakh
houses in rural areas and 7 lakh houses in urban areas every
year. Of this target, HUDCO was entrusted with the
responsibility of extending loan assistance of construction of
6 lakh houses in rural areas and 4 lakh houses in urban areas
every year.
Against the target of 36 lacs units upto the end of financial
year 2006-2007. HUDCO has sanctioned 37.06 lacs units in
urban areas and as against the target of 54 lacs unit, has
sanctioned 69.27 lacs dwelling units in rural areas. However,
after taking into consideration the withdrawals/revisions the
cumulative dwelling units sanctioned is 26.39 lacs in urban
areas and 51.56 lacs in rural areas. The reason for withdrawal
in general is implementing State agencies not getting State
Government guarantee.
Further, in urban areas so far 13.82 lacs dwelling units are
reported to be completed and 3.40 lacs dwelling units are in

9
progress and the balance units are yet to be taken up. In rural
areas, 35.23 lacs dwelling units are reported to be completed
and 12.98 lacs dwelling units are in progress and the balance
are yet to be taken up. With regard to the balance unit where
the work has not started yet, HUDCO is pursuing with the
state implementing agencies to complete the work at the
earliest.
16. From the information furnished by the Ministry, the
Committee are pained to note that the Two Million Housing
Programme, launched in 1998-99, which aimed at facilitating
construction of 20 lakh Dwelling Units (DUs) every year, has failed
to achieve its targets so far. The Committee understand that as per
this programme, around 1 crore 80 lakh DUs should have been
constructed in Urban areas for EWS and LIG categories during the
period from 1998-99 to 2006-07. However, as per the figures
furnished, there are hardly 17.22 lakh DUs which have been
completed/are in progress till date. According to the Annual Report
of the Ministry, the success of the Scheme largely depends upon
the cooperation of the agencies of the State Governments responsible
for launching and implementation of various housing schemes, apart
from HUDCO. However, the Committee have been given to
understand that the implementing State agencies not getting State
Govt. Guarantee is one major reason for their withdrawal. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for the State
Governments not giving guarantee for construction of DUs and urge
upon the Government to ensure that the State Government guarantee
is given to the implementing agencies for construction of houses in
a time bound manner.
Further, as per the Annual Report of the Ministry, Housing
Cooperative Societies and private sector will also be encouraged to
participate in Housing activity in a big way, provided a facilitating
environment is created by the State Governments. The Committee
are of the view that housing for the poor sections of the society
is by and large not seen as a very profitable venture by private
players and cooperative societies and thus, the onus lies on the

10
Government to encourage them with tax benefits and other
incentives to make housing available to the economically poor at
nominal rates. Besides, the Committee feel that Government bodies
should seek support from NGOs etc. in planning such houses in
terms of design and facilities so as to construct houses according
to the needs of the poor. The Committee have not been apprised
about efforts, if any, made by the Government to meet their annual
target of 2 million houses for the poor every year. They would like
to be apprised about the same.
Early Adoption of the National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy
Recommendation (Para No. 4.23)
17. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee express serious concern over the fact that
there is considerable delay in the adoption of the draft
National Urban Housing Policy. They have been made to
understand that the draft policy has now been finalized for
the approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs,
though comments from some Ministries are still awaited. The
Committee desire that the Ministries concerned may be
approached to send their comments without further delay so
that the Housing and Habitat Policy can be adopted soon.
Meanwhile, the Committee hope that all the relevant issues
concerning major changes in housing and real estate sectors
as well as habitat and human settlement issues will be taken
care of in the draft policy. The Committee may be apprised
about the progress in this regard within three months of
presentation of this Report.”
18. In response, the Ministry has replied as under:—
“The draft of the National Housing and Habitat Policy, 2007
(NUHHP-2007) has been prepared incorporating inputs from
various sectors and likely to be submitted for approval of
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs shortly.”

11
19. From the reply submitted to them, the Committee note
that the draft of the National Housing and Habitat Policy, 2007
(NUHHP-2007) is likely to be submitted for approval of Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs shortly. The Committee hope that
all the relevant issues, particularly, those concerning social housing
for EWS/LIG categories as well as the role to be played by the public
and private sectors have been clearly defined in the draft policy.
They feel that since two years have already passed since the draft
was circulated to the concerned Ministries/Departments, the matter
may now be followed up further. They expect that the draft must
have been submitted for approval of Cabinet Committee and desire
that it should be vigorously pursued so that the National Housing
and Habitat Policy, 2007 could be finalized for implementation by
the Government.

12
CHAPCHAPCHAPCHAPCHAPTER IITER IITER IITER IITER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Budgetary Projection to be made more realistic
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
The Committee observe from the details made available to them that
there have been large variations with regard to BE, RE and Actual in the
Budgetary provisions of the Ministry, particularly under the Plan Head.
While the Budgetary Estimates have remained on the higher side except
during 2003-2004, the allocation at the revised estimates stage and the
actual expenditure of the Ministry has gone away. To cite an instance,
through the BE under Plan Head in 2004-2005 was Rs. 830 crore as
against Rs. 625 crore in 2003-2004, the RE was reduced to Rs. 650 crore
in 2004-2005. However the actuals were Rs. 621.23 crore only in 2004-
2005 as against Rs. 641.85 crore in 2003-2004. The Committee, thus, feel
that the Ministry have not been able to make an accurate estimate of
requirement of funds under the various heads. In this connection, the
Committee gather an impression that their earlier recommendations have
not yielded the desired results as huge budgetary variations continue to
exist in the Budget Estimates of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Ministry to take due care to make the budgetary exercise
more sincere. They desire that the budgetary estimation should be
accurate and as close to reality as possible and variations should be
avoided to the maximum possible extent at the BE stage itself.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hononrable Committee have been noted for
compliance.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
12

13
Under-utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 2.17)
From the Expenditure details as furnished by the Ministry, the
Committee are dissatisfied to note there has been gross underutilization
of funds from the year 2000-2001 to 2006-07, with a lone exception of
the Financial Year 2003-2004. While there is continuous shortfall in the
utilization of funds, the percentage ranging between 70 to 75%, the
utilization of funds by the Ministry for the year 2006-2007 stood at mere
49%, i.e. Rs. 215.01 crore out of Rs. 421.67 crore. From this, the Committee
are inclined to conclude that the delivery mechanism of the Ministry
needs an urgent attention. What is more distressing to note is that while
on the one hand the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
has advocated the need for larger allocation of funds for successful
implementation of various schemes, their performance shows that they
have not been able to utilize, whatever amount was allocated to them
completely. The Committee were made to understand that there had been
some delay in sanction though the Ministry refrained from specifying
reasons for the same. Therefore, the Committee, while taking a serious
note of this gross underutilization of funds, urge the Ministry to make
sincere efforts to optimally utilise the funds allocated to them. Proper
homework, timely monitoring, timely action and initiatives need to be
taken by the Government during the launching and implementation of
any scheme.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for
compliance. The Ministry has drawn up programmes in consultation
with all the stakeholders to optimally utilize the funds allocated to
the Ministry. Regular consultation with the State/UT Governments/
Implementing Agencies and other stakeholders are organized through
periodical meetings/conferences, workshops at Central/Regional
levels.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]

14
Delay in furnishing Utilisation Certificates
Recommendation (Para No. 2.18)
In this connection, the Committee deplore the attitude of various
State Governments and the implementing agencies for not furnishing the
Utilisation Certificates as the figure shows that a number of UCs
involving an expenditure of Rs. 325.72 crore are still outstanding as on
31.12.2006 in respect of the grants released upto March, 2005. The
Committee urge the Ministry to sensitize the State Governments on the
implications of their lackadaisical approach on the overall efforts taken
by both the States and Central Governments with regard to achieving
targets set for alleviation of urban poverty.
Reply of the Government
The considered views of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted
for compliance. The Ministry is consistently pursuing with the State/UT
Governments for utilizing the unspent funds available with them and
submit the Utilization Certificates as stipulated. Regular Meetings and
Conferences/Workshops are organised by the Ministry at Central/
Regional levels with all stakeholders to remove the bottlenecks in the
effective implementation of the Schemes.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Surrender of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 2.19)
The Committee note that though there was surrender of funds to
the tune of Rs.561.87 crore till the year 2005-2006, there has been no
surrender of funds by the Ministry in the year 2006-2007. From the reason
cited by the Ministry, they conclude that by and large the contributing
reasons for the surrender of funds are non-start or low performance of
various schemes like VAMBAY and ILCS. As the trend seems to have
reversed this year, the Committee sincerely hope that it will continue in
the coming years as well so as to avoid surrendering of funds. The

15
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to make extra efforts for
the timely materialization of proposals under the Schemes/Projects and
meet the targets, which are set at the time of making budgetary
provisions.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted.
Concerted efforts are always made by the Ministry for timely completion
of the schemes and to meet the targets set at the time of making budgetary
provisions.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Viability/Feasibility of Urban Poverty Alleviation Schemes
Recommendation (Para No. 2.20)
The overall trend, in the opinion of the Committee shows that over
the years, schemes and programmes, devised from time to time to  combat
poverty, have not borne the desired results. Many of the urban poverty
alleviation Schemes/Programmes implemented by the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation have been named, renamed,
restructured combined or merged with other Schemes leading to
bureaucratic and administrative confusion and delay in their implemen-
tation. Though the schemes have been targeted at different target groups
and redefined at the State level to suit to local needs and aspirations,
the fact that still remains that these schemes have failed to reduce the
level of urban poverty to the desired extent. This, the Committee feel, is
more so due to the lack of a broader, all inclusive national strategy to
tackle urban poverty. The onus is on the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation, being the nodal Ministry for eradication of Poverty
in the urban areas, to check the rapid growth in the number of urban
poor and also to provide basic services to them so as to bring a qualitative
change in their lives. Keeping this in perspective, the Committee
recommend the Ministry to shift their focus from mere outlays and take
a hard look at outcomes so as to realize the desired impact of various
schemes/programmes.

16
Reply of the Government
The considered views of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation will strive hard
to come upto expectations in removing urban poverty in the country and
providing basic amenities to the urban poor living in slums. The
launching of Basic Services to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated
Housing and Slum Development Programme (IHSDP) under Jawaharlal
Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) since
3rd December 2005 and also the proposed revamping of the Scheme of
Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) are major steps in this
direction.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Unspent Balances Under the SJSRY Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 3.29)
The Committee note that as on 19.3.2007, an amount of Rs. 25.21
crore are still lying with the Ministry for release. Similarly at the State
level, Central funds amounting to Rs. 260.95 crore are lying with the
States/UTs as unutilized. The Committee are not convinced with the
explanation that this released amount included the funds released even
during the current year as well as previous years, for which utilization
certificates are not due and the actual accumulated unspent funds under
the scheme are less than this. Nonetheless, the Committee can not but
conclude that the implementation of the scheme in the States have been
very sluggish and there is a laxity on the part of the States and the
Implementing Agencies, as far as the implementation of the scheme is
concerned. The Committee are of the strong view that the Ministry should
strengthen the mechanism for tight monitoring of the scheme at both
Central and State levels. The Ministry may also think of establishing a
standing Monitoring Committee to oversee and monitor the effective
implementation of the scheme.

17
Reply of the Government
In case of the unspent funds under the Schemes of Swarna Jayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), as explained earlier to the Hon’ble
Committee, the unspent balances reflected in the Reports are calculated
by deducting the expenditure reported by the States/UTs as on date, from
the total funds released under the Schemes as on date. However, as this
released amount includes the funds released even during the previous
year, for which UCs are not due, the actual accumulated unspent funds
under the Scheme are quite less than reflected in the Statements. However
the considered views of the Hon’ble Committee regarding strengthening
the monitoring of the Schemes are noted and the Ministry has already
started pursuing more vigorously with the States/UTs which are lagging
behind in effective implementation of the Scheme.
Regarding standing Monitoring Committee, a High Level Monitor-
ing Committee (HLMC), headed by the Secretary (Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation) in the Ministry and comprising other stakeholders
such as Ministry of Finance, Reserve Bank of India, and a few States/
UT Governments, as Members already exists. The HLMC meets from time
to time to take stock of the progress of the Scheme. The revamped
Guidelines of the Scheme may also strengthen this mechanism, so as to
monitor the Scheme more effectively.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Awareness amongst the Urban Poor about the Benefits of the Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 3.30)
The Committee note that one of the reasons for abysmal
performance of the scheme in the urban are as is total lack of awareness
amongst the urban poor about the benefits of the scheme. Therefore, the

18
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should give wide
publicity to the schemes amongst the urban poor. At the State level also,
adequate publicity should be given to the target groups in the vernacular
language so as to reach large sections of the people. Awareness
campaign should also be organized at Municipal/ward level through
Urban Local Bodies from time to time so that there are more takers for
the scheme.
Reply of the Government
The considered views of Hon’ble Committee have been noted. A
publicity campaign for the Scheme of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar
Yojana (SJSRY) was carried out for a short period during March–April,
2007 through Directorate of Audio-Visual Publicity (DAVP) in the audio-
visual media and outdoor publicity through bus back panel, hoardings,
wall paintings etc. However, as the scheme of Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) is likely to be revamped shortly, it is proposed
to launch a comprehensive campaign, once the revised guidelines of the
Scheme come into force.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Recovery of Funds alongwith Interest from States/UTs and other
Implementing Agencies
Recommendation (Para No. 3.31)
On the issue of feasibility of imposing penal interest on the
defaulting States/UTs and Implementing Agencies, the Committee note
that there is no provision for imposing a penal interest on the defaulting
States/UTs/Implementing Agencies for not utilizing the funds. However,
as per the instructions of the Government, where there are pending UCs,
the subsequent instalments of the grants would not be released unless
UCs are furnished by them and as per the General Financial Rules
(GFR-2005), the Implementing Agencies have to return the funds along
with interest if they fail to utilize the funds in accordance with the

19
guidelines of the scheme. While the Committee agree with the Ministry’s
submission that the idea of imposing penal interest on States/UTs for
not submitting the UCs in time may not be feasible, they are at the same
time of the view that as per this GFR instruction, the Ministry should
closely and actively monitor the flow of funds and instantly try to recover
the unutilized amount alongwith interest due so as to ensure that the
States and Implementing Agencies utilize the disbursed money. This will
not only ensure a stringent monitoring mechanism but also help in
implementation of the scheme in a better way. The Committee may be
apprised of the progress in this regard within six months of submission
of this report.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation closely
monitors the implementation of the Scheme by the States/UTs through
Quarterly Progress reports as well as Review Meeting held time
to time. The recovery of the released amount from the States/UTs
alongwith interest have to be done only when the funds are utilised in
violation of the Scheme Guidelines. No such instance has so far
come to the notice of the Ministry, which require recovery of the released
funds.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Needs for Exclusive, Dedicated and Committed Staff for Successful
Implementation of SJSRY Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 3.32)
The Committee find that there is an urgent need to have an exclusive
cadre of officers/staff engaged for implementation of the urban poverty
alleviation schemes/programmes so that these schemes get proper
attention of the State Government/UTs/Urban Local Bodies. In this
connection, they have been given to understand that at present, most of
the staff working in the State Urban Development Agencies and District

20
Urban Development Agencies are on deputation/contract/extension basis
and hence there is a lack of commitment towards the implementation
of scheme. The Committee are in full agreement with the submission of
the Ministry and recommend that the matter of appointing dedicated
manpower may be taken up and discussed at the ministerial level. The
Committee feel that the feasibility of utilizing the services of unemployed
youth from the deprived section of society could also be explored for this
purpose. In the meantime, they desire that available staff may be
efficiently utilized and their allocation of duty should be done in
such a way that at least some section of existing staff are exclusively
put in charge of overseeing the successful implementation of the SJSRY
scheme.
Reply of the Government
The considered views of Hon’ble Committee have been noted. There
is an urgent need to have an exclusive cadre of officers/staff engaged
for implementation of the urban poverty alleviation schemes/programmes
so that these schemes get proper attention of the State Governments/
Urban Local Bodies. As the Administrative and Other Expenses (A&OE)
are limited to 5% of the allocation, which is a very meagre amount to
meet the salary of staff, State Governments face difficulty in having
dedicated manpower support for the scheme. Hence suitable provisions
have to be made for meeting the A&OE expenditure of such separate
cadre of officials dedicated for the implementation of urban poverty
alleviation programmes including SJSRY. The proposed modification of
the SJSRY Guidelines will consider this aspect also. However, there is
a need to adopt a convergence approach for this and all urban poverty
alleviation schemes/programmes should be implemented by a separate
Urban Poverty Alleviation (UPA) Cell at the ULB level. The Administrative
expenditure for this Cell may be met from the pool of A&OE funds from
all the urban poverty alleviation schemes being implemented by the UPA
Cell.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]

21
Needs for review of the integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme in
the Light of its poor performance in many States
Recommendation (Para No. 3.47)
The Committee note that in order to eliminate the abhorring practice
of physically earring night soil, the Centrally sponsored scheme for ILCS
was initiated way back in 1987. The Committee further observe that the
Employment of manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines
(Prohibition) Act, 1993 was enacted by the Parliament in the year 1994,
which provides that no person shall engage in or be employed for
manually carrying night soil nor maintain a dry latrine. However, the
Committee are deeply pained to note that even after a lapse of more than
a decade since the Act was passed, the most shameful, inhuman and
degrading practice of manual handling of night soil is still prevalent in
many parts of the country. The Committee have been informed that as
on date, out of 28 States, only 13 States and 7 Union territories have
declared themselves scavenger free while in the rest of the States, the
practice still persists. Even the Secretary was candid enough to admit this
fact during the evidence. In this scenario, the Committee regret to note
that the scope and impact of the scheme has not been able so far to
abolish this practice despite a twenty-year run. In many States, the
Scheme has failed to evoke the requisite enthusiasm which calls for a
need to identify the hurdles and bottlenecks in the implementation of
the scheme. Although the Ministry, as per the modifications suggested
in the ILCS Scheme, has stated that whole country is to be declared
scavenger free by 31.3.2007, the Committee have genuine doubts about
actual attainment of this goal. In the light of this, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry should revise and implement the guidelines
of the scheme urgently by examining the existing subsidy scheme in order
to make it more feasible. They desire that the Ministry should set
quarterly targets for State Governments to convert dry latrines into wet
ones and monitor it closely. The information, education and communi-
cation component of the scheme should also be strengthened by
undertaking more motivation campaigns through mass-media for cleaner
sanitary practices among the general public.

22
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is formulating revised guidelines of Integrated Low
Cost Sanitation Scheme in which aspects of feasibility as well as
information, education and communication have been taken care of and
circulated to the concerned Ministries in February, 2007 for comments.
According to the advice of the Planning Commission, an evaluation study
and impact assessment of ILCS Scheme in urban areas has been
entrusted to Agricultural Finance Corporation Ltd. The Corporation has
deputed its Study Team to selected cities in various States and the report
is likely to be submitted shortly. Secretary, HUPA has also convened a
meeting of State Urban Development Secretaries to ensure proper
implementation of the ILCS Scheme. The scheme shall be placed before
the Cabinet for approval, shortly.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Launching of ISSHU in the 11th Five Year Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 3.54)
The Committee are informed that a new scheme Interest Subsidy
Scheme for Housing for the Urban Poor has been introduced from this
financial year with an allocation of Rs. 30.00 crore in the 2007-2008
budget of the Ministry. Under the scheme, interest subsidy of 5% per
annum for a period of five years only will be provided to the commercial
lenders for lending to EWS and LIG segments of the people in the urban
areas. The target groups under the scheme are EWS and LIG and interest
subsidy is expected to leverage market funds to flow to housing the poor.
The Committee feel that while the efforts of the Ministry for providing
housing facility to urban poor through the interest subsidy is laudable,
the actual impact of the scheme in meeting the housing need of the urban
poor will be seen only after it is actually implemented. The Committee
recommend that while every effort should be made to finalise the
intricacies of the scheme at the earliest and implement it in an efficient
manner, considerable caution is required to ensure that no advantage of

23
the scheme is taken by the landmafia and other vested interests and the
actual benefits accrue to the intended sections of the society.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviations is in the
process to provide interest rate subsidy to Economically Weaker Sections/
Low Income Group category of the urban area. Various parameters have
been worked out and the Draft Memorandum for the Expenditure
Finance Committee is under finalization before its circulation to all
Ministries/Departments concerned. View points of Housing and Urban
Development Corporation has also been obtained. The scheme will have
a well defined implementation mechanism which apart from ensuring
timely implementation will also check its misuse by any quarter.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Increase in allocation under JNNURM
Recommendation (Para No. 3.76)
The Committee are pained to note that influx of rural population
to urban areas has led to a sharp rise in urban slums and unauthorized
settlements with virtually no access to civic amenities and other utilities.
To cope with the growing urban population and provide them with basic
services, the Ministry needs a corresponding increase in the Plan
allocation so that the delivery of civic amenities and provision of utilities
for the urban poor could be ensured. Therefore, the Committee
recommend that the allocation under this Head needs a re-look. They
also are of the view that for smooth and speedy disbursement of funds
under this scheme, the budgetary allocation for BSUP and IHSDP need
to be shifted from the Department of Expenditure to the Ministry of
HUPA.
Reply of the Government
Follow up action for converting the BSUP and IHSDP programmes
into a Centrally Sponsored Programme and for enhancement of allocation

24
would be taken by pursuing with Planning Commission, Ministry of
Finance etc.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Even disbursement of funds throughout the year in order to avoid
March rush and under utilization
Recommendation (Para No. 3.77)
The Committee find that under the Integrated Housing and Slum
Development Programme, a sum of Rs. 139.14 crore was released and
that too in the month of February 2007. Though the Committee have time
and again advised the Ministry for an even disbursement of funds under
the JNNURM in order to avoid any March rush, the Committee find that
under the IHSDP there was no release of fund from April, 2006 to January
2007 and suddenly in the month of February 2007, a total of Rs. 139.14
crore was released at one go. In this regard, the Committee recall that
even the Ministry of Finance has formulated a stipulation advising the
Ministries against March rush. They, therefore, feel that release of funds
of IHSDP in February, 2007 is highly uncalled for. The Committee take
a serious note of this undesirable trend and counsel the Ministry to avoid
such a disproportionate release of fund, which adversely affects the
overall performance of the Scheme.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry would keep in mind the observations of the Committee
in the overall performance of the Scheme.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Public-private partnership in the Housing Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)
The Committee note that as the need for safe, durable and
affordable housing is acute in India, the housing industry has become

25
a vitally important economic engine for growth and development. The
current housing shortage in the country is estimated to be around 24.07
million. The find requirement in the housing sector is very large, which
cannot be met solely with the limited public resources, even if it is
increased substantially. This requires an encouragement to the private
sector to play an important role in the housing scenario. Therefore, the
Committee desire that the Ministry should encourage public-private
partnership in addressing the issue of housing shortage particularly for
the poor and the deprived sections of the society.
Reply of the Government
The New Urban Housing and Habitat Policy-2007 (NUHHP-2007)
provides for encouragement of Public-Private Partnership (PPP) for
various purposes like land assembling and development, provision of
infrastructure, undertaking integrated Housing Projects with provision of
at least 10-15% of the land and 20-25% of the houses for economically
weaker sections and lower income groups, in the matter of slum
rehabilitation, etc.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]

26
CHCHCHCHCHAPTER IIIAPTER IIIAPTER IIIAPTER IIIAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Introduction of the Concept of Community Toilets
Recommendation (Para No. 3.48)
The Committee note that community toilets are the best tools to
promote better sanitation practices among the public residing in the slum
areas and unauthorised clusters. Community toilets are especially
important for slums where it is not possible to construct individual
household toilets due to unavailability of space and other facilities. The
Committee are happy to note that the Ministry are exploring the
possibility of introducing community toilets under ILCS Scheme. The
Committee desire that, in addition, the Ministry may also examine the
concept of ‘Eco-toilets’ as introduced in Karnataka which reportedly has
proved to be quite successful. The Committee recommend the Ministry
to despatch an expert team to the State of Karnataka to see the actual
working of this concept and explore the feasibility of extending the same
to other areas.
Reply of the Government
HUDCO has launched a scheme for Implementation of Community
Toilets and Sanitation (Sanjha Swachhata Abhiyan). The programme is
for funding of construction of Community Toilets and Sanitation facilities
for the benefit to floating population and the public in general was
introduced by HUDCO in the month of November, 2004. Subsequently
the guidelines was revised in ‘July 2005’ and ‘December 2005’ wherein
26

27
HUDCO loan component has been added to facilitate the agencies.
The scheme is for construction of community toilets in Schools/
Institutes/Hospitals/busy market places/Bus stands/Railway Stations/
slums etc.
HUDCO’s grant assistance will be available to State Govt.
nominated agencies, Corporate Sector agencies, NGOs, CBOs, Charitable
Trusts/Institutions.
– The scheme envisages the ceiling cost of WC/Bath at
Rs. 40,000/- each (excluding the cost of land). HUDCO would
make available a maximum of Rs. 20,000/- (50%) as subsidy
amount and the matching share Rs. 20,000/- would be borne
by the implementing agency from its own sources, or
from MPLAD/MLA funds etc. HUDCO’s funds would be
released only after agency invests its share of Rs. 20,000/- in
the project.
– In case the gross cost per WC/Bath exceeds Rs. 40,000/-, then
HUDCO can finance the balance project cost as loan to the
agency depending upon financial viability of the project, and
this loan would be extended under “Action Plan” schemes
terms of financing and agency will be required to pay
application fee and other applicable charges as per  HUDCO’s
prevailing financing pattern.
So far 25 schemes proposal (including 2 in-principal proposals)
have been sanctioned for HUDCO Grant for Rs. 916.00 lacs and
loan in 6 schemes for Rs. 66.67 lacs for construction of 4744 WC/
Bath. Till date release of Rs. 24.33 lacs of HUDCO loan and Rs. 147.60
lacs as HUDCO Grant have been released to the implementing
agencies.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]

28
Need to Reduce the Disparity in the Fund Disbursement under the
ILCS Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 3.49)
The Committee find that the implementation of Integrated Low Cost
Sanitation (ILCS) scheme for eradication of manual scavenging has been
painfully slow and not many States are keen to prepare viable plans to
avail the benefits under the scheme. The Committee are quite perturbed
to note that out of the budgetary allocation of Rs. 30 crore earmarked
for 2006-2007, only one state i.e. Uttar Pradesh came up with projects
under this scheme and almost the entire amount was disbursed to only
that state. This a clear case of failure on the part of the Ministry to impress
upon the other State Governments to avail the benefits under the scheme.
The Committee also find that enough feedback is not forthcoming from
the States in order to assess the magnitude and extent of the problem.
The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should motivate
and guide the States to come up with more viable projects under the
scheme. As the modification of the scheme is already underway, the
Committee hope that it would be able to attract more proposals from
those State Governments where the practices of manual scavenging still
exists.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has all along been impressing upon the States to send
their proposals on the projects to be undertaken under the ILCS scheme
in their States through demi-official references at Secretary’s level as also
through meetings with the State representatives. Since the proposals was
received only from the State of Uttar Pradesh and they had sent 100%
utilization certificates, therefore, funds were released to the State of U.P.
The Ministry while formulating the revised guidelines of the ILCS Scheme
have attempted to remove all the bottlenecks in the successful
implementation of the scheme by incorporating the suggestion from the
State Governments, Planning Commission and other stakeholders of the
scheme to make it more attractive. The draft cabinet note on the revised

29
guidelines is under finalization. Once the revised guidelines of ILCS
Scheme are approved by the Cabinet and are put into operation, the States
having manual scavenging problem would certainly come forward to
avail the central funds provided under the modified ILCS Scheme to
make the country scavenger free.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Integrated Slum Development to be accorded top priority
Recommendation (Para No. 3.75)
The Committee note that the availability of basic civic amenities/
service in the urban areas are grossly insufficient in view of the rapid
urbanization in the country. Majority of the city population do not have
access to basic services such as clean drinking water supply, sewerage,
drainage network, garbage disposal facilities etc. Besides, in the absence
of proper housing and human settlements, the urban poor are compelled
to live in dilapidated and impoverished slums and unauthorized clusters.
Therefore, it is high time that slum development is made a priority in
the Government’s agenda. In this context, the Committee would like to
recall that the national Common Minimum Programme of the
Government has also sought to give utmost importance to providing basic
services to urban poor. The Committee further note that to have an
integrated approach to ameliorate the conditions of the urban dwellers,
the only flagship scheme of JNNURM was launched in December, 2005.
However, the Committee are constrained to note that even through the
scheme is in a mission mode, many States are yet to come up with viable
projects under it. From the figures, they note that as many as 18 States
are lagging behind, as they are not in a position to utilize the funds
allocated under JNNURM. Even the Secretary, HUPA, has admitted
during the oral evidence that many States are not sending any schemes
under JNNURM and even those CDPs which have been submitted by
certain States also are found to be non-viable. Keeping this in view, the
Committee desire that regular capacity building programmes need to be

30
conducted vigorously at the State and Union Territory levels for
preparation of City Development Plans and that integrated development
of urban slums should be given topmost priority in preparation of CDPs.
The ULBs as well as the nodal agencies at the State Level should be
trained to prepare acceptable CDPs so that more States could avail of
the benefits of the scheme during the remaining five years of its seven
year duration. Further, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need
to have a national perspective on the issues concerning slum development
throughout the country, which can have a universal acceptance. This, the
Committee believe, would be very helpful in giving the requisite thrust
to the schemes/programmes like those under JNNURM for the benefit
of urban poor.
Reply of the Government
1. Awareness workshops on BSUP have been orgaized at
Kolkata, Bengalooru, Mumbai Ahmedabad, Jaipur and
Guwahati (for all North Eastern States).
2. Hands-outs on-workshops on DPR preparation and appraisal
for BSUP and IHSDP have been organized at Kolkata,
Bengalooru, Jaipur, Pune, Raipur, Chennai, Chandigarh,
Bhubaneshwar, Patna, Lucknow, Guwahati, Shillong (for all
North Eastern States), Amritsar and Shimla. The last workshop
was held on 18th-19th June-2007.
3. More such workshops are planned specifically to cover States
that are lagging behind.
4. Simplified Guidelines for developing DPRs, Capacity Building
Modules and conduct of training programmes have been
issued.
5. “National Consultation on Affordable Housing for All” was
organised on 1-2 June, 2007 in Mumbai.
6. Ongoing Advisory and Analytical Assistance instituted for
project preparation by Urban Local Bodies through HUDCO
and BMTPC.

31
7. The reforms to be undertaken and the projects to be
implemented under the JNNURM are dependent upon the
capacity of the ULBs. The Ministry has prepared an action
plan for capacity building at the State and Urban Local Bodies
level and for preparing City/State/Slum/Urban Poverty profile
for which the State Governments are given financial assis-
tance. The Ministry is also, separately, working on a Slum
policy.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]

32
CHAPTCHAPTCHAPTCHAPTCHAPTER IVER IVER IVER IVER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE
Poor Performance under the Two Million–Housing Programme.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.21)
The Committee hardly need to stress that shelter, being one of the
basic human needs just next to food and clothing, is a major growing
requirement in urban areas. Due to the rapid pace of urbanization,
increased migration from rural to urban centres in search of livelihood,
mismatch between demand and supply of sites and services and
dwelling units at affordable cost and the inability of poor urban settlers
to afford houses, a non-sustainable situation has emerged in our cities
which needs urgent attention. The Committee have been given to
understand that the aim of the Government is to ensure that the basic
need of ‘Shelter-to-all’ is fulfilled through schemes like the Two Million
Housing programme has not been satisfactory. To cite an instance, the
number of Dwelling Units constructed under the scheme for the year
2006-2007 remained as low as 13,796 as against the annual target of
7,00,000. In this regard, they are not convinced with the justification
forwarded by the Ministry that the achievement under this scheme is low
because fulfillment of physical targets under the scheme rests basically
with the State Governments, while HUDCO and other agencies simply
provide the loans and funds. The Committee are of the firm view that
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, being the nodal
Ministry in the housing sector, has the prime responsibility to ensure that
the physical targets set for completion in a year are met by all the State
Governments. It is only this way that the housing and shelter needs of
the urban poor can be fulfilled and the housing shortage in the country
can be brought down to the minimum.
32

33
Reply of the Government
To speed up construction and development activities, the Govern-
ment of India had launched additional Two Million Housing Programme
in 1998-99, which was designed specifically to meet the shelter needs of
EWS and LIG categories. Under the programme, it was envisaged to
construct 13 lakh houses in rural areas and 7 lakh houses in urban areas
every year. Of this target, HUDCO was entrusted with the responsibility
of extending loan assistance of construction of 6 lakh houses in rural
areas and 4 lakh houses in urban areas every year.
Against the target of 36 lacs units upto the end of financial year
2006-2007. HUDCO has sanctioned 37.06 lacs units in urban areas and
as against the target of 54 lacs unit has sanctioned 69.27 lacs dwelling
units in rural areas. However, after taking into consideration the
withdrawals/revisions the cumulative dwelling units sanctioned is
26.39 lacs in urban areas and 51.56 lacs in rural areas. The reason for
withdrawal in general is implementing state agencies not getting State
Government guarantee.
Further, in urban areas so far 13.82 lacs dwelling units are reported
to be completed and 3.40 lacs dwelling units are in progress and the
balance untis are yet to be taken up. In rural areas, 35.23 lacs dwelling
units are reported to be completed and 12.98 lacs dwelling units are in
progress and the balance are yet to be taken up. With regard to the
balance unit where the work has not started yet, HUDCO is pursuing
with the state implementing agencies to complete the work at the earliest.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)

34
34
CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER VVVVV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Early Finalization of Modified Guidelines of Swarna Jayanti ShahariEarly Finalization of Modified Guidelines of Swarna Jayanti ShahariEarly Finalization of Modified Guidelines of Swarna Jayanti ShahariEarly Finalization of Modified Guidelines of Swarna Jayanti ShahariEarly Finalization of Modified Guidelines of Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rojgar YojanaRojgar YojanaRojgar YojanaRojgar YojanaRojgar Yojana
Recommendation (Para No. 3.26)
The Committee observe that there is a substantial delay in the
adoption of the modified guidelines with regard to the Swarna Jayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) scheme. The Committee in their
6th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006), 9th Report on Swarna
Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) presented on 2.8.2005 and 15th
Report on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) had recommended for early
finalization of the revised guidelines of the scheme. However, the
Ministry have informed the Committee that they are still in the process
of modifying the guidelines of the scheme. The Committee take note of
this and recommend that the Ministry should be ready with the modified
guidelines well before the launching of the 11th Five Year Plan. The
Committee also sincerely hope that in-built flexibility in these guidelines
are ensured in SJSRY, as this is the only employment generation
scheme for the urban poor. The Committee desire that the guidelines
should enable the expansion of the scope and coverage of the scheme
keeping in view the specific requirements of the States and Union
Territories.”
Reply of the Government
The proposals for the modifications in the Guidelines of the Scheme
of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) are under active

35
consideration in the Ministry and this will be placed before the competent
authorities for appraisal/approval very shortly.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Skill Upgradation for the urban poor
Recommendation (Para No. 3.27)
The Committee further note that Micro-enterprises which constitute
an important component of this programme need timely and adequate
credit. However, inadequate flow of credit from Banks has been noticed
as a major bottle-neck. The Committee are of the view that skill formation
and up-gradation is important to convince the Banks about the credit
worthiness on the loanees. Therefore, attention needs to be paid to skill
development and selection of vocational training establishing backward
and forward linkages.
Reply of the Government
In the proposed modifications of the Guidelines of the Scheme of
Swarna Jayanti Shahri Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), more focus is to be
provided on skill formation among the urban poor, so as to improve their
potential for the self-employment, as well as, salaried employment.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Wage Employment Component of the SJSRY
Recommendation (Para No. 3.28)
The Committee have been informed that out of the two
components of the SJSRY, the self-employment component is

36
comparatively performing better while the wage employment
component is not very successful in the States. As such, the Ministry
have made a tentative plan and identified certain elements in the scheme
for a new revision and as a part of this revision exercise, the Ministry
plans to do away with the wage employment component. The Committee
desire the early finalisation of the plan scheme so that it can be
implemented right from the very beginning of the Eleventh Five Year
Plan.
Reply of the Government
The proposals for the modifications in the Guidelines of the Scheme
of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) are under active
consideration in the Ministry and this will be placed before the competent
authorities for appraisal/approval very shortly.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Early Adoption of the National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy
Recommendation (Para No. 4.23)
The Committee express serious concern over the fact that there is
considerable delay in the adoption of the draft National Urban Housing
Policy. They have been made to understand that the draft policy has now
been finalized for the approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs, though comments from some Ministries are still awaited. The
Committee desire that the Ministries concerned may be approached to
send their comments without further delay so that the Housing and
Habitat Policy can be adopted soon. Meanwhile, the Committee hope that
all the relevant issues concerning major changes in housing and real
estate sectors as well as habitat and human settlement issues will be
taken care of in the draft policy. The Committee may be apprised about
the progress in this regard within three months of presentation of this
Report.

37
 N EW DELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
21 November , 2007 Chairman,
30 Kartika , 1929  (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
Reply of the Government
The draft of the National Housing and Habitat Policy, 2007
(NUHHP-2007) has been prepared incorporating inputs from various
sectors and likely to be submitted for approval of Cabinet Committee
on Economic Affairs shortly.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No.
H-11013/2/2007-Bt.(HUPA) dated 11th July, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)

38
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2007-08)
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON
TUESDAY, 20TH NOVEMBER, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
13. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
04. Shri L. Rajagopal
 5. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
16. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Rajya Sabha
17. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
18. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
19. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
10. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
11. Shri Manohar Joshi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Saxena — D irector
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Harchain — Deputy Secretary-II
38

39
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members
to the sitting of the Committee. The Committee took up for consideration
the draft report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (14th Lok Sabha)
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of
Urban Development. The Committee adopted the draft action taken report
with slight modifications.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration another draft
report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twenty First Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of Housing & Urban
Poverty Alleviation. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the
draft action taken report with some modifications.
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise both
the Reports and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIRST
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN
DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
Total
I. Total number of Recommendations 22
II. Recommendations which have been accepted 14
by the Government : Para Nos. 2.16, 2.17, 2.18,
2.19, 2.20,  3.29, 3.30, 3.31, 3.32, 3.47, 3.54, 3.76,
3.77 and 4.22
Percentage of total recommendations (63.64%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not 3
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies :
Para Nos. 3.48, 3.49, 3.75.
Percentage of total recommendations (13.64%)
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies 1
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee : Para No. 4.21.
Percentage of total recommendations (4.6%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final 4
Replies of Government a re still awaited :
Para Nos. 3.26, 3.27, 3.28, 4.23.
Percentage of total recommendations (18.18%)
40

TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2007-08)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Twenty-First Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.11.2007
Presented in Rajya Sabha on 22.11.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka)

C.U.D. No. 27C.U.D. No. 27C.U.D. No. 27C.U.D. No. 27C.U.D. No. 27
Price : Rs. 47.00
© 2007 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by The Indian
Press, Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
12
26
32
34
38
40
C
OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................................................
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................
CHAPTER I Report..............................................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government..................................................................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply...............
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee....
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government are still awaited................................................
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee held on
20.11.2007.....................................................................................
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on
the recommendations contained in the Twenty-First
Report of the Committee  (14th Lok Sabha)..................
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
5. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
6. Shri Anant Gudhe
7. Shri Pushp Jain
8. Shri Kailash Joshi
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar
10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
12. Shri A.K. Moorthy
13. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
14. Shri L. Rajagopal
15. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Papu Yadav
16. Shri D. Vittal Rao
17. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
18. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
19. Shri Jagdish Tytler
20. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
21. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
(iii)

(iv)
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
27. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
28. Shri Penumalli Madhu
29. Shri Mukul Roy
30. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
31. Shri Manohar Joshi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Saxena — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Vietnam V. — Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2007-08) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Twenty-Seventh Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  of the Standing Committee
on Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry
of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation.
2. The Twenty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
27th April, 2007. The replies of the Government to 22 recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 25th July, 2007.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered aopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
20th November, 2007.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.
  N
EW DELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
21 November , 2007 Chairman,
30 Kartika , 1929  (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban
Development.

STANDING COMMITTEE
ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND
URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
2727272727
lR;eso t;rs
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORTTWENTY-SEVENTH REPORTTWENTY-SEVENTH REPORTTWENTY-SEVENTH REPORTTWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Twenty-First Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]