37
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
URBAN TRANSPORT
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
URBAN TRANSPORT
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2008
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 16.12.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 40
Price : Rs. 76.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
PART-I
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
CHAPTER I Introduction ................................................................ 1
A. Present Trend of Urbanization ........................ 1
B. Travel Demand and Pattern in Cities ............ 2
CHAPTER II Mass Based Public Transport .................................. 6
A. Public Transport—Importance ......................... 6
B. Pricing Public Transport ................................... 7
C. Integrated Public Transport System for a
Seamless Travel ................................................... 8
D. Bus Transport ...................................................... 9
E. Bus Rapid Transit Systems (BRTS) ................. 11
F. Mass Rapid Transit System (METRO) ........... 13
G. Inland Water Transport ..................................... 15
H. Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) ................ 17
C
HAPTER III Urban Transport: Policy Implimentation, Planning
and Financing............................................................. 23
A. National Urban Transport Policy-2006
(NUTP)—Objectives and Implementation .... 23
B. Study regarding Traffic and Transportation
Policies and Strategies in Urban Areas. ....... 26
C. Establishment of Unified Metropolitan
Transport Authority (UMTA) .......................... 26
D. Urban Transport Planning ............................... 29
E. Financing Urban Transport ............................. 34
F. Public-Private Partnership (PPP) ................... 40

PAGE
CHAPTER IV Urban Transport: Major Issues ............................... 42
A. Rapid Increase in Private Motor V ehicles ..... 42
B. Non-motorized Transport ................................. 43
C. Urban Transport and Environment—Need
for Clean Technologies ...................................... 45
D. Parking Problem ................................................. 47
E. Road Accidents ................................................... 49
PART-II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee ....................... 50
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Urban Development (2006-07) held
on 2nd August, 2007 ............................................................... 61
II. Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Urban Development (2007-08) held on
18th December, 2007 ............................................................... 63
III. Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Urban Development (2007-08) held
on 31st July, 2008. .................................................................... 65
IV . Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Urban Development (2008-09) held on
12th November, 2008 .............................................................. 67
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2008-2009)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
5. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
6. Shri Anant Gudhe
7. Shri Pushp Jain
8. Shri Kailash Joshi
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar
10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
12. Shri A.K. Moorthy
13. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
14. Shri L. Rajagopal
15. Shri D. Vittal Rao
16. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
17. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
18. Shri Jagdish Tytler
19. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
20. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
21. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Dr. Prabha Thakur
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
27. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
28. Shri Penumalli Madhu
29. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
30. Shri Manohar Joshi
31. Shri Mukul Roy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. Ravinder Kumar Chadha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Manish Kumar Thakur — Committee Assistant
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2008-09), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Thirty-Seventh Report on the subject
‘Urban Transport’ relating to the Ministry of Urban Development.
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Urban Development on 2nd August and 18th December,
2007 and 31st July, 2008. The Committee also undertook evidence of
the representatives of the Government of NCT-Delhi and DMRC on
2nd August and 18th December, 2007.
3. Experts Shri P .K. Sarkar, Head (TP), School of Planning and
Architecture, New Delhi and Shri Amitabh Bajpai, President, Association
for Intelligent Transport Systems India (AITS), New Delhi were also
invited to tender their views on the subject at the sitting of the
Committee held on 31st July, 2008.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting
held on 12th November, 2008.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Urban Development, representatives of Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD), Delhi Metro Rail
Corporation (DMRC) and the experts S/Shri P .K. Sarkar, Head (TP),
School of Planning and Architecture and Amitabh Bajpai, President,
Association for Intelligent Transport System India (AITS) for placing
before them the requisite material and their considered views in
connection with the examination of the subject.
6. They would also like to place on record their deep sense of
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the
officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
3 December, 2008 Chairman,
12 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Urban Development.
(v)

PART I
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Urban Transport is a critical component of urban infrastructure
and the lifeline of the city. A well-developed and planned transportation
system is integral to the development of economic and social activity
and accelerates urban economic growth. India is one of the emerging
economies in the world with roughly 60% of the country’s GDP coming
from urban areas. At the same time, the rapidly growing urban
population coupled with increased economic activities and increased
city size have resulted in mounting pressure on the urban transportation
system leading to some undesirable trends, for instance, severe
congestion on the roads, rapid deterioration in the air quality, noise
pollution, increased road fatalities, travel delays and loss of productivity.
Considering this trend, urban transportation issues are of immense
importance for the overall urban development. A multi-pronged and
holistic approach on the part of the Government is required to address
these issues. Moreover the Urban Transport policy should aim at a
sustainable mass-based Urban Transport system to suit the urban poor
and the low income group.
1.2 The Ministry of Urban Development is the nodal Ministry for
planning and coordination of Urban Transport matters at the central
level. Urban Transport is not defined in the Constitution as a separate
subject and the allocation of subjects between Central and State List is
mode-wise. However, since Urban Transport is completely intertwined
with Urban Development, which is State responsibility, Urban
Transportation is primarily a State subject. Accordingly, major
responsibility for urban Transport infrastructure and service delivery
rests with State Governments and urban local bodies.
A. Present Trend of Urbanisation
1.3 There has been a repid growth of urban population in India
during the last few years. As per the information furnished by the
Ministry of Urban Development, India’s population rose from 350
million at the time of independence to 1027 million in 2001. It is

2
projected to go further up to 1.4 billion by the year 2006. This increase
would be accompanied by large-scale transformation in the rural-urban
composition of the population. India’s urbanization in 2001 was around
28% which is expected to reach a level of 34% by 2021 and 38.2% by
2026. Also, 35 million-plus cities account for 39% of total urban
population of the country.
B. Travel Demand and Pattern in cities
1.4 Increasing urban population coupled with increased economic
activities and increased city size had led to a rapid growth in the
urban travel demand. Prof. P .K. Sarkar, Head, School of Planning &
Architecture, Delhi and expert on Urban Transport planning, informed
the Committee, through a Memorandum submitted in August, 2008,
that:
“A study carried out by RITES has projected the travel demand
for different categories of cities for the horizon year of 2021 as
presented below. The total intracity passenger demand of 759
million passenger kilometer (mpkm)/day would go up to 2511.23
mpkm/day in 2021. A total number of vehicular trips which were
of the order of 126 million in 1994 are expected to go up by 430
million in 2021:
Table 1: Projected Travel Demand (mpkm) for Different Categories
of Cities
Class of City 1994 2001 2021 Growth
2021/1994
A 103.09 149.43 453.25 4.36
B 75.89 90.43 309.57 4.08
C 109.20 148.66 227.23 2.08
D 94.41 132.07 347.08 3.68
E 92.08 97.22 270.30 2.94
F 284.34 420.99 903.80 3.18
Total 759.00 1038.80 2511.23 3.31
1.5 The Committee were informed by the Ministry that the
increased travel demand, in turn, has resulted in a rapid growth in
the number of motor vehicles. In the six major metropolises of India,
this has far outpaced the population growth. Although, on an average,

3
the population of India’s six major metropolises increased by 1.89 times
during 1981 to 2001, the number of registered vehicles went up by
7.75 times during the same period (Table 1). Thus the growth of motor
vehicles was almost four times faster than the growth of population.
To cite an instance, the total number of registered vehicles in these
cities increased from 95.56 lakh in 2001 to 115.69 lakh in 2004.
Table 1: Growth of Motor V ehicles and Population
Vehicles in Thousands, Population in Millions
1981 1991 2001 Growth 2001/1981
Vehicles Populn Vehicles Populn Vehicles Populn Vehicles Populn
Bangalore 175 2.91 577 4.11 1593 5.69 9.10 1.96
Kolkata 285 9.19 475 10.86 801@ 13.22 2.81 1.44
Chennai 120 4.28 544 5.36 1257 6.42 10.48 1.5
Delhi 536 5.71 1813 8.37 3634 12.79 6.78 2.24
Hyderabad 89 2.53 443 4.27 1241@ 5.53 13.94 2.19
Mumbai 307 8.23 629 12.56 1030 16.39 3.36 1.99
Average 7.75 1.89
Source: Ministry of Surface Transport, Handbook of Transport Statistics, 1999 & Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways, Motor Transport Statistics of India, 2001-02.
@ Figures of Kolkata and Hyderabad relate to 2002.
1.6 Further, as per the figures furnished by the Ministry on
30th September, 2008, the number of registered vehicles in the six
major metropolises can be compared with the respective figures in the
year 2001, as here under:
2001 (Figures in thousand)
Bangalore 1593 2779.024-September, 2006
Kolkata 801@ 875.56-March, 2004
Chennai 1257 1674.185-2005
Hyderabad 1241@ 1355.7-March, 2004
Mumbai 1030 1994.16-March, 2004
Delhi 3636 5627.384-March, 2008
@Figure relate to 2002.

4
1.7 During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee
received various memoranda, which fall under the following three
categories:
(i) Views/suggestions received from Chambers of Commerce
(ii) V iews/suggestions received from Associations/
organisations/institutes
(iii) Views/suggestions received from general public
The category (i) of memoranda contained views/suggestions from
ASSOCHAM, New Delhi and CII, Gurgaon. Their suggestions pertained
to proper land use and transport planning, reserving lanes/corridors
for public transport/non-motorized modes of travel, subsidization of
public transport for mass up-liftment of road infrastructure, investment
in MRTS/BRTS, high parking fees as deterrent for use of personal
vehicles, up-liftment parking facilities, more police personnel/modern
devices for control of traffic, etc.
The category (ii) of memoranda received from Associations/
Organizations/Institutes pertained to betterment of public transport
facilities in their respective towns/cities e.g. Corporatisation of Kolkata’s
taxi service, follow up of rules and regulations and development of
roads and traffic services in Agra, wider ring roads/inner roads in
Delhi, Mumbai, Nagpur, Pune etc., metro rail project for Bangalore
only on broad gauge, eco-friendly and cheap modes of transport, more
tax on private vehicles as deterrent to use public transport, surcharges
on diesel and petrol, etc.
The category (iii) of memoranda contained views/suggestions of
general public. These relate to development of satellite towns to ease
traffic in big cities, construction of bypass and ring roads around cities,
improvement of road infrastructure, strengthening of local bus transport
system, encouragement to battery and electric operated transport modes
i.e. use of cleaner technology vehicles, proper connectivity between
road and rail transport in the cities, central guidelines/policy for
improvement in traffic scenario in the big cities, removal of
encroachments for the roads, encouragement to public-private
partnership (PPP) in the transport sector, preparation of Master Plan
for urban transport, exemption from taxes/duties and subsidy to
alternative fuel driven vehicles, permission for FDI in transport sector,
increase in parking areas in all major cities, staggered hours for opening
and closing of Government and private offices, need for land
management and transport planning to have more land for transport

5
purposes, provision of a complete and updated data system on urban
transport for all cities for better planning and implementation, need
for a unified transport authority, etc.
1.8 The ever-increasing travel demand in cities has led to several
problems in transportation of people as well as goods. A transport
policy was, therefore, needed to offer a clear direction and a framework
for future action. In this context, the Government formulated a National
Urban Transport Policy in April, 2006 (NUTP-2006) with a vision:-
—T o recognize that people occupy center-stage in our cities
and all plans would be for their common benefit and well-
being.
—T o make our cities the most livable in the world and enable
them to become the “engines of economic growth” that
power India’s development in the 21st century.
To allow our cities to evolve into an urban form that is best suited
for the unique geography of their locations and is best placed to
support the main social and economic activities that take place in the
city.
1.9 Major Urban Transport issues and the Government’s response
thereto alongwith the guidelines under NUTP-2006 and its
implementation are examined in detail in the ensuing chapters of this
Report.

6
CHAPTER II
MASS BASED PUBLIC TRANSPORT
A. Public Transport—Importance
Public transport occupies less road space and causes less pollution
per passenger-km than personal vehicles. Besides it is a more
sustainable form of transport and can be a fundamental solution to
the ever-growing congestion. According to the Ministry, one major
objective of NUTP-2006, is investing in transport systems that encourage
greater use of public transport and non-motorized modes, instead of
personal motor vehicles. Elaborating it further, the Ministry informed
the Committee as below:
“The Government encourages investment in public transport as
well as measures that make its use more attractive than that of
personal motor vehicles. Towards this end, all the State capitals as
well as other cities with a population of more than one million
have been advised to start planning for a mass transit system,
including the use of available waterways, adopting a technology
that would best suit the city requirements in the coming years.
In this context, funding is available under JNNURM as central
financial assistance. The Ministry of Urban Development has also
formulated guidelines for development of Detailed Project Report
for Mass Transit System projects.”
2.2 Emphasizing the importance of public transport, the Secretary,
the Ministry of Urban Development, also stated during their briefing
on the subject, as under:-
“While deciding for appropriate mass rapid transport options for
the cities to ease pressure on the roads, the Cities/States have the
options ranging from a city bus service in mixed traffic to high
capacity metro rail system besides, bus rapid transit system, mono
rail, light rail transit etc. Since the urban transport is a State subject,
the choice of appropriate options after doing alternative analysis is
left to the concerned State Governments to decide. Central
Government is providing Central financial assistance for a number
of rail based and bus based MRTS projects”.

7
He added further as under:
“...For all the guided urban transit systems, like Metro, mono rail,
sky buses etc. coming up in the various cities in the country, there
is a need for legislative cover.
The Delhi O & M Act is being amended to extend it to all the
cities/urban agglomeration in the country for all types of guided
urban transit systems.
...We are encouraging States and cities to look at what exactly is
the requirement of the city and design a scheme so that public
transport becomes easy and people are motivated to shift from
two-wheelers and four-wheelers to an acceptable mode of public
transport”.
B. Pricing of Public Transport
2.3 Pricing of Public Transport is a major issue in Urban Transport.
As per the information furnished by the Ministry:
“The basic question here is whether investments in mobility should
be paid for by the direct users only or even by the indirect
beneficiaries. Thus, should the users of the public transport system
alone pay for the system or should car users and other city
residents also pay a portion as indirect beneficiaries of reduced
congestion and improved air quality? Similarly, should those who
benefit from enhanced land value also pay for it, even if they do
not use the public transport system? In this context, the NUTP
suggests that in financing mass transit systems the basic principle
should be that the Government should provide the infrastructure
but users/commuters must pay for operating costs and the rolling
stock. This implies, that the infrastructure and capital investments
should come from all beneficiaries, both direct and indirect, whereas
the operations and maintenance expenses should come from direct
beneficiaries.”
It was further informed as under:
“At present a number of towns and cities in India, have a public
bus service. However, the quality of service is not up to the mark
and most citizens who can afford private transport prefer not to
use the bus service. Since the poor, who do not have access to
other modes of transport, usually use public transport, it would
be advisable to render different type of service for different groups
of people. Keeping this in mind, the NUTP envisages the use of

8
different types of public transport services for different segments
of commuters. According to the policy, ...those who place a
premium on cost are the poorest sections of society and need to
be given affordable prices. The cost for providing public transport
for them needs to be subsidized by other sections of society.
However, there is another segment that values time saved and
comfort more than price. This segment is comparatively better off
and would shift to public transport if their quality expectations
are met. The cost of providing transport service to them need not
be subsidized and can be met from the fare revenues...”
C. Integrated Public Transport System for a seamless travel
2.4 A good public transport system is one that is perceived by the
user as a single system and allows seamless travel between one mode
and the other as also between systems managed by different operators.
In their Background note, the Ministry stated as under:
“NUTP , 2006 envisages the establishment of quality focused multi-
modal public transport systems that are well integrated, providing
seamless travel across modes. Such seamless interchange is possible
if proper inter-change infrastructure is available.
The Central Government would expect that investments in public
transport systems would also seek to ensure that such systems are
well integrated and offer a seamless system to the users. Central
Government’s financial support would be contingent on appropriate
authorities/entities being set up to ensure that a coordinated and
integrated public transport becomes available.”
2.5 On the ground level progress of seamless integrated travel in
cities, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development, during the briefing
held on 2nd August, 2008 informed the Committee as under:
“In the case of Delhi Metro, they have introduced feeder buses
also so that when a person gets off the station, he can take that
bus, which is immediately available, to certain nearby destinations
he wants to go to. In Delhi, an effort has been initiated to bring
about linkages between the Metro, the bus system and the rest so
that the type of connectivity, what you referred to as seamless
connectivity, is possible. I just recall that during a recent discussion
in Hyderabad, it emerged that when they have planned new Metro,
they have also planned for connectivity from Metro line to other
parts of the city”.

9
2.6 Single Ticketing : Single Ticket System can be an important
tool for a seamless travel. Such a ticket creates a psychological
impression of easy transfer, particularly since it does not require
multiple purchase of tickets and may also offer benefits of telescopic
fares. The benefits of common ticketing to the operators are reduced
transactions and lower recurring costs. For the passengers it means a
saving in time and greater convenience. This also requires that a single
agency takes responsibility for coordination so that there is a common
approach to public transport planning and management. Indore has
been a pioneer in this having set up the Indore City Transport Service
Ltd. Which arranges for the issue of common tickets and also for its
sharing on a fair and agreed basis.
On this aspect, the Ministry furnished the following information
to the Committee:
“Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) has implemented a smart
card based ticketing system. Further, other Transport authorities
(Bus and Railways) have also been requested to plan for Smart
Card based ticketing system with DMRC’s Cards. The same is
currently under discussion with the Transport Department of Delhi
Government. Once the systems are put in place by the respective
Transport Organisations and they adopt DMRC’s Smart Card, the
system can interlink through a Central Clearing House being put
up by DMRC. The Central Clearing house shall enable the
interoperability and apportionment of the revenue between the
different operators, on mutually agreeable terms.”
2.7 In this backdrop, the Committee examined major modes of
public transport and related ongoing projects in cities as follows:
D. Bus Transport
2.8 Bus transport constitutes one of the most important and basic
forms of public transport. Hence, it is of utmost importance that
modern city bus services are encouraged in keeping with the provision
of NUTP . During the course of briefing, the Secretary, Ministry of
Urban Development however, mentioned the decline in use of urban
public bus transport as under:
“According to a report, the use of public bus transport has declined
by 15 per cent during the period from 1995 to 2004 because there
are other means available. Now people are inclined to go for
personalized vehicles. But, people should be motivated to move
away from personalized vehicles to an acceptable and effective

10
public means of public transport and one of the experiments that
is going on in the country in this direction is the bus based mass
rapid transport system which assures continuous regular bus service
for a stretch of road.”
2.9 During the course of the oral evidence held on 18th December,
2007, the Committee also expressed serious concern that in most of
the cities, there was a deterioration in a dedicated bus service despite
its increasing demand. When asked about the strategy to tackle this
problem, the Secretary, the Ministry of Urban Development responded
as under:
“As far as the city bus transportation is concerned, if it is in the
private sector, they make it a viable proposition. We have strongly
taken up the point about giving tax concession, better quality bus
and introducing them in the cities. There is a problem. It is one
thing for the State Government Corporations to get more buses
and to introduce them. But they are finding it difficult to raise
resources. That is why, the Public Private Partnership has been
recommended whereby the private sector brings in more buses
and better quality buses. There is some incentive available. We
have repeated our request to the Finance Ministry to consider this
aspect so that this becomes a reality. So, the Central tax concession
plus the States also giving concession would help. If that happens,
we believe a large number of good buses can be introduced in
our cities. That could still be a viable proposition. That is one line
we are taking”.
2.10 In order to introduce quality modern buses for public transport
through private participation, the Ministry in their written note held
that it was a must either to bring down the cost of buses or provide
direct Government subsidy to encourage public transport. According
to them, a large component of cost was the taxes and duties on
purchase and operation of buses. The Committee was informed that
one major problem which discourages bus transport is that the present
taxation system is not conducive for the promotion of bus system. In
Delhi, for example, the tax burden on a bus is 26 times more than a
car. As per World Bank estimates, the total tax burden per vehicle km
is 2.3 times higher for public transport buses than cars in Indian cities.
It was, therefore, in the national interest that public transport was
promoted at all costs as it was not only highly energy efficient and
safe but would also lead to drastic reduction in congestion on roads.
The Ministry of Urban Development stated that they had suggested
to the Finance Ministry that urban transport having a seating capacity

11
of more than 20 persons might be exempted from VAT and Central
Excise Duty in the Budget 2007-08, subject to State Government also
waiving of their share of taxes. The amount of these taxes could be
compensated through levying proportionately higher duties on personal
vehicles. The Ministry held that since the ratio of personal vehicle to
public vehicles may be 5000:1 countrywide, the additional cost burden
on private vehicles would be very nominal. As per the latest
information provided by the Ministry on 30th September, 2008, the
proposal for exemption of V AT and Central Excise Duty was taken up
in the Budget 2008-09 and the excise duty was reduced from 16% to
12% on the buses.
E. Bus Rapid Transit Systems (BRTS)
2.11 BRTS is a sustainable, flexible, quickly implementable and
economical mode of providing mass rapid transit system. It replicates
various features to a metro system on road through a well-designed
system of buses running on segregated lanes.
2.12 As per the information furnished to the Committee, proposals
for Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS) had been approved for
Ahmedabad, Bhopal, Indore, Pune,/Pimpri-Chinchwad, Vijayavada,
Vishakhapatnam, Jaipur and Rajkot cities under JNNURM to provide
better public transport and ease congestion. Considering the low cost,
ease of implementation, wide area coverage, flexibility, scalability and
overall sustainability, lot of cities were stated to be coming up with
BRTS proposal to be funded under JNNURM.
2.13 Experience of BRTS in Delhi : Despite all the potential benefits
of BRTS, its implementation recently in Delhi has left much to be
desired. The Committee noted certain media reports which suggested
that the Delhi model of BRT (Based on Bogota, Columbia model) was
a failure. To a query regarding its loopholes and the suggestions to
plug these loopholes, Prof. P.K. Sarkar, head, School of Planning and
Architecture, Delhi and expert in Transport Planning, stated, as under:
“I fully agree with this view that the BRT system in Delhi is a
total failure. There are a number of loopholes as under:
- Major blunder has been to take away 7 m. road width from
the already inadequate Right of Way (R.O.W) of the road.
- Before BRT system, the road with divided 6-lane carriage
way continues to experience high volume of traffic during
most part of the day resulting in the over-multisation of

12
road capacity. Even this corridor needs widening in order
to meet the traffic demand, but instead of widening the
road, it has taken away 7 m width of road (2 lane) which
has added further problems of traffic operation.
-P resently, peak hour passenger flow ranges between 20,000-
30,000 phpd (peak hour passenger per direction) on Josip
Broz Tito Marg & L.B.S. Marg, while it is around 40,000
phpd on B.Z. Marg. In view of this, BRT is not a feasible
solution. The passenger carrying capacity in Bogota BRT
model is higher primarily due to allocation of four traffic
lanes (two dedicated bus lanes in each direction ) on both
directions as compared to Delhi’s BRTS. Moreover the
number of traffic lanes for personalized vehicular traffic is
more than two lanes as compared to Delhi’s BRTS. It is
note-worthy to mention that the total number of vehicles in
Bogota is one fifth of that of total number of vehicles
registered in Delhi.
- Even the movement of pedestrian traffic across the BRT
corridor is not well planned. Pedestrians are forced to walk
comparatively longer distance to cross the BRT corridor. Due
to lack of enforcement, pedestrians cross the BRT corridor
randomly wherever they find opportunity to jump over
railing barrier of the BRT corridor. After operation of BRTS,
a considerable number of fatal accidents are also reported.
- The operation 6 phase traffic signal resulting in more than
5 minutes signal cycle time is a bad example for signal
operation. On an average, the vehicular delay at any
intersections of this corridor is more than 5 minutes even
during off-peak hour.
- As a result, there is more than 100 per cent cycle failure to
cater to the heavy traffic demand at the intersection. Due
to lack of enforcement, personalized vehicles also occupy
the BRT lanes for movement. Two wheelers are also
observed to ply on the bicycle lanes.
- Even the BRT is being envisaged to be developed in the
other five corridors in Delhi where the RoW of the corridors
is inadequate. If the other five BRT corridors are developed
without paying due consideration to its negative impacts,
the residents of Delhi would face the same music and it
would be a nightmare for them.

13
In view of this, it is suggested that the Government of Delhi should
abandon the other 5 BRT corridors as approved earlier. Instead of
this, Metro Network should be strengthened along with strong
feeder bus service network covering all parts of the road network
of Delhi. if the mass transportation is improved integrating MRTS
and feeder bus service with high reliability, good frequency of
service and easy accessibility, personalized vehicle users, would,
no doubt switch over to public transport system as observed in
the situation in New York, Toronto, and London where public
transport system is very predominant”.
F. Mass Rapid Transit System (MRTS)-METRO
2.14 Metro constitutes a vital component of Mass Public Transport
in cities like Kolkata and Delhi. As per the information provided by
the Ministry, following are the ongoing Metro projects:—
(i) Delhi MRTS Project Phase-I
The Delhi MRTS project is being implemented by the Delhi Metro
Rail Corporation (DMRC) Ltd. set up in May 1995 with equity
participation by the GOI & GNCTD in the ratio of 50:50, i.e., equal
participation.
The Government of India approved the investment proposals for
Phase-I of the Delhi MRTS Project on 17th September, 1996.
The estimated cost of the project was Rs. 10,571 crore. Cumulative
expenditure upto 31.12.2007 was Rs. 10452.63 crore. All the corridors
of phase-I had since been completed and commissioned.
(ii) Delhi MRTS Project Phase-II
As per the information furnished, the project was approved by the
Government and necessary sanction issued on 30.3.2006 for
implementation at an estimated cost of Rs. 8118 crore and revised
alignment from IIT to Qutab Minar on 4.12.2006 at an estimated cost
of Rs. 558 crore, i.e. a total of Rs. 8676 crore for 54.675 km.
(iii)  Extension of Delhi Metro Phase-II to Gurgaon
Extension of Delhi Metro from Ambedkar Colony in Delhi to
Sushant Lok in Gurgaon (14.47 km) has been sanctioned by
Government of India (GoI) on 4.12.2006 for implementation by DMRC
at a toatal estimated completion cost of Rs. 1600.92 crore including
taxes and duties. The project is targeted for completion by July, 2010.

14
(iv) Extension of Delhi Metro Phase-II to Noida
- Extension of Delhi Metro from New Ashok Nagar to Sector 32,
Noida (7km) approved by Government on 18.1.2008 at an estimated
completion cost of Rs. 827 crore including taxes and duties.
(v) Bangalore Metro Rail Project
The Government of India approved in April 2006 the
implementation of the Bangalore Metro Rail Project at an estimated
completion cost of Rs. 6395 cr. over a total length of 33 kms. in
2 corridors viz:
1. North-South Corridor—14.9 kms (Yeshwantpur to R.V . Road
Jayanagar)
2. East-West Corridor-18.1 kms (Baiyapanahalli to Mysore Road)
(Out of the above 33 kms., 3.5. kms is underground)
The project was stated to be scheduled for completion in December,
2011. The first section of 7 km. would be completed in March, 2010.
(vi) Mumbai Metro Rail Project
Mumbai Metro Rail Project Phase-I
First Corridor.
Versova—Andheri—Ghatkopar
Total length—11.07 kms.
Completion cost projected by the private partner was reported as
Rs.2,356 crore.
The Government of Maharashtra (GoM) demanded a sum of
Rs. 650 crore as Viability Gap Funding for the project. Ministry of
Finance has not agreed for VGF assistance from their Ministry. As per
their advice, the Central assistance is being considered from the Budget
of the Ministry of Urban Development under JNNURM.
The Second corridor
Charkop—Bandra—Mankhurd
Total length—31.87 km.
(Estimated Completion Cost) Rs. 7660 cr.

15
With regard to Mumbai Metro project, the Ministry furnished the
following information to the Committee:
“The Ministry of Finance has given in principle approval for
viability gap funding of Rs. 1532 crore under the viability gap
funding scheme of the Ministry of Finance. This is the latest
position as on 20.11.08.”
(vii) Metro projects in Kolkata, Chennai and other cities
The Committee were further informed that the DPR for East-West
Metro Corridor in Kolkata, Metro in Chennai and extension of Metro
to Faridabad had since been completed. Studies for MRTS system in
Cuttack, Bhubaneswar, Ahmedabad and Gandhinagar were reportedly
in progress. Further, DPR for extension of Delhi Metro to Bahadurgarh
was also stated to be under progress.
2.15 On being enquired about efforts being made by the
Government towards implementing a comprehensive transport network
by integrating the Metro Rail with buses and feeder transport in order
to achieve a seamless urban transport system, the Ministry, through a
written reply, responded as under:
“Integration of different modes of transport i.e. Metro Rail, Buses
and Feeder Service is required at three levels, i.e. physical, fare
and information. State Governments have been advised to provide
for Inter-Modal Integration in the cities as Urban Transport is a
State subject. While sanctioning any new project on Metro/BRTS
with Central financial assistance, Inter-Modal Integration is being
insisted upon. Even for the Metro projects sanctioned for extension
to Gurgaon, Noida and Badarpur, it has been specified that the
projects should be part of integrated transport master plan which
would also include the plan for feeder routes also.
Government of Delhi has informed that the proposed Delhi
Integrated Multi Modal Transit System Ltd. will integrate all modes
including Metro Rail, Buses and Feeder Transport in order to achive
a seamless urban transport system. Delhi Metro has also been given
the status of State Transport Authority and has been permitted to
run feeder buses for Delhi Metro.”
G. Inland Water Transport (IWT)
2.16 Inland Water Transport, in coastal cities in States like West
Bengal, Kerala, Maharashtra, Goa etc. can be very significant for public

16
transport. NUTP-2006 enumerates IWT as an important component of
public transport, which should be encouraged wherever possible.
Besides, IWT Policy of Inland Water Authority of India (Ministry of
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways) aims at increasing the share
of IWT in the inter-modal mix of inland transport, encouraging private
participation, making this mode competitive and making Government
a provide and facilitator. When asked by the Committee about the
steps the Government has taken to start inland water transport and
link them with other modes of transport system in coastal cities, the
Ministry replied as under:
“Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways, Department
of Shipping has informed that Inland Water Authority of India
(IWAI) undertakes IWT developmental works on National
Waterways by providing and maintaining IWT infrastructural
facilities such as fairways, terminals and navigational aids. These
facilities can be utilized for transportation of cargo and passengers
in the cities through which a National Waterway passes.
In respect of cities of Mumbai, Channai and Kolkata, specific
information is given below:
(a) Mumbai City:
There is no National Waterway in this city and hence no project
of IWT operation is at present being implemented by IWAI here.
However, with a view to exploring the feasibility of decongestion of
Mumbai City through IWT and/or Coastal routes, IWAI has recently
commissioned a study.
(b) Chennai City:
There is no National Waterway in this city and no project is being
implemented by IWAI for connection IWT with other modes in this
city.
(c) Kolkata City:
National Waterway-I (River Ganga) passes through the city of
Kolkata and it is learnt that the State Government of West Bengal and
some private operators are running several ferry services for
transportation of men and material in the city.”
2.17 Further, during the course of the briefing, the Secretary,
Ministry of Urban Development stated as under:
“As far as water transport is concerned, we have put focus on this
subject. I can immediately recall, Kerala came up for discussion.

17
So we suggested in the case of city of Cochin, they should think
in terms of integrating water transport also with other means of
transport because with backwaters available and water movement
possible, they should think in those terms. There is presently a
water transport available to a limited extent, but it is a question
of making that also equally attractive so that people are attracted
to that option. When we advice the States and cities to go in for
comprehensive mobility plans where this potential exists, we ask
them to incorporate that element also so that that mode and that
available means is also utilized for movement of people.”
H. Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS)
Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS)—Meaning
2.18 Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) refers to the use of location,
information and communication technologies (like wireless & fixed
telephony, internet, mapping & satellite technologies) to make travel
safe, energy-efficient, seamless and comfortable. ITS connects roads,
vehicles and people through dynamic, real-time information and
support systems. The Committee decided to examine the feasibility of
ITS for Urban Transport in India and heard the views of an expert,
Shri Amitabh Bajpai, President, Association for Intelligent Transport
Systems, India (AITS) on the subject. He informed the Committee in
a written note submitted on 31st July, 2008 as under:
“The basic concept of ITS is to:
(a) Gather and store real-time traffic and traveller information.
(b) Process this information to model the most suitable
immediate, short, medium and long-term transport &
mobility plans.
(c) Disseminate the information to travellers—whatever mode—
on foot, cycles, public transport, air, rail, water, private
vehicles; commercial vehicle drivers, fleet operators, etc. to
make informed travel choices.”
2.19 From the information available on the internet, the Committee
observed that ITS can be applied in various procedures concerning
systematic flow of transport in cities, as under:
“(a) Vehicle Tracking: Vehicle tracking is a way of monitoring the
location, movements, status and behaviour of a vehicle or fleet of
vehicles. This is achieved through a combination of a GPS receiver

18
and an electronic device installed in each vehicle, communicating
with the user (dispatching, emergency or coordinating unit) and
PC—or web-based software. The data are turned into information
by management reporting tools in conjunction with a visual display
on computerized mapping software.
(b) Satellite Navigation:  Satellite navigation in the context of
ITS is the technology of using a GPS and electronic mapping tool
to enable the driver of a vehicle to locate a position, then route
plan and navigate a journey.
(c) Wireless Vehicles Safety Communications: Wireless vehicle
safety communications aid in car safety. It is an electronic sub-
system in a car or other vehicle for the purpose of exchanging
safety information, about such things as road hazards and the
locations and speeds of vehicles, over short range radio links. This
may involve temporary ad hoc wireless local area networks.
(d) Electronic Toll Collection: Electronic Toll Collection (ETC)
makes it possible for vehicles to drive through toll gates at traffic
speed, reducing congestion at toll plazas and automating toll
collection.
(e) Emergency Vehicle Notification Systems: The in-vehicle
e-call is emergency call generated either manually by the vehicle
occupants or automatically via activation of in-vehicle sensors after
an accident. When activated, the in-vehicle e-call device will
establish an emergency call carrying both voice and data directly
to the nearest emergency point (normally the nearest 112 Public
Safety Answering Point, PSAP). The voice call enables the vehicle
occupant to communicate with the trained e-call operator. At the
same time, a minimum set of data will be sent to the e-call operator
receiving the voice call.”
Shri Amitabh Bajpai, expert furnished further uses of ITS to
the Committee in his written note as under:
“- Traffic Signals Control
-V ehicles number plates recognition
- Real-time information of traffic and weather
- Route guidance
- Car park information
- Bus/Rail arrival times
- Delay/deviation trips”

19
ITS—Its benefits
2.20 During a briefing meeting with Shri Amitabh Bajpai, the
Committee were informed about the following benefits of ITS:
(i) Accessibility
-A vailability of real-time transport and traffic information.
- Make better decision on transport modes, routes to take
and the time to travel based on optimal criteria.
(ii) Traffic management
- Data collection and analysis are automatic and around the
clock.
- Human intervention is minimal except to respond to traffic
incidents detected by the system.
- Increase responsiveness to traffic incidents.
(iii) Public Transport operation
- Real-time monitoring of vehicles enables quick response to
delays.
- Planning and dispatching are much more efficient.
- Less manpower with higher efficiency.
(iv) Environment
- The use of LED in traffic signals and electronic signboards
consumes less energy and improve legibility.
- Improved transport efficiency reduce air pollution.
(v) Safety
- Vehicle is robot with artificial intelligence.
- Assistance provided when needed.
- Reduce the number of motor vehicle crashes and the related
fatalities.
(vi) Security
- Screen and track vehicles.
- Privacy becomes less important when security is concerned.
(vii) Technical
- More Professionals are required.

20
ITS—Government’s Efforts
2.21 The Ministry of Urban Development informed the Committee
that introduction of ITS for traffic management is one of the prime
objectives of NUTP , 2006. On the question of promotion of ITS in
Indian cities, the Ministry replied as under:
“(i) The Government of India encourages projects for introducing
Intelligent Transport Systems for collecting real time data
for efficient traffic management, on-line passenger
information system, automatic vehicle tracking system, fare
integration system etc. The State Governments have been
asked to prepare DPRs for the same. Under the existing
scheme of Urban Transport planning, 40% of cost of such
studies/preparation of DPRs shall be met by the
Government of India”. The Committee‘s examination of the
subject revealed that in August, 2008, the Ministry decided
to raise the Central financial assistance upto 80% to the
States/UTs for taking up various urban transport studies/
surveys etc.
(ii) ITS is a very wide term and includes advance traffic
management system, advance traveller information system,
passenger information system, automatic vehicle location
system, automatic fare collection system, automatic train
protection, automatic train control, electronic toll collection,
emergency transportation operation, vehicle assist and
automation and operation system etc. ITS is being
implemented for electronic ticketing, passenger information
system and automatic vehicle location system in city bus
service and BRTS, in automatic control, automatic train
protection, passenger information system for Metro rail
operations.”
2.22 The Ministry further informed as under:
“Ministry of Urban Development has set up a Inter-Ministerial
Core Group on Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) for framing a
National framework for intelligent Transport Systems. The Ministry
has also written to the Ministry of Heavy Industries for
manufacture of ITS enabled vehicles which have Global Positioning
System technology for vehicle tracking and traffic management.
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi has informed
that a decision has already been taken to introduce GPS technology
for Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) buses and phasing out of

21
private stage carriage Blue Line carriage buses operated by
individual operators and introduction of fleet of modern buses to
be operated by Corporates/Companies. The city bus service in
Indore is entirely GPS enabled with real-time vehicle tracking and
passenger information system. All the State Governments have been
advised to introduce ITS enabled city bus service in their cities
preferably by Public Private initiative.”
2.23 During the briefing, when asked whether any pilot project on
ITS was undertaken by the Ministry of Urban Development, the
Secretary submitted as under:
“Sir, to the best of my knowledge, there is no pilot project which
is in our focus and it is again at an evolving stage, what would
be the elements of ITS and where it can be applied. We have
suggested to the Delhi Government that they should think of
applying ITS in the context of the Commonwealth planning because
that would involve movement of a large number of people, vehicles
on certain roads at a certain point of time and like the reference
made to the peak time.”
2.24 Later, with reference to the initiatives being taken by the
Government in the field of ITS, the Secretary , the Ministry of urban
Development, during the evidence, informed the Committee that:
“Realizing the importance of Intelligent Transport System in
management of traffic and reduction of congestion, a Core Group
on ITS has been set up under the Chairmanship of Secretary , Urban
Development to bring all the stakeholders and Ministries together.
This Core Group will help in drafting National Framework for
ITS.”
However, as per the latest information furnished by the Ministry
on 30th September, 2008, the National Framework for ITS is yet to be
formulated.
2.25 When again enquired if any pilot project on ITS has been
initiated, the Ministry in their latest replies informed that:
“With the technical assistance from Government of Italy, a Detailed
Project Report for Comprehensive Mobility Planning and
Management using ITS has been developed for Delhi. The report
has been made available to Ministry of Home Affairs and
Government of Delhi for implementation. Based on the success
achieved on implementation of this pilot in Delhi, this will be
implemented in other cities.”

22
2.26 Shri Amitabh Bajpai also informed the Committee in this
context as below:
“It is now mandated for all cities under the NURM scheme to
develop a Comprehensive Mobility Plan using ITS through the
Traffic Information Management & Control Center (TIMCC). The
TIMCC will help generate real-time traffic data and help in
developing traffic models for different times of day, events, for
specific speeds, for specific modes, etc. Such models would give
the city-managers a tool to route-guide the travellers, thereby
making travel for ALL, which includes cyclists and pedestrians,
safe and efficient.
This TIMCC will also help maintain seamless timings between the
Metro and bus systems, as well as track buses to give real-time
passenger information via various communication modes like the
internet, kiosks, mobile and land phones, etc. In fact, this exercise
will greatly help in creating the best time-tables for road
construction and maintenance work so that road users are affected
in the least possible way during metro, road repair, BRTS work
going on.”

23
CHAPTER III
URBAN TRANSPORT: POLICY IMPLEMENTATION,
PLANNING AND FINANCING
A. National Urban Transport Policy, 2006 (NUTP)—Objectives and
Implementation
3.1 In order to deal with the rapidly growing Urban Transport
related problems as also to offer a clear direction and a framework for
future action, the Government formulated the National Urban Transport
Policy NUTP in April, 2006 with the objective to ensure safe, affordable,
quick, comfortable, reliable and sustainable access for the growing
number of city residents to jobs, education, recreation and such other
needs within our cities. This is sought to be achieved by:
(i) Incorporating urban transportation as an important
parameter at the urban planning stage itself rather than
being a consequential requirement.
(ii) Encouraging integrated land use and transport planning in
all cities so that travel distance are minimized and access
to livelihoods, education, and other social needs, especially
for the marginal segments of urban population, is improved.
(iii) Bringing about a more equitable allocation of road space,
with people rather than vehicles, as its main focums.
(iv) Investing in transport systems that encourage greater use of
public transport and non-motorized modes, instead of
personal motor vehicles.
(v) Establishing regulatory mechanisms that allow a level
playing field for all operators of transport services.
(vi) Addressing concerns of road safety and trauma response.
(vii) Building capacity (institutional and manpower) to plan for
sustainable urban transport and establishing knowledge
management systems that would service the needs of all
urban transport professionals, such as planners, researchers,
teachers, students, etc.
(viii) Promoting the use of cleaner technologies.

24
(ix) Improving access of business to markets and the various
factors of production.
(x) Encourage greater use of public transport and non-motorized
modes by offering Central financial assistance for this
purpose.
(xi) Enabling the establishment of quality focused multi-modal
public transport systems that are well integrated, providing
seamless travel across modes.
(xii) Establishing effective regulatory and enforcement
mechanisms that allow a level playing field for all operators
of transport services and enhanced safety for the transport
system users.
(xiii) Establishing institutional mechanisms for enhanced
coordination in the planning and management of transport
systems.
(xiv) Introducing Intelligent Transport Systems for traffic
management.
(xv) Reducing pollution levels through changes in travelling
practices, better enforcement, stricter norms, technological
improvements, etc.
(xvi) Raising finances, through innovative mechanisms that tap
land as a resource, for investments in urban transport
infrastructure.
(xvii) Associating the private sector in activities where their
strengths can be benefically tapped.
(xviii) Taking up Pilot Projects that demonstrate the Potential of
possible best practices in sustainable urban transport.
3.2. Pilot Projects: On the objective of taking up pilot projects
under NUTP 2006, the Ministry elaborated as under:
“In order to demonstrate the potential benefits from the policy
measures suggested herein, the Central Government would take
up pilot projects in a sample set of cities drawn from different
regions and different city types so that tested models of best
practices can be established for replication in other cities.”
3.3 The Committee, when desired to know the status of
implementation of NUTP , were informed by the Ministry as follows:
“NUTP-2006 lays down various guidelines for investment in urban
transport. The implementation of the policy is, therefore, an ongoing

25
process. Since Urban Transport is a State subject, the
implementation of NUTP in the field is to be done by the concerned
State Governments and Urban Local Bodies. At the Central
Government level, the policy is under implementation through
various projects which are being taken up with Central financial
assistance. A new scheme for “Urban Transport Planning” has been
processed wherein Government of India would provide Central
financial assistance to the extent of 80% for preparing
Comprehensive Mobility Plan, land use and transport plan,
feasibility studies, launching awareness campaign etc. A new
scheme for ‘Capacity Building in Urban Transport’ has also been
prepared and is in the process of approval. As per the latest
information provided by the Ministry, the new scheme for ‘Capacity
Building in Urban Transport’ is yet to be approved. The final EFC
note has been prepared based on the comments received from
various Ministries, and is likely to be approved soon. The new
scheme of the Urban Transport planning has been approved.”
3.4 In this connection, the Committee observed from the letter of
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development addressed to States/UTs on
26th August, 2008 that ‘under the present centrally sponsored scheme
of Urban Development planning, the response of the States to avail
Central Assistance had not been very satisfactory’, which led to the
revision of assistance from 40% to 80%.
3.5 Further, during the briefing, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Development said:
“The National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP) in April, 2006,
focuses on the need to ‘Move People-Not vehicles’. Since Urban
Transport is a State subject, copy of NUTP has been circulated to
all the States and Union Territories (UTs) for implementation. All
the Urban Transport Projects to be eligible for Central financial
assistance under JNNURM, have to be NUTP compliant. Instead
of coming up with piece-meal proposals under JNNURM, State/
Union Territories have been advised to prepare Comprehensive
Mobility plan for the urban agglomeration and derive each project
proposal as a part of Comprehensive Mobility Plan. Such
Comprehensive Mobility Plan would focus on mobility of people
rather than vehicles and accordingly give priority to pedestrian,
non-motorised transport (NMT), public transport (all modes),
Intermediate public transport duly integrating land use plan. The

26
Comprehensive Mobility Plan would also indicate the existing
situation as well as future plan with short term, medium term
and long term measures to improve mobility on sustainable basis,
reduce travel demand and develop networks for public transport
as well as non-motorised transport.”
B. Study regarding Traffic and Transportation Policies & Strategies
in Urban Areas:
The Committee were informed by the Ministry in a written note
that recently a study was taken up by the Ministry of Urban
Development to establish a comprehensive base line of the traffic and
transport scenario of urban India for 0.5 million plus cities and State
capitals. 30 sample cities were selected for the survey. It also aimed at
establishing an independent and reliable basis for the formulation of
future policies and programmes for the management of urban transport
in India. The final report which came in May, 2008 suggested that the
heavy urban transport infrastructure investments needs proper
guidance, planning, sustainability, adequate provisions for their
maintenance and safeguard. Apart from the required fund, adequate
expertise and proper institution mechanism to implement the urban
transport infrastructure is the basic requirement. The report made the
following suggestions for the proposed institutional framework:
- Priority for Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority
(UMTA) implementation.
- Development and management of Central Urban Transport
Database.
- Strengthening of Institutional set up.
- Development of urban transport software library .
- Clearing house for new technologies/major projects/projects
involving different agencies in urban transportation.
C. Establishment of unified Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA)
3.6 The Committee were informed by the Ministry in their
Background Note on the subject that the current legal institutional
arrangements for managing urban transport were developed at a time
when Urban Transport was not a major problem. As a result there is
a high degree of fragmentation and separate enactments covering
different modes of transport. Apart from this, the planning and
implementation of urban transport infrastructure rests with multiple

27
agencies, which do not necessarily work in a coordinated manner. The
Ministry informed the Committee that in most States, the Transport
Departments carry out regulatory functions of setting the fares for
public bus systems. Roads are built and managed by the local bodies
or State PWD. A State Transport Department Corporations operates
public buses. Classic examples exist in Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai
where rail based systems are operated by a Central Government agency.
Though Delhi has presented an example of the State Government and
Central Government having collaborated to set up the metro rail
system, yet there is little coordination between the Delhi metro and
the bus system. Fares for different modes are also set by different
agencies, drawing their authority to do so from different enactments.
3.7 The Ministry further stated that:
“Such a fragmented system of planning and implementation of
urban transport projects is not desirable and there should be
meaningful coordination in all urban transport activities. Several
changes need to be made in the existing regulatory and
administrative systems. They have to be conceptualised in the
context of the fact that urban transport can not be divorced from
the rest of urban development and there has to be very close
coordination between various modes of urban transport as also
between urban transport and land use. It calls for a very close
coordination among those who provide different urban services
and it would not be desirable for any one of them to work in
isolation. Accordingly, the National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP)
recommends the setting up of Unified Metropolitan Transport
Authority (UMTA) in all million plus cities to facilitate better
coordination in the planning and implementation of urban transport
systems. Such an authority should not be an operator of any
transport facility, but should function as a coordinator amongst
various operators.
It could perform a regulatory function and also provide common
facilities that would benefit all operators. It should play an
important role in creating a future vision for improved mobility
and ensuring that the required investments take place. With
reference to setting up of UMTA, the Ministry informed that States
of Karnataka and Rajasthan have taken lead in setting up UMTA.”
3.8 With reference to the setting up of UMTA, the Secretary, the
Ministry of Urban Development, during the briefing, further informed
on 2nd August, 2007 as under:
“Towards facilitating setting up of Unified Metropolitan Transport
Authority (UMTA) in all million plus cities, the Ministry has

28
constituted a Task Force for drafting model UMTA Act which will
provide requisite statutory backing to the UMTAs for facilitating
more coordinated planning, implementation and management of
urban transport system/projects. One meeting of the Task Force
has already been held and the State Governments have been
requested to give their suggestions on the draft Legislation. There
is a Task Force for Delhi. This Task Force has made a
recommendation that Delhi should immediately go in for what is
called unified Metropolitan Transport Authority preferably under
the Chairmanship of the Lt. Governor where all the concerned
units are represented. There should be legislation to enable this.
They still have to take a decision on that. As a follow up of that,
we have constituted a second Task Force to look at the requirements
of the remaining mega cities and the larger cities and that is what
I have referred to. We are currently on the job. We have had one
meeting of this Task Force in which State have participated and
we are working out a structure to have this metropolitan transport
authorities for at least the mega cities and cities which have larger
issues like this. So, that also is something which has to come into
effect. Of course, one issue we will have to address is that each
such entity would be governed by a separate legislation or a
separate scheme of things. How integration can be brought about
is something which we are seriously addressing and we have some
lessons from abroad also. Some of the consultants are guiding us
on that also. So we will take note of all those points while
formulating our recommendation for the remaining cities. The
National Urban Transport Policy, if I may read out refers to the
Central Government will, therefore, recommend setting up of a
unified multiplicity transport authority in all the metropolitan cities
to facilitate more coordinated planning in implementation of urban
transport problem projects and an integrated management of urban
transport systems. This is something which we intend pursuing
because it is not just transport planning or traffic management, it
is bringing about an integration of all these different players and
different requirements and working through a single platform to
facilitate that . So, I suppose, that is also a culture which will get
implemented in our country.”
3.9 When enquired about the latest position of the proposed UMTA
Act, the Ministry furnished the latest information on 30th September,
2008 as under:
“UMTAs have been established in various cities, namely, Bangalore,
Hyderabad, Chennai, Mumbai and Jaipur. In Hyderabad, the UMTA
is backed by an Act. This has been circulated to all the States vide
Secretary (UD)’s D.O. No. K-14011/15/2007-UT dated 12.05.2008.”

29
D. Urban Transport Planning
3.10 In the backdrop of numerous traffic and transportation
problems an effective and systematic urban transport planning is of
utmost importance. On the issues concerning Urban Transport Planning
for Indian cities, the Ministry submitted following information to the
Committee:
“Cities in India vary considerably in terms of their population,
area, urban form, topography, economic activities, income levels,
growth constraints, etc. Accordingly, the design of the transport
system will have to depend on these city specific features. Further,
transport planning is intrinsically linked to land use planning and
both need to be developed together in a manner that serves the
entire population and yet minimize travel needs. In short, a
Comprehensive Mobility Plan, including an integrated master plan
needs to interalize the features of sustainable transport systems. In
developing such plans, attention are being paid to channel the
future growth of a city around a pre-planned transport network
rather than develop a transport system after uncontrolled sprawl
has taken place. Transport plans should, therefore, enable a city to
take an urban form that best suits the geographical constraints of
its location and also one that best supports the key social and
economic activities of its residents. The Government therefore,
endeavours to promote the development of such integrated land
use and transport plans for all cities. To enable this, all urban
development and planning bodies in the States are required to
have in house transport planners as well as representation from
transport authorities in their managements. As part of this exercise,
each city is being encouraged to identify major transport axis as
potential corridors for future development and then establish a
transport system that would encourage growth around itself. Such
corridors would have to be protected from encroachment by putting
up physical barriers along such reserved corridors and physically
constructing roads on short stretches even before settlements come
up. This would imply that stretches of the corridor would come
up first in order to guide the location of the settlements and not
allow undue sprawl to take place.”
3.11 Prof. P . K. Sarkar, head, School of Planning and Architecture,
New Delhi and expert on Transport Planning explained through a
written reply that among the objectives spelt out by a working group
on urban transport of the Planning Commission as a part of terms of
reference, the following terms of reference are directly related to the

30
urban transportation planning:
-T o estimate the transport needs, not only for the current
urban population of cities but also for the needs of those
who are yet to join the urban population.
-T o suggest measures so as to ensure that appropriate
comprehensive city development plans with integrated traffic
& transportation plans are prepared under Jawaharlal Nehru
National Urban Renewal Mission for each city with
integration of Land use Planning and Transportation Plans.
3.12 Prof. Sarkar further added as follows:
In order to accomplish the above objective, the following issues
should be taken up to make urban transport programmes successful:
- Future prospective and planning
-T echnology issues
- Engineering issues
- Financial issues
- Legal/Administrative/Regulatory issues
- Capacity Building and Awareness issues.”
He elaborated further as under:
“As regards the comprehensive city development plans with
integrated transportation plans under JNNURM for each city, vision
document is to be made for preparation of comprehensive city
development (CDP) before it is able to access funds. Besides CDP ,
an integrated transport and land use plan is also required to be
prepared for ensuring high level of mobility for all sections of
people. Actions under such integrated transport plans could be
classified under the following areas:
(i) Land use Interventions:
- Encourage ‘Transit Oriented Development’ with high density
areas at or close to public transport stations.
- Allow land use changes from time to time, (including for
public/Government uses) to enable efficiency in urban
structure through market forces.

31
- Discourage sprawl through introduction of vacant land tax
and levy of ‘Transport Impact Fee’ on development in the
periphery.
(ii) Transport Sector Inverventions:
-P romote Non-Motorized V ehicles (NMV) by creating facilities
for safe use of such modes and its integration with public
transport systems.
-P romote public transit systems that are more cost effective
and able to meet the demand levels more optimally.
- Encourage investments in premium bus systems (AC,
Express, etc.) that persuade personal motor vehicle users to
also shift to public transport.
- Develop ring roads and city bypass roads as well as Railway
Line Bypass.
- Develop freight transport terminals outside city limits.
(a) Mobility needs for small and medium towns (1-5) lakh population
-P roviding for pedestrian pavements and cycle tracks.
- Some improvements in the quality of roads.
- De-congestion of some of the crowded areas like Inter State
bus stations, major hospitals, central market areas, major
Government offices, railway stations, etc.
- Improvement of some busy intersections.
- Developing transport corridors in advance to enable the
orderly growth of new settlements in a manner that would
facilitate a preference for public transport.
-C reation of parking spaces for para-transit and other
vehicles.
(b) Mobility needs for (0.5-1) million population
Improvement of some bus intersections:
- Improvement of some busy intersections.
- Construction of pedestrian paths and subways.
-P rovision of improved parking spaces.
- Improving traffic flow at selected congestion points.
- Improving Passenger facilities for bus systems.

32
- Shifting of certain facilities from the city center to the fringe
areas.
- Construction of freight terminals and bus terminals on a
BOT basis.
- Addition of bus lanes to existing roads.
- Construction of new corridors for the development of new
settlements.
- Linkages with small towns falling within a regional context.
(c) Mobility needs for (1-4) million population
- Planning for low medium capacity mass transit system
(Rs. 20 crores/km) Linking this MRTS with a larger network
of low capacity feeder system.
(d) Mobility needs for small and medium towns 4 million plus
population
- Planning for medium to high capacity MRTS.
-A  larger network of sub-system & feeder to be connected
with MRTS.”
3.13 During the course of interaction with the Committee,
Prof. Sarkar also elaborated on the concept of a system approach to
Urban Transport Planning for Indian cities. He said:
“Any kind of transport studies to be conducted should be based
on the concept of system approach which is connected with
optimizing the performance of transport system of urban area by
integrating landuse and transport components. Fig. 1 shows a broad
concept to system approach where society should receive maximum
benefit with respect to safety, mobility and accessibility through
the integration of land use—transport planning causing least
damage to environment.
Environment Economy Transportation Society
Integration of Landuse
and Transport
Noise & Air Pollution Safety, Mobility &
 Accessibility
Fig. 1 System Approach to sustainable Transport Planning.
It is envisaged to develop system approach to urban transportation
planning through the process of long term transport planning with
emphasis of planning for public transport and short term transportation
planning.

33
(i) Long Term Urban Transport Planning
Long Term Transport Planning is a long term strategy planning
which examines the traffic implications of alternative land use options
and recommends the best pattern of staging development.
The following may be considered to be the key objectives of
strategic Landuse plan:
-T o reduce the adverse effects of long term growth on the
existing urban system.
-T o reduce the effects of future urban development on the
natural environment.
-T o reduce the effects of future urban development on the
natural environment.
-T o work out a rational balance between residential and
employment opportunities so that the journey to work trip
is contained.
-T o work out a financially feasible transport system that is
compatible to environment and with preferences to the
community.
(ii) Short Term Transport Planning
The primary objective of short term transport planning is to control
the movement of people and goods on the urban transport network in
safe and efficient manner and in accordance with social concerns
through the coordination in planning and implementation of the
different elements of traffic managements.
For preparation of short term transport planning, there are a
number of measures which can be applied individually or in
combination to accomplish the following aims:
(i) Traffic Engineering Technologies
(ii) Lorry Routes
(iii) Traffic Restraint
(iv) Parking Control
(v) Bus Priority
(vi) Public Transport Pricing and Marketing
(vii) Pedestrian Scheme

34
E. Financing of Urban Transport
3.14 The information provided by the Ministry with reference to
their Demands for Grants (2008-09) mentioned the following regarding
financial assistance in the field of Urban Transport:
“Under the ongoing scheme of ‘Urban Transport Planning’, this
Ministry has been mainly providing grant assistance to State
Governments for urban traffic and transportation studies. The grant
assistance is presently restricted to 40% of the cost of the
comprehensive traffic and transportation studies, preparation of
detailed project reports, etc. In addition, this scheme is also used
to take up professional studies and for organizing conferences/
workshops etc. on Urban Transport”.
3.15 According to the Outcome Budget (2008-09) of the Ministry of
Urban Development:
“The present scheme of providing 40% as the Central Financial
Assistance for taking up studies and preparation of DPRs in the
field of urban transport was not found attractive enough by the
States and they were not exploiting the scheme. As such, a new
scheme providing for 80% for Central Financial Assistance for
Transport planning is in the process of sanction which will facilitate
implementation of National Urban Transport Policy, 2006 objectives
effectively throughout India right from the planning stage itself”.
3.16 As per Outcome Budget, (2008-09) of Ministry of Urban
Development, the outlay for the scheme of “Urban Transport Planning
& Capacity Building ” for the year 2008-09 is Rs. 30 crore. Besides, as
on 01.01.2008, under the component ‘Sub-Mission for urban
infrastructure and governance’ of JNNURM, the number of projects
funded for the sectors ‘MRTS’ and ‘other urban transport’ were
13 and 11 respectively. Details of the said project assistance are as
under:

35
JNNURM
(SUB-MISSION ON URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE AND GOVERNANCE)
DETAILS OF PROJECTS SANCTIONED UNDER ‘MRTS’ SECTOR
S.No. State City Sector Project Name Approved Central Share Central
Cost (Rs. Admissible Sharein Lakhs) (Rs. in lakhs) Released
(Rs. in lakhs)
12 3 4 5 6 7 81. Gujarat Ahmedabad Mass Rapid Bus Rapid Transport System- 87060.00 3066 766.50
Transport System Construction of 12 Km. Long stretch
(Stretch-1 of first phase) BRT Roadwayand Carrying out detailed studies andengineering of remaining stretches
2. Gujarat Ahmedabad Mass Rapid Bus Rapid Transit System (stretch of 46 km) 40572,00 14200.2 3550.05
Transport System
3. Madhya Pradesh Bhopal Mass Rapid Pilot Corridor (New Market to University) 23776.00 11888 2972.00
Transport System for Bus Rapid Transit System (21.715 km
long
4. Madhya Indore Mass Rapid Bus Rapid Transport System-PILOT PROJECT 9845.00 4922.5 1230.62
Pradesh Transport System
5. Rajasthan Jaipur Mass Rapid BRTS project proposal (Package IB) 7519.00 3759.5 939.88
Transport System from C zone Bypass crossing to
Panipech 
via 
Sikar Road
6. Maharashtra Pune Mass Rapid BRT Pilot project for Pune city (Katraj 6232.00 3116 779.00
Transport System Swargate Hadpsar Route 13.6 Km)

36
12 3 4 5 6 7 87. Maharashtra Pune Mass Rapid Bus Rapid Transport system 26865.00 13432.5 3358.13
Transport System (Development of Infrastructure for
Commonwealth Youth Games, 2008)
8. Maharashtra Pune Mass Rapid Bus Rapid Trasit (Phase I) for Pune city 47615.50 23807.75 5951.94
Transport System
9. Gujarat Rajkot Mass Rapid Bus Rapid Transit System Phase I 11000.00 5500 1375.00
Transport System (Development of Blue Corridor PartI)
10. Andhra Vijayawada Mass Rapid Bus Rapid Transport System for 15264.00 7632 1908.00
Pradesh Transport System Vijayawada (i) MG Road (ii) Nujiveedu
Road (iii) Eluru Road (iv) Route No. 5(v) S.N. Puram Road (vi) Loop Road
11.
Andhra Vishakhapatnam Mass Rapid Bus Rapid Transport System for 45293.00 22646.5 5661.63Pradesh Transport System Vishakapatnam (i) Simhachalam Transit
Corridor including tunnel (ii) PendurthiTransit Corridor
12. Rajasthan Jaipur Mass Rapid Bus Rapid Transport System (BRTS) 14400.00 7200.00 0.00
Transport System under package tours
13. Maharashtra Pune Mass Rapid Pimpri-Chinchwad-BRTS Corridor for 31214.00 15607.00 0.00
Transport System Mumbai-Pune Highway (8.5 Kms) and
Audh Rawet Road (14.5 Kms)
Total (Rs. In Lakh) 288355.50 136777.95 28492.75

37
JNNURM
(SUB-MISSION ON URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE AND GOVERNANCE)
DETAILS OF PROJECTS SANCTIONED UNDER ‘OTHER URBAN TRANSPORT’ SECTOR
S.No. State City Sector Project Name Approved Central Share Central
Cost (Rs. Admissible Sharein Lakhs) (Rs. in lakhs) Released
(Rs. in lakhs)
12 3 4 5 6 7 81. Karnataka Bangalore Other Development of Traffic and Transit Management centre 2112.66 739.431 184.86
Urban at Kengery (Proposed Bus terminal Maintenance DepotTransport and Passenger Amenity Centre at Kengery, Bangalore)
2. Karnataka Bangalore Other Development of Traffic and Transit Management centre 392.60 137.41 34.35
Urban at Bannerghatta, Bangalore (Proposed Bus TerminalTransport Maintenance Depot and Passenger Amenity Centre
at Bannerghatta)
3. Karnataka Bangalore Other Proposal for construction of TTMC at Shantinagar V ol I, 8467.96 2963.786 59.27
Urban Vol II, Vol III A 1234 Vol. III B 1 2Transport
4. Karnataka Bangalore Other Proposal for construction of TTMC at Koramangala 5058.06 1770.321 44.25
Urban Vol I, Vol II, V ol III 1 2 3 Transport
5. Karnataka Bangalore Other Proposal for construction of TTMC at Banashankari 2223.51 778.2285 19.45
Urban Vol I, Vol II, Vol III 1 2 Transport

38
12 3 4 5 6 7 86. Karnataka Bangalore Other Proposal for construction of TTMC at ITPL Whitefield 2655.63 929.4705 27.88
Urban Vol. I Vol. II Detailed drawingsTransport
7. Karnataka Bangalore Other Construction of TTMC at Vijaynagar Vol. I Vol. II 3812.42 1334.347 33.35
UrbanTransport
8. Karnataka Bangalore Other Traffic and Transit Management Centre at Domlur 1555.00 544.25 0
Urban Bus StandTransport
9. Karnataka Bangalore Other Traffic and Transit Management Centre at Yeswantpur 6131.93 2146.176 0
Urban Bus StandTransport
10. Maharashtra Greater Other Thane Railway System Area Traffic Improvement 2325.00 813.75 203.44
Mumbai Urban Scheme (SATIS)
Transport
11.
Karnataka Mysore Other Development of Transport Infrastructure facilities at  8525.74 6820.592 682.05
Urban MysoreTransport
Total (Rs. In Lakhs) 43260.51 18977.7620 1288.90

39
3.17 As the demand for investment in the urban transport sector
during the 11th Plan has been estimated to be around Rs. 1,325,000
million, there is a need felt to create a dedicated “Urban Transport
Revolving Fund” for the same. When asked to comment on this, the
Ministry replied as under:
“The investment required in Urban Transport during 11th Five
Year Plan for maintaining about 10% growth of GDP is about
Rs. 1,32,590 crore. It is likely to be difficult to find resources for
such massive investment from out of general funds and hence a
dedicated revolving fund for urban transport may be necessary at
three levels i.e. Central, State and Urban Local Bodies.
The National Urban Transport Policy—2006 also states that “The
Central Government would encourage the levy of dedicated taxes
to be credited to an urban transport fund and used exclusively to
meet urban transport needs within the State. Such dedicated taxes
could be in the form of a supplement to the petrol and diesel
taxes, betterment levy on land owners or even an employment tax
on employers. In fact, revenues from the betterment levy along
new high capacity public transport corridors would be included
as a component of the financing plan for such, creation transport
system.
As such, creation of a dedicated Urban Transport Revolving Fund
is under consideration”.
3.18 When asked if the said Urban Transport Revolving Fund has
since been created, the Ministry stated on 30th September, 2008 as
under:
“A dedicated Urban Transport Revolving Fund has been set up by
the city of Surat and also by Pimpri-Chinchwad very recently . All
the States have been advised to set up a Dedicated Urban Transport
Fund at State level and City level. At the Central level, setting up
of Dedicated and Revolving Urban Transport Fund have been
proposed in the agenda items of the meeting of National
Development Council.”
3.19 Land use and levy of taxes: The Ministry further informed
the Committee that as suggested in the NUTP , the following methods
of additional resource mobilization need to be tapped:
- Commercial exploitation of land and air rights over the land
used for transport infrastructure.

40
- Use of private capital in such activities that are financially
viable and can be provided by the private sector in a
competitive environment.
- Use of betterment levies to make those whose property
values have improved to also pay for the investments that
enhanced the value of their properties.
- Fees collected from parking, etc.
In this context, Delhi Metro is already using the space available in
the Metro Stations for commercial activities. Shops are being
developed in the station premises and at some locations even Malls
are being constructed in association with private developers. The
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation has also developed an IT Park at
Shastri Nagar.”
F. Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
3.20 Elaborting the relevance of PPP concept in Urban Transport
the Ministry, in a written note, informed the Committee as under:
“There are several activities in which the private sector can be
beneficially engaged, thereby saving financial resources for activities
that only public agencies can best perform. However, these have
to be done under conditions that strike a fair balance between the
universal obligations of the Government and the profit motive of
the private operator. Accordingly, the Government would encourage
a more liberal use of the private sector, especially in activities like
the operation and maintenance of parking facilities, certification
facilities, repair facilities, construction and management of terminal
facilities, etc. Till the mid 1980s most public transport services
were largely provided by publicly owned State Transport
Corporations. Since then, however, some States have permitted
privately run services. While public operations have tended to be
high cost and most State Transport Corporations have run up heavy
losses, the reliability and safety record of inadequately regulated
private operators has been poor. On balance, the Central
Government would encourage the State Governments to involve
the private sector in providing public transport services, but under
well structured procurement contracts.
The DPR guidelines for Integrated Mass Transit System also
specify the use of Public Private Partnership (PPP) for funding of
various activities including development of terminals, stations,
operation of buses etc. An example of this is the Indore city where

41
buses are operated through private entrepreneurs who are then
allowed to keep the fare box collected. The revenue generated
from bus passes and advertisements are also shared between the
operator and the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) formulated for bus
operations.”
3.21 Further, when asked by the Committee to enumerate the
activities and sectors of urban transport in which the Government had
opted for PPP , the Ministry stated as under:
“The activities and Sectors of Urban Transport where Public-Private-
Partnership (PPP) model has been followed or is intended, are as
follows:
(i) Construction, Operation and Maintenance of Metro projects,
for example Hyderabad and Mumbai line I and II.
(ii) Operation and Maintenance of Metro e.g. Airport Express
line from New Delhi Railway Station to IGI Airport.
(iii) Running of modern city bus service on PPP for example in
Indore and Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh.
(iv) Development of bus terminals and parking lots.
(v) Foot overbridges, road signages etc., for example, Foot
Overbridge projects being implemented in Hyderabad under
‘Fund Your Own City’ Scheme run by the Government of
Andhra Pradesh.
(vi) Provision/modernization of bus stops/stations, for example
new bus stops created in Indore, Madhya Pradesh.
(vii) Bus Rapid Transit System under JNNURM where
infrastructure is being provided by the Government and
rolling stock, operation and maintenance is planned through
PPP participation.”

42
CHAPTER IV
URBAN TRANSPORT: MAJOR ISSUES
A. Rapid increase in private motor vehicles
Rapidly increasing ownership and use of private cars/two wheelers
due to lack of reliable public transport as well as presence of extreme
income inequality has exacerbated India’s transport crisis. Prof. P.K.
Sarkar, Head, School of Planning and Architecture, Delhi and expert
in Urban Transport Planning, in a written note, referred to the data on
vehicle fleet sizes prepared by the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways showing an extremely rapid growth of motorcycle ownership
i.e. 16-fold between 1981 and 2002 while car ownership had increased
around 7-fold during the same period.
4.2 The Annual Report of the Ministry of Urban Development
(2007-2008) stated the following facts regarding vehicle ownership in
cities:—
“The average two wheeler and car ownership levels in metropolitan
cities which were 112 and 14 per 1000 population in 1994, are
expected to grow to 393 and 48 respectively by the year 2021. This
would mean 53 million two wheelers and 6 million cars in the
next 15 years in metropolitan cities.”
4.3 Responding to a query from the Committee as to what steps
the Government has taken to ease congestion on roads due to
unchecked rise in the number of personal vehicles in the cities, the
Ministry inter alia replied as under:
“...To ease congestion from roads, the Central Government is
encouraging public transport, pedestrian and non-motorised
transport in line with National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP),
2006 for all the projects which are posed to the Central Government
for Central financial assistance under Jawaharlal Nehru National
Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) etc. Cities and States/UTs have
also been advised to introduce modern city bus service with state-
of-the-art buses on Public-Private-Partnership basis so that people
are incentivised to use public transport rather than the personal
vehicles. The Central Government has sanctioned Bus Rapid
Transport System (BRTS) projects for a total of 287 kms. at a cost
of Rs. 2427 crore in 8 cities under JNNURM in addition to Metro

43
projects of 115 kms in Delhi at a cost of Rs. 18,205 crore and
33 kms in Bangalore at a cost of Rs. 6395 crore. The Central
Government is also encouraging Metro projects in other mega cities
namely, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad etc. and BRTS
projects in million plus cities.”
4.4 Congestion Tax: When asked by the Committee as to whether
the Government had any plan for imposing a congestion tax on
personal vehicles as a deterrent to the use of these vehicles, the Ministry
replied as under:
“Introduction of congestion tax lies within the purview of the
concerned State Government/City Government. The Govt. of NCT
of Delhi has replied that there is no enabling provision for
Government of Delhi under the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 and rules
to enforce congestion tax.
It is further mentioned that before congestion tax may be
introduced, it would require provision of credible alternatives in
the from of improved public transport system and creation of
sufficient parking spaces.”
B. Non-Motorized Transport
4.5 Until very recently non-motorized modes of travel like bicycles,
cycle-rickshaws and walking constituted very basic urban transport
modes for the lowest rung of the population. However, with increasing
urban sprawl and rising income levels, non-motorized transport has
lost its earlier importance. As per the information provided by the
Ministry, the share of bicycle trips of the total trips in Delhi declined
from 17% in 1981 to 7% in 1994, owing to factors like longer trip
lengths and greater risk of accidents, as studies showed that 56% of
the road accident fatalities in Delhi involve cyclists and pedestrians.
4.6 As regards the latest figures on the share of bicycle trips of the
total trips in major metropolises, the Ministry furnished the same on
30th September, 2008 as under:
“As per the report of M/s Wilbur Smith Associates in connection
with ‘Study on Traffic and Transportation Policies and Strategies
in Urban Areas in India’ submitted in May, 2008, the share of
bicycle trips of the total trips in major metropolises is as under:
Ahmedabad 15%
Hyderabad 9%

44
Chennai 9%
Bangaluru 5%
Delhi 12%
Kolkata 11%
Mumbai 6%
4.7 The Ministry however maintained that despite these bottlenecks,
non-motorized modes are environmentally friendly and need to be
given their due share in the transport system of a city. Towards this
end, the Ministry informed the Committee as under:
“First of all, the safety concerns of cyclists and pedestrians have
to be addressed adequately. For this purpose, there has to be a
segregated right of way for bicycles and pedestrians. Apart from
improving safety, this will improve traffic flow, increase the average
speed of traffic and reduce emissions resulting from sub-optimal
speeds. The Central Government would, therefore, support the
construction of cycle tracks in all million plus cities to enhance
safety for cyclists and thereby increase the number of commuters
using this mode. Similarly pedestrian paths would also be
supported. Cities are being encouraged to introduce a public bicycle
program, where shoppers can rent a bicycle for use in specially
designated areas. Creative facilities like shade giving landscaping,
provision of drinking water and resting stations along bicycle
corridors would also be encouraged as they can mitigate to a large
extent adverse weather conditions.
In order to enable longer trip lengths to be undertaken on bicycles,
there is a need to improve bicycle technology. Lighter bicycles
with gears and tubeless tyres would be more amenable to longer
trip lengths. Electric bicycles are now available in the international
market and these should be tested in the Indian market.”
4.8 The Ministry further stated that:
“The Central Government would support formulation and
implementation of specific “Area Plans” in congested urban areas
that propose appropriate mix of various modes of transport
including exclusive zones for non-motorized transit. The Central
Government would also take up pilot projects, in a simple set of
cities, to demonstrate the improvements that are possible through
the enhanced use of cycling, for possible replication in other cities.”

45
4.9 In this connection, the Committee were also informed by the
Ministry that it had issued an advisory letter to all the State
Governments on 2.1.2008 to provide for enough provision for dedicated
paths for pedestrians and cycle users with proper design for all new
roads, widened roads. It has also been advised that where it is not
possible to provide dedicated path for pedestrians and cyclists, traffic
calming measures need to be adopted to limit the maximum speed of
motorized vehicles to 30 kmph. State Governments had also been
advised to incorporate complete network of bicycle tracks to promote
safe cycling practice between homes and schools and work centres in
particular while preparing the Master Plans. Investment in creating
facilities for pedestrians and cyclists was identified as priority area for
investment in urban transport under Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban
Renewal Mission. Compliance of various advisories issued by the
Ministry was also being monitored while providing the Central
Financial assistance. All the Bus Rapid Transit Systems (BRTS) projects
sanctioned so far for the million plus cities i.e. Ahmedabad, Bhopal,
Pune, Indore, Vijaywada, Vishakhapatnam, Jaipur and Rajkot envisaged
construction of cycle tracks along the BRTS corridors. The work was
stated to be in different stages of progress for these projects. State
Governments had also been advised by the Central Ministry to give
a feedback on implementation of various provisions of NUTP 2006
including construction of cycle tracks. However, no specific steps had
been contemplated by the Government to improve bicycle technology
as according to them, it was not the technology but the present lack
of safe infrastructure for cycling which was leading to the declining
share of non-motorized modes of travel in cities.
C. Urban Transport and Environment—Need for clean technologies
4.10 In order to deal with the problem of vehicular pollution,
cleaner technologies need to be explored and encouraged. As per the
written information submitted to the Committee, while petroleum-based
fuels are by far the most commonly used today, other alternatives
have been emerging, though slowly. CNG was adopted in a big way
for bus transport in Delhi. Electric trolley buses were also being
proposed in the city. Electric vehicles had already entered the market
for cars and auto rickshaws. Electric two wheelers were also stated to
be under development. Besides, renewable sources needed to be tapped
as a measure of sustainable development and in recognition of India’s
energy security concerns. As per the Ministry’s information, the
Government was encouraging the research, development and
commercialization of cleaner technologies.

46
4.11 In this context, it was informed that the Ministry proposed to
lay down a clear and time bound schedule of progressively tighter
emission norms, with adequate lead-time, to allow the auto and oil
industry to make the required investments. Further, the Ministry
proposed to introduce measures to incentivize the use of fuel efficient
small sized vehicles that use up little road space and also cause low
pollution. The Committee were informed that statutory provisions
would also be introduced requiring all in-use vehicles in a city,
including personal motor vehicles, to undergo a periodic check up
and obtain a specified certification. States would be encouraged to set
up such certification facilities, in partnership with the private sector.
The Central Government would also support the establishment of
training centers for the staff of such certification establishments so
that there are adequate skilled personnel, both for certification and for
undertaking the required repairs. All of these would require an effective
regulatory body to be set up to prescribe, monitor and enforce the
adherence of emission and safety standards. When asked about status
of the same, the Ministry informed the Committee on 30th September,
2008 that the setting up of effective regulatory bodies to prescribe,
monitor and enforce the adherence of norms and safety standards as
well as establishment of training centres for the staff of Certification
Establishments was within the purview of the State Governments and
that so far none of the State Governments had reported any action
taken in this regard.
4.12 With reference to the strategy for adoption of cleaner
technology, the Ministry stated as under:
“The strategy of the Government to adopt cleaner technology is
outlined in the road map envisaged under the Auto Fuel Policy as
approved by the Government of India in 2002 which lays down
the roadmap for tighter emission regulation upto 2010. The tighter
emission norms as envisaged in the road map are under:
Vehicle Bharat Stage Bharat Stage Bharat Stage Bharat Stage
Category II (entire III (11 III (entrire IV (11 Metros)
country) Metros) country)
Passenger Cars 01 April, 2005 01 April, 2005 01 April, 2010 01 April, 2010
Commercial Vehicles 01 April, 2005 01 April, 2005 01 April, 2010 01 April, 2010
2 & 3 Wheelers 01 April, 2005 Preferably April,
2008 but not
later than
01 April, 2010

47
Department of Road Transport and Highways has informed that
the emission norms of the motor vehicles have been tightened
periodically. The Bharat Stage III emission norms have been made
effective from 1st April, 2005 in 11 mega cities  i.e. NCR-Delhi,
Mumbai, Kolkata, Kanpur, Ahmedabad, Chennai, Surat, Bangalore,
Hyderabad including Secunderabad, Pune and Agra. In rest of the
country, Bharat Stage II emissions norms are being enforced.
Further, cleaner fuels such as CNG/LPG have also been notified
by the Department of Road Transport and Highways.”
4.13 On the issue of the impact of Urban Transport on the
environment, the Secretary , Ministry of Urban Development, during
the course of the evidence, inter alia stated as under:
“Considering the importance of climate change in the present
scenario, Planning Commission is drafting a policy paper on
‘Public Transport Sensitive to Climate Change’. A draft policy paper
has been forwarded to Planning Commission from the Ministry of
Urban Development duly incorporating the comments of experts
and of Bureau of Energy Efficiency. The draft policy suggests
strengthening of public transport through promotional, fiscal
control/regulatory measures, reduction of the fuel consumption per
passenger travelled through modal shift to improve access to goods
and services through an integrated urban plan, integrating inter-
city road passenger transport with urban transport systems, shifting
from fossil fuel to natural gas and renewable energy sources,
implementing fuel efficient standard for new as well as existing
vehicles, discouraging diesel propelled personalized vehicles,
technological options to improve fuel economy, etc.”
The Ministry later informed on 30th September, 2008 that the
Planning Commission had submitted the policy paper on ‘Public
Transport Sensitive to climate change’ to the Prime Minister’s Office
(PMO).
D. Parking Problem
4.14 Intense motorization has expanded the demand for parking
space. On this issue, the Ministry, in a written note informed the
Committee as under:
“Levy of a high parking fee, that truly represents the value of the
land occupied, should be used as a means to make the use of
public transport more attractive. Preference in the allocation of
parking space for public transport vehicles and non-motorized
modes as well as easier access of work places to and from such
spaces would go a long way in encouraging the use of sustainable
transport systems. Park and ride facilities for bicycle users, with
convenient inter-change, would be another useful measure.

48
Simultaneously, a graded scale of parking fee, that recovers the
economic cost of land used in such parking, should be adopted.
The objective would be to persuade people to use public transport
to reach city centers.
State Governments would be required to amend building bye laws
in all million plus cities so that adequate parking space is available
for all residents/users of such buildings. To enable this, Floor Area
Ratio (FAR) norms would be made more liberal. Multi-level parking
complexes should be made a mandatory requirement in city centers
that have several high rise commercial complexes. Such complexes
could even be constructed underground, including below areas
declared as green belts in the master plan. Such complexes could
come up through public-private-partnerships in order to limit the
impact on the public budget. All such parking complexes would
be encouraged to go in for electronic metering so that there is
better realization of parking fees to make the investments viable
and also a better recovery of the cost of using valuable urban
space in the parking of personal motor vehicles. In residential areas
too, appropriate changes in bye-laws would be considered to free
the public carriage way from parked vehicles that impede the
smooth flow of traffic. Proposals for parking complexes would
also be given priority under the National Urban Renewal Mission.
Provisions would also be made in the appropriate legislation to
prevent the use of the right of way on road systems for parking
purposes.
The Ministry in its guidelines for Detailed Project Reports (DPRs)
on mass transit system has also specified allocation of parking
space for private vehicle, bicycle and para-transit services along
the corridor. It also lays emphasis on development of a parking
policy for the city and implementing it on PPP basis. The Ministry
has also listed the option of higher pricing for parking in Central
Business Districts (CBDs).
The Government of Delhi has already escalated the parking fees
in the CBD.”
4.15 During the course of briefing by the Ministry, the Committee
enquired as to whether it would be possible for the Ministry of Urban
Development to direct all the State Governments to modify the
Development Control Rules (DC Rules) to the extent that sufficient
parking space is compulsorily provided to everybody in the urban
area, and to deny commencement certificate unless that is done. To
this the Secretary , Ministry of Urban Development, responded as under:
“A beginning on this front has been made in Delhi. Under the
Master Plan of Delhi, earlier there was a parking space for one

49
vehicle for one dwelling unit. Now the parking space has been
increased to accommodate two or three vehicles per dwelling unit.
And this guideline shall be circulated to all the other States as
well.”
4.16 To a query from the Committee about the States/UTs that
have developed parking policies, the Ministry responded on
30th August, 2007 as under:
“Though all the States/UTs have been advised to develop parking
policy for smooth and sustainable transport system, most of the
States have yet to develop the same. However, the State
Governments have been recently asked to provide a feedback about
the same. Government of Delhi has informed that they have
developed a parking policy in line with NUTP , 2006 and submitted
to Hon’ble Supreme Court for consideration and approval. States
have also been advised to develop Multi-level parking in cities on
PPP basis.”
D. Road Accidents:
4.17 Growing traffic in urban areas is linked with a growing
number of accidents and fatalities. During the course of the briefing,
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development revealed that a total 4672
persons were killed in road accidents in the six major Indian
Metropolises of Bangalore, Kolkata, Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad and
Mumbai in 2005. As per the Ministry’s latest data this figure rose to
5796 in 2006 with following breakup:
Bangalore - 919
Kolkata - 476
Chennai - 1136
Delhi - 2169
Hyderabad - 427
Mumbai - 669
Total - 5796
One major factor for the road accidents is a lack of discipline, and
improper driving. The Committee, during the evidence, rued the fact
that in our country, it was very easy to get a licence. Further, drivers
have scant regard for transport rules and discipline. These factors have
aggravated the chaotic traffic situation in cities.
The Committee were informed that addressing concerns of road
safety and trauma reponse was an important objective of NUTP-2006.

50
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
Public Transport:
1. Public Transport is the more suitable form of transport for
our country in view of the ever-increasing population as well as
inability of a large chunk of the same to afford personal modes of
transport, apart from severe crunch of road space in metropolitan
cities. Therefore, it is imperative for the Government to explore
maximum ways to improve public transport and make it attractive.
The Committee have been made to understand that the Ministry
have advised all State Capitals as well as other million-plus cities to
start planning for mass transit systems, which is funded under
JNNURM. However, from the figures furnished by the Ministry, the
Committee note that 23 out of 35 million-plus cities are yet to submit
any proposal on public transport. The Committee, therefore may be
apprised of the steps being taken by the Government for impressing
upon these cities to submit proposals for improving their public
transport systems. In so far as providing statutory support to urban
transport system is concerned, reportedly, the Delhi O&M Act is
being amended to extend it to all the cities in the country for all
types of guided urban transit systems, as legislative cover. The
Committee appreciate the move and expect an expeditious action on
the same. The Committee hope that the cities are already aware of
the merits of a well-integrated and seamless public transport for the
users and are working towards proper inter-change infrastructure
between different modes of public transport. The Committee
understand that the National Urban Transport Policy, 2006 addresses
these issues. They would urge the Ministry to formulate a well-laid
out strategy/road map in consonance with the Policy and advise the
States accordingly. The Committee desire to be apprised of the same
in due course.
Bus Transport
2. Bus transport constitutes one of the most important and basic
forms of public transport. Thus, the city bus services need to be
strengthened. Sadly, the share of buses in all vehicles has declined
by 15% during 1995-2004. The Committee urge the Government to
take urgent measures to improve the city bus services through better
quality of buses and an efficient service.

51
One major problem which discourages bus transport is that the
present taxation system is not conducive for the promotion of bus
system. In Delhi, for example, the tax burden on a bus is 26 times
more than a car. As per World Bank estimates, the total tax burden
per vehicle km is 2.3 times higher for public transport buses than
cars in Indian cities. Thus, the taxation system need to be rationalized
and harmonized with a view to improving public transport bus
system. The cost of modern buses need to be brought down through
tax and duty concessions so as to make their introduction financially
viable. The Government’s initiative of reducing the excise duty from
16% to 12% on the buses in the Budget 2008-09 is appreciable and
must be carried forward in future through phasing out V AT and
Central Excise Duty on buses. The Committee also desire that the
input cost of bus transport particularly the fuel cost needs to be
brought down through measures like fuel subsidy to make it viable.
Further, to make public transport attractive so that people move
away from using personal vehicles, it would be advisable, in line
with the recommendation of the National Urban Transport Policy,
2006 (NUTP), that there should be different types of public transport
services for different segments of commuters. At the lower levels
public transport should be affordable. However, fares should be
commensurate with the quality of services provided. The
economically better off, who value time saved and comfort, would
definitely shift to public transport if their quality expectations are
met. State of the art modern buses may be introduced on Public
Private Partnership (PPP) mode. There should also be provisions for
express buses guaranteeing seats to passengers. The Committee may
be apprised of the steps taken by Government with regard to above
issues.
Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS)
3. BRTS which entails dedicated lanes for high capacity buses,
is a crucial mode providing smooth and affordable transport facility
to the public. Considering its low cost, ease of implementation, wide
area coverage, flexibility and overall sustainability, this system should
be encouraged. However, the Committee have been informed by the
expert that its merits notwithstanding, this concept should be
cautiously and selectively applied in cities and that there are certain
basic parameters and prerequisites necessary to make this system
successful. In line with the advice of NUTP , the Committee would
like to believe that factors such as the urban form, terrain, level of
demand, direction and extent of sprawl, width of road available,

52
extent of population density have been taken into consideration in
BRTS projects. From the material furnished by the Ministry, the
Committee understand that apart from Delhi, BRTS projects in
8 other cities have been approved. The Committee hope that before
implementing these BRTS projects, a thorough scientific feasibility
study of each respective city has been taken up in the light of the
above-mentioned parameters with due incorporation of public opinion
as well. In the backdrop of the criticism of BRTS project in Delhi,
the Committee expect that utmost care would be taken in the
implementation of these projects.
Inland Water Transport (IWT)
4. Inland Water Transport is a very significant, economic, fuel-
efficient and environment-friendly mode of transport for coastal cities
and those having inland waterways. However, its current share in
total inland transport is very low. IWT Policy of Inland Water
Authority of India (Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and
Highways) aims at increasing the share of IWT in the inter-modal
mix of inland transport, encouraging private participation, making
this mode competitive and making Government a provider and
facilitator. The Committee expect the Ministry of Urban Development
to coordinate with the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and
Highways to realize the goals of IWT policy and give a boost to
inter-modal transport by connecting the urban inland waterways with
other modes of transport, wherever feasible. They urge the Ministry
to ensure that cities capable of having inland waterways transport
are encouraged to come up with suitable mobility Plans that utilize
and integrate their waterways transport with other modes of public
transport. The Committee further feel still there is ample scope left
to explore the utility of inland waterways in several cities for
providing a major affordable means of public transport. Therefore,
the Committee also desire that for a smoother and better utilization
of inland waterways for urban traport, the Government should
explore the possibilities of bringing in land water transport in the
urban areas under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Urban
Development. The Committee would urge the Ministry to take up
the matter at appropriate level and apprise them of the outcome.
Intelligent Transport System (ITS)
5. As per the expert opinion, ITS when used in urban transport,
has a great potential of enhancing safety, reducing emissions as well
as congestion. The draft urban bus specifications, currently under
finalisation in the Ministry, have also specified that bus architecture

53
should be compatible with ITS and vehicle tracking system.
Considering the benefits of ITS, there is a strong case for formulating
a National-level Intelligent Transport System framework. The
Ministry of Urban Development has reportedly set up an Inter-
Ministerial core group on ITS for establishing a National framework
for ITS after bringing all the stakeholders and Ministries together.
The Committee commend the same and desire that the core group
must frame it with due urgency. They would like to be apprised of
the progress on the matter.
National Urban Transport Policy- 2006 (NUTP)
6. The Committee note that Government of India has formulated
a National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP) 2006 with its objective to
ensure easily accessible, safe, affordable, quick, comfortable, reliable
and sustainable mobility for all. It focuses inter alia on integrated
land use and transport planning, more equitable allocation of road
space, greater use of public transport and non-motorized vehicles,
road safety, establishing knowledge management and promoting
cleaner technologies. Appreciably, it underlines the need to ‘Move
People-Not vehicles’. As major policy guidelines need to be
implemented by the State Governments and Urban Local Bodies
(ULBs), the Committee urge that the State Governments should not
be found wanting in this respect and should take expeditious steps
to prepare Urban Transport projects in compliance with the NUTP .
While the NUTP is a commendable initiative, the Committee
would like to comment on certain vital aspects which should be
implemented. According to experts, the planning based on the policy
should be more specific on tragets and goals and performance
measures, for instance 50% reduction in road accidents over 5 years;
reduction in petrol fuel use by 20% 30% and 50% over 2, 3 and 5
Years; increase in pedestrianisation and cycling trips; increase in bus
capacity & use; improvement in air quality; reduction in vehicular
noise, etc. Also, the Committee feel that some common, basic
technical, communication and service standards should be set by the
State Governments by standardizing tolling systems and traffic
monitoring, management & control systems to ensure seamlessness
in Urban Transport. Further, the Committee would like to emphasize
upon reform-oriented funding ensuring that more money is not given
merely to cities and towns with more problems. In fact, it should be
extended as incentives to such towns and cities that show
improvement with optimization of existing infrastructure, efficient
solutions, and innovative ways to mobilize resources and private

54
investments. The Committee expect that these proposals would find
favour with the Government and would be duly incorporated in the
NUTP .
Establishment of Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA)
7. A high degree of fragmentation within Urban Transport
management and separate enactments for various modes of Urban
Transport as also the multiplicity of Urban Transport agencies render
a coordinated planning and implementation of Urban Transport
infrastructure difficult, ultimately defeating the prime purpose of a
unified integrated Urban Transport System. In this connection, the
Committee commend the fact that the Ministry is working towards
ensuring very close coordination between the providers of urban
transport services. They note further that the NUTP recommends the
setting up of Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA)
backed by an Act in all million plus cities to facilitate better
coordination in the planning and implementation of Urban Transport
systems.
The Committee deplore the fact that even after more than two
years of NUTP’s recommendation for UMTA, the drafting and
enactment of the said Act in all million-plus cities, except Hyderabad,
is yet to be done which would provide requisite statutory backing
to the UMTAs for facilitating more coordination, planning,
implementation and management of urban transport system/projects.
Reportedly, Hyderabad is the only example where UMTA Act is in
place. The Committee, therefore desire the expeditious enactment of
the UMTA Act, by all the State Governments. The Committee also
note the constitution of a second Task Force to look at the
requirements of the remaining mega cities and the larger cities with
respect to the setting of UMTA. The Committee desire that no further
time should be lost in finalizing the constitution of the said Authority
for all these cities as well. The Committee may be apprised of the
composition and the functional mechanism of the UMTAs, thus set
up.
Urban Transport Planning: Need for a long-term system approach
8. In the light of the uncontrollable urban transport related
problems, a long-term system approach to urban transport planning
is urgently required. In this connection, experts have emphasized
before the Committee that any Comprehensive Mobility Plan,
including an integrated master plan, should be developed keeping
in view the population, area, urban form, topography and mobility

55
needs of each city. The Committee also desire that in compliance
with the aim of the NUTP , 2006, the Ministry should systematically
encourage the integration of land use and transport planning in all
cities so that travel distances are minimized and access to livelihood,
education and other social needs, specially, for the marginal segments
of the urban population is improved by encouraging the concept of
walk-to-work. For a systematic and successful urban transport
planning, future perspective technology issues, engineering issues,
financial issues, legal/Administrative/Regulatory, capacity building
and awareness issues need to be adequately addressed. The
Committee expect that in all future urban planning, all these factors
would be taken due care of.
Financing of Urban Transport
9. A sound and adequate funding is required for a sustainable
urban transport. In so far as the Centralized schemes on Urban
Transport is concerned, the Committee note that a scheme for Urban
Transport Planning was introduced wherein the Government of India
provided Central Financial assistance to the States/UTs upto 80% for
preparing comprehensive urban transport plans/studies, integrated
land use etc. The percentage of Central Financial assistance was
revised from earlier 40% to 80% as the States were reportedly not
very forthcoming in availing the same. The Committee hope that
the revised provision would attract a suitable response from the
States/UTs. They would like to be apprised of the response from the
States/UTs to the scheme as well as the level of monitoring done to
ensure appropriate utilization.
Further, the Committee have been given to understand a new
scheme for ‘Capacity Building in Urban Transport’ is currently
awaiting approval of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). They
would like to be apprised of the latest position on the same and
furnished with a note on the details of the scheme, projections and
tragets, if any.
Further, the Committee are dissatisfied to learn that as on
01.01.2008, under the component ’Sub-Mission for urban infrastructure
and governance’ of JNNURM, the numbers of projects funded for
the sector MRTS and ‘Urban Transport’ excluding MRTS were just
13 and 11 respectively. Moreover the projects are being taken up in
only 12 cities out of 63 mission cities, which is not even 20%. The
Committee do not find it satisfactory considering the fact that
JNNURM, which was started in December, 2005 will be completing

56
3 years by the end of this year. The Committee hope that more
projects covering all these cities would be taken up. Further, as the
demand for investment in urban transport sector during the
11th Plan has been estimated to be around Rs. 1,325,00 crore, there
is a need felt to create a dedicated “Urban Transport Revolving Fund”
for the same. However, the Committee regret the delay in creation
of the said fund. As regards States, the Committee learn that only
the cities of Surat and Pimpri-Chinchwad have set up such a fund.
At the Central level, the setting of such a fund has been proposed
in the agenda items of the meeting of National Development Council.
The Committee hope that the Ministry would continue to pursue
the matter so that such a fund is set up at the earliest.
Public Private Partnership
10. The merits of private participation in Urban Transport in
bridging the resource gap in investment and improving the
operational and efficiency vis-a-vis the rapidly growing Urban
Transport demand have already been recognized. At present the
Government is stated to be pursuing policies to promote private
sector involvement in Urban Transport. An appropriate regulatory
framework is required for a cooperative public-private mixed
operation. While the Government should coordinate and monitor
the operation, private operators should also be consulted for planning
the system. Though privatization appears to have good potential for
improving the efficiency of public transport, experience to date has
shown the crucial need for public regulation of safety, route and
schedule coordination and service quality. The Committee have been
apprised of certain sectors where PPP model is being followed in
cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Indore, Bhopal and Hyderabad. They
further desire that focus of PPP should be on those sectors of Urban
Transport which encourage inter-modal public transport, cleaner
technologies, modern parking facilities and Intelligent Transport
Systems. The Ministry may apprise the Committee of the activities/
sectors of Urban Transport, where PPP is being taken up in
conformity with the parameters mentioned above.
Rapid Increase in Private Motor Vehicles:
11. Indian cities are facing a transport crisis in recent times. As
an inveitable consequence of rapid urbanization, which is reportedly
expected to reach from 28% in 2001 to 34% by 2021, the country is
witnessing great jump in travel demand. However, inadequate public
transport facilities, as well as uncoordinated land use and transport

57
planning are some of the most severe problems faced by a city-
dweller today. This has led to a tremendous increase in personalized
vehicles. The growth of private motor vehicles has far outpaced the
growth in public transport facilities in the major cities. According to
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, while motorcycle
ownership has shown a 16-fold increase between 1981 and 2002, car
ownership has shown a 7-fold increase during the same period. The
impact of such imbalance has resulted in choking up of already
congested roads, increase in traffic accidents, environmental pollution
due to greenhouse gas emission, noise pollution and rise in demand
for petroleum products thereby putting an increasing pressure on
our foreign exchange reserves. The Committee feel that the urban
poor suffer the most from the worsening transport problems in cities
as they cannot afford personal vehicles and remain dependent on
public transport for travel.
In this context, the Committee desire that in order to check the
rapid rise of personal vehicles in cities as well as cater to the
increasing demand for public transport, the Ministry, in coordination
with the States, should play a pro-active role in providing modern,
reliable, comfortable, affordable and seamless public transport service
in cities. As Urban Transport is primarily a State subject, the Central
Ministry has to play the role of a guide and facilitator in the matter.
Congestion Tax
12. Traffic congestion is the most visible transport problem
plaguing our cities on a daily basis. The most important cause of
congestion is the presence of mind-boggling number of private motor
vehicles sharing road space with other modes of transport. According
to the Annual Report of the Ministry, 5.3 crore two wheelers and 60
lakh cars will be on the road in our metropolitan cities in the next
15 years. The Committee feel that the Ministry should explore the
possibility of issuing suitable guidelines for levy of ‘congestion tax’
on personal vehicles in the form of a toll tax in the congested areas
or roads. This mechanism should be evolved in such a manner that
the charges change according to the time of the day to reflect
congestion levels so that the private vehicle users are inclined to
consider other options for transport.
Non-Motorized Transport
13. The Committee note that non-motorized modes of transport
like bicycles, cycle rickshaws, etc. are environment friendly and
economically favourable for the lower income group population.

58
Hence, these modes need to be encouraged. However, they deplore
the fact that non-motorized modes of transport are fast losing their
importance not only as a natural consequence of the increasing urban
sprawl and rising income levels but also as a result of lack of desired
importance given to non-motorized modes in the overall urban
transport policy, planning and investment.
The Committee desire that the safety concerns of cyclists and
pedestrians should be addressed urgently and adequately. The
Ministry must ensure that segregated right of way for bicycles and
pedestrians are constructed in all the million plus cities. Facilities
like secure parking, shade giving landscaping, provisions for drinking
water and resting stations along bicycle corridors should be
encouraged. Further, the Ministry should incentivize the use of lighter
bicycles with gears and tubeless tyres as also the use of electric
bicycles. Besides, local neighbourhood roads need to be strengthened.
People taking cars for small distance need to be discouraged by
building safe, comfortable and exclusive walking and cycling paths.
The Committee are also of the view that there should be a clear
provision for rights as well as responsibilities of pedestrians and
cyclists in the traffic rules. The Committee note that under the NUTP ,
the Central Government has committed to give priority to the
construction of cycle tracks and pedestrian paths in all cities, apart
from encouraging public-bicycle programmes. The Bus Rapid T ransit
System (BRTS) projects in 8 million-plus cities resportedly have
provision for cycletracks. The Committee hope that the Ministry will
monitor this in all seriousness and take necessary steps to protect
the non-motorists. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress on the matter.
Urban Transport and Environment—Need for clean T echnologies
14. In order to deal with the problem of vehicular pollution,
cleaner technologies need to be explored and encouraged. In this
connection, a clear and time bound schedule of progressively tighter
norms with adequate lead-time has been envisaged in NUTP , 2006.
In this context the Committee feel that for popularizing cleaner
technologies as well as reducing the use of fossil fuels, the use of
battery-run/electric vehicles/carts should be encouraged in closed
campuses like universities, institutions, Government organisations
etc.
The Committee have been made to understand that the
Government proposes to encourage State Governments to set up

59
specified certification facilities wherein all in-use vehicles in a city,
including personal motor vehicles, would be required to undergo a
periodic check up and obtain a specified certification in tune with
the policy. Further, as the Government has decided to support the
establishment of training centres for the staff of such certification
establishments so that there are adequate skilled personnel, both for
certification and for undertaking the required repairs, the Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress on the matter. In so far
as setting up of an effective regulatory body to prescribe, monitor
and enforce the adherence of emission and safety standards is
concerned, the Committee deplore the fact that so far none of the
State Governments has reported any action taken in this regard.
They expect the Ministry to play a proactive role in the matter.
Parking Problem
15. Inadequate parking space has aggravated the congestion
problem in cities. In this context, the Committee expect an urgent
and proactive role by the Ministry in laying down such guidelines
that encourage formulation of State level urban transport policies
containing features like a differential charging of parking fees for
various vehicles, preferential treatment for public transport and non-
motorized modes etc. In this connection, the Committee note that
the Government of Delhi has escalated the parking fee in Central
Business Districts. The Committee expect that similar measures
should have been taken by other million-plus cities also. Further
the Committee feel that the building bye laws must make it
mandatory to leave ample space for parking of at least two vehicles
per dwelling units. Besides, the purchaser of a vehicle must be asked
to produce relevant documents related to availability of parking space
at home. The Committee are also of the view that multi-level parking
complexes on PPP basis must be made a mandatory requirement in
city centres that have several high-rise commercial complexes. The
Committee deplore that despite the Ministry’s advisory to State
Governments on all the above-mentioned aspects of the parking
policy, they are yet to come up with an appropriate parking policy.
The Committee hope that the Ministry would take up the matter
with the State Governments and urge them to address this issue.
Accidents and Safety: Need for a stricter licensing policy
16. The Committee are pained to note that a total of 4672 persons
were killed in road accidents in the six major Indian Metropolises
of Bangalore, Kolkata, Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad and Mumbai in

60
2005. The figure rose to 5796 in 2006 for these six Metropolises.
These figures indicate that about 16 persons per day were killed in
road accidents in these six cities during 2006. Though the Ministry
could not furnish latest figures, yet the Committee are convinced
that the figures are showing an upward trend day-by-day. The
Committee observe that most of the road accidents/fatalities occur
due to indiscipline and lack of proper driving skills of drivers. The
Committee, therefore, feel that licensing norms need to be made
stricter in the urban transport policy with appropriate monitoring
for implementation of the same. The Committee also desire that in
order to rein in the recalcitrant drivers, punitive action should be
made more stringent. Also, Intelligent Transport Systems should be
utilized in identifying the culprits. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the efforts made by the Government towards enhancing
road safety.
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
3 December, 2008 Chairman,
12 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Urban Development.

61
ANNEXURE I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 2ND AUGUST, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Room No. ‘139’
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
3. Shri Anant Gudhe
4. Shri Kaliash Joshi
5. Shri A.K. Moorthy
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri D. Vittal Rao
8. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
9. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
10. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Manohar Joshi
12. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
13. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
14. Shri Penumalli Madhu
15. Shri Mukul Roy
16. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S. Balshekar — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Saxena — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Harchain — Under Secretary

62
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
(i) Shri M. Ramachandran, Secretary (UD)
(ii) Shri M. Rajamani, Joint Secretary (UD)
(iii) Shri S.K. Lohia, Director, (UT)
(iv) Shri C.B.K. Rao, Director (P&P), DMRC
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members and
representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development to the sitting of
the Committee. The Chairman then asked the Secretary, Ministry of
Urban Development to brief the Committee on the subject, “Urban
Transport”. He also drew the attention of the representatives to the
provisions under Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development, then gave a brief
presentation on the subject ‘Urban Transport’ and also explained the
measures taken by them for ensuring an efficient and sustainable urban
transport system in the light of the National Urban Transport Policy,
2006. The representatives of the Ministry then clarified the queries
raised by the Members on the subject, “Urban Transport”.
4. As there are several technical as well as non-technical aspects of
the subject, the Hon’ble Chairman desired to hear the views of the
experts also and have further briefing from the representatives of the
Ministry of Urban Development on the subject “Urban Transport” in
due course.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

63
ANNEXURE II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON TUESDAY, 18TH DECEMBER, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in the Committee
Room ‘D’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
3. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillion
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Anant Gudhe
6. Shri Pushp Jain
7. Shri Sajjan Kumar
8. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
9. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
10. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
11. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
13. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
14. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
15. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
16. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
17. Shri Penumalli Madhu
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Balshekar — Joint Secretary (SB)
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary (UD )
3. Shri Harchain — Deputy Secretary-II (UD )

64
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
(i) Shri M. Ramachandran, Secretary (UD)
(ii) Shri S.K. Lohia, Director (UT), MoUD
(iii) Shri Vijay Anand, Director (Projects), DMRC
(iv) Shri A.K. Chaturvedi, Special Commissioner (Transport),
Govt. of NCTD
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members
and the representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development to the
sitting of the Committee. The Chairman then asked the Secretary,
Ministry of Urban Development to brief the Committee on the subject
“Urban Transport”. He also drew the attention of the representatives
to the provision of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha.
3. The Secretary , Ministry of Urban Development then briefly
outlined the issues regarding the subject ‘Urban Transport’ and also
explained the initiatives taken by them to realize the objectives of the
National Urban Transport Policy, 2006. The representatives of the
Ministry also to the clarifications sought by the Members on the subject.
4. As there are several technical as well as non-technical aspects of
the subject which needed further clarification, the Committee decided
to hear the views of some experts also on the subject in due course.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

65
ANNEXURE II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY,
THE 31ST JULY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘139’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
3. Shri Anant Gudhe
4. Shri Pushp Jain
5. Shri Sajjan Kumar
6. Shri A.K. Moorthy
7. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
8. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
9. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
Rajya Sabha
10. Dr. Prabha Thakur
11. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
12. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
13. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
14. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
15. Shri Penumalli Madhu
16. Shri Mukul Roy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Harchain — Deputy Secretary II

66
EXPERT
Professor P .K. Sarkar, Head (TP), School of Planning & Architecture,
I.P . Estate, New Delhi.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Professor P .K. Sarkar
and drew his attention to the provision of Direction 55(1) of the
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’.
3. Professor P .K. Sarkar, then proceeded with his power point
presentation on the topic ‘Transport Planning & Research’, and
highlighted certain core issues like increasing number of private vehicles
and the consequent rise in road congestion, transport related pollution,
inadequate traffic management, etc. He also explained the concept of
a sustainable long-term transport planning focussing on ‘people centric’
public transport. Thereafter, he responded to the queries raised by the
Members pertaining to the subject.
Professor Sarkar then withdrew.
EXPERT
Shri Amitabh Bajpai, President, Association for Intelligent Transport
Systems, India (AITS), Prithvi Raj Road, New Delhi, AITS.
4. Shri Amitabh Bajpai, was then invited to appear before the
Committee.
5. The Chairman welcomed Shri Amitabh Bajpai and drew his
attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha. Shri Bajpai then made a power point presentation
on ‘Intelligent Transport Systems’ (ITS). He explained the meaning
and significant role of ITS in making travel safe, energy-efficient,
seamless and comfortable through the use of real time information
and support systems. He also responded to the queries raised by the
Members pertaining to the subject.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

67
ANNEXURE IV
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2008-09)
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON WEDNESDAY, THE 12TH NOVEMBER, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room
’E’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anant Gudhe
3. Shri Pushp Jain
4. Shri A.K. Moorthy
5. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
6. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Rajya Sabha
7. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
8. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
9. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
10. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
11. Shri Penumalli Madhu
12. Shri Mukul Roy
13. Shri Manohar Joshi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. Ravinder Kumar Chadha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Arvind Sharma — Under Secretary

68
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the draft Report on the subject ‘Urban Transport’ relating to the
Ministry of Urban Development. After some deliberations, the
Committee adopted the draft Report with some modifications.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the
Report in the light of the additions suggested and consequential
changes, if any, arising out of factual verification of the Report by the
Ministry, and present the Report to the Parliament.
4. The Committee also decided to have a briefing with the
representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development on Tuesday, the
25th November, 2008 in connection with the examination of the subject,
“The progress of JNNURM and challenges of Urban Infrastructure.”
The Committee then adjourned.