CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2008-2009) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in their Thirty Sixth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on “Government of India Stationery Office, Kolkata” (GISO)
relating to the Ministry of Urban Development, which was presented to
the Lok Sabha on 23rd October, 2008.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Report. These have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government (Chapter-II):—
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 (Total- 4)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government
(Chapter-III):—
-Nil-       (Total- NIL)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
(Chapter-IV):—
Sl. No. 6 (Total – 01)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited (Chapter-V):—
Sl. No. 5 (Total- 01)

2
3.3.3.3.3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be givenThe Committee trust that utmost importance would be givenThe Committee trust that utmost importance would be givenThe Committee trust that utmost importance would be givenThe Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
by the Government to the implementation of their Recommenda-by the Government to the implementation of their Recommenda-by the Government to the implementation of their Recommenda-by the Government to the implementation of their Recommenda-by the Government to the implementation of their Recommenda-
tions. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government totions. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government totions. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government totions. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government totions. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government to
implement the Recommendation(s) in letter and spirit for any reason,implement the Recommendation(s) in letter and spirit for any reason,implement the Recommendation(s) in letter and spirit for any reason,implement the Recommendation(s) in letter and spirit for any reason,implement the Recommendation(s) in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons forthe matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons forthe matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons forthe matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons forthe matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation.non-implementation.non-implementation.non-implementation.non-implementation.
4.4.4.4.4. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on theThe Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on theThe Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on theThe Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on theThe Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this ReportRecommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this ReportRecommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this ReportRecommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this ReportRecommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report
and final replies in respect of the Recommendations for which onlyand final replies in respect of the Recommendations for which onlyand final replies in respect of the Recommendations for which onlyand final replies in respect of the Recommendations for which onlyand final replies in respect of the Recommendations for which only
interim replies have been furnished by the Government  (includedinterim replies have been furnished by the Government  (includedinterim replies have been furnished by the Government  (includedinterim replies have been furnished by the Government  (includedinterim replies have been furnished by the Government  (included
in Chapter-V) should be immediately furnished to the Committee.in Chapter-V) should be immediately furnished to the Committee.in Chapter-V) should be immediately furnished to the Committee.in Chapter-V) should be immediately furnished to the Committee.in Chapter-V) should be immediately furnished to the Committee.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs:—
Implementation of the Reports of Department of Administrative
Reforms and Public Grievances and Internal Work Study Unit
(IWSU) on GISO.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 and 4)Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 and 4)Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 and 4)Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 and 4)Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 and 4)
6. The Committee had observed that the recommendation of the Study
Report of Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
was either restructuring of GISO into an Autonomous Body or
continuation of GISO with a staff strength to be assessed by an Internal
Work Study Unit (IWSU) of the Ministry of Urban Development. The
Committee also observed that although IWSU Report of September, 2001
had recommended net reduction of 49 posts in GISO, regrettably no
serious efforts were taken by the Ministry of Urban Development to
implement the Reports of the Department of Administrative Reforms &
Public Grievances and IWSU. The cause of GISO was also not taken up
forcefully with the Ministry of Finance.
7. The Committee had further expressed their surprise while noting
that without ascertaining the findings of the study conducted by the
Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances and the

3
study by the IWSU of the Ministry of Urban Development, the
Expenditure Reforms Commission had unilaterally recommended closure
of GISO in October, 2001 on the misplaced plea that order position of
GISO (Rs. 10.19 crore in 2000-01) was far less than the non-plan
expenditure incurred by GISO (23.6 crore). From the information
furnished by the Ministry of Urban Development, the Committee had
observed that the premise on which ERC made its recommendation for
closure of GISO did not hold good. The establishment cost of GISO in
2007-08 was far too less at Rs. 10.41 crore (Budget Estimates) as against
the reported order book position of Rs. 90.00 crore. The stationery rates
charged by GISO were also observed to be far less than those of the
Kendriya Bhandar in respect of most of the items. Evidently, ERC’s Report
on GISO did not take into consideration crucial facts such as rates and
quality of stationery and related factors concerning GISO and jumped
to recommend closure of the organization. While observing that the
Ministry of Finance too, without an independent examination of facts,
had relied on the unjustified report of ERC and insisted on winding up
of GISO, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Finance
should reconsider the matter in totality taking into account all relevant
factors and implications thereof and GISO be allowed to function as an
efficient and vibrant organization with the staff strength recommended
by IWSU.
8. In their action taken reply, the Government have informed the
Committee as under:—
“Recommendation/observation of Standing Committee as above
have been examined in consultation with the Ministry of Finance.
It has been decided that Government of India Stationery Office
(GISO), Kolkata could be allowed to function with staff compliment
as recommended by IWSU and further assessment by Ministry of
Urban Development.”
9.9.9.9.9. The Committee are glad to note that in line with the spiritThe Committee are glad to note that in line with the spiritThe Committee are glad to note that in line with the spiritThe Committee are glad to note that in line with the spiritThe Committee are glad to note that in line with the spirit
of their recommendation, it has been decided that Government ofof their recommendation, it has been decided that Government ofof their recommendation, it has been decided that Government ofof their recommendation, it has been decided that Government ofof their recommendation, it has been decided that Government of
India Stationery Office (GISO), Kolkata could be allowed to functionIndia Stationery Office (GISO), Kolkata could be allowed to functionIndia Stationery Office (GISO), Kolkata could be allowed to functionIndia Stationery Office (GISO), Kolkata could be allowed to functionIndia Stationery Office (GISO), Kolkata could be allowed to function
with staff compliment as recommended by IWSU. Howevwith staff compliment as recommended by IWSU. Howevwith staff compliment as recommended by IWSU. Howevwith staff compliment as recommended by IWSU. Howevwith staff compliment as recommended by IWSU. However the replyer the replyer the replyer the replyer the reply

4
is silent on any concrete steps that have been taken by theis silent on any concrete steps that have been taken by theis silent on any concrete steps that have been taken by theis silent on any concrete steps that have been taken by theis silent on any concrete steps that have been taken by the
Government to ensure that GISO would function as an efficient andGovernment to ensure that GISO would function as an efficient andGovernment to ensure that GISO would function as an efficient andGovernment to ensure that GISO would function as an efficient andGovernment to ensure that GISO would function as an efficient and
vibrant organization, as recommended by the Committee. As muchvibrant organization, as recommended by the Committee. As muchvibrant organization, as recommended by the Committee. As muchvibrant organization, as recommended by the Committee. As muchvibrant organization, as recommended by the Committee. As much
time has already been wasted, the Committee strongly urge thetime has already been wasted, the Committee strongly urge thetime has already been wasted, the Committee strongly urge thetime has already been wasted, the Committee strongly urge thetime has already been wasted, the Committee strongly urge the
Government to finalise the requirements of GISO in accordance withGovernment to finalise the requirements of GISO in accordance withGovernment to finalise the requirements of GISO in accordance withGovernment to finalise the requirements of GISO in accordance withGovernment to finalise the requirements of GISO in accordance with
the Report of Department of Administrative Reforms and Publicthe Report of Department of Administrative Reforms and Publicthe Report of Department of Administrative Reforms and Publicthe Report of Department of Administrative Reforms and Publicthe Report of Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances and IWSU, as early as possible and take suitable actionGrievances and IWSU, as early as possible and take suitable actionGrievances and IWSU, as early as possible and take suitable actionGrievances and IWSU, as early as possible and take suitable actionGrievances and IWSU, as early as possible and take suitable action
thereon. The Committee would await the final action taken by thethereon. The Committee would await the final action taken by thethereon. The Committee would await the final action taken by thethereon. The Committee would await the final action taken by thethereon. The Committee would await the final action taken by the
Ministry of Urban Development in this regard.Ministry of Urban Development in this regard.Ministry of Urban Development in this regard.Ministry of Urban Development in this regard.Ministry of Urban Development in this regard.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
10. The Committee had deplored that adequate budgetary support as
recommended by the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances was not provided to GISO. The budgetary provision for
“Material & Supply” which ranged between Rs. 12.00 crore and Rs. 20.00
crore from 1992-93 to 2003-04 was drastically reduced to Rs. 5.00 crore
in 2004-05 and further reduced to a meagre Rs. 1.00 crore in 2006-07.
The Ministry of Finance had informed the Committee that the Ministry
of Urban Development were to decide the extent of budgetary support
to GISO. The Committee had, therefore, desired that the Ministry of Urban
Development should clear the air of uncertainty regarding the continu-
ance of GISO and provide adequate funds to enable GISO to function
effectively. The Committee had also recommended that the feasibility of
generating revenue by commercializing the surplus capacity, if any,
available in the laboratory and quality testing facilities available with
GISO be examined.
11. The Government in their action taken reply furnished to the
Committee have informed as under:—
“Steps are being taken to provide adequate budgetary support to
Government of India Stationery Office, Kolkata for its efficient
functioning. Mechanism to generate revenue by commercializing
the surplus capacity, if any, is being worked out”.
12.12.12.12.12. The Committee have been informed that steps are being takenThe Committee have been informed that steps are being takenThe Committee have been informed that steps are being takenThe Committee have been informed that steps are being takenThe Committee have been informed that steps are being taken
by the Ministry of Urban Development to provide adequateby the Ministry of Urban Development to provide adequateby the Ministry of Urban Development to provide adequateby the Ministry of Urban Development to provide adequateby the Ministry of Urban Development to provide adequate

5
budgetary support to GISO for its efficient functioning. As thebudgetary support to GISO for its efficient functioning. As thebudgetary support to GISO for its efficient functioning. As thebudgetary support to GISO for its efficient functioning. As thebudgetary support to GISO for its efficient functioning. As the
budgetary exercise for the year 2009-10 would have been completedbudgetary exercise for the year 2009-10 would have been completedbudgetary exercise for the year 2009-10 would have been completedbudgetary exercise for the year 2009-10 would have been completedbudgetary exercise for the year 2009-10 would have been completed
by now, the Committee trust that adequate budgetary support forby now, the Committee trust that adequate budgetary support forby now, the Committee trust that adequate budgetary support forby now, the Committee trust that adequate budgetary support forby now, the Committee trust that adequate budgetary support for
GISO, as recommended by Department of Administrative ReformsGISO, as recommended by Department of Administrative ReformsGISO, as recommended by Department of Administrative ReformsGISO, as recommended by Department of Administrative ReformsGISO, as recommended by Department of Administrative Reforms
and Public Grievances, has been proposed by the Ministry of Urbanand Public Grievances, has been proposed by the Ministry of Urbanand Public Grievances, has been proposed by the Ministry of Urbanand Public Grievances, has been proposed by the Ministry of Urbanand Public Grievances, has been proposed by the Ministry of Urban
Development. The Committee would like to be apprised of theDevelopment. The Committee would like to be apprised of theDevelopment. The Committee would like to be apprised of theDevelopment. The Committee would like to be apprised of theDevelopment. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
proposals made by the Ministry of Urban Development for budgetaryproposals made by the Ministry of Urban Development for budgetaryproposals made by the Ministry of Urban Development for budgetaryproposals made by the Ministry of Urban Development for budgetaryproposals made by the Ministry of Urban Development for budgetary
support to GISO during 2009-10.support to GISO during 2009-10.support to GISO during 2009-10.support to GISO during 2009-10.support to GISO during 2009-10.
13.13.13.13.13. As regards the mechanism, if any, to generate revenue byAs regards the mechanism, if any, to generate revenue byAs regards the mechanism, if any, to generate revenue byAs regards the mechanism, if any, to generate revenue byAs regards the mechanism, if any, to generate revenue by
commercializing the surplus capacity, the Committee have beencommercializing the surplus capacity, the Committee have beencommercializing the surplus capacity, the Committee have beencommercializing the surplus capacity, the Committee have beencommercializing the surplus capacity, the Committee have been
merely informed that this is still being worked out. They, therefore,merely informed that this is still being worked out. They, therefore,merely informed that this is still being worked out. They, therefore,merely informed that this is still being worked out. They, therefore,merely informed that this is still being worked out. They, therefore,
desire that the Ministry should sincerely workout and finalize thedesire that the Ministry should sincerely workout and finalize thedesire that the Ministry should sincerely workout and finalize thedesire that the Ministry should sincerely workout and finalize thedesire that the Ministry should sincerely workout and finalize the
mechanism to generate additional revenue by GISO at the earliestmechanism to generate additional revenue by GISO at the earliestmechanism to generate additional revenue by GISO at the earliestmechanism to generate additional revenue by GISO at the earliestmechanism to generate additional revenue by GISO at the earliest
as it would have a positive impact on the overall functioning of theas it would have a positive impact on the overall functioning of theas it would have a positive impact on the overall functioning of theas it would have a positive impact on the overall functioning of theas it would have a positive impact on the overall functioning of the
organization.organization.organization.organization.organization.
Filling up of vacant posts including the post of Controller ofFilling up of vacant posts including the post of Controller ofFilling up of vacant posts including the post of Controller ofFilling up of vacant posts including the post of Controller ofFilling up of vacant posts including the post of Controller of
Stationery.Stationery.Stationery.Stationery.Stationery.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
14. The Committee had been informed that the staff strength of
Government of India Stationery Office was reduced considerably over
a period of time which crippled its performance and resulted in
deterioration of quality of work in some cases. The post of “Controller
of Stationery” was also stated to be lying vacant for the last 3 years. The
Committee had felt that the failure of the Ministry of Urban Development
in updating the Recruitment Rules for the post in time appeared to have
delayed the filling up the post of “Controller of Stationery”. Whereas the
Ministry of Urban Development had claimed that the Ministry of Finance
had not agreed for the revival of the post, the latter had asserted that
it was the responsibility of the former to deal with the issue. The
Committee had urged both the Ministries to sort out the issue
expeditiously in a spirit of accommodation without further loss of time
in filling up the post of “Controller of Stationery” and ensuring adequate
staff strength to Government of India Stationery Office as recommended
by the IWSU of the Ministry of Urban Development.

6
15. In their action taken reply, the Government have informed the
Committee that the matter has been resolved and steps are being initiated
to fill the vacancies.
16.16.16.16.16. The Committee are not convinced by the one-line reply tenderedThe Committee are not convinced by the one-line reply tenderedThe Committee are not convinced by the one-line reply tenderedThe Committee are not convinced by the one-line reply tenderedThe Committee are not convinced by the one-line reply tendered
by the Government on their recommendation to fill up the post ofby the Government on their recommendation to fill up the post ofby the Government on their recommendation to fill up the post ofby the Government on their recommendation to fill up the post ofby the Government on their recommendation to fill up the post of
“Controller of Stationery “ in GISO, which is lying vacant for more“Controller of Stationery “ in GISO, which is lying vacant for more“Controller of Stationery “ in GISO, which is lying vacant for more“Controller of Stationery “ in GISO, which is lying vacant for more“Controller of Stationery “ in GISO, which is lying vacant for more
then 3 years, without further loss of time, as well as to ensurethen 3 years, without further loss of time, as well as to ensurethen 3 years, without further loss of time, as well as to ensurethen 3 years, without further loss of time, as well as to ensurethen 3 years, without further loss of time, as well as to ensure
adequate staff strength. The Government in their action taken replyadequate staff strength. The Government in their action taken replyadequate staff strength. The Government in their action taken replyadequate staff strength. The Government in their action taken replyadequate staff strength. The Government in their action taken reply
furnished to the Committee have merely stated that steps are beingfurnished to the Committee have merely stated that steps are beingfurnished to the Committee have merely stated that steps are beingfurnished to the Committee have merely stated that steps are beingfurnished to the Committee have merely stated that steps are being
initiated to fill the vacancies. There appears to be indifference oninitiated to fill the vacancies. There appears to be indifference oninitiated to fill the vacancies. There appears to be indifference oninitiated to fill the vacancies. There appears to be indifference oninitiated to fill the vacancies. There appears to be indifference on
the part of the Ministry on the issue of posting a Controller ofthe part of the Ministry on the issue of posting a Controller ofthe part of the Ministry on the issue of posting a Controller ofthe part of the Ministry on the issue of posting a Controller ofthe part of the Ministry on the issue of posting a Controller of
Stationery in GISO. The Committee cannot but deplore the way inStationery in GISO. The Committee cannot but deplore the way inStationery in GISO. The Committee cannot but deplore the way inStationery in GISO. The Committee cannot but deplore the way inStationery in GISO. The Committee cannot but deplore the way in
which incomplete and vague replies are furnished to specificwhich incomplete and vague replies are furnished to specificwhich incomplete and vague replies are furnished to specificwhich incomplete and vague replies are furnished to specificwhich incomplete and vague replies are furnished to specific
recommendations made by them. They therefore desire to berecommendations made by them. They therefore desire to berecommendations made by them. They therefore desire to berecommendations made by them. They therefore desire to berecommendations made by them. They therefore desire to be
apprised of the present status of filling up of all the vacant postsapprised of the present status of filling up of all the vacant postsapprised of the present status of filling up of all the vacant postsapprised of the present status of filling up of all the vacant postsapprised of the present status of filling up of all the vacant posts
in GISO including that of Controller of Stationery.in GISO including that of Controller of Stationery.in GISO including that of Controller of Stationery.in GISO including that of Controller of Stationery.in GISO including that of Controller of Stationery.

7
7
CHAPCHAPCHAPCHAPCHAPTER IITER IITER IITER IITER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendations (Sl. No. 1 to 4)
1. The Government of India Stationery Office (GISO), a 158-year old
organization   established in the year 1850, has been responsible for
procurement and supply of stationery stores to around 13,166 authorized
indenters consisting of various Government of India offices, Public
Sector Undertakings etc. spread all over the country. At present GISO
carries out its duties through its various Branches as well as its three
Regional Stationery Depots in Mumbai, New Delhi and Chennai. GISO
has been facing an uncertain future since the year 1987 when the Cabinet
took the decision to wind up this office and a Government of India
Resolution to this effect was issued on 16th October, 1987. Subsequently
the closure order was revoked vide Government of India Resolution dated
27th February, 1991, pending a study on the subject. The study conducted
by the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances in
July, 1997 recommended the continuance of GISO. When the follow up
action on the recommendation of the study Report was in progress, the
Expenditure Reforms Commission (ERC) in October, 2001 recommended
closure of GISO. Since then, the Ministry of Urban Development and the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) have been wrangling
over the question of continuance of GISO, which inevitably had a
negative impact on the overall functioning and performance of GISO. The
Committee’s conclusions and recommendations arising out of the
examination of these and other related issues are set out in the following
paragraphs.
2. In pursuance of the recommendation of the Group of Secretaries,
Government of India decided in October, 1987 (Resolution dated
16.10.1987) to wind up the operations of the GISO and de-centralize the

8
work handled by GISO with immediate effect. The ostensible reasons
advanced by the Group of Secretaries for the closure of GISO included
high overhead cost of procurement and supply of stationery and GISO
rates being higher than those in the open market. Curiously, these reasons
have been proved wrong subsequently. It was decided after three and
half years (Resolution dated 27.2.1991) to resume the operations of GISO
and to make a study to establish whether there had been any economy
in purchase of stationery after closure orders were issued in
October, 1987. The study conducted by the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Public Grievances (Report dated 30.7.1997) revealed that
there was more expenditure on stationery during closure period as
compared to the period of functioning of GISO.  Thus, the initial
presumption on which Group of Secretaries recommended closure of
GISO stood refuted.
3. The study Report of Department of Administrative Reforms and
Public Grievances recommended either restructuring of GISO into an
Autonomous Body or continuation of GISO with a staff strength to be
assessed by an Internal Work Study Unit (IWSU) of the Ministry of Urban
Development. The IWSU took over 4 years to complete its study and
present a report.  The IWSU Report of September, 2001 recommended
net reduction of 49 posts in GISO.  Regrettably no serious efforts appeared
to have been taken by the Ministry of Urban Development to implement
the Reports of the Department of Administrative Reforms & Public
Grievances and IWSU nor was the cause of GISO taken up forcefully
with the Ministry of Finance.
4. The Committee are surprised to note that without ascertaining the
findings of the study conducted by the Department of Administrative
Reforms & Public Grievances and the study by the IWSU of the Ministry
of Urban Development, the Expenditure Reform Commission appears to
have unilaterally recommended closure of GISO in October, 2001 on the
misplaced plea that order position of GISO (Rs. 10.19 crore in 2000-01)
was far less than the non-plan expenditure incurred by GISO (23.6 crore).
From the information furnished by the Ministry of Urban Development,
the Committee observe that the premise on which ERC made its
recommendation for closure of GISO does not hold good. The

9
establishment cost of GISO in 2007-08 was far too less at Rs. 10.41 crore
(Budget Estimates) as against the reported order book position of Rs. 90.00
crore. The stationery rates charged by GISO are also observed to be far
less than those of the Kendriya Bhandar in respect of most of the items.
Evidently, ERC’s three-fourth page report on GISO did not take into
consideration crucial facts such as rates and quality of stationery and
related factors concerning GISO and jumped to recommend closure of
the organization. It is strange that the Ministry of Finance too, without
an independent examination of facts, has been relying on the unjustified
report of ERC and insisting on winding up of GISO. The Committee do
not expect such mishandling of an issue involving livelihood of as many
as over 600 employees. The Committee, therefore, urge that in the light
of the above facts, the Ministry of Finance should reconsider the matter
in totality taking into account all relevant factors and implications thereof
and allow GISO to function as an efficient and vibrant organization with
the staff strength recommended by IWSU.
Reply of the Government
Recommendations/observations of Standing Committee as above
have been examined in Consultation with the Ministry of Finance. It has
been decided that Government of India Stationery Office (GISO), Kolkata
could be allowed to function with staff compliment as recommended by
IWSU and further assessment by Ministry of Urban Development.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11018/2/2008-Sty
Dated 07 January, 2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report.)

10
10
CHCHCHCHCHAPTER IIIAPTER IIIAPTER IIIAPTER IIIAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-Nil-

11
11
CHAPTCHAPTCHAPTCHAPTCHAPTER IVER IVER IVER IVER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
The Committee have been informed that the staff strength of GISO
has been reduced considerably over a period of time which has crippled
its performance and resulted in deterioration of quality of work in some
cases. The post of “Controller of Stationery” is also stated to be lying
vacant for the last 3 years. Failure of the Ministry of Urban Development
in updating the Recruitment Rules for the post in time appears to have
delayed the filling up the post of “Controller of Stationery” and the
resultant delay has reportedly led to ‘deemed abolition’ of the post. It
is distressing in this connection to note the Inter-Ministerial wrangle on
the matter. Whereas the Ministry of Urban Development has claimed that
the Ministry of Finance had not agreed for the revival of the post, the
latter has asserted that it is the responsibility of the former to deal with
the issue. The Committee would urge both the Ministries to sort out the
issue expeditiously in a spirit of accommodation. There should be no
further loss of time in filling up the post of “Controller of Stationery”
and ensuring adequate staff strength to GISO as recommended by the
IWSU of the Ministry of Urban Development.
Reply of the Government
The matter has been resolved. Steps are being initiated to fill the
vacancies.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11018/2/2008-Sty
Dated 07 January, 2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report.)

12
12
CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER VVVVV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
The Committee deplore that adequate budgetary support has not
been provided to GISO as recommended by the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances. The budgetary provision
for “Material and Supply” which ranged between Rs. 12.00 crore and
Rs. 20.00 crore from 1992-93 to 2003-04 was drastically reduced to
Rs. 5.00 crore in 2004-05 and further reduced to a meagre Rs. 1.00 crore
in 2006-07. According to the Ministry of Finance, it is for the Ministry
of Urban Development to decide the extent of budgetary support to GISO.
The Committee would expect the Ministry of Urban Development to clear
the air of uncertainty regarding the continuance of GISO and provide
adequate funds to enable GISO to function effectively. GISO on its part
should develop more professionalism in its activities and establish that
it can function more effectively in the competitive environment.
Incidentally, the feasibility of generating revenue by commercializing the
surplus capacity, if any, available in the laboratory and quality testing
facilities available with GISO be examined.
Reply of the Government
Steps are being taken to provide adequate budgetary support to
Government of India Stationery Office, Kolkata for its efficient
functioning. Mechanism to generate revenue by Commercializing the
surplus capacity, if any, is being worked out.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11018/2/2008-Sty
Dated 07 January, 2009]

13
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph Nos. 12 and 13 of Chapter-I of the Report.)
 N EW DELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
12 February , 2009 Chairman,
23 Magha , 1930  (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

14
ANNEXURE I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2008-09)
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 5th FEBRUARY, 2009
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
3. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Pushp Jain
6. Shri Sajjan Kumar
7. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
8. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
9. Shri Jagdish Tytler
10. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
12. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
13. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
14. Shri Mukul Roy
15. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
14

15
SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. Ravinder Kumar Chadha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Arvind Sharma — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
1. Dr. M. Ramachandran, Secretary (UD)
2. Dr. M.M. Kutty, JS (D&L)
3. Smt. Sujata Chaturvedi, Director (DD)
Representatives of the Delhi Development Authority (DDA)
1. Shri Ashok Kumar, Vice-Chairman
2. Shri V.K. Sadhu, Principal Commissioner
3. Ms. Asma Manzar, Commissioner (Housing)
4. Shri V.S. Tomar, Deputy Director (System)
2.* At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members ****.
3.* *** *** *** *** ***
4.* *** *** *** *** ***
5.* *** *** *** *** ***
6. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the Draft Report
on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in their Thirty Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Government of
India Stationery Office, (GISO) Kolkata’, of the Ministry of Urban
Development, and adopted the same without any modification. The
Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report and present
the same to the Parliament.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related with the Report.

ANNEXURE II
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
Total
I. Total number of recommendations 6
II. Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government: 4
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4
Percentage to total recommendations (66.66%)
III. Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of Government’s replies: -Nil-
Percentage to total recommendations 0%
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect 1
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation No. 6
Percentage to total recommendations (16.67%)
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect 1
of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited:
Recommendation No. 5
Percentage to total recommendations (16.67%)
16

THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA STATIONERY OFFICE,
KOLKATA (GISO)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Thirty-sixth Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.2.2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.2.2009
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.U.D. No. 42C.U.D. No. 42C.U.D. No. 42C.U.D. No. 42C.U.D. No. 42
Price : Rs. 25.00
© 2009 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by The Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
7
10
11
12
14
16
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................................................
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................
CHAPTER I Report..............................................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government.................................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies..............................................................................................
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee..............................................................................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government are still awaited...................
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Standing
Committee on Urban Development (2008-09) held on
5th February, 2009....................................................................
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Sixth
Report of the Committee  (14th Lok Sabha)...................
P
AGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2008-2009)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
5. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
6. Shri Anant Gudhe
7. Shri Pushp Jain
8. Shri Kailash Joshi
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar
*10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
12. Shri A.K. Moorthy
13. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
14. Shri L. Rajagopal
15. Shri D. Vittal Rao
16. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
17. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
18. Shri Jagdish Tytler
19. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
20. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
21. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
(iii)
*Ceased to be the Member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation
from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 18.12.2008.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Dr. Prabha Thakur
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
27. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
28. Shri Penumalli Madhu
29. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
30. Shri Manohar Joshi
31. Shri Mukul Roy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. R.K. Chadha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Under Secretary
4. Shri Sumit Kumar Grover — Committee Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2008-09) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report
on their behalf, present the Thirty-Ninth Report on the action taken by
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Sixth
Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban
Development on the subject “Government of India Stationery Office,
Kolkata” of the Ministry of Urban Development.
2. The Thirty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
23rd October, 2008. Replies of the Government to all the recommenda-
tions contained in the Report were received on 9th January, 2009.
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 5th February, 2009.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty–Sixth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the
body of the Report.
  N
EW DELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
12 February , 2009 Chairman,
23 Magha , 1930  (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban
Development.

STANDING COMMITTEESTANDING COMMITTEESTANDING COMMITTEESTANDING COMMITTEESTANDING COMMITTEE
ON URBAN DEVELOPMENTON URBAN DEVELOPMENTON URBAN DEVELOPMENTON URBAN DEVELOPMENTON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)(2008-2009)(2008-2009)(2008-2009)(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN
DEVELOPMENT
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA STATIONERY OFFICE,
KOLKATA (GISO)
3939393939
THIRTY-NINTH REPORTTHIRTY-NINTH REPORTTHIRTY-NINTH REPORTTHIRTY-NINTH REPORTTHIRTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Thirty-sixth Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
lR;eso t;rs


All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale
at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.