CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Urban Development (2008-09)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Thirty First Report on the Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of Urban Development which was presented
to the Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2008.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 16 recommendations which have been categorized as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.10, 2.15, 2.16, 2.21, 3.14, 3.15, 3.16, 3.17, 3.18,
3.29, 3.30, 336, 3.46 and 3.47
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para No. Nil
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 3.28 and 3.42
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited.
Para No. Nil
3. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to the
comments made by the Committee in Chapter I be furnished to
them within three months of the presentation of this Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
High-Powered Expert Committee (HPEC) for estimating the
investment requirements for Urban Infrastructure Services
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
5. The Committee had noted that despite the slowing down of
urbanization at the macro level in India, as suggested by some
comparative studies, the pressure on the class I cities, metros and
mega cities was still crushing and the long term stakes involved in
putting good planning and resources mobilization in place, were quite
high. So far no detailed study had been done by the Government to
understand as to how the existing gap between the demand and supply
of resources could be bridged so that a viable urban infrastructure
could be established, developed and sustained. While examining the
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Urban Development year after
year, the Committee had gathered an impression that such a study
was urgently required to be undertaken by the National Institute of
Urban Affairs, an autonomous body within the Ministry, which could
guide them on the investments needed to ensure a sustainable delivery
of urban services. They, therefore, urged the Ministry to take action on
the matter urgently and apprise them of the same in due course.
6. The Ministry in their action taken report have stated as under:
“Government of India has set up a High-Powered Expert
Committee (HPEC) under Dr. Isher Judge Ahluwalia, ICRIER
(Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations),
with other eminent persons to look into the relevant issues. The
terms of reference of the Committee are to establish the conceptual,
analytic, contractual and institutional basis for the delivery of urban
services to support improvements in productivity, quality of life
on an inclusive basis, governance and enviro-socio parameters on
a sustainable basis keeping in mind the financial capacity of the
country and trends in other emerging markets etc. for estimating
the investment requirements for Urban Infrastructure Services. The
Committee has already met and shall submit its report to the
Government within a period of eighteen months from the date of
constitution.
An Inter-Ministerial group under the Secretary, Urban Development
alongwith Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation, representatives of Planning Commission, Department
of Economic Affairs and PMO will interact with the HPEC on
quarterly basis.
The Ministry of Urban Development has thus initiated the action
and will apprise the Committee about the outcome.”

3
7. The Committee are glad to note that in line with the spirit of
this Committee’s recommendation a High-Powered Expert Committee
(HPEC) has been set up for estimating the investment requirements
for urban infrastructure services. The Committee would like to be
informed of the HPEC’s composition, the date of its constitution
and the frequency of actual interaction with HPEC by the Inter-
Ministerial group. The Committee hope that the HPEC would submit
its report within the stipulated time. The Committee would like to
be kept informed of HPEC’s recommendations.
Delay in Submission of DPRs by nine cities under JNNURM
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
8. Having noted that DPRs had been received only from 54 out
of 63 identified cities under JNNURM, the Committee had desired
among other things that the Ministry should impress upon the
remaining cities to submit DPRs at the earliest so that the Mission
could sustain its desired momentum in its third year. The Committee
had also inter alia urged the Ministry to identify such cities which
have performed very well under JNNURM and recommend the slow
performing cities to learn from the models followed by those cities
in tackling the problems/differences in implementing various urban
reforms. The Ministry of Urban Development have not given any
response to these points. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the specific steps taken by the Ministry so far in this regard.
They would like to know the latest position regarding the number
of cities, which are yet to submit DPRs to the Ministry in order to
avail of funds under JNNURM.
Allocation of adequate funds for JNNURM
Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)
9. The Committee had noted that for the year 2008-2009, an amount
of Rs. 3100.37 crore had been allocated for JNNURM (Urban
Infrastructure and Governance) despite a projection of Rs. 4400 crore
made by the Ministry. As the allocation of Rs. 3100.37 crore during
the year 2008-2009 was not adequate for the Mission, keeping in view
the committed liability as well as sanction of new projects during the
year 2008-2009, the Committee recommended that the Government
should continue in their efforts to get adequate funds allocated for the
JNNURM early, to meet the requirements of committed liability and
sanction of new projects in the coming years.

4
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:
“The matter for allocation of adequate funds for JNNURM has
already been taken up with the Planning Commission. It has been
emphasized that due to small annual allocation of funds against
the 7 year provision for the UIG component, the pace of
implementation of the approved projects would be adversely
affected. At present, 58% of the funds stands committed so far. At
this pace of sanction of projects, the Mission period allocation
would not be sufficient and three is a need to seriously look at
the possibility of enhancing outlay so that the much desired basic
infrastructure projects can be taken up and also the needs of cities
needing more funds may be met. The Ministry will continue its
efforts to get the allocation enhanced.”
11. Though the matter for allocation of adequate funds for
JNNURM has reportedly been taken up with the Planning
Commission by the Ministry of Urban Development, nothing has
been mentioned in the reply as to what was the response from the
Planning Commission in the matter. Allocation of adequate funds is
a pre-requisite to achieve the goal of reform-driven, fast track and
planned development of infrastructure of identified cities. The
Committee hope that the Ministry of Urban Development will
vigorously pursue the matter with the Planning Commission and
ensure that sufficient funds are made available to JNNURM.
Mid-term Appraisal of JNNURM and UIDSSMT
Recommendations (Para Nos. 3.18 and 3.29)
12. The Committee had urged the Ministry to conduct a mid-term
appraisal of the JNNURM and UIDSSMT in order to know their impact
so far on the improvement of urban infrastructure and existing civic
services for the urban dwellers.
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:
“As regards mid term appraisal of the scheme, Ministry of Urban
Development have decided to have the mid term appraisal of
UIDSSMT also alongwith UIG component of the Jawaharlal Nehru
National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM).”
14. The Committee are happy to note that as desired by them,
the Ministry of Urban development have agreed to undertake a mid-
term appraisal of JNNURM and UIDSSMT so as to know the impact
of these schemes on the improvement of urban infrastructure.

5
However, it is not clear from the reply as to when this exercise will
be undertaken and by whom. The Committee hope that the mid-
term appraisal will be conducted soon and the outcome reported to
them.
Need for adequate allocation of funds for UIDSSMT
Recommendation (Para No. 3.28)
15. The Committee had noted that allocation for the Urban
Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns
(UIDSSMT) scheme for the year 2008-09 was Rs. 879.69 crore, whereas,
according to the Ministry, the minimum requirement under UIDSSMT
during 2008-09 was about Rs. 3000.00 crore. The Committee felt that
a shortage of Rs. 2120.00 crore was to staggering and thus, were of
the view that the proposed allocation of Rs. 879.69 crore during
2008-09 would be insufficient to meet even the committed liabilities of
the previous years. They had also opined that consequently , it would
not be possible for the Government to allot funds for further projects
which were likely to be put forward this year for sanctioning purposes,
thus directly affecting the small and medium towns. The Committee
had felt that this would further widen the disparity between small
and big towns and defeat the very purpose of the UIDSSMT scheme.
They, therefore, had desired that the Government should increase the
budgetary allocation for this scheme so that more projects could be
taken up and completed in small and medium towns within the
stipulated time period of the scheme.
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:
“Regarding enhancement of allocation, Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission have been requested to enhance the provision
for UIDSSMT during 2008-09 and overall allocation for the Mission
period substantially to enable us to cover more number of eligible
towns/cities and to make the Scheme successful and effective to
serve the purpose for which it has been launched. Ministry of
Finance, in this regard, has recently stated that the allocation of
funds for UIDSSMT Scheme for the Mission has been frozen and
has regretted to enhance the allocation.“
17. The Ministry of Finance have reportedly regretted their
inability to enhance allocation of funds recommended by the
Committee for UIDSSMT Scheme. No reasons have been advanced
for freezing the allocation of funds for the scheme. There is a need
to accord priority in allocation of funds to develop the urban
infrastructure of small and medium towns for improving the living

6
conditions of the people. The Committee would like to know the
status of utilization of funds already allocated for the scheme. In
case the funds have been already utilized, the Ministry of Urban
Development should impress upon the Ministry of Finance, the need
and justification for additional allocation of funds for the scheme
during the current year.
Timely Completion of the Pilot Project on Solid Waste Management
in the remaining three Airfield Towns
Recommendation (Para No. 3.42)
18. The Committee noted that in order to sanitize the areas around
the airfields to control the bird hit menace, which was the biggest
contributing factor in air mishaps, 10 selected IAF airfield towns were
selected under a pilot project in the year 1989 for providing solid
waste management and drainage facilities on priority basis to these
towns. It was proposed to take up the scheme for 10 Airfields towns
in two phases, namely Phase-I and Phase-II. Six towns under
Phase-I and four towns under Phase-II were to be taken up and
completed up to 4th year of 10th Plan and 1st year of the 11th Plan
respectively. The action in regard to preparation of DPRs by HUDCO
was initiated by the Ministry in 2003-04 and funds to the tune of
Rs. 99 lakh was released to HUDCO in March, 2004. The Committee
were dismayed to note that non-submission of DPRs by HUDCO in
time was holding up the implementation of projects and release of
funds. Therefore, HUDCO was later on asked to prepare DPRs for
only 3 airfield towns namely Tezpur, Gwalior and Pune. The Committee
were surprised as to how the Ministry of Urban Development paid
50% of the amount originally agreed, to HUDCO although they could
only complete 30% of the project. The Committee felt that the Ministry
should had penalized HUDCO for its inability to fulfill its commitment,
rather they chose to pay an amount, which HUDCO did not deserve.
The Committee further noted that in order to expedite the shceme, in
consultation with the Planning Commission, the Ministry had to direct
the NBCC and U.P . Jal Nigam to prepare DPRs for the rest of the
towns and implement the scheme to meet the target of completion of
scheme by the end of 10th Plan. Apart from the time and cost overruns
caused mainly by HUDCO’s bad performance, what was more
concerning to the Committee was the fact that out of 10 airfield towns
schemes, only three schemes at Sirsa, Jodhpur and Dundigal are 100%
complete and other seven schemes are under different stages of
execution. The Committee was particularly disturbed to note that in
Tezpur, which is a defence airfield, Pune and Hindon towns, the
progress had been quite unsatisfactory . The Committee, therefore,
recommended that the Ministry should immediately take up the matter

7
with the concerned agencies/authorities for these 3 towns and complete
all the schemes by June,, 2008 positively. They were of the opinion
that apart from causing huge loss to the Government exchequer, the
delay in completion of this project was directly linked with saving the
lives of the pilots as well as the aircraft, which could not be ignored
under any pretext.
19. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as below:
“The observation of the Committee has been noted for future
compliance.
In the meeting held on 2.9.2004 under the Chairmanship of Joint
Secretary (UD) to review the status of decisions taken in the
Steering Committee meeting, since the DPRs could not be finalized
by August 2004 as agreed by HUDCO, Joint Secretary (UD)
cautioned HUDCO that delay in the submission of DPRs by
HUDCO was a matter of serious concern and that it was holding
up the implementation of the project and release of funds. It was,
therefore, decided to get the project executed by a Central
Government agency viz. National Building Construction Corporation
Ltd. (NBCC).
In order to penalize HUDCO, the Ministry had withdrawn the
preparation of DPRs from HUDCO and assigned the task to NBCC.
However, HUDCO prepared DPRs for three airfield towns, namely,
Tezpur, Gwalior and Pune. As against the amount of Rs. 0.99 crore
released to HUDCO, HUDCO has furnished utilization certificate
for Rs. 0.90 crore and the balance amount of Rs. 0.09 crore have
been refunded to the Ministry.
The delay in the implementation of the Pilot project on Solid Waste
Management & Drainage in Hindon, Tezpur and Pune is due to
the non-availability of land for treatment and disposal facilities.
The ULBs and State Governments are taking a long time to resolve
the issues.
Out of 10 selected Airfield towns, projects in six towns, namely,
Sirsa, Jodhpur, Adampur, Dundigal, Gwalior and Ambala have been
completed. The work in respect of Pune Municipal Corporation is
in progress and is expected to be completed by December 2008.
For Pune airfield project, Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation
(PCMC) ahs obtained the forest clearance from the Ministry of
Environment and Forests but the PCMC has not yet acquired the
land to be handed over to NBCC. This work can be completed in

8
8 months after handing over of land to NBCC. In regard to the
Hindon airfield project, it has been informed by the Principal
Secretary, Govt. of UP that another/alternative landfill site is being
acquired in Village Dasna for the Solid Waste Management Project
at Hindon Airfield Town. Once the land is made available to the
Implementing Agency the project can be taken up. In Tezpur, the
land related issues are not resolved as yet.
The Ministry of Urban Development is taking up the issues with
State Governments of UP , Assam and Maharashtra for resolving
the land issues for early completion of projects in these States.”
20. It is observed from the reply furnished by the Ministry of
Urban Development that four out of ten Solid Waste Management
Projects in airfield towns are yet to be completed. These are in
Pune, Tezpur, Hindon and Bareilly. The project in Pune is expected
to be completed by December, 2008. In T ezpur, the project has not
yet taken off due to non-availability of land. With regard to Hindonn
Project, it has been stated that the UP Government is now looking
for an alternative landfill site. Nothing has been mentioned in the
action taken reply about the status of the project in Bareilly. As
there has been inordinate delay in implementation of projects at
Hindon and Tezpur, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Urban
development should take up the issue of acquisition of land with
the concerned State Governments at the highest level and ensure
that there is no further loss of time in implementation of these
projects. As regards the Bareilly project, the Committee would like
to be apprised of the present position.

9
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10)
Proper Utilization of Budgetary Allocation
The Committee note that the Budget Estimate (2008-09) of the
Ministry of Urban Development is Rs. 4128.75 crore (Both Plan &
Non-Plaan). As per the Ministry’s submission, the same would be
sufficient just to sustain the ongoing schemes of the Ministry during
the year 2008-2009. The Committee also takes note of the submission
made by the Secretary, Urban Development before them,, during the
course of Oral Evidence, that measures have been initiated to strengthen
the monitoring of implementation of various schemes to ensure proper
utilization of funds released by it and timely completion of projects.
However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry has
surrendered substantial funds from 2002-2003 to 2006-2007 under its
three demands, the largest being Demand No. 100 ((UD), which
amounts to Rs. 1185.38 crore. The justification tendered by the Ministry
to the surrender of funds as non-receipt of approvals and sanctions
does not seem tenable, as the Ministry is surrendering the funds year
after year, which can be prevented if the estimation projection is
submitted in a time bound manner and vigorously pursued thereafter.
The Committee feels that this merely depicts lack of financial
accountability and responsibility on the part of the Ministry . Thus,
they desire that the Ministry should make sincere efforts for efficient
utilization of funds and ensure effective implementation of schemes
through strict monitoring and coordination between various
implementing agencies so as to avoid the practice of surrendering
funds, after seeking higher allocation at Supplementary or Revised
Estimate Stage.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been noted for future
compliance.
For proper utilization of funds Ministry has issued instructions to
all concerned divisions vide letter dated 6th/15th May 2008 to project
their Budget Estimates/Revised Estimates and supplementary demand

10
only after careful examination of the pace of expenditure of the
scheme/project for which it is obtained and ensure that the funds will
be utilized for the purpose it is sought within the stipulated time
limit. While projecting the Budget Estimates/Revised Estimates and
Supplementary Grant precaution should be taken that funds are sought
only when it is absolutely necessary and will be utilized in the limited
time period.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
Adequate Allocation for Urban Development
The Committee note that with the rise in the share of urban
population, improving the urban infrastructure covering basic services
like water supply, sewage, solid waste management and urban transport
have assumed greater significance. The Municipal institutions
responsible for providing these civic services are facing acute shortage
of capacity and resources. As per the documents received from the
Ministry on their Demands for Grants, the Committee note that the
net Budgetary Estimates 2008-2009 is Rs. 4128.75 crore consisting of
Rs. 2553.75 crore under Plan head and Rs. 1575.00 crore under Non-
Plan head. Besides, a sum of Rs. 3100.37 crore has been provided as
Additional Central Assistance for JNNURM projects, which is reflected
in the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Finance. However, the
Committee has been informed that the Planning Commission has
already estimated the funds required for urban development during
11th Plan period as Rs. 1,29,237 crore, which would mean Rs. 25847
crore (approximately) for each year. In fact, the Ministry has already
planned to approach the concerned Ministry to get additional resources.
The Committee thus after that the investments required to meet the
needs of urban infrastructure are grossly inadequate and have
consistently lagged behind the required levels. It is distressing to note
that the expenditure incurred on urban development by the Central
Government is generally hovering between 0.49% to 0.78% out of their
total expenditure from 2000-01 to 2006-07. The Committee are, therefore,
convinced that the growth in urbanization, which includes a three
fold increase in the number of million plus cities in the last 10 years,
has not been accompanied by a corresponding investment for
improving the urban infrastructure and civic services. Thus, there is a
need to allocate adequate funds for improving urban infrastructure
and civic services keeping in view the growth of economy of the
country, as the cities are important determinants of national economic
growth. At the same time, the onus lies on the Ministry of Urban

11
Development to utilize the allocated funds in an efficient and prudent
manner. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should
constantly strive to follow the best practices in utilizing the allotted
funds so as to improve the living conditions in urban areas through
improved service delivery, financial sustainability of ULBs and better
urban governance.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been noted for future
compliance.
Efforts are being made to obtain adequate allocation of funds for
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM). The
matter for adequate allocation of funds has already been taken up
with the Planning Commission, so that there is adequate allocation of
funds to improve the living conditions in urban areas through improved
service delivery, financial sustainability of ULBs and better urban
governance. This Ministry is making efforts for enhanced availability
of the funds for urban areas.
As regards utilization of funds, constant monitoring is being done
in the review meetings to ensure timely and efficient utilization of
funds.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
Detailed study required to assess the demand-supply situation for
urban infrastructure
The Committee note that despite the slowing down of urbanization
at the macro level in India, as suggested by some comparative studies,
the pressure on the class I cities, metros and mega cities was still
crushing and the long term stakes involved in putting good planning
and resources mobilization in place, are quite high. The Committee
are also aware that so far no detailed study had been done by the
Government to understand as to how the existing gap between the
demand and supply of resources could be bridged so that a viable
urban infrastructure could be established, developed and sustained.
While examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Urban
Development year after year, the Committee has gathered an impression
that such a study is urgently required to be undertaken by the National
Institute of Urban Affairs, an autonomous body within the Ministry,
which can guide them on the investments needed to ensure a

12
sustainable delivery of urban services. They, therefore, urged the
Ministry to take action on the matter urgently and apprise them of
the same in due course.
Reply of the Government
Government of India has set up a High-Powered Expert Committee
(HPEC) under Dr. Isher Judge Ahluwalia, ICRIER (Indian Council for
Research on International Economic Relations), with other eminent
persons to look into the relevant issues. The terms of reference of the
Committee are to establish the conceptual, analytic, contractual and
institutional basis for the delivery of urban services to support
improvements in productivity, quality of life on an inclusive basis,
governance and enviro-socio parameters on a sustainable basis keeping
in mind the financial capacity of the country and trends in other
emerging markets etc. for estimating the investment requirements for
Urban Infrastructure Services. The Committee has already met and
shall submit its report to the Government within a period of eighteen
months from the date of constitution.
2. An Inter-Ministerial group under the Secretary, Urban
Development alongwith Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation, representatives of Planning Commission,
Department of Economic Affairs and PMO will interact with the HPEC
on quarterly basis.
3. The Ministry of Urban Development has thus initiated the action
and will apprise the Committee about the outcome.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
[Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.21)
PPP in Urban Infrastructure Development
The Committee are of the view that urbanization has undergone
a major change following the country‘s transition towards a market
based economy. The urban infrastructure deficit requires a large amount
of investment. However, the Government find it difficult, if not
impossible, to mobilize the requisite investment. The Committee,
therefore, feel that while constantly increasing the Government‘s
investment in the urban infrastructure in the current scenario, there is

13
also a need to create a conducive environment for Public-Private-
Partnership with adequate regulatory mechaanism. As per the Ministry,
under the JNNURM, possibilities are being explored to get projects on
solid waste management under the PPP mode. Also, the High Speed
Express Link from New Delhi Railway Station to IGI Airport and its
extension to Dwarka Sector-21 has been approved by the Government
for implementation of DMRC project on Public-Private-Partnership
basis. The Committee feel that in addition, the Ministry may advise
the Mission cities to explore projects on water supply and recycling,
reuse of waste water, transport, etc. also under PPP structure. They
further feel that some of the private institutions may have developed
requisite expertise in these areas, which can prove to be very useful
for the Mission projects. The Committee expect the Ministry to explore
such areas and utilize the PPP concept in the best possible manner.
Reply of the Government
Central Sanctioning & Monitoring Committee (CSMC) of Jawaharlal
Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) emphasizes the
need to implement projects on Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) basis.
For SWM (Solid Waste Management) projects, PPP is at least one of
the components-collection, transportation and disposal of waste in
emphasized.
So far, PPP initiatives in BRT systems are limited in financing of
rolling stock and provision of bus stands, FOBs (Foot Overbridges)
etc. Land is an important resource which needs to be leveraged to
part finance the urban transport projects. This can be done on PPP
model. Indore (Madhya Pradesh) has taken a lead for successful
running of city bus service on PPP model. Other cities like Pune
(Maharashtra) and Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh) have also taken
initiatives in this area. Mumbai Metro project is being executed on
PPP model. Further, in principle approval has been conveyed for
execution of Hyderabad Metro projects on PPP model as well. States
have also been advised vide letter dated 12.2.2007 to run city services
as per PPP model. The advice of the Committee is noted for exploring
possibilities of PPP further in urban development projects under this
Ministry.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
Strengthening Capacity Building of ULBs
The Committee note that the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban
renewal Mission (JNNURM) was launched on 3rd December, 2005 with

14
the goal of achieving reforms driven, fast track and planned
development of identified 63 cities. Significant progress has reportedly
been made since the launch of the Mission. As on 31st December,
2007, nearly 50% of the seven year ACA commitment under its sub-
Mission on Urban Infrastructure and Governance (UIG) has already
been made. According to the Ministry, nearly one fifth of the targeted
milestones under JNNURM reforms have been achieved. The
Committee further note that of the 63 Mission cities, the DPRs have
been received from 54 cities so far. The Committee desire that the
Ministry should impress upon the remaining cities to submit DPRs at
the earliest so that Mission could sustain its desired momentum in its
third year. Although there is still some time left to assess the overall
impact of the Mission, the Committee desire that there is a need to
strengthen the capacity building of ULBs belonging to the slow
performing cities through experience/knowledge sharing on urban
reforms and city governance. In this connection, the Committee desire
the Ministry to identify cities which have performed very well under
JNNURM so far and recommend the slow performing cities to learn
from the models followed by those cities in tackling the problems/
difficulties in implementing various urban reforms. In a similar spirit,
organizations in the Ministry like the Central Public Health and
Environmental Engineering Organization (CPHEEO) can extend their
expertise in diverse fields like water supply, solid waste management,
etc., to help them prepare their DPRs. Such efforts would go a long
way in making the Mission cities more liable, economically productive,
efficient, equitable and responsive.
Reply of the Government
Government has taken initiative by launching Peer Experience and
Reflective Learning (PEARL) programme to foster cross learning among
JNNURM cities in various sectors of urban reforms and city governance
which has emerge das a potential area for capacity building. The
Mission Directorate has also initiated networking among JNNURM cities
for Peer Experience and Reflective Learning (PEARL), for cross learning
and knowledge sharing. Following actions have been taken in this
direction.
(i) Development and dissemination of Toolkits
Toolkits have been envisaged as an important facilitatory tool for
implementing the programme of the Mission. A number of toolkits
have been formulated and disseminated among the ULBs, State
Governments, financial institutions etc. as follows:
1. Preparation of DPRs
2. Heritage

15
3. Community Participation Fund (CPF)
4. Reimbursement of cost of preparation of CDPs and DPRs
5. Appointment of Independent Review and Monitoring
Agencies for projects.
6. Programme Management Units (PMUs)
7. Project Implementation Units (PIUs)
8. Pooled Finance Development Fund (PFDF)
These toolkits facilitate the States/ULBs in submission of projects
and other proposals under the Mission programme.
(ii) Rapid Training Programme (RTP)
Rapid Training Programme (RTP), prioritizing slow performing
cities, that have lagged behind in accessing JNNURM funds, on three
prioritized modules has been rolled out in Sept., 2007. Training on
Governance and Reforms, Supervision/Preparation of Detailed Project
Reports (DPRs) and Project Management and Implementation are being
imparted by identified training institutes and delivered at city level in
the first phase. The RTP training is being delivered through the
following six agencies:
(i) Yeshwantrao Chavan Academy of Development
Administration (YASHADA), Pune.
(ii) Centre for Good Governance (CGG), Hyderabad.
(iii) Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad.
(iv) Uttaranchal Academy of Administration (UAA), Nainital.
(v) Centre for Environment Planning and Technology (CEPST),
Ahmedabad.
(vi) Regional Centre for Urban and Environmental Studies
(RCUES), Lucknow.
So far, 73 Rapid training Programmes (RTP) have been organized
across the country where elected representatives of ULBs and officials
have been imparted training.
(iii) Programme Management Unit (PMU)
To strengthen the capacity of SLNA to effectively coordinate
implementation of projects and reforms under Jawaharlal Nehru

16
National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), Ministry of Urban
Development has proposed to support a Programme Management Unit
(PMU) at SLNA. A typical PMU shall comprise a team of professionals
recruited from the open market on contractual basis. These professionals
are Program Manager, Public Works and Public Health engineer, Project
Management and Procurement Specialist, MIS expert etc.
So far, 11 PPMUs have been approved for the following States:
1. Madhya Pradesh
2. Orissa
3. Kerala
4. Karnataka
5. Uttar Pradesh
6. Bihar
7. Punjab
8. Gujarat
9. Rajasthan
10. West Bengal
11. Jharkhand
(iv) Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
MoUD is committed to extend financial and technical support to
establish Project Implementation Unit (PIUs) at ULBs to enhance their
capability to effectively implement projects and reforms under
JNNURM.
The Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) has
approved recruitment of professionals in each urban local body covered
under the Mission. The PIU is meant to be an operation unit,
supplementing and enhancing the existing skill mix of the ULBs, rather
than a supervisory body. It is expected to work in tandem with the
existing staff with focus on strengthening implementation of projects
and reforms Mission. A PIU is envisaged to consist of professionals
recruited from the open market based on fixed term contract.
So far, 26 IPUs have been approved for the following ULBs:
1. Bhopal
2. Indore
3. Jabalpur
4. Ujjain

17
5. Lucknow
6. Agra
7. Allahabad
8. Kanpur
9. Mathura
10. Meerut
11.V aranasi
12. Jaipur
13. Bodhgaya
14. Ajmer
15. Mysore
16. Kochi
17. Thiruvananthapuram
18. Howrah
19. Chandernagar (Kolkata)
20. Asansol
21. Durgapur (Asansol)
22. Rajkot
23. Ludhiana
24. Vijayawada
25. Kolkata
26. Patna
An indicative list of the qualified Consultants for preparation of
DPRs is already available at the website of JNNURM. Also under RTP ,
training is being imparted to officials on Project preparation and
implementation. In the letters sent to the States it has inter-alia been
emphasized that cities should expedite the submission of DPRs.
The Ministry is thus making a sincere effort in bringing the mission
cities on board and facilitating the States/ULB’s in preparation of
DPR’s.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
[Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report]

18
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15))
Need to enhance capacity of Municipal bodies by providing
appropriate staff training
From the Annual Report of the Ministry, the Committee note that
they support research and training activities for the municipal
employees through 3 Regional Centres in Mumbai, Hyderabad and
Lucknow and also at the Indian Institute of Public Administration
(IIPA), New Delhi, wherein training courses on topics relating to local
self-Government, low cost sanitation, etc. are organized. The Committee
expect the Ministry to encourage the State Governments, particularly
those belonging to the less developed category, to make optimal use
of the existing training facilities. They are of the opinion that the
municipal employees all over the country should have a systematic
training to acquire the right attitude, skill and knowledge to deliver
public service in a citizen-friendly manner and hope that the training
programmes organized by the Ministry are aimed for the same. Only
then the benefits of a Mission like JNNURM can reach the deprived
sections of society.
Reply of the Government
The three Regional Centres for Urban and Environmental Studies
(RCUESs) at Mumbai, Hyderabad and Lucknow, as well as the Centre
for Urban Studies (CUS) of Indian Institute of Public Administration
(IIPA), New Delhi conduct training programmes on various subjects
relating to Local Self-Government and urban development for the
municipal employees. In addition, the CPHEEO which is the technical
wing of the Ministry sponsors a number of training courses under the
Ministry’s Public Health Engineering (PHE) Training Programme
through academic institutions like IITs, Engineering Colleges, Public
Health Engineering Departments (like Water Boards) and local urban
water utilities for the benefit of field engineers in urban water supply
and sanitation sector. Circulars have already been issued for
nominations from various State Departments including ULBs for the
year 2008-09 also. The details of the institutes and training schedule
are available in the CPHEEO’s website www.cpheeo.nic.in . In addition,
the Ministry is in the process of formulating appropriate schemes for
capacity building and strengthening of urban local bodies.
The States are being advised to make optimal use of the existing
training facilities provided by these Regional Centres for getting the
municipal employees properly trained to acquire right attitude, skill
and knowledge for delivering public service in a citizen-friendly
manner. Simultaneously, the Regional Centres are also asked to

19
coordinate with the concerned States to hold training programmes for
the municipal employees.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)
Allocation of Adequate Funds for JNNURM
The Committee note that for the year 2008-2009 an amount of
Rs. 3100.37 crore has been allocated for JNNURM (Urban Infrastructure
and Governance) despite a projection of Rs. 4400 crore made by the
Ministry. The Committee further note from the submission made by
the Ministry that the allocation of Rs. 3100.37 crore during the year
2008-2009 would not be adequate for the Mission, keeping in view the
committed liability as well as sanction of new projects during the year
2008-2009. The Committee recommend that the Government should
continue in their efforts to get adequate funds allocated for the
JNNURM early, to meet the requirements of committed liability and
sanction of new projects in the coming years, so that the goal of
achieving reform driven, fast track and planned development of
identified cities could be achieved without any time overruns.
Reply of the Government
The matter for allocation of adequate funds for JNNURM has
already been taken up with the Planning Commission. It has been
emphasized that due to small annual allocation of funds against the
7 year provision for the UIG component, the pace of implementation
of the approved projects would be adversely affected. At present, 58%
of the funds stands committed so far. At this pace of sanction of
projects, the Mission period allocation would not be sufficient and
three is a need to seriously look at the possibility of enhancing outlay
so that the much desired basic infrastructure projects can be taken up
and also the needs of Cities needing more funds may be met. The
Ministry will continue its efforts to get the allocation enhanced.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
[Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.17)
Enhancement of Credit Worthiness of ULBs
The Committee note that one of the factors for the ULBs not
availing funds under JNNURM is their limited financial base. The

20
JNNURM, being a demand driven scheme, experiences variations in
achievement of targets due to limited involvement of ULBs, which are
stakeholders in projects under JNNURM. The Committee have been
informed that the JNNURM has undertaken an exercise for the
assessment of finances and credit worthiness of the ULBs, through a
process of Credit Rating and that 42 ULBs in the Mission cities have
been assigned draft ratings. The Committee feel that since a key
strategy for sustaining the Mission is to diversify the funding sources,
given the substantial investment requirement and limited financial base
of ULBs, the Government, while sanctioning the projects, should make
efforts to explore the feasibility of Public-Private-Partnership in the
areas wherever it is feasible. They are of the opinion that the Mission
cities, being metros and large cities, would be considered commercially
attractive by the private sector and thus it is possible to find takers
for the proposed projects under JNNURM in the private sector.
Reply of the Government
A key strategy for sustaining the Mission is to diversify the funding
sources, given the substantial investment requirement and limited
financial base of the ULBs. Encouraging Public Private Partnership,
institutional financing and financial leveraging by cities for projects
taken up under JNNURM are critical elements of the overall Mission
Design.
JNNURM has undertaken an exercise for assessment of finances
and credit worthiness of the Mission ULBs, through a process of Credit
Rating. This is intended to trigger the process of leveraging debt for
JNNURM projects and to provide a platform for the ULBs and financial
institutions to engage on issues related to project financing. Presently,
44 ULBs in the Mission cities have been assigned draft ratings.
The Mission is also facilitating the dissemination of the ratings
through Regional Conferences on Financial Leveraging for Urban
Infrastructure Investments, to be attended by the ULBs, Banks and
Financial Institutions. The Conference for the Southern region was
organized in Bangalore in March, 2008 and for Western Region in
June, 2008. As an outcome of the conference, the ULBs have committed
to explore options for project structure for financial leveraging which
will be helpful in designing PPP projects.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]

21
Recommendation (Para No. 3.18)
Mid-term appraisal of JNNURM
The Committee note that under JNNURM, the Ministry has initiated
a system of monthly review, apart from quarterly progress and
monitoring by independent agencies. Regional reviews and supervision
by senior officers in the Ministry is also being undertaken. The
Committee feel that the ultimate aim of an urban renewal programme
like the JNNURM is to ensure that its benefits percolate down to the
most under-privileged sections of the urban society. They , therefore,
urge the Ministry to conduct a mid-term appraisal of the JNNURM so
as to know its impact so far on the improvement of urban infrastructure
and existing civic services for the urban dwellers.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has decided to initiate the process for conduct of the
mid term appraisal of the JNNURM so as to know its impact so far,
on the improvement of urban infrastructure and existing civic services
for the urban dwellers.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
[Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.29)
Mid-term appraisal of UIDSSMT
The Committee note from the figures furnished by the Ministry
that out of 4313 towns/urban areas as per Census 2001, only 342
towns/urban areas have been sanctioned 421 projects under the
UIDSSMT scheme. The Committee has also been informed that some
States have already reached the allocation limit and thus no further
projects could be taken up by them. As the scheme is already into
third year of its time period, the Committee feel that the scheme should
be evaluated in order to assess its performance so far, as well as to
suggest improvements. In this regard, the Committee learn that no
third party evaluation of the UIDSSMT Scheme has been undertaken
so far although, monthly review of the progress of the scheme is
undertaken at the level of Secretary (UD). The Committee feel that the
time is just right for the Government to conduct a mid-term appraisal/
study of the scheme from a competent independent agency. They,

22
therefore, urge the Government to take suitable action on the matter.
At the same time, the Committee agree that the challenge of improving
the current state of urban infrastructure in all the small and medium
towns is gigantic and cannot be met with the existing budgetary
support, and thus reiterate their earlier recommendation urging the
Government to take a re-look at the funds allocation for the purpose
in due course of time.
Reply of the Government
As regards mid term appraisal of the scheme, Ministry of Urban
Development have decided to have the mid term appraisal of UIDSSMT
also alongwith UIG component of the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban
Renewal Mission (JNNURM).
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
[Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.30)
Alternative Suggestions on the implementation of infrastructure
projects
From the submission made by the Ministry , the Committee note
that most of the small and medium towns are facing problems in
getting good contractors for implementation of infrastructure projects,
particularly on water supply and sewerage, which is causing cost
escalation and delay in completion of projects. The Committee desire
that since the Ministry has identified the problem, they should issue
an advisory to all the State Governments on this matter, which are in
a better position to give suitable alternative suggestions to their
municipal bodies on the implementation of infrastructure projects so
that cost escalation and delay in completion of projects could be
avoided to the best possible extent.
Reply of the Government
Advisory in form of a letter to the State Government/SLNA is
being issued to take suitable measures so that problems being faced
by the ULBs in getting good contractors for implementation of projects
under UIDSSMT could be sorted out.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]

23
Recommendation (Para No. 3.36)
Need to encourage States to set-up State Pooled Finance Entities
under Pooled Finance Development Fund Scheme (PFDF)
The Committee note that Pooled Finance Development Fund
Scheme was launched in November, 2006 to provide credit enhancement
to urban local bodies (ULBs) to access market borrowings based on
their credit worthiness through State level Pooled Finance mechanism.
The Committee further note that the Planning Commission has
provided Rs. 400.00 crore for the Scheme during the 10th Plan. As the
scheme was launched at the fag end of the last year of 10th Plan, no
expenditure could be incurred during the 10th Plan. Now, an allocation
of Rs. 2500.00 crore has been proposed for 11th Plan and the budget
provision of Rs. 20.00 crore has been made for the year 2008-2009 to
implement the Scheme. The Committee express their dissatisfaction
over the fact that despite being aware of the fund crunch felt by the
ULBs all over the country, the Ministry took a long time for launching
such a scheme. Besides, the Committee feel that the Ministry in all
probability has launched the scheme without requisite homework with
the result that though it was launched in November, 2006, till date
only one State i.e. Tamil Nadu has came forward to avail its benefits.
The Committee were informed during evidence that the interest rate
situation changed after the scheme was launched, which has affected
its wide acceptance. The Committee also find the Ministry to be
skeptical about the scheme showing immediate success. Nonetheless,
they desire that the Ministry should take concrete steps now to
encourage the States to implement/operationalize the PFDF Scheme in
their respective States to facilitate the Urban Local Bodies to access
capital and financial markets for investment in critical municipal
infrastructure by providing credit enhancement grants to State Pooled
Finance Entities (SPFEs), which is extremely crucial for the development
of the urban areas in the country.
Reply of the Government
Initially, all the State/UT Governments were requested on 23.10.2006
and 14.12.2006 to take necessary preparatory action for
operationalisation of the scheme in accordance with the Scheme
guidelines. To sensitize the State Governments/Stakeholders for
implementation of the scheme in a time-bound manner, a National
Workshop was organized in Chennai on 20th November 2006 when
the scheme was formally launched. One regional Workshop on PFDF
was held at Kolkata on 21.2.2007 and second such Regional Workshop
was held at Shillong on 5.4.2007. The matter has been pursued at the
Chief Secretary and Chief Minister level on 23.1.2007 and 8.3.2007

24
respectively to expedite setting up of SPFEs in the States/UTs. So far,
the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Nagaland, Orissa, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Assam and Madhya Pradesh have set up their
“State Pooled Finance Entity” for implementation of the scheme in
their States in accordance with the Guidelines of the Scheme. The
State of Goa and U.T. of Andaman & Nicobar have intimated that
setting up of a SPFE in the State is not feasible. State Governments
have been requested on 24.9.2007 that, if necessary, consultancy services
of Tamil Nadu Urban Development Fund, Chennai, Karnataka Urban
Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation, Bangalore who
have already gained sufficient experience in this field or any other
financial institutions may be obtained for this purpose. Ministry is in
the process of dissemination of PFDF toolkit to State Governments
and ULBs. A National Workshop on need to encourage states to set-
up State Pooled Finance Entities under Pooled Finance Development
Fund Scheme is also on the anvil. The Ministry of Urban Development
has taken concrete steps to encourage the States/UTs to take advantage
of this scheme.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.46)
Preservation of Printing equipment of heritage value at GOI
Production-cum-Training Centre, Shimla
The Committee note that the process of modernization of 12
Government of India Presses is likely to be completed this year. The
Government has also decided to convert the Government of India
Press, Shimla into Production-cum-Training Centre. In this regard, the
Committee recall that this Government of India Press, was established
way back in the year 1872, and thus, has printing equipment of heritage
value. The Committee, therefore, feel that in order to preserve the
history of printing craftsmanship as well as provide an opportunity to
the trainees to compare the antique printing technologies with the
modern ones, such old equipment in Shimla Press could prove to be
very handy and useful for training purpose. Consequently, they desire
that some chosen pieces of old printing equipment in Shimla Press are
identified, preserved, maintained and utilized appropriately for the
benefit of the trainees, who undergo the final training in the Production-
cum-Training Centre, Shimla.
Reply of the Government
Necessary instructions have already been issued to Govt. of India
Press, Shimla not to dismantle the old printing equipment and

25
machinery of heritage value in order to preserve the history of printing
craftsmanship as well as provide an opportunity and benefit to the
trainees to compare the old printing technology with the modern
technology at the time of the final training in the “Production-cum-
Training Centre“ Shimla.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.47)
Requirement of suitable market Strategy for optimum utilization of
GoI Presses
In so far as other Government of India Presses are concerned, the
Committee observe that these Presses can be utilized in a very effective
manner, provided they get sufficient printing orders in hand. They
feel that the Directorate of Printing (DoP) in the Ministry need to
extend help to these units in the marketing field for procurement of
orders. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should
direct the DoP to plan and execute an aggressive marketing strategy
taking into account the capacity of the Government of India Presses
so that those are utilized optimally instead of ending up as loss-making
units. At the same time, the Committee would urge the DoP to take
effective steps to recover the outstanding printing charges from the
different defaulting Government Indenters.
Reply of the Government
In order to obtain the maximum printing jobs for Govt. of India
Presses and to ensure a self sufficient sustainable and financially viable
status for the same, efforts are being made at various level of
Directorate of Printing and Ministry of Urban Development through
continuous liasoning with various Central Ministries/Departments, State
Governments, Educational Institutions, Banks, Universities, Autonomous
Bodies and PSUs.
Though presently there is no market expertise in the Presses, even
then some selected officers available in Govt. of India Presses are being
deputed to survey market and obtain suitable printing jobs for Govt.
of India Presses for execution.
The Directorate of Printing has taken various steps to recover the
outstanding printing charges from the different defaulting Government
Indenters. These steps include: (a) holding meetings at Joint Secretary
level, Director level and Field level; (b) identification of the major

26
bottlenecks relating to the difficulties being faced in location of the
particular Indenters/Departments especially those which had already
ceased to exist in the same form due to merger/relocation etc. over a
period of time, non-availability of original records and non-availability
of budget provision etc.; (c) sustained efforts to pursue the matter
through D.O. reminders; (d) sending special recovery teams to the
Indenting Departments and (e) monitoring of the recovery through
fortnightly returns.
As a result of these efforts, there is considerable improvement in
the recovery of outstanding printing charges in comparison to the
previous years performance as can be seen in the table given below:
Status of the Recovery of outstanding printing
charges for the last four years
(Rs. in crore)
Year
2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09
(For April, 2008)
90.96 91.30 106.34 118.92 18.76
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]

27
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
—Nil—

28
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 3.28)
Adequate allocation for UIDSSMT
The Committee are of the opinion that by their sheer demographic
dimensions, economic significance as well as vast magnitude of
problems, the million plus cities in our country tower over the small
and medium towns and thus grab attention of the policy makers in
getting major chunk of the fund allocation. This, in turn, has resulted
in disparities in the urban infrastructure in the large cities and the
small & medium towns. Nonetheless, the Committee feel that the small
and medium towns have very important role to play in attracting and
accommodating migrant population from their surrounding rural areas
and thus, maintaining a balance in the urban growth. In this regard
the Committee note that the Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme
for Small & Medium towns (UIDSSMT) was launched in December,
2005 for improving the overall urban infrastructure covering all cities/
towns as per 2001 Census, excluding 63 mission cities covered under
JNNURM. The Scheme proposes to cover areas like water supply,
sewerage, storm water drains, solid waste management, construction
upgradation of roads, parking on PPP made, prevention & rehabilitation
of soil erosion in case of Special Category States and preservation of
water bodies. The Committee also note that allocation for the scheme
for the year 2008-09 is Rs. 879.69 crore, whereas, according to the
Ministry, the minimum requirement under UIDSSMT during 2008-09
is about Rs. 3000.00 crore. The Committee feel that a shortage of
Rs. 2120.00 crore is too staggering and thus, are of the view that the
proposed allocation of Rs. 879.69 crore during 2008-09 would be
insufficient to meet even the committed liabilities of the previous years.
Consequently, it would not be possible for the Government to allot
funds for further projects which are likely to be put forward this year
for sanctioning purposes, thus directly affecting the small and medium
towns. The Committee feel that this would further widen the disparity
between small & big towns and defeat the very purpose of the
UIDSSMT scheme. They, therefore, feel that the Government should
increase the budgetary allocation for this scheme so that more projects
could be taken up and completed in small and medium towns within
the stipulated time period of the scheme.

29
Reply of the Government
Regarding enhancement of allocation, Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission have been requested to enhance the provision
for UIDSSMT during 2008-09 and overall allocation for the Mission
period substantially to enable us to cover more number of eligible
towns/cities and to make the Scheme successful and effective to serve
the purpose for which it has been launched. Ministry of Finance, in
this regard, has recently stated that the allocation of funds for UIDSSMT
Scheme for the Mission has been frozen and has regretted to enhance
the allocation.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
[Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.42)
Unsatisfactory progress of the Pilot Project on Solid Waste
Management in 10 Airfield Towns
The Committee note that in order to sanitize the areas around the
airfields to control the bird hit menace, which is the biggest contributing
factor in air mishaps, 10 selected IAF airfield towns were selected
under a pilot project in the year 1989 for providing solid waste
management and drainage facilities on priority basis to these towns. It
was proposed to take up the scheme for 10 Airfields towns in two
phases, namely Phase-I and Phase-II. Six towns under Phase-I and
four towns under Phase-II were to be taken up and completed up to
4th year of 10th Plan and 1st year of the 11th Plan respectively. The
action in regard to preparation of DPRs by HUDCO was initiated by
the Ministry in 2003-04 and funds to the tune of Rs. 99 lakh was
released to HUDCO in March, 2004. The Committee are dismayed to
note that non-submission of DPRs by HUDCO in time was holding
up the implementation of projects and release of funds. Therefore,
HUDCO was later on asked to prepare DPRs for only 3 airfield towns
namely Tezpur, Gwalior and Pune. The Committee feels disappointed
noting the fact that despite being an ISO certified company, HUDCO’s
performance in this project was not satisfactory at all. Moreover, they
are surprised as to how the Ministry of Urban Development paid 50%
of the amount originally agreed, to HUDCO although they could only
complete 30% of the project. The Committee feels that the Ministry
should had penalized HUDCO for its inability to fulfill its commitment,

30
rather they chose to pay an amount, which HUDCO did not deserve.
The Committee feels that the Ministry should not be lenient towards
unprofessional attitude shown by agencies, once they agree to
implement a project. The Committee further notes that in order to
expedite the scheme, in consultation with the Planning Commission,
the Ministry had to direct the NBCC and U.P . Jal Nigam to prepare
DPRs for the rest of the towns and implement the scheme to meet the
target of completion of scheme by the end of 10th Plan. The Committee
has also been informed that the total cost of the scheme now is
Rs. 13067.97 lakh. Apart from the time and cost overruns caused mainly
by HUDCOs bad performance, what is more concerning to the
Committee is the fact that out of 10 airfield towns schemes, only three
schemes at Sirsa, Jodhpur and Dundigal are 100% complete and other
seven schemes are under different stages of execution. The Committee
is particularly disturbed to note that in Tezpur, which is a defence
airfield, Pune and Hindon towns, the progress has been quite
unsatisfactory. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the
Ministry should immediately take up the matter with the concerned
agencies/authorities for these 3 towns and complete all the schemes
by June, 2008 positively. They are of the opinion that apart from causing
huge loss to the Government exchequer, the delay in completion of
this project is directly linked with saving the lives of the pilots as well
as the aircraft, which can not be ignored under any pretext.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been noted for future
compliance.
In the meeting held on 2.9.2004 under the Chairmanship of Joint
Secretary (UD) to review the status of decisions taken in the Steering
Committee meeting, since the DPRs could not be finalized by August
2004 as agreed by HUDCO, Joint Secretary (UD) cautioned HUDCO
that delay in the submission of DPRs by HUDCO was a matter of
serious concern and that it was holding up the implementation of the
project and release of funds. It was, therefore, decided to get the project
executed by a Central Government agency viz. National Building
Construction Corporation Ltd. (NBCC).
In order to penalize HUDCO, the Ministry had withdrawn the
preparation of DPRs from HUDCO and assigned the task to NBCC.
However, HUDCO prepared DPRs for three airfield towns, namely,
Tezpur, Gwalior and Pune. As against the amount of Rs. 0.99 crore
released to HUDCO, HUDCO has furnished utilization certificate for
Rs. 0.90 crore and the balance amount of Rs. 0.09 crore have been
refunded to the Ministry.

31
The delay in the implementation of the Pilot project on Solid Waste
Management & Drainage in Hindon, Tezpur and Pune is due to the
non-availability of land for treatment and disposal facilities. The ULBs
and State Governments are taking a long time to resolve the issues.
Out of 10 selected Airfield Towns, projects in six towns, namely,
Sirsa, Jodhpur, Adampur, Dundigal, Gwalior and Ambala have been
completed. The work in respect of Pune Municipal Corporation is in
progress and is expected to be completed by December 2008. For Pune
airfield project, Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) has
obtained the forest clearance from the Ministry of Environment &
Forests but the PCMC has not yet acquired the land to be handed
over to NBCC. This work can be completed in 8 months after handing
over of land to NBCC. In regard to the Hindon airfield project, it has
been informed by the Principal Secretary, Govt. of UP that another/
alternative landfill site is being acquired in Village Dasna for the Solid
Waste Management project at Hindon Airfield Town. Once the land is
made available to the Implementing Agency the project can be taken
up. In Tezpur, the land related issues are not resolved as yet.
The Ministry of Urban Development is taking up the issues with
State Governments of UP , Assam and Maharashtra for resolving the
land issues for early completion of projects in these States.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-Bt.(UD),
Date 11th July, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
[Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report]

32
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—Nil—
  N EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
19 September, 2008 Chairman,
28 Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Urban Development.

33
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2008-2009)
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON TUESDAY, THE 16TH SEPTEMBER, 2008
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
3. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Anant Gudhe
6. Shri Sajjan Kumar
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
9. Shri Jagdish Tytler
10. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
12. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
13. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Director
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Harchain — Deputy Secretary-II

34
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
3. The Committee then took up for consideration draft report on
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in their Thirty First Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2008-2009) of the Ministry of Urban Development and adopted the
same without any modifications.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize both
the reports in the light of the additions suggested and consequential
changes, if any, arising out of factual verification of the reports by the
Ministry, and present the reports to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related with the report.

35
APPENDIX II
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY FIRST
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN
DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 16
II. Recommendations which have been accepted 14
by the Government:
Para Nos. 2.10, 2.15, 2.16, 2.21, 3.14, 3.15, 3.16,
3.17, 3.18, 3.29, 3.30, 3.36, 3.46 and 3.47
Percentage of total recommendations (87.5%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not Nil
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
Replies:
Para No. Nil Nil
Percentage to total recommendations (0%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Para Nos. 3.28 and 3.42 2
Percentage to total recommendations (12.5%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final Nil
Replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
Percentage to total recommendations (0%)

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale
at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”

THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Thirty-First Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development (14th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ……………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ……………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
September, 2008/Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 36
Price : Rs. 43.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government .................................................. 9
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to  pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 27
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 28
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 32
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the third sitting of the Committee
held on 16.9.2008 ...................................................... 33
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-First Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)....................................................... 35
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2008-2009)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
5. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
6. Shri Anant Gudhe
7. Shri Pusp Jain
8. Shri Kailash Joshi
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar
10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
12. Shri A.K. Moorthy
13. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
14. Shri L. Rajagopal
15. Shri D. Vittal Rao
16. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
17. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
18. Shri Jagdish Tytler
19. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
20. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
21. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Dr. Prabha Thakur
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
27. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
28. Shri Penumalli Madhu
29. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
30. Shri Manohar Joshi
31. Shri Mukul Roy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Committee Officer
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2008-09), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Thirty-Third Report on the Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-First Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development on ‘Demands for Grants (2008-09)‘ of the Ministry
of Urban Development.
2. The Thirty First Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development was presented to Lok Sabha on 16th April, 2008.
Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in
the Report were received on 15th July, 2008.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting
held on 16th September, 2008.
4. An analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-First Report of the Committee
is given at Appendix II.
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
19 September, 2008 Chairman,
28 Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Urban Development.
(v)

33
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Thirty-First Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development (14th Lok Sabha)]
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
