CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2007-08) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second Report on the subject
“Directorate of Printing” of the Ministry of Urban Development which
was presented to the Lok Sabha on 14th May, 2007.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 13 recommendations which have been categorized as
follows:—
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.6, 2.7, 2.15, 3.13, 3.14, 3.15, 4.23, 4.25 and 4.26
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 3.12
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 1.17, 4.24 and 5.6
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para No. Nil
3. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Need to Review the Allocation of Business Rules in respect of
Directorate of Printing
Recommendation (Para No. 1.17)
4. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee note that the Directorate of Printing had been
under the administrative control of the Ministry of Works and

2
Housing, which has been renamed as the Ministry of Urban
Development for many decades. The Committee feel that the
allocation of work relating to the Directorate of Printing to the
Ministry of Urban Development does not appear to be quite
appropriate and based on very sound principles. The Committee
also feel that the Ministry of Urban Development was unable to
devote adequate time to monitor and supervise the work of the
Directorate of Printing as the Ministry had been engaged in more
or less tasks of carrying out the urban development all over the
country. Since urban development was the focus area of the
Ministry of Urban Development, the work relating to the
Directorate of Printing and the Government of India Printing
Presses remained neglected for many years and the subject did
not receive the required attention unless it was a pressing problem.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that due attention should
be given to the works relating to the Directorate of Printing by
the Ministry of Urban Development.”
5. The Government have replied as below:—
“The Directorate of Printing caters to the printing needs of various
Ministries/Departments of Government of India. This job has been
categorized as ‘Work’ and hence this Directorate is functioning for
a very long time under what was earlier called the Ministry of
Works & Housing and now renamed as Ministry of Urban
Development.
Ministry of Urban Development is devoting appropriate time to
monitor and supervise the issues relating to the Directorate of
Printing. Necessary instructions/guidelines are being issued to all
concerned from time to time for attending to all problems being
faced by the Directorate so that the overall performance of the
Presses, quality-wise and capacity-wise are constantly improved.”
6. The Committee, in their original recommendation, had felt
that the Ministry of Urban Development was unable to devote
adequate time to monitor and supervise the work of Directorate of
Printing and the allocation of work relating to the Directorate of
Printing did not appear to be based on sound principles. They were
of the opinion that the focus of the Ministry was more or less on
the tasks of carrying out the urban development and thus, the work
relating to the Directorate of Printing and the Government of India
Printing Presses had remained neglected for many years. The
Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have sought to justify the

3
functioning of Directorate of Printing under the Ministry of Urban
Development by stating that the printing job has been categorized
as ‘Work’ and the Ministry, which was earlier named as the Ministry
of Works and Housing, has traditionally been associated with it. It
has further been stated that the Ministry is devoting appropriate
time to monitor and supervise the issues relating to the Directorate
of Printing. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Ministry, which obviously misses the basic point raised in their
recommendation. The Committee had desired the Ministry to revisit
the allocation of Business Rules in respect of the Directorate of
Printing so that its functioning does not get overshadowed by the
main focus of the Ministry i.e. Urban Development. This, they feel,
is more important in view of the fact, that in the present scheme of
things, transferring the Directorate of Printing to some other Ministry
may, perhaps, be difficult. Though the Committee agree that the
main focus of the Ministry of Urban Development would remain on
the massive problems that have emerged as a result of rapid urban
growth in the country, they still feel that the Directorate of Printing,
being one of its entities, needs revitalization. They therefore, reiterate
that the Ministry may take a fresh look into its functioning and
strive to get it optimally utilized for the printing needs of the
Government.
Training of Employees
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15)
7. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee note that the Directorate of Printing is setting up
a “Production-cum-Training Centre” at Shimla. The Committee
desire that sufficient in-built training devices are kept in this
“Production-cum-Training Centre” so that the workers from all the
Government of India Printing Presses can receive proper and state-
of-the-art training in this Centre. Also, proper training should be
imparted to the newly recruited workers under the ‘Revised
Recruitment Rules’ in future.”
8. The Government had replied as under:—
“Government of India Press, Shimla is already under the process
of modernization which include restructuring/renovation of Press
building, acquiring modern machines and equipment. Sanctioned
staff strength of various Government of India Presses under
modernization scheme has been issued to the Presses. Initial/basic

4
training has already been started at respective Presses to all the
eligible categories of staff in the month of July, 2007. After
completion of the initial/basic training in respective Presses, the
final state-of-the-art training of all respective categories will be
carried out in batches at “Production-cum-Training Centre” at
Government of India, Faridabad and Government of India Press,
Shimla.”
9. In their earlier recommendation, the Committee, while noting
the setting up of a “Production-cum-Training Centre” at Shimla by
the Directorate of Printing, had desired that sufficient in-built training
devices are kept in the proposed Training Centre for the benefit of
the workers from all the Government of India Printing Presses. They
had also emphasized on the proper training that would be imparted
to the newly recruited workers in future. The Committee are satisfied
to note from the reply of the Ministry that the Government of India
Press, Shimla is already under the process of modernization, which
includes acquiring modern machines and equipment. The Committee
feel that as the printing technology has witnessed substantial
advancements of late, it is imperative that the Directorate of printing
remains aware of the latest equipment and technology in the field
and interact with printing institutions abroad to familiarize
themselves with the new trends. They further note that the initial/
basic training course has already been started at the respective Presses
and following the completion of the initial training, the final state-
of-the-art training of all respective categories will be carried out in
batches at the “Production-cum-Training Centre” at Government of
India Press, Shimla and Government of India Press, Faridabad. The
Committee hope that the training of employees would be completed
within the given timeframe.
Non-Utilization of Procured Modern Machineries at Santragachi Press,
Kolkata
Recommendation (Para No. 4.24)
10. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee are also constrained to learn that machineries at
Santragachi Press, Kolkata have been allowed to remain idle due
to non-availability of funds for execution of day-to-day work order.
The Committee recommend that needful corrective action be taken
by the Ministry in this regard to ensure full utilization of the new
printing machines.”

5
11. The Government have replied as under:—
“At Government of India Press, Santragachi, Kolkata the machines
remained idle due to non-availability of sufficient trained printing
staff. The Government had in the past imposed a ban on
recruitments in the Government of India Presses resulting in lack
of availability of adequate and trained staff on modern machines.
Now, approval for filling up the post by direct recruitment and re-
deployment under modernization scheme has been received from
Ministry of Finance and accordingly instructions have also been
issued to the Government of India Press at Santragachi to take
necessary action to expedite recruitment of adequate and trained
staff to run the machines smoothly.
As regards funds, it is submitted that adequate funds have been
provided to Government of India Press, Santragachi and hence
paucity of funds is no reason for idling of machinery.”
12. The Committee are dismayed to note from the reply of the
Government that due to non-availability of sufficient trained printing
staff at Government of India Press, Santragachi, Kolkata, the
machines remained idle. They are at a loss to understand as to why
the availability of trained staff could not be ensured well in time,
particularly when a decision for modernization of the Government
of India presses was already taken way back in August, 2002. They
feel that had the Ministry initiated efforts for recruitment,
redeployment and training of staff, the machines at Santragachi Press
would not have remained idle so far. The Committee are of the
view that this indicates laxity as well as lack of foresight and
willingness on the part of the Ministry to give a fresh lease of life
to Government of India presses. The Committee can only hope that
at least now, the pace of things would improve to expedite the
recruitment, redeployment and training of staff in Government of
India press, Santragachi so that there is no further idling of expensive
machinery. At the same time, the Committee would urge the Ministry
to fix the responsibility for the delay in the matter. The Committee
desire to know the progress in this regard at the time of submission
of the final Action Taken Statement.
Need to Expand the Market Base for Government Presses
Recommendation (Para No. 4.25)
13. The Committee had noted as under:—
“The Committee observe that the Directorate of Printing along with
its 16 Government of India Presses have a well laid out set up

6
from top to bottom but without adequate job orders. Printing is a
vast area and requirements in the printing market are changing
everyday. However, the Directorate with its old mind set up is not
able to tap these resources to keep it fully occupied. The
Committee, therefore recommend that the Directorate of Printing
should make all out efforts to expand their market base and procure
work orders from private parties apart from Government bodies,
as mostly, the Government of India Presses are instantly involved
only in printing of Government circulars, Budget papers, Reports
etc. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in the
matter.”
14. The Government have replied as under:—
“It is submitted that the Directorate of Printing is very much alive
to the changing environment towards market economy and the
consequent need to compete in open market. The Directorate has
accordingly been taking efforts to reorient the entire functioning of
the Government of India Presses through various measures like
introduction of commercial accounting, procurement of modern
equipments and state-of-the-art training to the staff etc. to enhance
their printing skill and quality of output.
D.O. letters from Joint Secretary (UD) were issued on 01.05.2007 to
State Governments of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Punjab,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir to entrust large number
of printing jobs to Government of India Presses for execution.
Directorate of Printing has also approached Central Institute of
Indian Languages, Mysore for printing their publications. In
response thereto, Central Institute of Indian Languages has allotted
12 books in Tamil Language for execution by the Directorate of
Printing.”
15. The Committee appreciate that the Directorate of Printing
has been making several efforts to re-orient the entire functioning
of the Government of India Presses through various measures in
view of the changing market scenario. The Ministry have approached
various State Governments and the Central Institute of Indian
Languages to entrust substantial printing jobs to the Government of
India Presses for execution. The Committee further desire that the
Ministry should also open a dedicated cell in the Directorate of
Printing for designing and executing a well-laid out strategy for
continuous liaisoning with various Central Ministries, State

7
Government, PSUs and Private Sector entities to obtain printing jobs
for Government of India Presses so as to ensure a self-sufficient,
sustainable and financially viable status for the same.
Government of India Text Book Presses not to be Privatized
Recommendation (Para No. 5.6)
16. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The three Text Book printing presses of Mysore, Bhubaneswar
and Chandigarh have a historical background of being linked to
our educational system. The Committee, therefore, strongly feel
that these Government of India Text Book Presses should not have
been chosen for privatization. The Committee are given to
understand that in accordance with the proposal of UNESCO, the
German Government had gifted the requisite machinery to these
three Text Book printing presses. The Committee further note the
important fact that there is a constant printing demand from
NCERT and other agencies and these Text Book printing presses
cater very well to the printing needs of the Government of India
in the Eastern and North-Eastern Regions. The Committee need
hardly emphasize that these presses have been functional. In such
a situation, the Committee desire that the Ministry should take a
fresh look into their decision relating to privatization of these three
printing presses. The Committee look forward to a positive response
from the Government.”
17. The Government have replied as under:—
“The Government of India Text Book Presses at Bhubaneswar,
Chandigarh and Mysore were not getting printing jobs for text
books from the respective State Governments. However, the
suggestion of the Committee to have a fresh look into decision
relating to privatization of the three Text Book Printing Presses is
being examined.”
18. The Committee while expressing concern over the decision
taken by the Government for privatization of the three Text Book
Presses, had desired that the Ministry should take a fresh look into
it. The Ministry, in their Action Taken reply, have informed the
Committee that the Government of India Text Book Presses at
Bhubaneswar, Chandigarh and Mysore were not getting printing jobs
for Text Books from the respective State Governments and that the
suggestion of the Committee to have a fresh look into the decision

8
relating to privatization of these three Text Book Presses is being
examined. The Committee expect that sincere efforts would be made
by the Government to revitalize these presses in their existing form.
From the fact that these three Text Book Presses were not getting
printing jobs for Text Books from the respective State Governments,
the Committee are inclined to conclude that an effective market
strategy is required on the part of the Government to procure jobs
for these presses in today’s competitive market scenario. They feel
that instead of remaining solely dependent on getting orders from
the respective State Governments, the Ministry should devise a
suitable plan to expand the activities of these Text Book Presses by
exploring for orders from various other educational institutions in
the fields of administration, management, computers etc., IITs and
other recognized regional Universities which have come up in the
recent past. The Committee further desire that for expanding the
clientele of Government of India Presses, the Ministry should ensure
availability of adequate funds for their publicity and advertisement.

9
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.6)
Budgetary Support to the Government Printing Presses
The Committee find that the Directorate of Printing had started
earmarking funds for renewal and replacement of machinery and
equipment in the Government of India Presses only from the year
2003-04. It has been observed that in the year 2003-04, Rs. 21.93 crore
was earmarked for the renewal and replacement of machinery and
thereafter the allocation for this item has come down to Rs. 5 crore
only in the year 2006-07. The Committee also find that over the years,
the Directorate of Printing had accumulated Depreciation Reserve Fund
of Rs. 28 crore. In spite of the availability of adequate funds for the
modernization of the Presses, there was no adequate justification given
for the lethargic attitude of the Government in expediting the process
of modernization. Even after enumerating Rs. 21.93 crore in 2003-04,
the actual expenditure incurred was only Rs. 15.07 crore under the
modernization programme. The Committee are not happy with such
sluggish pace of utilization of funds by the Directorate of Printing for
executing their modernization programme and desire that a definite
time-frame should be fixed for various stages of modernization of all
the Printing Presses and Government should endeavour to complete
the modernization work within that time-frame.
Reply of the Government
Civil and Electrical work in 11 Government of India Presses under
modernization have already been completed. The civil and electrical
work in respect of Government of India Press, Shimla to convert it
into a “Production-cum-Trianing Centre’” is under progress. 75% civil
work on the shop floor in respect of Government of India Press, Shimla
has been completed and remaining work is under execution on war
footing basis.
2. Out of Rs. 21.93 crore earmarked for modernization of the
Presses, orders worth Rs. 20.82 crore have already been placed for
11 Government of India Presses under modernization and out of

10
additional Rs. 2.19 crore subsequently earmarked for modernization of
Government of India Presses, Shimla, orders worth Rs. 1.22 crore have
already been placed for some machines and equipments. Procurement
of balance machines is likely to be completed by November/December,
2007.
3. Details of the equipment/machinery procured/to be procured
under modernization scheme is given below:—
1. Total Nos. of equipment/machinery to be 280 Nos.
procured under modernization programme
2. Total Nos. of equipment/machinery has been 219 Nos.
purchased.
3. Total Nos. of equipment/machinery supply 201 Nos.
completed and installed
4. Supply awaited 18 Nos.
5. Yet to be procured 61 Nos.
4. Regarding procurement of the remaining 61 items under the
modernization programme, it has been decided by the Ministry of
Finance to procure through e-procurement w.e.f. 1st July, 2007. The
matter has been taken up with the DGS&D, New Delhi to provide the
facility of e-procurement. Accordingly a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) has already been signed on 10.08.2007. The
e-procurement process will start immediately.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.7)
Need for a better accounting system in Government of India Presses
On the question of the ‘Accounting System’ followed by the
Government of Indian Printing Presses, the Committee are concerned
to note that since the inception of the Directorate of Printing till date,
the old accounting system of ‘Proforma Accounting’ is still being
followed by the GOIPs. The Secretary , Ministry of Urban Development
has also admitted during the oral-evidence before the Committee that
it is high time that the old system of accounting and financing is
reviewed in view of the modernization programme. Competitiveness
of the Presses is to be ensured so as to steer them towards a self-
sustaining mechanism. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a

11
suitable and effective accounting system needs to be adopted by all
the presses so as to ensure better financial management of the printing
units.
Reply of the Government
To ensure better financial management of the Printing Presses and
to make Presses self sustaining, Ministry of Urban Development has
decided to switchover from present Government Accounting System
to computer software based Commercial Accounting System and evolve
and also to develop a costing system and instant billing system in the
Government of India Presses. To meet the requirements, Ministry has
also decided to avail the services of Consultant to help Directorate of
Printing to switchover completely to the commercial system of
accounting by inviting tenders from the financial institutions/firms.
Action for appointment of the Consultant has been initiated.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
Recovery of Outstanding Dues
The Committee note that as on date bills to the tune of Rs. 300
crore are pending for payment against various indenting Departments.
The Committee find that the dues have accumulated over the years
because of the billing procedure that has been followed all these years.
The Committee note that Presses raise the bills in two stages—
(i) provisional bills and (ii) supplementary bills. Provisional bills are
preferred immediately after the printing jobs are over. Thereafter, the
supplementary bill/final bill is preferred after the completion of
Proforma Accounts of the relevant year in which the job is executed.
Since the final bill could be given to the indenting Departments only
after the close of the financial year, the budgetary grants already
available for the job indented in the previous year lapsed and these
indenting Departments were not able to fulfill the monetary obligations
towards the Directorate of Printing. The Committee are unhappy to
find the Directorate of Printing wanting in their efforts to recover the
dues in the past 25 to 30 years. They, however, note that an Arrear
Recovery Cell has now been created within the Directorate of Printing
to monitor the old bills and also current bills. The meeting of Arrear
Recovery Cell is now being called by the Head of the Department
every week to monitor the progress and instructions are being given
to the Government of India Presses on development matters. The

12
Committee have been informed that the response of the Government
Departments in setting their old bills is not very encouraging. In this
regard, the Directorate of Printing has suggested that the Ministry of
Finance should be approached to effect the recovery of printing charges
from the budget grants of the defaulting Government Departments.
The Committee recommend that this option proposed by the Directorate
of Printing should be given a serious consideration so that a definite
way is found to settle the matter of arrears of printing charges.
Reply of the Government
In response to Ministry of Urban Development’s proposal for
effecting recovery of outstanding printing charges from various
Ministries/Departments through budget allocation of defaulting
Ministry/Departments, Ministry of Finance has suggested that the
matter of recovery of printing charges may be pursued as per provision
of Government Accounting Rules 1990 in consultation with Financial
Adviser/Chief Controller of Accounts of the Ministry. Accordingly
Directorate of Printing had requested the Controller of Accounts to
suggest suitable action in this regard. In reply, Chief Controller of
Accounts has suggested that a mechanism of recovery of dues through
raising ‘Debit Notes’ against Pay & Accounts Office (Sectt.) of indenting
Ministries through “A” Category Cheques be devised.
2. Accordingly, Directorate of Printing had requested the Chief
Controller of Accounts to provide detailed procedure for raising debit
notes on Pay & Accounts Office (Secretariat) of the various Ministries
for Inter Governmental Settlement through ‘A’ category cheques to
enable to Presses to raise debit notes for settlement of printing charges
bills. On receipt of the procedure from the Chief Controller of Accounts
necessary instructions will be issued to the Presses for raising of debit
notes.
3. In order to peg down the huge pendency of printing charges
pending against various Ministries/Departments, all the Managers/
Officer-in-Charges of the Presses have been directed to make serious
efforts for recovery of printing charges as per the target set by the
Ministry of Urban Development, as under:—
Target:
(a) April, 2007 to June, 2007—15% of the total outstanding
amount as on 1.4.2007
(b) July, 2007 to Sept., 2007—10% of the total outstanding
amount as on 1.4.2007

13
(c) Oct., 2007 to Dec., 2007—10% of the total outstanding
amount as on 1.4.2007
(d) Jan, 2008 to March, 2008—15% of the total outstanding
amount as on 1.4.2007
4. Presses have also been advised to provide details of bills to the
indenting Departments and depute officials to facilitate speedy
settlement of printing charges bills.
5. Progress of the recovery of printing charges is being monitored
through Fortnightly Report and instructions are issued to Government
of India Presses from time to time to improve their performance and
achieve targeted recovery.
6. During the financial year 2007-08, upto 31st July, 2007, Rs. 64.92
crore has been recovered by the Presses from the various indenting
Ministries/Departments.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.13)
Lifting of Ban on Recruitment of Staff
The Committee note that due to the ban in the recruitment of
workers since 1985, there has been a continuous and steep decline in
the available staff strength in the Directorate of Printing as well as in
the 16 Government of India Printing Presses (GOIPs). The Committee
need hardly emphasize that the aforesaid ban in employing adequate
staff in the printing presses has had an adverse impact on the efficiency
and working of the Government of India Printing Presses. The
Committee are concerned about the damaging effects of such bans i.e.
increasing frustration, a constant sense of dissatisfaction, confusion and
uncertainty among the existing staff leading to lowering of morale.
The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that sincere efforts have to be
made by the Ministry in exploring the possibilities of lifting up the
ban and employing and recruiting adequate workforce in the
Government of India Printing Presses in the near future. The Committee
recommend that the matter of revival of 464 vacant posts should be
taken up immediately with the authorities concerned. The Committee
may be apprised about the action taken in this direction at the earliest
possible.

14
Reply of the Government
The Government had in the past imposed a ban on recruitment in
the Government of India Presses. However, now, after modernization,
revised sanctioned strengths of various cadres of Government of India
Presses/Directorate of Printing have been fixed in consultation with
the Ministry of Finance. Office Orders in this regard has already been
issued on 18.05.2007. Based on this, Government of India Presses are
taking action to fill up the vacant posts. This process is likely to be
completed by December, 2007.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
Recruitments under ‘Revised Recruitment Rules’
The Committee are informed that most of the Government Presses
have been working on “Letter Press Technology” and they have to be
upgraded by use of ‘offset technology’ by employing the latest
equipment like web-offset machines in which computer based
application is predominantly used. This change of technology requires
personnel with superior technical skills. The Committee are, however,
constrained to note that the existing staff, which had been recruited
decades ago, is not conversant with the modern operating system. The
Committee are also informed that about 578 employees will be re-
designated after they acquire higher skill as per the “Revised
Recruitment Rules” of the Directorate of Printing for which higher
pay scales have been proposed. However, approval for re-designation
of 578 workers is awaited from Ministry of Finance. Apart from the
above, recruitment for 115 posts under the Revised Recruitment Rules
have been proposed in different Presses for which approval is still
awaited from the Ministry of Finance. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that all out measures must be taken to impart the State-
of-the-Art training to all the 578 workers so as to be re-designated
them under the ‘Revised Recruitment Rules’ after which they can be
put on the job expeditiously. The Committee also recommend that the
Government must take concerted efforts to fill the 115 posts under the
Directorate as per the revised recruitment rules and the services of the
work force must be effectively utilized at the Printing Presses, thereby,
making these Printing presses viable units.

15
Reply of the Government
Approval for revised staff strength of Government of India Presses
has been received from Ministry of Finance. The training process for
all the eligible employees has already been started and is likely to be
completed by December, 2007. As regards filling up of the above
mentioned 115 posts, action has already been initiated in this regard
and action is likely to be completed by December, 2007 in this regard
also.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15)
Training of Employees
The Committee note that the Directorate of Printing is setting up
a “Production-cum-Training Centre” at Shimla. The Committee desire
that sufficient in-built training devices are kept in this “Production-
cum-Training Centre” so that the workers from all the Government of
India Printing Presses can receive proper and state-of-art training in
this Centre. Also, proper training should be imparted to the newly
recruited workers under the ‘Revised Recruitment Rules’ in future.
Reply of the Government
Government of India Press, Shimla is already under the process of
modernization which include restructuring/renovation of Press building,
acquiring modern machines and equipment.
2. Sanctioned staff strength of various Government of India Presses
under modernization scheme has been issued to the Presses. Initial/
basic training has already been started at respective Presses to all the
eligible categories of staff in the month of July, 2007.
3. After completion of the initial/basic training in respective Presses,
the final state-of-the art training of all respective categories will be
carried out in batches at “Production-cum-Training Centre” at
Government of India Faridabad and Government of India Press, Shimla.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report)

16
Recommendation (Para No. 4.23)
Delays in Modernization of Government Printing Presses
The Committee are distressed to note that the Ministry of Urban
Development has been adopting a piece meal approach to the issues
of modernization and restructuring of the printing presses, procurement
of machineries, power contract and skill upgradation. Instead of
approaching the Finance Ministry for obtaining sanction in different
phases, the Ministry should have gone in for the same in a
comprehensive and time bound manner in one package. The Committee
are also deeply concerned to note that inordinate delay in obtaining
sanctions and the idling away of procured machineries in many of the
Printing Presses. They are quite unhappy that expensive machineries
have been procured for the modernization of printing presses and
have been allowed to remain unutilized due to lack of trained
manpower. Therefore the Committee recommend that concerted and
effective steps must be taken to fully utilize the modern machinery
already installed in various presses.
Reply of the Government
Approval for sanctioned staff strength of various Government of
India Presses under modernization scheme has been received from
Ministry of Finance. Orders for revised staff strength has been issued
on 18.05.2007. Action for filling up of posts is likely to be completed
by December, 2007.
2. For ensuring full utilization of modern machinery, training of
staff has already been started and is likely to be completed by
December, 2007.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.25)
Need to Expand the Market Base for Government Presses
The Committee observe that the Directorate of Printing along with
its 16 Government of India Presses have a well laid out set up from
top to bottom but without adequate job orders. Printing is a vast area
and requirements in the printing market are changing everyday.
However, the Directorate with its old mind set up is not able to tap
these resources to keep it fully occupied. The Committee, therefore

17
recommend that the Directorate of Printing should make all out efforts
to expand their market base and procure work orders from private
parties apart from Government bodies, as mostly, the Government of
India Printing Presses are instantly involved only in printing of
Government circulars, Budget papers, Reports etc. The Committee may
be apprised about the action taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that the Directorate of Printing is very much alive
to the changing environment towards market economy and the
consequent need to compete in open market. The Directorate has
accordingly been taking efforts to reorient the entire functioning of the
Government of India Presses through various measures like introduction
of commercial accounting, procurement of modern equipments and
state-of-the-art training to the staff etc. to enhance their printing skill
and quality of output.
2. D.O. letters from Joint Secretary (UD) were issued on 01.05.2007
to State Governments of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Punjab,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir to entrust large number of
printing jobs to Government of India Presses for execution.
3. Directorate of Printing has also approached Central Institute of
Indian Languages, Mysore for printing their publications. In response
thereto, Central Institute of Indian Languages has allotted 12 books in
Tamil Language for execution by the Directorate of Printing.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.26)
Completion of the Modernization Process as Targeted
The Committee note that the Government of India and the
Directorate of Printing are committed to complete the entire process of
modernization of Government of India Presses by 31.01.2007. The
Committee hope and trust that the modernization process is completed
as assured to them. In addition, the Committee also desire that
concerted efforts should be made to restructure and renovate the

18
Directorate of Printing to meet the new demands in printing technology
and make it more competitive at par with the private printing presses.
The latest position may be apprised to the Committee in the matter.
Reply of the Government
Vigorous and sustained efforts are being taken by the Directorate
of Printing and the Ministry of Urban Development to speed up the
entire process of modernization of the Government of India Presses.
2. Latest position in this regard is as under:—
(i) The Ministry of Finance’s concurrence for overall staff
strength for modernization of Government of India Presses
has since been obtained and orders issued on 18.5.2007.
Action has been initiated to fill up all the vacant posts in
accordance with the aforesaid staff strength. This action is
likely to be completed by December, 2007;
(ii) Training of staff in the modern equipment/technology has
already started and is likely to be completed by December,
2007;
(iii) Civil and Electrical works of 11 Government of India Presses
under modernization have been completed;
(iv) Action to convert the Government of India Press, Shimla
into Production-cum-Training Centre is under progress on
war footing;
(v) 95% of the supply orders of modern machine equipments
for these Presses has already been placed. Procurement of
balance machines is likely to be completed by December,
2007;
(vi) Commercial Accounting System is under process of
finalization;
(vii) Efforts are being made to procure more jobs for the Presses
from NCERT, Central Institute of Indian and Foreign
Languages, Mysore etc.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]

19
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 3.12)
Need to Fill up Vacancies of Posts of Director/Senior Officials
The Committee are surprised to note that the posts of the highest
level i.e. of Director in both the Directorate of Printing as well as the
Government of India Stationery Office are laying vacant since August,
2003. The absence of the heads of these institutions for such a long
time reflects the lack of concern on the part of the Ministry of Urban
Development in ensuring the efficient and effective functioning of the
Directorate of Printing and the Government of India Printing Presses
(GOIPs). The Committee are of the firm view that the keeping of
senior managerial level posts vacant for long periods slackens the
decision making process in any Institution or Organization. The fact
that the Directorate of Printing remained without a head of the
Institution, has certainly acted as a major deterrent factor in the smooth
functioning of this Institution leaving it direction-less. The Committee
take a serious note of this and recommend the Ministry to take up the
matter on priority basis to fill up these vacant posts in both the
Directorate of Printing as well as in the Government of India Stationery
Office. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken
in this regard within two months of the presentation of the Report to
the House.
Reply of the Government
First two efforts to fill the post of Director of Printing through
UPSC could not materialize due to non-availability of suitable
candidates. However, the post was last circulated on 15.09.2006 and
published in the Employment News dated 30.12.2006 and 05.01.2007.
In response thereto, eight persons have applied for the post, out of
which three applicants were found eligible. The proposal for selection
for the post has already been referred to UPSC on 03.05.2007. It is
expected that the post is likely to be filled shortly.
2. As regards filling up the post of Controller of Stationery in
Government of India Stationery Office, it is stated that revision of

20
Recruitment Rules for the post of Controller of Stationery is in process.
After Recruitment Rules are notified, approval of Ministry of Finance
would be obtained for revival of the post of Controller of Stationery
as the post is currently under ‘deemed abolition’. Thereafter process
of filling up the post of Controller of Stationery would start. At present
a senior officer has been assigned the additional charge of the post of
Controller of Stationery.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]

21
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 1.17)
Need to Review the Allocation of Business Rules in respect of
Directorate of Printing
The Committee note that the Directorate of Printing had been under
the administrative control of the Ministry of Works and Housing, which
has been renamed as the Ministry of Urban Development for many
decades. The Committee feel that the allocation of work relating to
the Directorate of Printing to the Ministry of Urban Development does
not appear to be quite appropriate and based on very sound principles.
The Committee also feel that the Ministry of Urban Development was
unable to devote adequate time to monitor and supervise the work of
the Directorate of Printing as the Ministry had been engaged in more
or less tasks of carrying out the urban development all over the country.
Since urban development was the focus area of the Ministry of Urban
Development, the work relating to the Directorate of Printing and the
Government of India Printing Presses remained neglected for many
years and the subject did not receive the required attention unless it
was a pressing problem. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
due attention should be given to the works relating to the Directorate
of Printing by the Ministry of Urban Development.
Reply of the Government
The Directorate of Printing caters to the printing needs to various
Ministries/Departments of Government of India. This job has been
categorized as ‘Work’ and hence this Directorate is functioning for a
very long time under what was earlier called the Ministry of Works
& Housing and now renamed as Ministry of Urban Development.
2. Ministry of Urban Development is devoting appropriate time to
monitor and supervise the issues relating to the Directorate of Printing.
Necessary instructions/guidelines are based issued to all concerned

22
from time to for attending to all problems being faced by the
Directorate so that the overall performance of the Presses, quality-wise
and capacity-wise are constantly improved.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 6 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.24)
Non-Utilization of Procured Modern Machineries at Santragachi Press,
Kolkata
The Committee are also constrained to learn that machineries at
Santragachi Press, Kolkata have been allowed to remain idle due to
non-availability of funds for execution of day-to-day work order. The
Committee recommend that needful corrective action be taken by the
Ministry in this regard to ensure full utilization of the new printing
machines.
Reply of the Government
At Government of India Press, Santragachi, Kolkata the machines
remained idle due to non-availability of sufficient trained printing staff.
The Government had in the past imposed a ban on recruitments in
the Government of India Presses resulting in lack of availability of
adequate and trained staff on modern machines.
2. Now, approval for filling up the post by direct recruitment and
re-deployment under modernization scheme has been received from
Ministry of Finance and accordingly instructions have also been issued
to the Government of India Press at Santragachi to take necessary
action to expedite recruitment of adequate and trained staff to run the
machines smoothly.
3. As regards funds, it is submitted that adequate funds have been
provided to Government of India Press, Santragachi and hence paucity
of funds is no reason for idling of machinery.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report)

23
Recommendation (Para No. 5.6)
Government of India Text Book Presses not to be Privatized
The three Text Book printing presses of Mysore, Bhubaneswar and
Chandigarh have a historical background of being linked to our
educational system. The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that these
Government of India Text Book Presses should not have been chosen
for privatization. The Committee are given to understand that in
accordance with the proposal of UNESCO, the German Government
had gifted the requisite machinery to these three Text Book printing
presses. The Committee further note the important fact that there is a
constant printing demand from NCERT and other agencies and these
Text Book printing presses cater very well to the printing needs of the
Government of India in the Eastern and North-Eastern Regions. The
Committee need hardly emphasize that these presses have been
functional. In such a situation, the Committee desire that the Ministry
should take a fresh look into their decision relating to privatization of
these three printing presses. The Committee look forward to a positive
response from the Government.
Reply of the Government
The Government of India Text Book Presses at Bhubaneswar,
Chandigarh and Mysore were not getting printing jobs for text books
from the respective State Governments. However, the suggestion of
the Committee to have a fresh look into decision relating to
privatization of three Text Book Printing Presses is being examined.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20015/3/2006-B&A
Dated: 27th August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter-I of the Report)

24
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
  N EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
3 January, 2008 Chairman,
13 Pausa, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

25
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON FRIDAY, 28TH DECEMBER, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Room No. ‘62’,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
3. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
4. Shri Anant Gudhe
5. Shri Sajjan Kumar
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
8. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
9. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
10. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Waghmare
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
12. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
13. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
14. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
15. Shri Mukul Roy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary (UD)
2. Shri Harchain — Deputy Secretary-II (UD)

26
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members
to the sitting of the Committee. The Committee took up for
consideration the draft report on Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject ‘Directorate of
Printing’ of the Ministry of Urban Development. After some
deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Action Taken Report
with slight modifications.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
Report and present the same to Parliament.
4. *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
***Not related with the report.

27
APPENDIX II
[vide para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY
SECOND REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 13
II. Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government: 09
Para Nos. 2.6, 2.7, 2.15, 3.13, 3.14, 3.15, 4.23,
4.25 and 4.26
Percentage to total recommendations (69.23%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies: 01
Para No. 3.12
Percentage to total recommendations (7.69%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee: 3
Para No. 1.17, 4.24 and 5.6
Percentage to total recommendations (23.08%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited: Nil
Para No. Nil
Percentage to total recommendations (0%)

TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DIRECTORATE OF PRINTING
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ..................
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ..................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
January, 2008/Pausa, 1929 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 31
Price : Rs. 34.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 9
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
reply ............................................................................. 19
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee ........................................................... 21
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 24
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee held
on 28.12.2007 ............................................................................ 25
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in Twenty-Second
Committee (14 th Lok Sabha) ................................................. 27
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
5. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
6. Shri Anant Gudhe
7. Shri Pusp Jain
8. Shri Kailash Joshi
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar
10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
12. Shri A.K. Moorthy
13. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
14. Shri L. Rajagopal
15. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
16. Shri D. Vittal Rao
17. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
18. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
19. Shri Jagdish Tytler
20. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
21. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
27. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
28. Shri Penumalli Madhu
29. Shri Mukul Roy
30. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
31. Shri Manohar Joshi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Saxena — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Committee Officer
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2007-08) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Twenty-Eighth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Second Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Urban Development on the subject “Directorate of Printing” of the
Ministry of Urban Development.
2. The Twenty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
14th May, 2007. The replies of the Government to 13 recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 27th August, 2007.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
28th December, 2007.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second Report. (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
3 January, 2008 Chairman,
13 Pausa, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
(v)

28
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DIRECTORATE OF PRINTING
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Twenty Second Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
