CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2007-2008) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in their Thirty Second Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants” (2008-2009) of the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, which was presented to the
Lok Sabha on 16th April, 2008
2. The Report contained 13 recommendations. Action taken
notes in respect of all the recommendations have been received from
the Government. These have been categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.9, 2.10, 3.15, 3.17, 3.25, 3.42, 4.23, 4.24, 4.25, 4.27
(Total-10)
(Chapter-II)
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Nil (Total-Nil)
(Chapter-III)
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 3.16, 4.22, 4.26 (Total–3)
(Chapter-IV)
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Nil (Total-Nil)
(Chapter-V)

2
3.3.3.3.3. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to theThe Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to theThe Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to theThe Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to theThe Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to the
comments made by the Committee in Chapter-I be furnished tocomments made by the Committee in Chapter-I be furnished tocomments made by the Committee in Chapter-I be furnished tocomments made by the Committee in Chapter-I be furnished tocomments made by the Committee in Chapter-I be furnished to
them within three months of the presentation of this Report.them within three months of the presentation of this Report.them within three months of the presentation of this Report.them within three months of the presentation of this Report.them within three months of the presentation of this Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
I.I.I.I.I. Poor implementation of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar YojanaPoor implementation of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar YojanaPoor implementation of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar YojanaPoor implementation of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar YojanaPoor implementation of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
(SJSRY)(SJSRY)(SJSRY)(SJSRY)(SJSRY)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)
5. The Committee had shown their concern over the fluctuating
progress of the components of SJSRY namely the Urban Self
Employment Programme (USEP), the Urban Wage Employment
Programme (USWP) and skill training. While appreciating the progress
of the skill training component in the year 2007-2008, which exceeded
the target, they were dissatisfied with the progress of USEP and UWEP
components of SJSRY during 2007-2008. Further, they noted that the
achievements under SJSRY were not as holistic as desired, in all the
States, which was evident from the fact that there had been nil
achievement in the fields of setting up of micro-enterprises and skill
training to urban poor in States like Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar,
Jharkhand, Daman & Diu etc. The Committee had thus desired a
holistic progress of SJSRY, and had recommended the Ministry to strive
to increase its achievement levels in all the components of SJSRY in
order to avoid inconsistency in its performance.
6. In their Action taken reply, the Government have stated as
follows:
“The updated achievements, as on 31.3.2008 , against the targets
for 2007-2008, under SJSRY are as under:—
Target Achievement
12 3
Number of urban poor assisted to 1,20,000 1,30,804
set-up  individual/group  micro-
enterprises

3
12 3
Number of Urban poor imparted 1,50,000 1,92,066
skill training
Number of Mandays of work — 31.84 Lakh
generated under Urban Wage
Employment Programme (UWEP)
Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation is striving hard
to impress upon the States/UTs, to effectively implement the
Scheme of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY).
Various review Meetings, State level orientation workshops of the
field level Officers/functionaries have also been organized in the
States. It is expected that the revised Guidelines of SJSRY will
also play a role of catalyst in expediting the progress of the
Scheme of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY).”
7. The Committee regret to note that under SJSRY, thoughThe Committee regret to note that under SJSRY, thoughThe Committee regret to note that under SJSRY, thoughThe Committee regret to note that under SJSRY, thoughThe Committee regret to note that under SJSRY, though
the number of urban poor assisted to set up individual/group microthe number of urban poor assisted to set up individual/group microthe number of urban poor assisted to set up individual/group microthe number of urban poor assisted to set up individual/group microthe number of urban poor assisted to set up individual/group micro
enterprises as well as the number of urban poor imparted skillenterprises as well as the number of urban poor imparted skillenterprises as well as the number of urban poor imparted skillenterprises as well as the number of urban poor imparted skillenterprises as well as the number of urban poor imparted skill
training have exceeded the targets during 2007-2008, the numbertraining have exceeded the targets during 2007-2008, the numbertraining have exceeded the targets during 2007-2008, the numbertraining have exceeded the targets during 2007-2008, the numbertraining have exceeded the targets during 2007-2008, the number
of Mandays of work generated under Urban Wage Employmentof Mandays of work generated under Urban Wage Employmentof Mandays of work generated under Urban Wage Employmentof Mandays of work generated under Urban Wage Employmentof Mandays of work generated under Urban Wage Employment
Programme (UWEP) has registered a steep decline during 2007-08.Programme (UWEP) has registered a steep decline during 2007-08.Programme (UWEP) has registered a steep decline during 2007-08.Programme (UWEP) has registered a steep decline during 2007-08.Programme (UWEP) has registered a steep decline during 2007-08.
Despite substantial increase in fund allocation for the scheme, theDespite substantial increase in fund allocation for the scheme, theDespite substantial increase in fund allocation for the scheme, theDespite substantial increase in fund allocation for the scheme, theDespite substantial increase in fund allocation for the scheme, the
number of Mandays of work generated during 2007-08 was justnumber of Mandays of work generated during 2007-08 was justnumber of Mandays of work generated during 2007-08 was justnumber of Mandays of work generated during 2007-08 was justnumber of Mandays of work generated during 2007-08 was just
31.84 lakh Mandays as against 81.55 lakh Mandays during31.84 lakh Mandays as against 81.55 lakh Mandays during31.84 lakh Mandays as against 81.55 lakh Mandays during31.84 lakh Mandays as against 81.55 lakh Mandays during31.84 lakh Mandays as against 81.55 lakh Mandays during
2006-07. The Government have not given any reasons for such a2006-07. The Government have not given any reasons for such a2006-07. The Government have not given any reasons for such a2006-07. The Government have not given any reasons for such a2006-07. The Government have not given any reasons for such a
dismal performance during 2007-08. Further, the Committee haddismal performance during 2007-08. Further, the Committee haddismal performance during 2007-08. Further, the Committee haddismal performance during 2007-08. Further, the Committee haddismal performance during 2007-08. Further, the Committee had
pointed out that the States like Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar,pointed out that the States like Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar,pointed out that the States like Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar,pointed out that the States like Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar,pointed out that the States like Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar,
Jharkhand, Daman & Diu etc. had not achieved any progress inJharkhand, Daman & Diu etc. had not achieved any progress inJharkhand, Daman & Diu etc. had not achieved any progress inJharkhand, Daman & Diu etc. had not achieved any progress inJharkhand, Daman & Diu etc. had not achieved any progress in
setting up of micro enterprises and in imparting skill training tosetting up of micro enterprises and in imparting skill training tosetting up of micro enterprises and in imparting skill training tosetting up of micro enterprises and in imparting skill training tosetting up of micro enterprises and in imparting skill training to
urban poor under SJSRY during 2007-08. The Government’s replyurban poor under SJSRY during 2007-08. The Government’s replyurban poor under SJSRY during 2007-08. The Government’s replyurban poor under SJSRY during 2007-08. The Government’s replyurban poor under SJSRY during 2007-08. The Government’s reply
is silent as to the reasons for non-implementation of the schemeis silent as to the reasons for non-implementation of the schemeis silent as to the reasons for non-implementation of the schemeis silent as to the reasons for non-implementation of the schemeis silent as to the reasons for non-implementation of the scheme
in these States. It is not clear as to what specific steps were takenin these States. It is not clear as to what specific steps were takenin these States. It is not clear as to what specific steps were takenin these States. It is not clear as to what specific steps were takenin these States. It is not clear as to what specific steps were taken
by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation to by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation to by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation to by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation to by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation to ensureensureensureensureensure

4
implementation of the scheme in these States. The Committeeimplementation of the scheme in these States. The Committeeimplementation of the scheme in these States. The Committeeimplementation of the scheme in these States. The Committeeimplementation of the scheme in these States. The Committee
expect the Ministry to take up the matter vigorously with theexpect the Ministry to take up the matter vigorously with theexpect the Ministry to take up the matter vigorously with theexpect the Ministry to take up the matter vigorously with theexpect the Ministry to take up the matter vigorously with the
concerned State Governments and ensure implementation of theconcerned State Governments and ensure implementation of theconcerned State Governments and ensure implementation of theconcerned State Governments and ensure implementation of theconcerned State Governments and ensure implementation of the
scheme. The Committee would await the specific steps taken byscheme. The Committee would await the specific steps taken byscheme. The Committee would await the specific steps taken byscheme. The Committee would await the specific steps taken byscheme. The Committee would await the specific steps taken by
the Government in this regard.the Government in this regard.the Government in this regard.the Government in this regard.the Government in this regard.
II.II.II.II.II. Delay in modification of Guidelines of SJSRYDelay in modification of Guidelines of SJSRYDelay in modification of Guidelines of SJSRYDelay in modification of Guidelines of SJSRYDelay in modification of Guidelines of SJSRY
Recommendation (Para No. 3.17)Recommendation (Para No. 3.17)Recommendation (Para No. 3.17)Recommendation (Para No. 3.17)Recommendation (Para No. 3.17)
8. The Committee had shown their dissatisfaction at the failure
of the Ministry to finalize the modified guidelines even in the first
year of the Five Year Plan despite their recommendation in their
21st Report on Demands for Grants for the year 2007-2008 to finalise
it before the commencement of the Plan. As per the Ministry, the
modified guidelines were awaiting approval of the EFC. The
Committee had desired that the said guideline should give emphasis
to micro-enterprises, self-help groups, micro-finance, skill develop-
ment, vocational training, market-accessibility and swift micro-credit
flow with special focus on women, SC/ST population, minorities,
disabled and slum dwellers, so that the SJSRY could achieve its aim
comprehensively.
9. In their Action Taken reply, the Government have stated as
under:
“The proposal for Modification in the Guidelines of Swarna
Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) has since been cleared by
EFC and it will be moved to the competent authority i.e. Union
Cabinet, shortly for its approval. The suggestions of Hon’ble
Committee have been given due consideration while preparing
the proposals for modifications in the Guidelines of Swarna
Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY).”
10. The Committee fail to understand the reasons for in-
ordinate delay in modifying the guidelines governing implemen-
tation of SJSRY, the performance of which left much to be desired.

5
The Committee had been urging revision of the guidelines since
2005-06. The Committee stress that there should be no further
loss of time in this regard. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the modifications effected in the guidelines. They
further urge the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
to implement the revised scheme expeditiously and ensure that the
targets of its various components are achieved without fail in all
the States.
III.III.III.III.III. In-situ upgradation of old toilets in slum areasIn-situ upgradation of old toilets in slum areasIn-situ upgradation of old toilets in slum areasIn-situ upgradation of old toilets in slum areasIn-situ upgradation of old toilets in slum areas
Recommendation (Para No. 3.25)Recommendation (Para No. 3.25)Recommendation (Para No. 3.25)Recommendation (Para No. 3.25)Recommendation (Para No. 3.25)
11. The Committee had inter-alia, expressed concern about the
extremely shabby conditions of old latrines in urban slum areas and
had felt that the Ministry should allot funds for in-situ upgradation/
repair/maintenance of the same under the Integrated Low Cost
Sanitation Scheme (ILCS). Besides, as the budgetary allocation for ILCS
for the year 2008-09 had reportedly been increased to Rs. 150 crore
from Rs. 40 crore earlier, they had desired to be kept apprised of the
actual expenditure of the enhanced budgetary allocation under ILCS
on all such areas. The Committee had also expected that the target to
convert the existing six lakh dry latrines into pour flush units under
the scheme would be achieved strictly within 2-3 years.
12. In their Action Taken reply, the Government have stated as
under:
“During the current Financial Year, an amount of Rs. 150.00 crore
is provided in the Budget Estimates for implementing the Revised
Guidelines of the Centrally Sponsored “Integrated Low Cost
Sanitation (ILCS) scheme. Out of the Rs. 150.00 crore, Rs.
 
1.50 crore
i.e. 1% is retained to be utilized for MIS, Monitoring System,
Capacity Building and Information, Education, and Communica-
tion (IEC) components  as per the revised guidelines of the
scheme. Out of the remaining funds, 75% will be used for

6
conversion of dry latrines into twin pit pour flush latrines and
25% will be for construction of new toilets to EWS households,
who have no latrines in the urban areas of the country. The
primary emphasis will be to complete conversion of around six
lakh dry latrines reported by the States of Assam, Bihar, J&K,
Nagaland and Uttar Pradesh by 31st March 2010 and funds will
be utilized with respect to the number of dry latrines prevalent
in these areas. The proportionate State-wise allocation with regard
to construction of new toilets to EWS households will be worked
on the basis of households having no latrines as per RGI’s census
2001. Under the revised guidelines, there is a provision for
involving NGOs having adequate experience in this field, who
will be funded to the maximum to the extent of 15% over and
above the total project cost to be borne by the Centre and States,
based on the ratio of 5:1 at different stages of implementation.
Looking after operation and maintenance of the converted units
will be one of the tasks entrusted to them. However, there is no
separate provision for ‘in-situ’ up gradation/repair/ maintenance
of old toilets for slum areas under the ILCS scheme”
13.13.13.13.13.  Having noticed that old latrines in urban slum areas Having noticed that old latrines in urban slum areas Having noticed that old latrines in urban slum areas Having noticed that old latrines in urban slum areas Having noticed that old latrines in urban slum areas
remained in shabby condition due to neglect, the Committee hadremained in shabby condition due to neglect, the Committee hadremained in shabby condition due to neglect, the Committee hadremained in shabby condition due to neglect, the Committee hadremained in shabby condition due to neglect, the Committee had
recommended that there should be allotment of funds for in-siturecommended that there should be allotment of funds for in-siturecommended that there should be allotment of funds for in-siturecommended that there should be allotment of funds for in-siturecommended that there should be allotment of funds for in-situ
upgradation/repair/maintenance of the same under the Integratedupgradation/repair/maintenance of the same under the Integratedupgradation/repair/maintenance of the same under the Integratedupgradation/repair/maintenance of the same under the Integratedupgradation/repair/maintenance of the same under the Integrated
Low Cost Sanitation Scheme. The Government have stated in theirLow Cost Sanitation Scheme. The Government have stated in theirLow Cost Sanitation Scheme. The Government have stated in theirLow Cost Sanitation Scheme. The Government have stated in theirLow Cost Sanitation Scheme. The Government have stated in their
reply that there is no separate provision for in situ up-gradation/reply that there is no separate provision for in situ up-gradation/reply that there is no separate provision for in situ up-gradation/reply that there is no separate provision for in situ up-gradation/reply that there is no separate provision for in situ up-gradation/
repair/maintenance of old toilets for slum areas under the ILCS.repair/maintenance of old toilets for slum areas under the ILCS.repair/maintenance of old toilets for slum areas under the ILCS.repair/maintenance of old toilets for slum areas under the ILCS.repair/maintenance of old toilets for slum areas under the ILCS.
Frankly, the Committee did not expect such a response from theFrankly, the Committee did not expect such a response from theFrankly, the Committee did not expect such a response from theFrankly, the Committee did not expect such a response from theFrankly, the Committee did not expect such a response from the
Government which is in disregard to the spirit of the recommen-Government which is in disregard to the spirit of the recommen-Government which is in disregard to the spirit of the recommen-Government which is in disregard to the spirit of the recommen-Government which is in disregard to the spirit of the recommen-
dation. Needless to point out that old toilets which are indation. Needless to point out that old toilets which are indation. Needless to point out that old toilets which are indation. Needless to point out that old toilets which are indation. Needless to point out that old toilets which are in
dilapidated condition can be repaired with minimal cost. Thedilapidated condition can be repaired with minimal cost. Thedilapidated condition can be repaired with minimal cost. Thedilapidated condition can be repaired with minimal cost. Thedilapidated condition can be repaired with minimal cost. The
Committee, therefore, urge the Government to find ways and meansCommittee, therefore, urge the Government to find ways and meansCommittee, therefore, urge the Government to find ways and meansCommittee, therefore, urge the Government to find ways and meansCommittee, therefore, urge the Government to find ways and means
to revive these toilets and also involve beneficiaries/Self-Helpto revive these toilets and also involve beneficiaries/Self-Helpto revive these toilets and also involve beneficiaries/Self-Helpto revive these toilets and also involve beneficiaries/Self-Helpto revive these toilets and also involve beneficiaries/Self-Help
Groups/NGOs in their operation and maintenance.Groups/NGOs in their operation and maintenance.Groups/NGOs in their operation and maintenance.Groups/NGOs in their operation and maintenance.Groups/NGOs in their operation and maintenance.

7
IV.IV.IV.IV.IV. Housing ShortageHousing ShortageHousing ShortageHousing ShortageHousing Shortage
Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)
14. In connection with urban housing shortage, the Committee
had noted a huge backlog of 24.71 million at the end of the
Tenth Five Year Plan. They had also expressed their dissatisfaction at
a mere 15% achievement in the construction of dwelling units during
the first half of Financial Year 2007-08. In this backdrop, the Committee
had desired prudent and judicious utilization of the enhanced
budgetary allocation to the housing sector in order to considerably
reduce the huge backlog. They had also advised a prompt, albeit a
cautious, engagement with private partners in this field.
15. In their Action Taken reply, the Government have stated as
under:
“The National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy, 2007 (NUHHP-
2007) aims at forging strong partnership between the Public
Private and Co-operative sector for accelerated growth in housing
sector and sustainable development of Habitat.  The National
Urban Housing and Habitat Policy, 2007 promotes observance of
the National Building Code (NBC) 2005 as part of regulatory
framework and this is expected to improve and ensure quality
in respect of all projects being executed by public agencies
including Public Private Partnership projects.”
16.16.16.16.16. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of theThe Committee are not satisfied with the reply of theThe Committee are not satisfied with the reply of theThe Committee are not satisfied with the reply of theThe Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Government as it fails to address the concerns expressed by themGovernment as it fails to address the concerns expressed by themGovernment as it fails to address the concerns expressed by themGovernment as it fails to address the concerns expressed by themGovernment as it fails to address the concerns expressed by them
at the slow progress of construction of dwelling units during theat the slow progress of construction of dwelling units during theat the slow progress of construction of dwelling units during theat the slow progress of construction of dwelling units during theat the slow progress of construction of dwelling units during the
first half of the year 2007-08. The reply merely states certainfirst half of the year 2007-08. The reply merely states certainfirst half of the year 2007-08. The reply merely states certainfirst half of the year 2007-08. The reply merely states certainfirst half of the year 2007-08. The reply merely states certain
features of the National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy, 2007features of the National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy, 2007features of the National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy, 2007features of the National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy, 2007features of the National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy, 2007
(NUHHP 2007). The Committee would like to be informed of the(NUHHP 2007). The Committee would like to be informed of the(NUHHP 2007). The Committee would like to be informed of the(NUHHP 2007). The Committee would like to be informed of the(NUHHP 2007). The Committee would like to be informed of the
actual achievement during 2007-08 and the reasons for shortfall,actual achievement during 2007-08 and the reasons for shortfall,actual achievement during 2007-08 and the reasons for shortfall,actual achievement during 2007-08 and the reasons for shortfall,actual achievement during 2007-08 and the reasons for shortfall,
if any, during the year. Further, the Committee would like to knowif any, during the year. Further, the Committee would like to knowif any, during the year. Further, the Committee would like to knowif any, during the year. Further, the Committee would like to knowif any, during the year. Further, the Committee would like to know
the details regarding the funding pattern of the newly proposedthe details regarding the funding pattern of the newly proposedthe details regarding the funding pattern of the newly proposedthe details regarding the funding pattern of the newly proposedthe details regarding the funding pattern of the newly proposed

8
Interest SInterest SInterest SInterest SInterest S ubsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP),ubsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP),ubsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP),ubsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP),ubsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP),
and the mechanism to ensure the quality aspect of construction inand the mechanism to ensure the quality aspect of construction inand the mechanism to ensure the quality aspect of construction inand the mechanism to ensure the quality aspect of construction inand the mechanism to ensure the quality aspect of construction in
public-private partnership projects.public-private partnership projects.public-private partnership projects.public-private partnership projects.public-private partnership projects.
V.V.V.V.V. Need for Pro-active Policy on Vertical Development ofNeed for Pro-active Policy on Vertical Development ofNeed for Pro-active Policy on Vertical Development ofNeed for Pro-active Policy on Vertical Development ofNeed for Pro-active Policy on Vertical Development of
SlumsSlumsSlumsSlumsSlums
Recommendation (Para No. 4.26)Recommendation (Para No. 4.26)Recommendation (Para No. 4.26)Recommendation (Para No. 4.26)Recommendation (Para No. 4.26)
17. In view of the rapidly shrinking urban land space, the
Committee had urged the Government to go for vertical development
of slum areas in big cities. They had further recommended that vertical
slum development, alongwith provision of suitable basic amenities,
should be incorporated in the National Urban Housing and Habitat
Policy in due course of time. They had desired that the Ministry should
issue an advisory to the States urging the cities covered under Basic
Services to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated Housing & Slum
Development Programme (IHSDP) also to explore vertical construction
of EWS houses, wherever feasible.
18. In their Action Taken reply, the Government have stated as
under:
“The National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy-2007 provides
for review of Floor Area Ratio (FAR) in line with international
practices for allowing more efficient use of scarce urban land by
construction of high rise buildings.  However, it is for the State
Govts. and ULBs to adopt this in the respective Mater Plans.
Under the Basic Services to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated
Housing & Slum Development Programme (IHSDP) Projects
considering the acute scarcity of land, wherever feasible, new
construction of housing units in multi-storey structures (G+3) are
encouraged.  In some locations building designs with more than
G+3 storeys have also been approved under BSUP.  Some such
structures also have ramps to make them disabled friendly.”

9
19.19.19.19.19. The Committee had desired the Ministry of Housing andThe Committee had desired the Ministry of Housing andThe Committee had desired the Ministry of Housing andThe Committee had desired the Ministry of Housing andThe Committee had desired the Ministry of Housing and
Urban Poverty Alleviation to issue an advisory to the States urgingUrban Poverty Alleviation to issue an advisory to the States urgingUrban Poverty Alleviation to issue an advisory to the States urgingUrban Poverty Alleviation to issue an advisory to the States urgingUrban Poverty Alleviation to issue an advisory to the States urging
them to explore vertical construction of EWS houses under Basicthem to explore vertical construction of EWS houses under Basicthem to explore vertical construction of EWS houses under Basicthem to explore vertical construction of EWS houses under Basicthem to explore vertical construction of EWS houses under Basic
Services to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated Housing andServices to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated Housing andServices to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated Housing andServices to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated Housing andServices to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated Housing and
Slum Development Programme (IHSDP). The Ministry of HousingSlum Development Programme (IHSDP). The Ministry of HousingSlum Development Programme (IHSDP). The Ministry of HousingSlum Development Programme (IHSDP). The Ministry of HousingSlum Development Programme (IHSDP). The Ministry of Housing
and Urban Poverty Alleviation are, however, indifferent to theand Urban Poverty Alleviation are, however, indifferent to theand Urban Poverty Alleviation are, however, indifferent to theand Urban Poverty Alleviation are, however, indifferent to theand Urban Poverty Alleviation are, however, indifferent to the
suggestion and have held that it is for the State Governments tosuggestion and have held that it is for the State Governments tosuggestion and have held that it is for the State Governments tosuggestion and have held that it is for the State Governments tosuggestion and have held that it is for the State Governments to
adopt this in their Master Plans. The Committee do not expect theadopt this in their Master Plans. The Committee do not expect theadopt this in their Master Plans. The Committee do not expect theadopt this in their Master Plans. The Committee do not expect theadopt this in their Master Plans. The Committee do not expect the
Ministry to be apathetic in such matters. There is need forMinistry to be apathetic in such matters. There is need forMinistry to be apathetic in such matters. There is need forMinistry to be apathetic in such matters. There is need forMinistry to be apathetic in such matters. There is need for
pro-active approach in addressing the housing problems in urbanpro-active approach in addressing the housing problems in urbanpro-active approach in addressing the housing problems in urbanpro-active approach in addressing the housing problems in urbanpro-active approach in addressing the housing problems in urban
areas. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommen-areas. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommen-areas. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommen-areas. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommen-areas. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommen-
dation that possibilities of vertical slum development alongwithdation that possibilities of vertical slum development alongwithdation that possibilities of vertical slum development alongwithdation that possibilities of vertical slum development alongwithdation that possibilities of vertical slum development alongwith
provision for suitable basic amenities should be urgently pursued,provision for suitable basic amenities should be urgently pursued,provision for suitable basic amenities should be urgently pursued,provision for suitable basic amenities should be urgently pursued,provision for suitable basic amenities should be urgently pursued,
encouraged and realized, particularly in large cities facing acuteencouraged and realized, particularly in large cities facing acuteencouraged and realized, particularly in large cities facing acuteencouraged and realized, particularly in large cities facing acuteencouraged and realized, particularly in large cities facing acute
space constraints. The Committee would like to be apprised of thespace constraints. The Committee would like to be apprised of thespace constraints. The Committee would like to be apprised of thespace constraints. The Committee would like to be apprised of thespace constraints. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
specific steps taken in this regardspecific steps taken in this regardspecific steps taken in this regardspecific steps taken in this regardspecific steps taken in this regard.

10
10
CHAPCHAPCHAPCHAPCHAPTER IITER IITER IITER IITER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 2.9)
Increase in BE 2008-09 – Challenges ahead
From the information furnished to them, the Committee are
satisfied to note that the overall BE of Ministry of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation (MoHUPA) for 2008-09 has been increased to
Rs. 850 crores. During BE 2007-08, the total fund allocation to this
Ministry was Rs. 500 crore which implies that an increase to the tune
of 70 per cent has been effected this year. This is mainly due to
enhanced allocation for the schemes like SJSRY, ILCS & ISHUP.
Further, the Committee appreciate that the Ministry could also bring
down their Non-Plan expenditure by 33.33%. However, the Committee
are aware that the incidence of poverty in urban areas is quite
staggering even today. Quite understandably, this translates into a
major challenge before the Ministry of HUPA, which is the nodal
Ministry of successful implementation of the Housing schemes for the
poor as well as various poverty alleviation schemes. They feel that
with a stronger financial base this year, the onus is on the Ministry
to deliver a matching performance. The Committee, therefore, urge
upon the Ministry to aim towards the successful implementation of
the schemes so that a difference could be made in the lives of the urban
poor.
Reply of the Government
All necessary steps are being taken to ensure successful
implementation of JNNURM. In this respect, the National Steering

11
group under JNNURM in its 4th Meeting held on 31.03.2008 has also
discussed this issue and decided that this should be taken up with
Planning Commission. The Ministry has taken up various measures
to facilitate State Government in setting up technical support structure
for successful implementation of JNNURM. These include setting up
of
— Programme Management Unit at State level
— Project Implementation Unit at city level
— Third Party Inspection & Monitoring.
A web enabled project tracking system is also under implemen-
tation to track progress of projects and reforms under JNNURM.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt.(HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008]
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 2.10)
Social Auditing of Schemes
The Committee, further, feel that the Ministry should explore
introduction of process of social auditing of its various Schemes in
order to assess the success of the Government’s endeavour to provide
infrastructure and basic services to the urban poor and demonstrate
its social, economic benefits and also limitations, if any. In their view,
such and effort would enable the Government to increase accountabil-
ity as well as enhance democratic practice in the country.
Reply of the Government
The Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee and Central
Sanctioning Committee in the Ministry of HUPA has requested the
State Governments to take necessary action for constituting beneficiary
committees which would supervise construction at various levels-

12
foundation, basement, lintel, roof, completion, occupation, etc. and
undertake social audit of the projects after completion. In this regard
Secretary (HUPA) has addressed to States to initiate action.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt.(HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.15)
Prudent use of Additional Funds
The Committee appreciate the fact that the budgetary allocation
for SJSRY has been increased from Rs. 344 crore last year to Rs. 515
crore this year, thereby registering an increase of around 50%. They
also observe that SJSRY is the only urban poverty alleviation scheme
addressing the issues of “inclusive urban development” encompassing
both self-employment and wage employment components and income-
generation and community support system to the urban poor.
Considering that the proposals for modifications in the Guidelines of
SJSRY has been approved “in principle” by the Planning Commission
and the said proposals would be moved shortly by the Ministry for
consideration of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), the Committee
desire that the additional funds should be channelised appropriately
in sync with the proposed modified Guidelines of the scheme in order
to increase the achievement level in the field of creation of more self-
help groups, setting up of more micro-enterprises and giving a boost
to micro finance. Further, the Committee recommend that the
additional funds available this year needs to be utilized for generating
a better number of Mandays of work under ‘Urban Wage Employment
Programme’, as this particular aspect has not given encouraging results
so far.
Reply of the Government
The considered views of Hon’ble Committee have been noted. The
proposal for Modification in the Guidelines of SJSRY has since been

13
cleared by EFC and it will be moved to the competent authority
i.e. Union Cabinet, shortly for its approval. The revised Guidelines
will come into effect, after the approval of the Cabinet, in this year
itself.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt.(HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.17)
Finalization of Modified Guidelines of SJSRY
In regard to early finalization of modified guidelines of SJSRY,
the Committee had, in their 21st Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08), recommended that the Ministry should be ready with the
modified Guidelines before the commencement of 11th Five-Year-Plan.
Now, they have been informed by the Ministry that the said guidelines
are yet to be approved by the competent authority i.e. the EFC, though
the proposed modifications have received “in principle” approval of
the Planning Commission. The Committee are dissatisfied at the failure
of the Ministry to finalize the modified guidelines till date, particularly
when one year of 11th Five Year Plan has also come to an end. They
are at a loss to know as to why it took so long. They, however, hope
that the revised guidelines would be approved by the EFC soon and
the modified guidelines of SJSRY would be implemented without
loosing any time further. The Committee further expect that the
modified guidelines are flexible and comprehensive enough to cover
the needs of the urban poor and has ample focus on women, SC/ST
persons, minorities, disabled people and the slum dwellers. The
Committee also feel that in order to make urban poor a dignified and
self-sufficient lot, more focus needs to be given to the setting up of
micro-enterprises, self-help groups, micro-finance, skill development,
vocational training as well as for ensuring an appropriate network to
access the markets for selling their products. Moreover, appropriate
guidelines must be spelt out to streamline the flow of micro-credit from

14
Banks, so that the flow of credit could be made faster and hassle-free
for the urban poor. In a nutshell, the Committee feel that unless the
States and banks together perform well, the SJSRY scheme cannot
achieve its aim comprehensively.
Reply of the Government
The proposal for Modification in the Guidelines of Swarna Jayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) has since been cleared by EFC and it
will be moved to the competent authority i.e. Union Cabinet, shortly
for its approval. The suggestions of Hon’ble Committee have
been given due consideration while preparing the proposals for
modifications in the Guidelines of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar
Yojana (SJSRY).
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt. (HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.25)
Funds under ILCS to be utilised for in-situ upgradation of old
toilets in slum areas
The Committee are happy to note that the budgetary allocation
for Integrated Low Cost Sanitation (ILCS) scheme for 2008-09 has been
increased to Rs.150 crore from a meagre allocation of Rs.40 crore during
2007-08. The Committee also appreciate the initiative taken by the
Ministry to make the scheme more attractive by revising its guidelines
in the current year, which also happens to be the ‘International year
of sanitation’. They note that as per the revised scheme, the Ministry
would be directly releasing the funds to the States/Union Territories
instead of HUDCO. Besides, in view of the total absence of latrine units
in certain urban slum areas, the Ministry have kept 25% of the total
fund over the Plan period for the same. The Committee are, however,

15
concerned about the extremely shabby conditions of old latrines in
urban slum areas and feel that the Ministry should also allot funds
for “in-situ” upgradation/repair/maintenance of the same under ILCS.
The Committee would like to be kept apprised as to how specifically
the enhanced budgetary allocation under ILCS scheme would be spent
in actual on all such areas. Besides, the Committee have been assured
that the existing 6 lakh dry latrines would be converted into pour flush
units under the scheme within 2-3 years. They expect that the target
is achieved without further delay.
Reply of the Government
During the current financial year an amount of Rs.150.00 crore
is provided in the Budget Estimates for implementing the Revised
Guidelines of the Centrally Sponsored “Integrated Low Cost Sanitation
(ILCS) Scheme”. Out of the Rs.150.00 crore, Rs.1.50 crore i.e. 1% is
retained to be utilized for MIS, Monitoring System, Capacity Building
and Information, Education, and Communication (IEC) components as
per the revised guidelines of the scheme. Out of the remaining funds
75% will be used for conversion of dry latrines into twin pit pour flush
latrines and 25% will be for construction of new toilets to EWS
households who have no latrines in the urban areas of the country.
The primary emphasis will be to complete conversion of around six
lakh dry latrines reported by the States of Assam, Bihar, J&K, Nagaland
and Uttar Pradesh by 31st March 2010 and funds will be utilized with
respect to the number of dry latrines prevalent in these areas. The
proportionate state-wise allocation with regard to construction of new
toilets to EWS house holds will be worked on the basis of households
having no latrines as per RGIs census 2001. Under the revised
guidelines there is a provision for involving NGOs adequate experience
in this field who will be funded to the maximum to the extent of 15%
over and above the total project cost to be borne by the Centre and
States based on the ratio of 5:1 at different stages of implementation.
Looking after operation and maintenance of the converted units will
be one of the tasks entrusted to them. However, there is no separate

16
provision for ‘in-situ’ up gradation/repair/maintenance of old toilets
for slum areas under the ILCs scheme.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt. (HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.42)
Suggestions for Allotment of Funds to States under BSUP and
IHSDP components of JNNURM
The Committee note that under JNNURM, the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (MoHUPA) has been the nodal
Ministry for slum development in the 63 Mission cities under BSUP
and for providing shelter and basic amenities in other non-Mission
cities under the IHSDP. They further note that these programmes focus
on improving the living conditions of the urban poor, especially those
residing in slums and low-income settlements. The Committee are
aware that there is a tremendous demand for approval of slum
development projects from small and medium towns and the present
allocation of fund is insufficient, which has led to re-appropriation of
funds from BSUP to IHSDP in the year 2007-2008 in order to
accommodate the demand. Against this backdrop, the Committee were
informed by the Ministry that they had proposed allocation of Rs.4000
crore under BSUP and Rs.2000 crore under IHSDP for the year
2008-09. It has been justified by the Ministry on the basis of
insufficiency of funds for NER States, Hill States, small UTs especially
the Island UTs. However, the Committee find that the allocation made
is only Rs.1880.35 crore under BSUP and Rs.613.84 crore under IHSDP
which would be grossly insufficient for the purpose. In this connection,
a suggestion has been received by the Committee stating that since
the programme is demand-based, year-wise restriction on release of

17
funds to States based on the year-wise allocation by Planning
Commission may be dispensed with. Instead, an indicative allocation
may be made within the overall BE/RE since all the States/UTs have
been given 7-year allocation. The Committee are in agreement with
the suggestion and urge the Ministry to initiate suitable action on the
same. Further, the Committee find an urgent need for additional
allocation under BSUP and IHSDP to take up infrastructure
development in slums. The Committee thus, urge the Ministry to
approach the disbursing Ministry as well as the Planning Commission
on these lines and apprise them of the outcome in due course.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of HUPA has taken up the issue of releasing fund
based on demand from States and UTs and also enhancement of
allocation for BSUP and IHSDP with the National Steering Group
under JNNURM. The National Steering Group in its meeting held on
31st March, 2008 has also agreed to the suggestion of release of fund
in accordance with the demands from States/UTs within 7 year
allocations under JNNURM as well as with the demand for enhanced
allocation. The Ministry of HUPA has further taken up the matter with
both Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for enhanced
allocation as well as dispensing with Annual State-wise allocation
within the Mission period allocations framework.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt. (HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008]
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.23)
Unsatisfactory Progress of 2 Million Housing Programme
The Committee note that under the 2 Million Housing
Programme, out of the annual target of 20 lakh dwelling units, 7 lakh
are to be constructed in urban areas. However, they are dismayed to
learn that in the recent years, there has been an astronomical gap

18
between the target fixed and the achievement. To cite an example, out
of the target of 4 lakh dwelling units to be constructed by HUDCO
during the last Fiscal Year (2007-2008), a mere 19406 dwelling units
could be constructed by it during the year 2007-08. Further, out of the
target of 2 lakh dwelling units to be constructed by the HFIs and Public
Sector Banks, only 96531 could be constructed during the year 2007-
08. The Committee cannot but feel deep anguish at the under
performance of all the agencies responsible for implementing this
scheme. They, therefore, urge the Ministry to seek explanation from
these agencies as well as the State Governments for missing the targets
by such a huge margin. They further feel that the Ministry must
coordinate and vigorously pursue with them and simultaneously
enhance financial support to adequately meet the targets of this scheme.
Reply of the Government
The Two Million Housing Programme was launched in 1998-99
as a loan based scheme by assigning targets for financing dwelling
units. It envisaged facilitating construction of 20 lakh additional units
every year (7 lakh dwelling units in urban areas and 13 lakh dwelling
units in rural areas).
Of the seven lakh dwelling units for urban areas, four lakh
dwelling units were to be financed by Housing and Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. (HUDCO); two lakh dwelling units
were to be financed through Housing Finance Institutions (HFIs) and
Public Sector Banks; and one lakh houses were to be constructed
through auspices of National Cooperative Housing Federation.
During last 10 years of its implementation against the assigned
target of 70 lakh urban dwelling units, more than 77 lakh dwelling
units have been facilitated under the scheme.
The shortfall in annual targets during last few years have
primarily been due to non-submission of schemes for financing by

19
HUDCO by the State Government agencies who are now keen on
implementing schemes involving Central assistance ( viz., BSUP and
IHSDP). The Ministry has set up a High Powered Committee under
the chairmanship of Shri Ashok Jha, retired Finance Secretary,
Government of India, to rejuvinate HUDCO with a view to strengthen
its financial position and expansion of activities for better service to
poor and weaker sections of the Society. The Ministry will take
appropriate measures for implementation of the recommendations once
available.
The Ministry has been pursuing greater participation by the
cooperative sector through National Cooperative Housing Federation
(NCHF), the apex body for various State level cooperative housing
federations. The Ministry has requested various States for allotment
of 30% of land acquired to housing cooperative functioning in the State
at concessional rate and on priority basis so that they could undertake
housing programme at large scale. In addition, State Governments have
also been requested to exempt members of housing cooperative from
payment of stamp duty and registration fee.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt. (HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008]
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.24)
National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy, 2007 (NUHHP-2007)
The Committee appreciate that the New National Urban Housing
and Habitat Policy, 2007 (NUHHP-2007) has been finalized in
consultation with all concerned and laid in the Parliament on
07.12.2007. The Committee also note that the focus of the policy is on
affordable urban housing for all with special emphasis on SC/ST/OBC/
Minorities and Women. In addition, they feel that besides earnestly
endeavouring for meeting this primary goal, special emphasis needs
to be given to the provision of shelter to urban poor at their present

20
location or near their work place, in-situ slum rehabilitation, promotion
of micro finance institutions as well as the use of remote-sensing for
preparing detailed city maps, aerial survey and ground verification. The
Committee are also of the view that the Ministry must sincerely follow,
in a time-bound manner, the Action Plan envisaged under NUHHP,
2007 and facilitate the preparation of State Urban Housing and Habitat
Policy and Action Plan at the earliest. The Committee also
recommended the expeditious setting up of the High Level Monitoring
Committee, as envisaged under NUHHP, 2007 for periodic review and
implementation of the policy and for making amendments and
modifications, wherever considered necessary.
Reply of the Government
All the State Governments/UT’s have already been advised to
formulate State Urban Housing and Habitat Policy and Action Plan.
A High Level Monitoring Committee as envisaged under National
Urban Housing and Habitat Policy-2007 is being set up under the
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of State (Independent Charge) of
Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation for periodic review and
implementation of the Policy.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt. (HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008]
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.25)
Quality Housing/Designing
The Committee appreciate the view of the Ministry that Housing
for the urban poor does not mean poor housing. The Committee desire
that the Ministry, while maintaining the quality of house construction,
should design houses, specially toilets, taking into consideration the
local customs, preferences, community consideration and aesthetics,
while ensuring the use of latest techniques and ideas in the field of

21
building designs. The Committee acknowledge the initiatives of the
Ministry towards preparing several innovative designs of houses on
CDs. The Committee desire that HUDCO, BMTPC and all other
organizations/architects having expertise in the field of designing
houses for the poor must be further involved in this process and after
their consultation, appropriate region and community-wise designs
should be approved.
Reply of the Government
Inputs
HUDCO as part of its appraisal process has tried to incorporate
designs based on local needs through the help of Planners, Architects,
Engineers and Community Development Offices based on the
geographical location, detailed socio-economic survey and housing
typoligy prevalent in the Regions. A series of measures have been
initiated to sensitize the State level Nodal Agency/Local Bodies for
incorporating the efficient design developed by professionals of
HUDCO.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt. (HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008]
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.27)
HUDCO
The Committee note that after being awarded the ‘mini-ratna’
status to HUDCO, the financial support of Government of India in the
form of exemptions is no more available to it thereby making loans
of HUDCO non-competitive. Keeping in view the changes in the
economic scenario, the Committee are aware that the HUDCO is
already in the process of exploring alternative thrust areas to enhance
their earning like developing themselves as project management
consultants and strengthening their HUDCO Niwas Scheme in a big-

22
way. However, in view of the resource crunch to meet the needs of
housing for the poor, the Committee feel that HUDCO should continue
to play a major role in this area. Therefore, the Committee recommend
that MoHUPA should earnestly seek the help of Ministry of Finance
so as to make HUDCO eligible for low cost funds as well as to ensure
that the facilities extended to HUDCO, before it was awarded a mini
ratna status, are continued.
Reply of the Government
The Government has decided to set up a High Powered
Committee under the chairmanship of Shri Ashok Jha, retired Finance
Secretary, Government of India, to rejuvenate HUDCO with a view
to strengthen its financial position and expansion of activities for better
service to poor and weaker sections of the Society.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt. (HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008]

23
23
CHCHCHCHCHAPTER IIIAPTER IIIAPTER IIIAPTER IIIAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
–Nil–

24
24
CHAPTCHAPTCHAPTCHAPTCHAPTER IVER IVER IVER IVER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.16)Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.16)Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.16)Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.16)Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.16)
Physical achievement under various components of SJSRYPhysical achievement under various components of SJSRYPhysical achievement under various components of SJSRYPhysical achievement under various components of SJSRYPhysical achievement under various components of SJSRY
About the performance of the USEP components of the Scheme,
the Committee have been informed that out of the target of 1,20,000
micro enterprises, a total of 95,404 have been set up till date for year
2007-08. However, the Committee find that the performance on this
particular aspect is far lower than in the year 2006-2007, which was
1,36,178. However, the Committee are happy that in regard to skilled
training component, the Ministry has actually exceeded the target in
2007-2008, which was 1,52,308 persons as compared to the target of
1,50,000 persons. The Committee would still like to lay stress on the
points that these achievements have not been as holistic as desired in
all the States. They note that there has been nil achievement in the
fields of setting up of micro-enterprises and skill training to urban poor
in States like Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Daman & Diu etc.
The Committee feel that the achievement should have been more
comprehensive and holistic. Besides, as already stated in the previous
recommendation, the Committee are disappointed over the low
achievement of the urban wage employment component of SJSRY. They
note that only 21.78 lakh Mandays of work were generated during 2007-
2008 till 29th February, 2008 whereas the figure for 2006-2007 was as
high as 81.55 lakh. The Committee, thus, are dismayed at the
fluctuating progress of this component of SJSRY. They, therefore,
recommend the Ministry to earnestly strive to increase its achievement
levels in all the components of SJSRY in order to avoid inconsistency
in its performance.

25
Reply of the Government
The updated achievements, as on 31.3.2008 , against the targets for
2007-2008, under SJSRY are as under:—
Target Achievement
Number of urban poor assisted to 1,20,000 1,30,804
set-up  individual/group  micro-
enterprises
Number of Urban poor imparted 1,50,000 1,92,066
skill training
Number of Mandays of work — 31.84 Lakh
generated under Urban Wage
Employment Programme (UWEP)
Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation is striving hard
to impress upon the States/UTs, to effectively implement the Scheme
of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY). Various review
Meetings, State level orientation workshops of the field level Officers/
functionaries have also been organized in the States. It is expected that
the revised Guidelines of SJSRY will also play a role of catalyst in
expediting the progress of the Scheme of Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY).
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt.(HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.22)Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.22)Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.22)Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.22)Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.22)
Housing ShortageHousing ShortageHousing ShortageHousing ShortageHousing Shortage
The Committee note that as per the recommendations of the
working group on Housing for the 11th Plan, the total shortage of

26
dwelling units at the end of 10th Plan is 24.71 million. During the Plan
period (2007-2012) the shortage including the backlog is likely to be
26.53 million units. They further note that out of the 24.71 million
backlog, 10.6 million units are in the urban areas. In this regard, the
Committee are dissatisfied to note that a mere 15% achievement was
registered in construction of dwelling units during the 1st half of the
Financial Year 2007-08. The Committee feel that the situation is very
alarming, as housing constitutes as basic human need and shelter is
the basic human right of the urban poor. At this point, the Committee,
welcome a 128.23% increase in current year’s budgetary allocation to
this sector. The Committee expect that the enhanced allocation will be
prudently and judiciously utilized in funding all the ongoing schemes
as well as the newly proposed scheme of Interest Subsidy Scheme
for Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP) in order to considerably
reduce the huge backlog. The Committee, further desire that ample
scope should be created for public-private partnership in the housing
sector. However, the partnership with the private sector needs to be
handled  with caution so that the quality of houses is not compromised
upon.
Reply of the Government
The National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy, 2007
(NUHHP-2007) aims at forging strong partnership between the Public,
Private and Co-operative sector for accelerated growth in housing sector
and sustainable development of Habitat.  The National Urban Housing
and Habitat Policy, 2007 promotes observance of the National
Building Code (NBC) 2005 as part of regulatory framework and this
is expected to improve and ensure quality in respect of all projects
being executed by public agencies including Public-Private Partnership
projects.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt.(HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008]

27
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.26)Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.26)Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.26)Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.26)Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4.26)
Vertical Development of SlumsVertical Development of SlumsVertical Development of SlumsVertical Development of SlumsVertical Development of Slums
With rapid pace of urbanization, land space in cities has been
constantly shrinking. What has aggravated this alarming situation is
the horizontal development of slums devoid of basic facilities/
amenities, open spaces, proper roads, etc. The Committee, therefore,
urge the Ministry to go in for vertical development of slum areas. While
acknowledging the Ministry’s support towards this end to the city of
Chennai, they desire that this should be taken up in those big cities,
where the land is scarce, by making it a general policy measure. The
Committee recommend that vertical slum development alongwith
provision of suitable basic amenities should be incorporated in the
National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy in due course of time. In
the meantime, they desire the Ministry to issue an advisory to the
States  urging the cities covered under BSUP, IHSDP also to explore
vertical construction of EWS houses, wherever feasible, so that
the existing pressure on habitable land in the urban areas could be
eased.
Reply of the Government
The National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy—2007 provides
for review of Floor Area Ratio (FAR) in line with international practices
for allowing more efficient use of scarce urban land by construction
of high rise buildings.  However, it is for the State Governments and
ULBs to adopt this in the respective Master Plans.
Under the Basic Services to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated
Housing & Slum Development Programme (IHSDP) Projects
considering the acute scarcity of land, wherever feasible, new
construction of housing units in multi-storey structures (G+3) are

28
encouraged.  In some locations building designs with more than G+3
storeys have also been approved under BSUP.  Some such structures
also have ramps to make them disabled friendly.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/1/2008-Bt.(HUPA) date 2nd July, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)

29
29
CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER VVVVV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
–Nil–
 N EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
4 September , 2008 Chairman,
13 Bhadrapada , 1930  (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban
Development.

30
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2008-09)
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 2nd SEPTEMBER, 2008
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Room No. ‘139’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
13. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
14. Shri Anant Gudhe
15. Shri Pushp Jain
16. Shri Kailash Joshi
17. Shri Sajjan Kumar
18. Shri A.K. Moorthy
19. Shri D. Vittal Rao
10. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
11. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
12. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
Rajya Sabha
13. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
14. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
15. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
16. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
17. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
30

31
18. Shri Penumalli Madhu
19. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Harchain — Deputy Secretary-II
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee took up for consideration
the draft report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in their Thirty Second Report (14th Lok
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Ministry of Housing
and Urban Poverty Alleviation and adopted the same with slight
modification. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise
the report and present the same to the Parliament.
*** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
***Not related with the Report.

APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY SECOND
 REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN
DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
Total % of
Total
II. Total number of recommendations 13
II. Recommendations which have been 10 76.92%
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 2.9, 2.10, 3.15, 3.17, 3.25, 3.42,
4.23, 4.24, 4.25, 4.27
III. Recommendations which the Committee 3 23.076%
do not desire to pursue in view of
Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 3.16, 4.22 & 4.26
IV. Recommendations in respect of which 0 (0%)
replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee:
Para No. NIL
V. Recommendations in respect of which 0 (0%)
final replies of the Government are
still awaited:
Para No. NIL
32

THIRTY FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2008-09)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Thirty Second Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on...........................
Presented in Rajya Sabha on.........................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
September, 2008/Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.U.D. No. 37C.U.D. No. 37C.U.D. No. 37C.U.D. No. 37C.U.D. No. 37
Price : Rs. 40.00
© 2008 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by The Indian
Press, Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
10
23
24
29
30
32
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................................
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................
CHAPTER I Report....................................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government..........................................................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies.....................................................................................
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee.............................................................................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government are still awaited..........................................
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee held
on 2.9.2008...........................................................................
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Thirty Second
Report of the Committee  (14th Lok Sabha)...............
P
AGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2008-2009)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
5. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
6. Shri Anant Gudhe
7. Shri Pushp Jain
8. Shri Kailash Joshi
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar
10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
12. Shri A.K. Moorthy
13. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
14. Shri L. Rajagopal
15. Shri D. Vittal Rao
16. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
17. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
18. Shri Jagdish Tytler
19. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
20. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
21. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
Rajya Sabha
22. Dr. Prabha Thakur
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
(iii)

(iv)
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
27. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari
28. Shri Penumalli Madhu
29. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
30. Shri Manohar Joshi
31. Shri Mukul Roy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Develop-
ment (2008-09) having been authorized by the Committee to submit
the Report on their behalf, present the Thirty-Fourth Report on the
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-Second Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation.
2. The Thirty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
16th April, 2008. The replies of the Government to 13 recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 8th July, 2008.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held
on 2nd September, 2008.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty Second Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
4th September , 2008 Chairman,
13 Bhadrapada , 1930  (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban
Development.

STANDING COMMITTEESTANDING COMMITTEESTANDING COMMITTEESTANDING COMMITTEESTANDING COMMITTEE
ON URBAN DEVELOPMENTON URBAN DEVELOPMENTON URBAN DEVELOPMENTON URBAN DEVELOPMENTON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2008-09)(2008-09)(2008-09)(2008-09)(2008-09)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND
URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
3434343434
THIRTY FOURTH REPORTTHIRTY FOURTH REPORTTHIRTY FOURTH REPORTTHIRTY FOURTH REPORTTHIRTY FOURTH REPORT
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Thirty Second Report of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
lR;eso t;rs
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
September, 2008/Bhadrapad, 1930 (Saka)

All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament
House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website
mentioned above.