19
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
NINETEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

NINETEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ……………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ……………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
January, 2007/Magha, 1928 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 19
Price : Rs. 35.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER-I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER-II Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government .................................................. 11
CHAPTER-III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 21
CHAPTER-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 22
CHAPTER-V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 23
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Committee
held on 22.1.2007. ..................................................... 26
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in Fifteenth
Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ...... 28
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
Mohd. Salim —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
3. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Anant Gudhe
6. Shri Pushp Jain
7. Shri Kailash Joshi
8. Shri Sajjan Kumar
9. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
10. Shri A.K. Moorthy
11. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
12. Shri L. Rajagopal
13. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
14. Shri D. Vittal Rao
15. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
##16. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
17. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
18. Shri Jagdish Tytler
**19. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
20. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
$$21. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
(iii)
## Ceased to be the member of the Committee  w.e.f. 4.12.2006 consequent upon
resignation from Lok Sabha.
** Nominated w.e.f. 25.9.2006 vice Shri Ravi Prakash Verma, M.P . ceased to be the
member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.9.2006.
$$ Nominated w.e.f. 2nd January, 2007.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
27. Shri Penumalli Madhu
28. Shri Mukul Roy
#29. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
30. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
*31. Shri Manohar Joshi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Saxena — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
5. Shri Shanker Verma — Executive Assistant
(iv)
*Nominated w.e.f. 1st September, 2006.
#Ceased to be the member of the Committee w.e.f. 30.11.2006.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2006-2007) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Nineteenth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Fifteenth Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban
Development on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation.
2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 22nd May,
2006. The replies of the Government to 18 recommendations contained
in the Report were received on 21st August, 2006.
3. Reply to the remaining one Recommendation No. 3.39 was
received from the Ministry on 28th November, 2006.
4. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
22nd January, 2007.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2006-2007) is given in Appendix II .
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
25 January, 2007 Chairman,
5 Magha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Urban Development (2006-2007)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Fifteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-2007)
of Ministry of Housing and Urban & Poverty Alleviation which was
presented to Lok Sabha on 22nd May, 2006.
2. Out of 19 recommendations, action taken notes in respect of all
the  recommendations have been received from the Government which
have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1.8, 2.8, 2.9, 3.15, 3.16, 3.17, 3.18, 3.19, 3.20, 3.29,
3.30, 3.52, 3.53, 4.11 and 4.12
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Nil
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para No. 3.54
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.10, 3.39 and 4.10
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes
in respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of the
Report may be furnished to the Committee within three months of
the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
Unspent balance with the Implementing Agencies and timely
utilization of funds by States/UTs under (SJSRY) Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 2.9)
5. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee express their deep concern over the fact that the
Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation has
surrendered Rs. 453.00 crore during the year 2001-02 to 2004-05
and as on 31 December, 2005 Rs. 1320.70 crore were lying as
unspent balance with State/UTs Government under various
Schemes of the Ministry and as on 31.12.2005 Rs. 132.61 crore of
unspent balances were lying with the Implementing Agencies i.e.
NBCC and BMTPC. The Committee cannot but conclude from the
above that the performance and monitoring of various Schemes of
the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation has not
been unto the mark. Though the mandate of the Ministry are
(i) Urban Employement & Poverty Alleviation, and (ii) Housing &
Human Settlements, the Ministry is precariously lagging behind in
fulfilling the same. The Committee desire that the Ministry should
seriously ponder over the issues as to why they are failing in the
realization of their mandates and objectives. A serious thought is
required to be given on this aspect. The Committee are of the
view that the Ministry should strengthen their mechanism for
monitoring of various Schemes both at the Central & State levels
and persuade the States/UTs which are lagging behind in utilizing
funds under various schemes to come up with viable and effective
projects for the benefit of the urban poor, thereby, utilize the funds
completely and in time. The Committee also recommend that the
Government should explore the feasibility of imposing penal
interest on the States/UTs, if they fail to utilize the unspent balances
lying with them under various schemes within a fixed time period.
The Committee should be kept informed about the steps taken in
this regard”.
6. In response, the Ministry has replied as under:—
“The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for
compliance. Moreover, in case of Scheme of Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), the unspent balances reflected in the Reports
are calculated by deducting the expenditure reported by the States/
UTs as on date from the total funds released under the Scheme.
However, as this released amount includes the funds released even
during the previous year, for which UCs are not due, the actual

3
accumulated unspent funds under the Scheme are quite less than
what was reflected in the Statements. Regarding imposing of penal
interest on the defaulting States/UTs, it is submitted that as per
General Financial Rules (GFR-2005), the implementing agencies have
to return the funds along with interest, if they fail to utilize the
funds in accordance with the guidelines of the Scheme. However,
keeping in view the ground realities and difficulties faced by the
State/District level agencies in the implementation of the scheme
at grass root level, it may be difficult to fix a timeframe for
utilization of funds, which may attract penal interest for time-
default”.
7. The Committee desire that a correct picture of the unspent-
balance of funds under various schemes including the scheme of
‘SJSRY’ must be given by the Ministry in their budgetary papers
vis-a-vis the funds released in a financial year for the perusal of the
Committee in future so that the Committee could derive better
conclusions. Regarding, the utilization of funds by the States/UTs
for the projects under SJSRY, the Committee desire that all the States/
UTs must be persuaded to furnish their utilization certificates (UCs)
from time to time so that the implementation process of the scheme
is not adversely effected.
Wide Publicity by Government about the benefits of SJSRY Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10)
8. The Committee had noted as below:—
“Keeping in view the poor performance of Urban Poverty
Alleviation Schemes, the Committee note that there is lack of
awareness amongst the urban poor about the benefits of UPA
Schemes and their efficacy. As already stated on several occasions,
the Committee recommend that the Ministry should give wide
publicity to its various Schemes so as to create awareness amongst
the urban poor. The Committee may be apprised about the action
taken in this regard”.
9. In response, the Ministry has replied as under:—
“The Ministry is planning a comprehensive publicity campaign
(both outdoor as well as audio-visual), through Directorate of
Advertising & Visual Publicity (DAVP) for the Swarna Jayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) Scheme this year. Directorate of
Advertising and Audio-Visual Publicity (DAVP) is preparing the
designs of advertisements and the campaign is likely to start very
shortly”.

4
10. The Committee appreciate that the designs of advertisements
and campaign about the Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
(SJSRY) scheme are being prepared by DA VP and will be launched
shortly. The Committee desire that the Ministry should also ensure
that success stories like that of “Kudambashree’ in the State of Kerala
are publicized through print and electronic media so as to generate
awareness amongst the urban poor about the benefits of its various
schemes. The Committee may be apprised about the final position
in this regard in due course.
Implementation of the SJSRY Scheme in UT s
Recommendation (Para No. 3.17)
11. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee note that upto 31.12.2005, Rs. 217.45 crore was
lying as unspent balance with States/UTs under SJSRY. The
Committee also note that Jharkhand, Gujarat, Goa, North-Eastern
States and all the UTs are defaulting in furnishing utilization
certificates and the Scheme is not performing well in almost all
the UTs. The Committee recommend that the Government should
impress upon the defaulting States/UTs which are lagging behind
in furnishing Utilization Certificates on time the need for furnishing
the UCs in time and examine the feasibility of charging penal
interest if they fail to furnish Utilization Certificates within a
reasonable time period. Since UTs are under the direct
administrative control of the Union Government, the Committee
recommend that Pilot Projects be taken up in the UTs by the Union
Government under the SJSRY Scheme. Such Pilot Projects would
motivate the urban poor population in the UTs to set up micro
enterprises under SJSRY scheme”.
12. In response, the Ministry have replied as under:—
“The Ministry recently organized a one day Conference at Shimla
on 31st May, 2006 of average/bad performing States/UTs inviting
Ministers/Secretaries of 10 States and all the 6 UTs and discussed
in detail the problems/strategies for boosting the progress of the
implementation of the scheme in these States/UTs. It is hoped
that these States/UTs will now perform more effectively. Regarding
imposing of penal interest on the defaulting States/UTs, as per
General Financial Rules (GFR-2005), the implementing agencies have
to return the funds along with interest, if they fail to utilize the
funds in accordance with guidelines of the Scheme. However,

5
keeping in view the ground realities and difficulties faced by the
State/District level agencies in the implementation of the
Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) scheme at grass
root level, it may be difficult to fix a timeframe for utilization of
funds which may attract penal interest for time-default. Regarding
Pilot projects, it is submitted that present guidelines of the scheme
do not permit the innovative projects under the scheme and the
scheme has to be implemented through States/UTs only. However,
the considered views of the Hon’ble Committee will be taken care
of while proposing modifications in the guidelines of the Scheme
for the 11th Five Year Plan”.
13. The Committee note with satisfaction that steps are being
taken by the Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation for
discussing problems/strategies for boosting the progress of the
implementation of the SJSRY Scheme in the States/UTs through
Conferences with States Governments. The Committee hope that such
coordinative measures would be taken up by the Ministry on a
regular basis so as to motivate the poor performing States/UTs to
come up with tangible and feasible production units under the SJSRY
scheme. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in
the matter.
Early completion of House-to-House Survey
Recommendation (Para No. 3.18)
14. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee note that House-to-house survey has been done
in only 3646 towns out of total 3755 towns in the country unto
31 March, 2006 for the identification of beneficiaries living below
the poverty line. No timeframe has been fixed by the Ministry for
the completion of house-to-house survey by the States. The
Committee are of the view that in the absence of State specific
urban poverty line list, it would be difficult to implement effectively
SJSRY Scheme and assess the impact of the Scheme on the persons
living below the poverty line. The Committee recommend that the
Government should persuade States/UTs, which are lagging behind
in completion of BPL survey to complete house to house survey
at the earliest. The poverty line should reflect the prevailing
conditions of the urban poor on non-economic parameters of the
respective States/UTs”.

6
15. In response, the Ministry have replied as under:—
“The defaulting States/UTs have been requested to complete the
house to house survey at the earliest so that the identification of
genuine beneficiaries under the scheme can be done and the scheme
is implemented effectively. The guidelines of the Swarna Jayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) contain economic/non-economic
parameters to identify the genuine beneficiaries”.
16. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and
desire that the house-to-house survey of remaining 109 towns be
completed without any further delay. The Ministry should also fix
timeframe for the survey. The Committee may be apprised about
the action taken in this regard.
Construction of Kiosks for Urban Poor by HUDCO funding
Recommendation (Para No. 3.20)
17. The Committee had noted below:—
“The Committee note that the proposal for modification of
guidelines of the SJSRY has been considered by the Cabinet and
the Cabinet had decided that the Scheme should continue without
modification to its guidelines during the remaining period of the
10th Plan and an evaluation of the Scheme would be carried out
for the 11th Plan. The Committee also note that the process of
independent evaluation has been started which will be completed
by 31st October, 2006 and the Ministry will get enough time for
moving of appropriate modifications in the Scheme before the
commencement of the 11th Five Year Plan in April, 2007. The
Committee presume that the Ministry would be able to complete
the independent evaluation of Scheme within the stipulated time
period and are optimistic that the revised guidelines of the Scheme
would be flexible and innovative enough to cater to the
requirements of the urban poor. The Committee desire that keeping
in view the large number of urban unemployed particularly in the
Metropolitan Cities, the revised guideline of the Schemes during
the 11th Five Year Plan should be able to cater to the needs of
hawkers/and other urban poor. The Ministry in associations with
HUDCO should explore the feasibility of providing ‘kiosks’ to these
hawkers at an affordable price so as to solve the problem of
encroachments on public land”.

7
18. In response, the Ministry have replied as under:—
“The evaluation of the Scheme for the 11th Plan has already been
initiated and Human Settlements & Management Institute (HSMI),
New Delhi has placed advertisement in Newspapers inviting
Expression of Interest (EOI) from Research Agencies for carrying
out the evaluation. Regarding the feasibility of providing kiosks,
Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd. (HUDCO) has
launched a Scheme in 2005 for construction of kiosks for urban
poor. The Scheme is to provide loan facilities to urban poor living
below the poverty line in any urban centre. The scheme provides
employment opportunities to urban poor by providing loan facility
to enable them to construct kiosks, vending platforms for sale of
petty items etc”.
19. The Committee note that HUDCO has launched a scheme in
2005 for construction of ‘Kiosks’ for urban poor. The scheme
envisages to provide loan facilities to urban poor living below
poverty line in any urban centre. The Committee, hope that
construction of ‘Kiosks’, vending platform etc. in cities/towns through
HUDCO would go a long-way in providing livelihood to the urban
poor families. The Committee may be apprised about the progress
made in the matter.
Finalization of the guidelines in respect of Integrated Low Cost
Sanitation Scheme (ILCS) by Government
Recommendation (Para No. 3.39)
20. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee note that in order to eliminate the dehumanising
practice of physically carrying night soil, the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme for Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCSs) was
initiated in 1981. The Committee, however, deprecate that since its
inception the Scheme is infested with numerous problems and it
has not performed well. In the 10th plan Rs. 200 crore has been
allocated for the scheme, but only 29.60 crore has been released
unto 31.1.2006. In the circumstances, the Committee are compelled
to believe that the Government has launched ILCS without doing
proper study and homework. Moreover, the Government has also
not shown any responsibility and accountability in revising the
Scheme timely which is meant for eradicating manual scavenging.
The Committee recommend the Ministry of Urban Employment &
Poverty Alleviation should revise the guidelines of the Scheme

8
after incorporating suggestions and comments of the State
Governments and the Planning Commission so as to make it user
friendly. The Ministry should also ensure that the disadvantaged
and deprived sections of society are given a fair deal so that they
can live with human dignity and should take concerted action in
association with State Governments and other Central Ministries
to rehabilitate the manual scavengers.
21. The Government has replied as under:—
“With an objective to revamp the scheme, the views/suggestions
of the State Governments, Planning Commission and other
concerned Ministries/Agencies were sought. Based on the
suggestions/comments received from the Central Ministries/State
Govt., an extensive revision of the existing guidelines is being
carried out. The expenditure Finance committee meeting under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance was
held on 17.7.2006 which considered and approved the revised
guidelines of ILCS. The Cabinet Note is under preparation”.
22. The Committee note that based on the suggestions/comments
of the Central Ministries and State Governments, the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has taken up extensive
revision of the existing guidelines for Integrated Low Cost Sanitation
Scheme (ILCS). These revised guidelines have been considered and
approved by the Ministry of Finance on 17.7.2006 and these revised
guidelines have to be placed before Cabinet and approved for
implementation. the Committee, therefore, desire that the revised
guidelines for ILCS are finalized at the earliest possible by
Government for onward transmission to the States/UTs for
implementation.
Integrated Housing & Slum Development Programme (IHSDP)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.54)
23. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee note that budgetary allocation for BSUP and
IHSDP for the year 2006-07 have been provided in the budget of
Ministry of Finance and not in the budget of Ministry of Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviation. The Committee recommend
that for better financial control and smooth & speedy disbursement
of funds, the budgetary allocations for BSUP & IHSDP should be
provided in the budget of Urban Employment & Poverty
Alleviation, as suggested by the National Steering Group and the
Ministry should take up this matter at the highest level in the
Ministry of Finance”.

9
24. The Government has replied as under:—
“The Ministry had taken up the matter of placing funds under
JNNURM in the budget of the respective Ministry. However,
Ministry of Finance did not agree to the proposal. The budget for
the scheme has been provided as Additional Central Assistance
(A.C.A.) to States/UTs in the budget of the Ministry of Finance”.
25. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and
desire that Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA)
should take up at the highest level with the Ministry of Finance for
proper budgetary allocations for BSUP & IHSDP Schemes in the
budget of Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation so as to
facilitate successful implementation of these schemes by the urban
local bodies (ULBs) in States/UTs in the country. The action taken in
this matter may be reported to the Committee.
Finalization of the National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy
Recommendation (Para No. 4.10)
26. The Committee had noted as below:—
“The Committee note that draft of the National Urban Housing
and Habitat Policy has been prepared to address various issues
involved in the implementing the housing Policy. The draft of the
National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy is yet to be placed
before the cabinet for its approval. The committees desire that the
Ministry should expedite the approval of draft of the National
Urban Housing and Habitat Policy and implement the same at the
earliest”.
27. The Government has replied as under:—
“The draft Cabinet note of the National Urban Housing and Habitat
Policy was circulated to the various Ministries/Departments of the
Govt. of India for their comments. The Planning Commission has
suggested that issues involved in the draft Policy are complex and
before going to the Cabinet, the paper should be discussed by the
Committee of Secretaries (CoS)”. Comments from a few Ministries/
Departments are still awaited. On receipt of their comments, the
paper will be discussed in the CoS and revised draft policy will
be placed for the approval of the Cabinet thereafter.

10
28. The Committee note that as suggested by the Planning
Commission the draft Cabinet Note of National Urban Housing and
Habitat Policy has been circulated to the various Ministries/
Departments of Government of India for their comments. However,
comments from some Ministries/Departments are still awaited. On
receipt their comments, the paper will be discussed in the Committee
of Secretaries CoS). Thereafter, the revised draft policy will be placed
for approval of the Cabinet. The Committee desire that all out efforts
should be made to finalize the National Urban Housing and Habitat
Policy at the earliest.

11
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1.8)
The Committee desire that Government should implement all the
22 recommendations, which are under process of implementation in a
specific time frame. The Committee be apprised about the steps taken
by the Government in this direction.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the committee have been noted for compliance
and its recommendations are at different stages of processing. Final
action, when completed would be informed to the committee.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) Dated 21.8.2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.8)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Urban Employment &
Poverty Alleviation has been allocated an over all Budget Estimates of
Rs. 431.67 crore (Gross) for the year 2006-2007. There is a decrease of
Rs. 80.36 crore in B.E. 2006-2007 over B.E. 2005-06. The reasons
advanced by the Ministry regarding the decrease are that (i) the Valmiki
Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY) and the National Slum
Development Programme (NSDP) had been subsumed in the Integrated
Housing and Slum Development (IHSDP) and the budgetary allocation
for this new IHSDP scheme has been reflected in the budget of Ministry
of Finance. The decrease in B.E. 2006-07 over BE 2005-06 is also due
to discontinuation of interest subsidy to HUDCO for construction of
two million houses.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for
compliance.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/3/20006-Bt. (HUPA) Dated 21.8.2006]

12
Recommendation (Para No. 2.9)
The Committee express their deep concern over the fact that the
Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation has surrendered
Rs. 453.00 crore during the year 2001-02 to 2004-05 and as on
31 December 2005 Rs. 1320.70 crore were lying as unspent balance
with State/UTs Government under various Schemes of the Ministry &
as on 31.12.2005 Rs. 132.61 crore of unspent balances were lying with
the Implementing Agencies  i.e. NBCC and BMTPC. The Committee
cannot but conclude from the above that the performance and
monitoring of various Schemes of the Ministry of Urban Employment
& Poverty Alleviation has not been unto the mark. Though the mandate
of the Ministry are (i) Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation and
(ii) Housing & Human Settlements, the Ministry is precariously lagging
behind in fulfilling the same. The Committee desire that the Ministry
should seriously ponder over the issues as to why they are failing in
the realization of their mandates and objectives. A serious thought is
required to be given on this aspect. The Committee are of the view
that the Ministry should strengthen their mechanism for monitoring of
various Schemes both at the central & State levels and persuade the
States/UTs which are lagging behind in utilizing funds under various
schemes to come up with viable and effective project for the benefit
of the urban poor, thereby, utilize the funds completely and in time.
The Committee also recommend that the Government should explore
the feasibility of imposing penal interest on the States/UTs. if they fail
to utilize the unspent balances lying with them under various schemes
within a fixed time period. The Committee should be kept informed
about the steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for
compliance. Moreover, in case of Scheme of Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), the unspent balances reflected in the Reports
are calculated by deducting the expenditure reported by the States/
UTs as on date from the total funds released under the Scheme.
However, as this released amount includes the funds released even
during the previous year, for which UCs are not due, the actual
accumulated unspent funds under the Scheme are quite less than what
was reflected in the Statements. Regarding imposing of penal interest
on the defaulting States/UTs, it is submitted that as per General
Financial Rules (GFR-2005), the implementing agencies have to return
the funds alongwith interest, if they fail to utilize the funds in
accordance with the guidelines of the Scheme. However, keeping in

13
view the ground realities and difficulties faced by the State/District
level agencies in the implementation of the scheme at grass root level,
it may be difficult to fix a timeframe for utilization of funds which
may attract penal interest for time-default.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15 & 3.16)
The Committee note that Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
(SJSRY) is the only flagship Scheme of the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation, which seeks to provide gainful
employment to the Urban unemployed or underemployed, living below
the poverty line. The Committee take a positive note of the fact that
budgetary allocation for the Scheme for the year 2006-2007 has been
increased to Rs. 250 crore from Rs. 160 crore for the year 2005-2006.
The Committee also note that during the year 2005-2006 some States
demanded additional funds under the Scheme which were partly met
by the Ministry keeping in view the funds available for the Scheme
for the year 2005-2006. The Committee recommend that adequate
financial allocation should be made for this Scheme so as to meet the
additional requirement of funds of better performing States. The
Committee desire that the Ministry should pay special attention to the
States where urban poor population is more but demands under the
scheme is low. Such States should be persuaded and motivated to
give priority to this Scheme which is the only Urban Poverty Alleviation
Scheme in Urban Sector so that massive problem of unemployment
could be tackled in an effective manner. The Committee recommended
that frequent and regular meetings must be held between the senior
officials of the Central Ministry and State Governments so as to impress
upon the non performing States to set up SJSRY projects/Units.
Reply of the Government
The considered views of Hon’ble Committee have been noted and
the Ministry will coordinate and follow up the implementation of the
Scheme with the States/UTs. Also regular meetings and conferences/
workshops are organized by the Ministry at central/regional level,
inviting the States/UTs and other stakeholders to remove the
bottlenecks in the effective implementation of the scheme.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]

14
Recommendation (Para No. 3.17)
The Committee note that upto 31.12.2005, Rs. 217.45 crore was
lying as unspent balance with States/UTs under SJSRY. The Committee
also note that Jharkhand, Gujarat, Goa, North-Eastern States and all
the UTs are defaulting in furnishing utilization certificates and the
Scheme is not performing well in almost all the UTs. The Committee
recommend that the Government should impress upon the defaulting
States/UTs which are lagging behind in furnishing Utilization
Certificates on time the for furnishing the UCs in time and examine
and the feasibility of charging penal interest if they fail to furnish
Utilization Certificates within a reasonable time period. Since UTs are
under the direct administrative control of the Union Government. The
Committee recommend that Pilot Projects be taken up in the UTs by
the Union Government under the SJSRY Scheme. Such Pilot Projects
would motivate the urban poor population in the UTs to set up micro
enterprises under SJSRY scheme.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry recently organized a one day Conference at Shimla
on 31st May 2006 of average/bad performing States/UTs inviting
Ministers/Secretaries of 10 States and all the 6 UTs and discussed in
detail the problems/strategies for boosting the progress of the
implementation of the scheme in these States/UTs. It is hoped that
these States/UTs will now perform more effectively. Regarding
imposing of penal interest on the defaulting States/UTs, as per General
Financial Rules (GFR-2005), the implementing agencies have to return
the funds along with interest, if they fail to utilize the funds in
accordance with the guidelines of the Scheme. However, keeping in
view the ground realities and difficulties faced by the State/District
level agencies in the implementation of the Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) scheme at grass root level, it may be difficult
to fix a timeframe for utilization of funds which may attract penal
interest for time-default. Regarding Pilot projects, it is submitted that
present guidelines of the scheme do not permit the innovative projects
under the scheme and the scheme has to be implemented through
States/UTs only. However, the considered views of the Hon’ble
Committee will be taken care of while proposing modifications in the
guidelines of the Scheme for the 11th Five Year Plan.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report.)

15
Recommendation (Para No. 3.18)
The Committee note that house-to-house survey has been done in
only 3646 towns out of total 3755 towns in the country unto 31 March,
2006 for the identification of beneficiaries living below the poverty
line. No time frame has been fixed by the Ministry for the completion
of house-to-house survey by the States. The Committee are of the
view that in the absence of State specific urban poverty line list, it
would be difficult to implement effectively SJSRY Scheme and assess
the impact of the Scheme on the persons living below the poverty
line. The Committee recommend that the Government should persuade
States/UTs, which are lagging behind in completion of BPL survey to
complete house-to-house survey at the earliest. The poverty line should
reflect the prevailing conditions of the urban poor on non-economic
parameters of the respective States/UTs.
Reply of the Government
The defaulting States/UTs have been requested to complete the
house-to-house survey at the earliest so that the identification of
genuine beneficiaries under the scheme can be done and the scheme
is implemented effectively . The guidelines of the Swarna Jayanti Shahari
Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) contain economic/non-economic parameters to
identify the genuine beneficiaries.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation
O.M. No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.19)
The Committee note that the Scheme is being monitored through
quarterly progress reports and periodical review meetings under the
Chairmanship of Minister/Secretary/Joint Secretary/Director of the
Ministry. The Committee also note with satisfaction that the Ministry
is proposing to call a meeting of average/bad performing States/UTs
to sort out their problems. The Committee recommend that the
Government should strengthen their monitoring mechanism of the
Scheme both at Central and State levels for the effective implementation
of the Scheme. The Ministry for the success of the Scheme should lay
special focus on the average/bad performing States by conducting
workshops, training programmes for the functionaries. Success stories

16
and best practices of the better performing States should be documented
and replicated in bad performing States. The Committee also
recommend that capacity building and sensitisation of functionaries of
States/UTs and bank officials related with the Scheme should be taken
up for the success of the Scheme.
Reply of the Government
Regular meetings and conferences/workshops will be organized
by the Ministry at Central/Regional level, inviting the States/Uts and
other stakeholders with a view to remove the bottlenecks in the
effective implementation of the Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
(SJSRY). The capacity building of functionaries and documentation of
best practices under the scheme is carried out effectively by the five
National Training Institutes viz. Human Settlement & Management
Institute (HSMI), New Delhi, Regional Centre for Urban &
Environmental Studies (RCUES), Mumbai, Regional Centre for Urban
& Environmental Studies (RCUEs), Hyderabdad, Institute of Local
Government and Urban Studies (ILGUS, Kolkata and National Institute
for Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development (NIESBUD),
NOIDA.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation
O.M. No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.20)
The Committee note that the proposal for modification of guidelines
of the SJSRY has been considered by the Cabinet and the Cabinet had
decided that the Scheme should continue without modification to its
guidelines during the remaining period of the 10th Plan and an
evaluation of the Scheme would be carried out for the 11th Plan. The
Committee also note that the process of independent evaluation has
been started which will be completed by 31st October, 2006 and the
Ministry will get enough time for moving for appropriate modifications
in the Scheme before the commencement of the 11th Five Year Plan in
April, 2007. The Committee presume that the Ministry would be able
to complete the independent evaluation of Scheme within the stipulated
time period and are optimistic that the revised guidelines of the Scheme
would be flexible and innovative enough to cater to the requirements
of the urban poor. The Committee desire that keeping in view the
large number of urban unemployed particularly in the Metropolitan
Cities, the revised guideline of the Schemes during the 11th Five Year
Plan should be able to cater to the needs of hawkers/and other urban

17
poor. The Ministry in associations with HUDCO should explore the
feasibility of providing ‘kiosks’ to these hawkers at an affordable price
so as to solve the problem of encroachments on public land.
Reply of the Government
The evaluation of the Scheme for the 11th Plan has already been
initiated and Human Settlement & Management Institute (HSMI), New
Delhi has placed advertisement in Newspapers inviting Expression of
Interest (EOI) from Research Agencies for carrying out the evaluation.
Regarding the feasibility of providing kiosks, Housing & Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. (HUDCO) has launched a Scheme in
2005 for construction of kiosks for urban poor. The Scheme is to provide
loan facilities to urban poor living below the poverty line in any urban
centre. The scheme provides employment opportunities to urban poor
by providing loan facility to enable them to construct kiosks, vending
platforms for sale of petty items etc.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation
O.M. No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.29)
The Committee note that to have an integrated approach to
ameliorate the conditions of the urban slum dwellers who do not
have adequate shelter and reside in dilapidated conditions, VAMBAY
and the discontinued National Slum Development Programme (NSDP)
have been subsumed in a new Scheme called Integrated Housing &
Slum Development Programme (IHSDP). This new Scheme was
launched by the Hon’ble Prime Minister on 3rd December, 2005. The
Committee also note a budget provision of Rs. 75.01 crore has been
made under VAMBAY for the year 2006-07 to provide necessary funds
for the on-going Schemes till completion of those projects. The
Committee recommend that till IHSDP is implemented un full force,
no slackness should be shown in implementation of VAMBAY. The
Government should effectively persuade the State Governments of
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand &
Uttaranchal, which are not performing well under the scheme in terms
of physical achievements and in submission of Utilization Certificates
to submit in time.

18
Reply of the Government
Noted for compliance and necessary follow up action is being
taken.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation
O.M. No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.30)
The Committee observe that nature of urban poverty in towns/
cities other than the Mega Cities is more acute due to limited economic
opportunities in small towns/cities. Therefore, poor people in those
towns generally live in inadequate housing on their own in small
tenements. The Committee recommend that in newly launched IHSDP ,
special projects of housing for poor should be taken up in the small
towns and cities. The Committee also recommend that proper
awareness programmes may be made to motivate State level bodies to
take up housing projects for poor by public-private partnership.
Reply of the Government
Thrust is given on projects with an integrated approach to provide
housing & infrastructure in the cities & towns covered under Integrated
Housing and Slum Development Programme. To disseminate
information on the project and also for capacity building of the
implementing agencies/officials, a number of workshops have already
been organized by the Govt. More such workshops will be organized
in the coming days.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation
O.M. No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.52)
The Committee note with appreciation the objectives of the Sub-
Mission of Basic Services to the Urban Poor (BSUP) implemented by
the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation. The
Committee desire that in order to make BSUP a sustainable and
successful Scheme the Ministry should cautiously monitor the Scheme
and on the basis of feedback received from the States/ULBs revise the
Scheme accordingly, if found necessary. The Committee hope that the
Ministry would earnestly try to overcome the risk factors involved in
the implementation of the Scheme.

19
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee noted for compliance.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation
O.M. No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.53)
The Committee note that Integrated Housing & Slum Development
Programme (IHSDO) has been launched on 3rd December, 2005, with
the objective to strive for holistic slum development, with a healthy &
enabling urban environment by providing adequate shelter and basic
infrastructure facilities to the slum dwellers of the identified urban
areas. The existing VAMBAY and the discontinued NSDP Scheme are
subsumed on the IHSDP . The Committee hope that in order to make
IHSDP a successful scheme, the Ministry must have taken into account
while formulating IHSDP , the shortfalls & risk factors experienced
during the implementation of VAMBAY and NSDP Schemes.
Reply of the Government
The new scheme is an improvement over the previous schemes.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation
O.M. No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.11)
The Committee note that total housing shortage in the country is
24.7 million, out of which 14.1 million is in rural areas and 10.6 million
is in urban areas. The Committee desire that keeping in view the
huge housing shortage in the country, the Government should explore
the feasibility Public-Private Partnership in the housing sector in order
to address the problem of housing shortage. Priority should be given
to the States where housing shortage is acute. The Government should
also encourage cost effective construction technologies in coordination
with BMTPC and other agencies so as to reduce the cost of construction
and provide affordable houses to the needy people.
Reply of the Government
Observation of the Hon’ble committee has been noted. The issues
of Public-Private Partnership in the housing sector, housing shortage
and cost effective technologies to reduce the cost of construction have
been largely focused in the draft of National Urban Housing and
Habitat Policy.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation
O.M. No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]

20
Recommendation (Para No. 4.12)
The Committee note that as per the report of the Working Group
of Planning Commission on Urban Housing, there is shortage of about
18 million dwelling units under EWS/LIG category. The Committee
appreciate that HUDCO used to allocate 55% of its resources for
housing sector to LIG and EWS housing. The Committee, however,
feel that HUDCO alone will not be able to cater to the need of EWS/
LIG category, as the shortage in this category is very large. As such,
they feel that suitable innovative measures should be taken to address
this problem.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation
O.M. No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]

21
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

22
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 3.54)
The Committee note that budgetary allocation for BSUP and IHSDP
for the year 2006-07 have been provided in the budget of Ministry of
Finance and not in the budget of Ministry of Urban Employment &
Poverty Alleviation. The Committee recommend that for better financial
control and smooth & speedy disbursement of funds, the budgetary
allocations for BSUP & IHSDP should be provided in the budget of
Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation, as suggested by the National
Steering Group and the Ministry should take up this matter at the
highest level in the Ministry of Finance.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry had taken up the matter of placing funds under JNNURM
in the budget of the respective Ministry. However, Ministry of Finance
did not agree to the proposal. The budget for the scheme has been
provided as Additional Central Assistance (A.C.A.) to States/UTs in
the budget of the Ministry of Finance.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M. No. H-
11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)

23
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Wide Publicity by Government about the benefits of SJSRY scheme.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10)
Keeping in view the poor performance of Urban Poverty Alleviation
Schemes, the Committee note that there is lack of awareness amongst
the urban poor about the benefits of UPA Schemes and their efficacy .
As already stated on several occasions, the Committee recommend
that the Ministry should give wide publicity to its various Schemes so
as to create awareness amongst the urban poor. The Committee may
be apprised about the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is planning a comprehensive publicity campaign (both
outdoor as well as audio-visual), through Directorate of Advertising &
Visual Publicity (DAVP) for the Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
(SJSRY) Scheme this year. Directorate of Advertising and Audio Visual
Publicity (DAVP) is preparing the designs of advertisements and the
campaign is likely to start very shortly.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation
O.M. No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCS)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.39)
The Committee note that in order to eliminate the dehumanizing
practice of physically carrying night soil, the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme for Integrated Low Cost Sanitation (ILCS) was initiated in
1981. The Committee, however, deprecate that since its inception the
Scheme is infested with numerous problems and it has not performed
well. In the 10th Plan Rs. 200 crore has been allocated for the Scheme,

24
but only Rs. 29.60 crore has been released upto 31.1.2006. In the
circumstances, the Committee are compelled to believe that the
Government has launched ILCS without doing proper study and
homework. Moreover, the Government has also not shown any
responsibility and accountability in revising the Scheme timely which
is meant for eradicating manual scavenging. The Committee recommend
the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation should
revise the guidelines of the Scheme after incorporating suggestions
and comments of the State Governments and the Planning Commission
so as to make it user friendly. The Ministry should also ensure that
the disadvantaged and deprived sections of society are given a fair
deal so that they can live with human dignity and should take
concerted action in association with State Governments and other
Central Ministries to rehabilitate the manual scavengers.
Reply of the Government
With an objective to revamp the scheme, the views/suggestions of
the State Governments, Planning Commission and other concerned
Ministries/Agencies were sought. Based on the suggestion/comments
received from the Central Ministries/State Govt., an extensive revision
of the existing guidelines is being carried out. The expenditure Finance
committee meeting under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure),
Ministry of Finance was held on 17.7.2006 which considered and
approved the revised guidelines of ILCS. The Cabinet Note is under
preparation.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation
O.M. No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 8.11.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)
Finalization of the National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy
Recommendation (Para No. 4.10)
The Committee note that draft of the National Urban Housing
and Habitat Policy has been prepared to address various issues
involved in implementing the housing Policy. The draft of the National
Urban Housing and Habitat Policy is yet to be placed before the cabinet
for its approval. The committees desire that the Ministry should
expedite the approval of draft of the National Urban Housing and
Habitat Policy and implement the same at the earliest.

25
Reply of the Government
The draft Cabinet note of the National Urban Housing and Habitat
Policy was circulated to the various Ministries/Departments of the
Govt. of India for their comments. The Planning Commission has
suggested that issues involved in the draft Policy are complex and
before going to the Cabinet, the paper should be discussed by the
Committee of Secretaries (COS). Comments from a few Ministries/
Departments are still awaited. On receipt of their comments, the paper
will be discussed in the COS and revised draft policy will be placed
for the approval of the Cabinet thereafter.
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation
O.M. No. H-11013/3/2006-Bt. (HUPA) dated 21.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
  N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
25 January, 2007 Chairman,
5 Magha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

26
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 22ND JANUARY, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
3. Shri Anant Gudhe
4. Shri Sajjan Kumar
5. Shri A.K. Moorthy
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri L. Rajagopal
8. Shri D. Vittal Rao
9. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
10. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
11. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
12. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare
13. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
15. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
16. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
17. Shri Penumalli Madhu
18. Shri Mukul Roy
19. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa

27
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members and also
newly nominated member Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi, MP , Lok Sabha
to the sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee took up for consideration Memorandum No. 2
regarding draft Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth
Report of the Committee on Urban Development (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of
Urban Development. The Committee adopted the draft action taken
report with slight modification.
4. The Committee then took up for consideration Memorandum
No. 3 regarding draft Report of the Committee on Action Taken by
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth
Report of the Committee on Urban Development (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. After some deliberations
Committee adopted the draft action taken report with slight
modifications.
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise both
the Reports and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

28
APPENDIX II
[vide Para 5 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTEENTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN
DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 19
II. Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government: 15
Para Nos. 1.8, 2.8, 2.9, 3.15, 3.16, 3.17, 3.18,
3.19, 3.20, 3.29, 3.30, 3.52, 3.53, 4.11 and 4.12
Percentage to total recommendations (78.94%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies: Nil
Nil
Percentage to total recommendations (0%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee: 1
Para No. 3.54
Percentage to total recommendations (5.27%)
V. Recommendations  in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited: 3
Para Nos. 2.10, 3.39 and 4.10
Percentage to total recommendations (15.79%)