 
  
 
30 
STANDING  COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
 
 
                 FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION   
 
 
 
INTEGRATED LOW COST SANITATION SCHEME  
  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha] 
  
 
THIRTIETH REPORT  
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 


 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT  
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
URBAN DEVELOPMENT  
(2007-08) 
 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION   
 
INTEGRATED LOW COST SANITATION SCHEME  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Fifth  Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development] 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.4.2008 
                                            Laid in Rajya Sabha on  20.3.2008 
 
      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
March, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) 
 


 
C.U.D. No.: 33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© ) 2008 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by ………… 
 

 
 
CONTENTS  
 
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………            (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..               (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I Report …………………………………………………………            1 
 
 
@CHAPTER II   Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government  … 
 
 
@CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in  
    view of the Government’s replies ………………………………… 
 
 
@CHAPTER IV   Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government  
                            have not been accepted by the Committee ……………………… 
 
 
@CHAPTER V   Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited…………………….………………. 
 
APPENDICES  
 
1. Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Committee held on 11.3.2008 …………… 
 
2. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
 contained in Twenty Fifth Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ………….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008) 
 
Mohd. Salim         -        Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
3. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
5. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal 
6. Shri Anant Gudhe 
7. Shri Pushp Jain 
8. Shri Kailash Joshi 
9. Shri Sajjan Kumar 
10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra 
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
12. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
13. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
14. Shri L. Rajagopal 
15. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Papu Yadav 
16. Shri D. Vittal Rao 
17. Shri Sudhangshu Seal 
18. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
19. Shri Jagdish Tytler 
20. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav 
21. Shri Suresh Ganpatrao Wagmare 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur 
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
25. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel 
26. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki 
27. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari 
28. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
29. Shri Mukul Roy 
30. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa 
31. Shri Manohar Joshi  
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri S.K. Sharma    - Additional Secretary  
 2. Shri. S. Bal Shekar    - Joint Secretary  
 3. Shri R. K. Saxena    - Director  
 4. Smt. Anita B. Panda   - Deputy Secretary  
 5. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  -  Committee Officer    

 
  
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2007 -2008) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
the Thirtieth Report on the Action Taken by the Governm ent on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Fifth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Urban Development on the subject “Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme” of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
 
2. The Twenty Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 22 nd November, 2007. 
The replies of the Government to 13 recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 15th February, 2008.   
 
3. The Replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considere d 
and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 11th March, 2008. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2007 -
2008) is given in Appendix  II.  
   
  
  
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
March, 2008 
Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) 
MOHD. SALIM,  
Chairman, 
Standing Committee on Urban 
Development. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2007 -
2008) deals with the actio n taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Fifth  Report of the Committee on the subject “Integrated 
Low Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCS)” of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation which was presented to the Lok Sa bha on 22 nd November, 
2007.  
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the 13 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Para Nos.   4.1, 4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6 and 4.10 
 
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s replies:  
 Para Nos.  4.7, 4.8, 4.11, 4.12 and 4.13      
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of th e Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee  
Para No. 4.3 
 
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited.  
 Para No. 4.9  

3. The Committee desire that final Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
recommendation contained in Chapter-V of the Report may be furnished to 
the Committee at the earliest.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of these recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
Revision of Guidelines of ILCS      
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.2) 
 
5.  The Committee had recommended as below:-  
 
  The Committee note that out of 1,38,464 scavengers to be liberated 
only 52829 scavengers have been liberated till date. As per the guidelines 
of the Scheme 1538 town s were to be covered under it, out of which only 
654 towns have so far been declared scavengers free. The Committee 
note that on the advice of the Planning Commission an evaluation of the 
ILCS scheme has now been entrusted to the Agricultural Finance 
Corporation. The Study team of Agricultural Finance Corporation was likely 
to submit its report by the end of July, 2007. The Committee expect that 
the Report of Study Team is now under the examination of Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation follow ing which the Ministry would 
finalize the Cabinet note regarding the evaluation/revision of ILCS scheme. 
The Committee desire that as the eradication of the practice of manual 
scavenging by the year 2007 was declared by the Prime Minister as one of 
the pri orities of the Government, the Ministry should finalize the draft 
Cabinet note on revision of guidelines of ILCS scheme well in time taking 
into account all the inputs/suggestions from the State Governments/UTs, 
the Planning Commission, the Agricultural Fi nance Corporation and other 

stakeholders in the Scheme. The Committee only hope that with the 
revised guidelines, the ILCS will be able to make some difference in the 
lives of the manual scavengers in a reasonable timeframe. 
 
6. The Government have replied as follows:  
 
 “The number of scavengers to be liberated is the reported number of 
scavengers informed by the State agency while proposing the ILCS Scheme to 
HUDCO for sanction. The successful implementation of proposed conversion of 
dry units into 2 pit pour flush units on town -wise basis at household level under 
the Government action plan programmes helps to achieve liberation of 
scavengers and results in the town being declared scavenger free. This Ministry 
has already released Rs. 35 crore of subsidy for implementing this Scheme in the 
State of Assam, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir and Uttar Pradesh during 2007-08. 
  
The Agricultural Finance Corporation Limited was entrusted with the 
evaluation /impact assessment of the ILCS Scheme in the month of February, 
2007 and study team has submitted its draft interim report in the month of August 
2007. The critical findings of the AFC report, suggestions/ comments of the 
various Ministries/Departments/State Governments, etc. has been incorporated 
while finalizing the Rev ised guidelines of the scheme. The guidelines of the 
existing scheme have been revised. It is expected that with the implementation of 
the revised guidelines, the scheme will become more attractive and 
implementable.”     
 
 
7. The revision of the Integrate d Low Cost Sanitation Scheme was a 
long pending issue. As the eradication of the practice of manual 
scavenging by the year 2007 was declared by the Prime Minister as one of 
the priorities of the Government, the Committee, in their earlier 
recommendation, had desired the said guidelines to be revised well in time 

taking into account all the inputs / suggestions from the concerned 
stakeholders in the scheme. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have 
now stated that the Agricultural Finance Corporation L imited, which was 
entrusted with the evaluation / impact assessment of ILCS Scheme, has 
submitted its draft interim report in the month of August, 2007. On the 
basis of critical findings of AFC report and suggestions / comments of 
various Ministries / Departments / States, the guidelines of existing scheme 
have been revised. The Committee recall that the AFC report was 
scheduled to be submitted in July, 2007. However AFC, according to the 
Ministry, has submitted ‘a draft interim report’ in August, 2007. The  
Committee wonder as to whether on the basis of an interim report, revising 
the guidelines of the ILCS scheme was the right thing to do. They are of the 
view that  the guidelines revised on the basis of a Report, which in all 
probability is not yet final, may not serve the intended purpose. Therefore, 
the Committee desire to be apprised  about the date when AFC would 
submit their final report as well as about the difficulties, due to which the 
AFC could not submit in final Report by the target date i.e. end  of July, 
2007. Moreover, as the Ministry have not furnished the revised guidelines 
to the Committee, they are unable to reach at any plausible conclusion 
about their efficacy at this stage.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Overall  Implementation of ILCS 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.3) 
 
 
8.  The Committee had noted as below:-  
 
  The Committee are disappointed that the implementation of ILCS has 
been  very dismal as according to State Governments, lakhs of dry latrines  are 
yet to be converted into water seal toilets. The conver sion of dry latrines is the 
key to removing the practice of manual scavenging. However, the physical 
progress upto 31.5.07 given by Ministry of HUPA shows that around 6 lakh dry 
latrines are yet to be converted. The Committee have also been made to 
understand that this data has been reported by the State Governments and 
covers towns only upto 5 lakh population as per the  Census of 1991. The 
Committee feel that the data provided is, in all probability, outdated, and thus, are 
of the view that with the conti nuous rise in population, the situation could be 
worse in the present scenario. The Committee also find that according to most of 
the States, the number of dry latrines yet to be converted is ‘NIL’. The Committee 
are not convinced by this declaration as it  has been a matter of common 
knowledge/widely reported in the media that in States like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, 
Tamil Nadu & Gujarat, the use of dry latrines is very much prevalent. Further, the 
Committee find that at present hardly 30% of the beneficiaries are able to utilize 
the water seal toilets constructed under the scheme due to shortage of water. As 
the Government is already contemplating to increase the subsidy for toilet units 
to Rs. 10,000/- the Committee feel that a slight  design change can be mad e by 
constructing water seal toilet -cum-bathroom with a small water storage tank. 
Overall the Committee desire that there is need for coordinated and sincere 
efforts at all levels, be it the Government, ULBs or implementing agencies, for the 
conversion asp ect ,  along with adequate provision of water for the water seal 
toilets, which would accelerate the progress of the ILCS Scheme.  
 
 
9. The Government have replied as follow:-  

 
 
 Around 6 lacs dry units is the total urban problem size informed by the 
States to this Ministry. It also includes the number of units as per NSSO survey 
particularly for Bihar, where the State has not provided latest information as per 
resurvey. Depending on the prevalence of dry latrines in the State of UP, Bihar, 
Assam, Jammu & Kashmir this Ministry has released Rs. 35 crores during 2007 -
08 to HUDCO for implementing the Scheme effectively in these States. Tamil 
Nadu and Gujarat have already been declared as scavenger -free by the State 
Governments.  
 
 The Agricultural Finance Corp oration Limited was entrusted with the 
evaluation/impact assessment of the ILCS Scheme in the month of February, 
2007 and study team has submitted its draft interim report in the month of 
August, 2007. the critical findings of the AFC Report, suggestions /  comments of 
the various Ministries / Departments / State Governments, etc. has been 
incorporated while finalizing the Cabinet Note and the guidelines have been 
revised. Innovative technology options conforming to the local conditions and 
availability will be utilized by the State Governments / Implementing agencies in 
consultation with the Central Government in the revised guideline. Subsequently, 
surveys will be conducted in States/ UTs by the Agricultural Finance Corporation 
which has conducted impact assessment or NGOs selected by the States/UTs to 
arrive at the exact number of existing dry latrines in the urban areas of the 
country.  
 
10. The Committee in their original recommendation had felt that 
conversion of dry latrines into water-seal units was the key to removing the 
practice of manual scavenging in the country and thus had emphasized 
upon the need for coordinated and sincere efforts at all levels for the 
conversion aspect. They had also desired that adequate provision of water 

for the water -seal toilets needs to be made and for this, a small water 
storage tank could be infused into the design of the unit which would go a 
long way in making such units more functional. The Ministry, in their action 
taken reply, which fails to address all the aspects  of the Committee’s 
recommendation, have merely stated that based on the critical findings of 
the AFC, the guidelines of ILCS Scheme have been revised and innovative 
technology options conforming to the local conditions and availability 
would be utilized b y the State Governments / Implementing Agencies in 
consultations with the Central Government in the revised guidelines. It has 
been stated that subsequently, surveys would be conducted in States/UTs 
by the Agricultural Finance Corporation or NGOs to arrive  at the exact 
number of existing dry latrines in the Urban areas of the country. As the 
Committee have been given no clue about the changes / revisions brought 
about in the ILCS Scheme guidelines, they are not sure as to whether their 
concerns have been suitably addressed. Nonetheless, the Committee are of 
the view that the proper survey to know the exact number of existing dry 
latrines in the country is an essential pre -requisite for knowing the 
magnitude of the problem of manual scavenging in the country.   Therefore, 
the Committee feel that since now the guidelines of ILCS have been 
reportedly revised, the surveys of dry latrines in the country should be 
conducted in a time bound manner and in right earnest. They would like the 
Central Government to impres s upon the State Governments to set a  
target for conversion of dry units into water -seal ones. The Ministry should 
monitor the progress to ensure that the target is met. As regards the 

functionality of water -seal units, the Committee are well aware of sev eral 
instances where such water -seal units become redundant due to non -
availability of water. In view of the shortage of water, the Committee, while 
reiterating their earlier recommendation, would suggest that it must be 
ensured that treated water from wat er treatment plants/ such other 
sources, as per local conditions, is supplied  to such units. They urge the 
Government to sensitize ULBs on this particular aspect. The Committee 
desire the Ministry to furnish their specific Action Taken reply on this issue  
in due course.   
   
Creation of Awareness about ILCS Scheme 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.9) 
 
 
11.  The Committee had noted as below:-  
 
The Committee feel that creating awareness among the masses to discourage 
use of dry latrines is fundamental to popular ize the concept of pour -flush latrine. 
The Committee have been given to understand that once the revised guidelines 
of ILCS scheme are approved by the Cabinet, a campaign will be launched by 
the Ministry through print and electronic media to sensitize the people about the 
urgency of proper implementation of the Scheme. The Committee desire that 
wide publicity to the ILCS scheme and the legal position relating to the dry 
latrines and manual scavenging, the alternative forms of sanitation and 
assistance avail able to the BPL households should be arranged through 
electronic and print media. The Government should also involve elected 

Corporators, Mayors, MLAs and MPs in this campaign. The Committee feel that 
this will draw the attention of the general public towa rds bringing an end to 
manual scavenging which is a blot on the civil society. The Committee also 
desire that adequate funds for publicity purposes should be allocated in the 
budgetary allocation of ILCS scheme every year. 
 
 
12. The Government have replied as follow:-  
 
 
 To make the scheme attractive and implementable, the existing guidelines 
have been revised with the approval of the Cabinet. In the revised guidelines 
provision is made for IEC (Information, Education, Communication) component 
which could be utilized for creation of awareness amongst the public with 
reference to the advantages of using sanitary latrines. The Ministry will develop 
an IT enabled MIS and Monitoring system and similar systems will be created at 
the State & ULB levels under the revised scheme.   
 
13. With regard to their suggestion for popularizing the concept of pour 
flush latrines, the Committee have been made to understand by the 
Ministry that in the revised guidelines of ILCS, provision is made for IEC 
(Information, Education , Communication)  component, which could be 
utilized for creation of awareness amongst the public with reference to the 
advantages of using sanitary latrines. The Ministry, however, have not 
indicated as to whether the revised guidelines have received appro val by 
the Cabinet, following which the States and ULBs could be advised on 
launching special drives/campaigns for the same. The Committee further 

note from the Action Taken Reply that the Ministry has a proposal to 
develop an IT enabled MIS and Monitoring  system and that similar systems 
will be created at the State & ULBs levels under the revised scheme. Again, 
the Ministry have not furnished details, which could throw more light as to 
how such a system would effectively monitor the IEC  activities in Stat es.  
The Committee are of the opinion that this should have been done, since 
according to the Ministry, the Scheme stands revised now. Moreover, the 
Ministry have not addressed the Committee’s suggestion on involvement 
of elected Corporators, Mayors, MLAs and MPs in the awareness campaign 
of ILCS scheme. The Committee, therefore, cannot but reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and hope that the Ministry would be more forthcoming 
with regard to creation of awareness among people to popularize the use of 
pour-flush latrines and prevent them from using dry latrines cleaned by 
manual scavengers.       

APPENDIX  II 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIFTH    
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN  
DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations       13 
 
 
II. Recommendations which have been accepted by the  
 Government          06 
 
Para Nos. 4.1, 4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6 and 4.10       
   
 
Percentage of total recommendations       (46.16%) 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not  
 Desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
 Replies  
Para No. 4.7, 4.8, 4.11, 4.12 and 4.13      05 
    
Percentage to total recommendations     (38.46%) 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of  
 the Government have not been accepted by the  
 Committee: 
 
 Para No. 4.3         01  
 
Percentage to total recommendations     (7.69%) 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final  
 Replies of the Government are still awaited: 
   
Para No. 4.9          01 
 
Percentage to total recommendations        (7.69%) 
 
 