3
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
IMPLEMENTATION OF PART IXA
OF THE CONSTITUTION
THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
IMPLEMENTATION OF PART IX A
OF THE CONSTITUTION
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.12.2004
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 7.12.2004
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2004/Agrhayana, 1926 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory ................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Salient Features of the Part IX A of the
Constitution ................................................................ 4
CHAPTER III Process of Devolution of Powers to the
Municipalities ............................................................. 16
CHAPTER IV District Planning Committees ................................ 31
CHAPTER V Metropolitan Planning Committees ...................... 36
CHAPTER VI Training of Elected Members of Municipalities .. 39
CHAPTER VII Role of Women ......................................................... 40
ANNEXURES
I. Recommendatory/Mandatory Provisions contained in
Part IX A of the Constitution ................................................ 41
II. Devolution of functions to the Municipalities as per
12th Schedule of the Constitution ........................................ 52
III. Taxation Powers of the Municipalities ................................. 57
IV . State-wise allocation of Local Bodies Grants by Tenth
Finance Commission ................................................................. 59
V . State-wise allocation of Local Bodies Grants by Eleventh
Finance Commission ................................................................. 61
VI. Revenue and expenditure of ULBs during 1999-2000 to
2001-2002 ...................................................................................... 63
VII. Statement showing State-wise details of Provision for
Creation of Data-base and utilisation thereof as reported
by State Government ................................................................ 64

VIII. Gist of the recommendations of the State Finance
Commissions (State-wise) ......................................................... 66
IX. District Planning Committees ................................................. 99
X. Minutes of the first sitting of the sub-Committee II
of the Committee on Urban and Rural Development
(2002) held on 6.6.2002 ............................................................ 102
XI. Minutes of the Twenty-eighth sitting of the Committee
on Urban and Rural Development (2003) held on
5.11.2003 ........................................................................................ 104
XII. Minutes of the Twenty-ninth sitting of the Committee on
Urban and Rural Development (2003) held on 4.12.2003 .... 106
XIII. Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Committee on Urban
Development (2004-2005) held on 4th October 2004 ....... 108
XIV. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee on Urban
Development (2004-2005) held on 25th October 2004 ..... 110
XV . Statement of Observations/Recommendations ................... 112
PAGES
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Mohd. Salim— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
4. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
5. Shri Pushp Jain
6. Shri P . Mohan*
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Amitava Nandy
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
11. Shri L. Rajgopal
12. Shri D. Vittal Rao
13. Shri Sajjan Kumar
14. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
15. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
16. Shri Sugrib Singh
17. Shri K. Subbarayan
18. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
19. Shri Suresh Ganpat Wagmare
20. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
21. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
(iii)
* Nominated w.e.f. 27 October 2004.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
23. Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur
24. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
25. Shri Jayantilal Barot
26. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
27. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
28. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
29. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
30. Vacant**
31. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Shrimati Neera Singh — Under Secretary
**Shri Vidya Niwas Mishra Ceased to be a member of this Committee w.e.f. 5 September,
2004 consequent upon his nomination to the Committee on Home Affairs.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Report of the Committee on the
subject ‘Implementation of Part IXA of the Constitution’.
2. Initially, Standing Committee on Urban and Rural Development
(1999-2000), (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) had selected for examination and
Report to Parliament the subject, ‘Implementation of Part IX and IX A
of the Constitution’. Before the Committee could examine the subject,
their term expired. Subsequently, the Committee (2001) took up the
same subject and formed a sub-Committee to examine the same. The
said sub-Committee invited memoranda from various experts,
individuals. Around 33 memoranda were received from various experts,
individuals, etc. The sub-Committee conducted a study visit to
Hyderabad in November, 2001 and held informal discussions with the
representatives of State Governments, Panchayati Raj Institutions of
Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu and experts on
the subject. The sub-Committee also heard the views of some of the
experts from Delhi and Dehradun at their sitting held on 3rd December
2001. Due to expiry of the term of the Committee (2001) on 31st
December 2001, the Committee was unable to complete the examination.
3. The Committee (2002) once again took up the same subject and
decided to examine and report to Parliament the subject
‘Implementation of Part IX and IX A of the Constitution separately.
Accordingly, two sub-Committees were formed, sub-Committee-I to
examine ‘Implementation of Part IX of the Constitution’, and sub-
Committee-II to examine ‘Implementation of Part IXA of the
Constitution’. The Committee (2002) decided to take up examination
of the subject ‘Implementation of Part IX of the Constitution’ first. The
Committee (2002) presented their 37th Report on ‘Implementation of
Part IX of the Constitution’ which related to the Panchayati Raj
Institutions to the House on 20 November 2002. However, in view of
shortage of time, the Committee could not complete its examination of
the subject i.e. ‘Implementation of Part IX A of the Constitution’ as
their tenure was over on 31 December 2002.
4. The Committee on Urban and Rural Development (2003) selected
again the subject ‘Implementation of Part IX A of the Constitution’,
which relates to ‘Municipalities’. The Committee heard the views of

an expert on 5th November 2003. The Committee then took oral
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
and Poverty Alleviation (Department of Urban Development) on
4th December, 2003. However, due to paucity of time, the Committee
could not present their report to the House during the Thirteenth
Lok Sabha as the term of the Committee expired on 31 December 2003.
5. Considering the fact that the Constitution (74th Amendment)
Act was indeed a path-breaking legislation and proper implementation
of the constitutional provisions in respect of the functioning of
municipalities etc., was absolutely necessary, the newly constituted
Standing Committee on Urban Development (2004-2005) took up this
unfinished work of the earlier Committees. After due deliberations, at
their sittings held on 4th and 25th October, 2004, the Committee
considered and adopted the Report.
6. The Committee places on record their deep sense of appreciation
of the work done by the earlier Committees and sub-Committees.
7. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the officials
of the Ministry of Urban Development for placing before them the
requisite material from time to time and their considered views in
connection with the examination of the subject.
8. The Committee were greatly benefitted by the views of
representatives of State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala,
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu and the experts and individuals, who
appeared before the sub-Committee/Committee in Hyderabad and New
Delhi. The Committee express their profuse thanks to the
representatives of the said State Governments and also to experts/
individuals who furnished memoranda or tendered evidence before
the sub-Committee/Committee.
9. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation of the invaluable assistance rendered to them
from time to time by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached
to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
30 November, 2004 Chairman,
9 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban
Development.
(vi)

REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
Urbanization in India is largely a process whereby the surplus
population of workers from rural areas resettles in urban centres where
non-agricultural job opportunities are available. While the towns and
cities contribute substantially towards economic development of the
country, these urban centres also play an important support role in
the development of rural hinterland. It is now being recognized that
cities are the engines of growth at both regional as well as national
level. To facilitate and sustain this growth, cities have to provide both
a high quality of life and a efficient infrastructure for economic
activities. In order to keep pace with this economic transformation
and the needs and realities at the grassroots level, it is necessary that
the people and their representatives are fully involved in the planning
and implementation of the developmental programmes at the local
level. Notably, if democracy in Parliament and State Legislatures is to
remain strong and stable, its roots must reach towns and villages and
the cities where the people live.
2. The Constitution of India has made detailed provisions for
ensuring protection of democracy in Parliament and in State
Legislatures. Hence, democracy in these institutions has survived and
flourished. However, the Constitution did not make Local Self
Government in urban areas a clear-cut Constitutional obligation. While
the Directive Principles of State Policy refer to Village Panchayats,
there is no specific reference to municipalities except implicitly in Entry-
5 of the State List in the Constitution of India, which places the subject
of Local Self Government as a responsibility of the State. There has
been a steady diversion and diminution of responsibilities in the sphere
of municipal functions. As a consequence of inadequate Constitutional
provision for Local Self Government, democracy in municipal
governance was not stable. Though, the respective municipal acts of
the State provided for regular elections to municipal bodies, they were
frequently suspended and superseded for indefinite periods of time.
Frequent and indefinite suspensions or supersessions eroded the very
basis of local self-government and had a negative effect on democracy
at the grassroots’ level. The general position with regard to the financial
resources of the municipal was also not satisfactory. Over the years,

2
there was a steady encroachment on the assigned functions and
revenues of these democratically elected bodies i.e. the Urban Local
Bodies (ULBs) by specialized agencies of the State Governments. As a
result, many Urban Local Bodies became weak and were not able to
perform effectively. The weakened status of Urban Local Bodies brought
to the fore public opinion in favour of need for a Constitutional
guarantee to safeguard the interests of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). In
order to provide for:—
• Regular and fair conduct of elections to these bodies.
• Holding of elections within a specified time limit in case of
supersession.
• Adequate representation of SC/ST and women in the elected
bodies.
• Placing on firm footing the relationship between the State
Governments and the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) with
respect to:
— functions and taxation powers of the urban local bodies
— arrangement for revenue sharing between the State
Government and the urban local bodies.
— involvement of elected representatives at the grass-root
level, in planning at the district and metropolitan levels.
3. The Constitutional (74th Amendment) Act, 1992 (in short 74th
CAA) relating to ‘Municipalities’ pertains to articles 243P to 243ZG of
the Constitution of India. This Act as passed by the Parliament in
1992 covers all the urban areas across the country. The Act aims at
imparting ‘Constitutional guarantee’ to safeguard the interest of Urban
Local Bodies (ULBs) to enable them to function as effective democratic
and self-governing institutions at grassroots level. The Constitution
74th Amendment entrusts the responsibilities for the upkeep and
development of towns and cities to Municipalities and corporations.
Apart from the important role of the Panchayats and its institutions in
the administrative and democratic set up of the Governments, the
articles 243W of the Constitution empowers the Legislature of a State
to endow by law the Municipalities with such powers and authority
as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-
government. The Act provides for a framework for electing local level
governments and for their effective functioning to ensure provisions

3
of urban services and infrastructure. It also provides ULBs with
political, functioning and fiscal improvement for good governance.
The 74th CAA, which came into force on 1st June, 1993, mandates
compulsory re-constitution of municipal bodies within a stipulated time
frame, thus, ensuring continuity of local representatives in order to
provide time to allow changes to be made in the then existing laws,
which were inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution (74th
Amendment) Act, a transitional period of one year was provided for.
The Act stipulates setting up of District Planning Committees (DPC)
and Metropolitan Planning Committees (MPC) along with constitution
of the State Finance Commissions to achieve integrated economic
development and regional planning by formulation of urban plans at
‘Municipality’, District, Metropolitan and State levels.
This revolutionary piece of legislation by which Constitution of
India was amended to incorporate a separate Chapter on urban local
bodies is one of the legislations administered by the Ministry of Urban
Development.
The erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural Development (2002)
took up for examination of the various aspects of the ‘Implementation
of Part IX A of the Constitution’ focusing towards the Urban Local
Bodies (ULBs) which are the primary implementing agencies of the
developmental projects/programmes/schemes, in the urban areas of
the country. The subject ‘Implementation of Part IX of the Constitution’,
has been re-selected for scrutiny by the newly formed Committee on
Urban Development in the Fourteenth Lok Sabha. The Committee on
Urban Development (2004-2005) have considered the diverse aspects
of timely and proper implementation of the provisions of the Part IX
A of the Constitution and have made certain suggestions/
recommendations recorded in the succeeding paragraphs.

CHAPTER II
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE PART IX A OF THE
CONSTITUTION
The salient features of the 74th CAA are:—
• Urban local bodies, to be known as Municipal Corporations,
Municipal Councils and Nagar Panchayat depending on the
population, shall be constituted through universal adult
franchise in each notified urban area of the country.
• These shall be constituted for a period of five years and if
dissolved earlier, an election to reconstitute it shall be
completed before the expiration of a period of six months
from the date of its dissolution.
• Not less than one-third of total number of seats in each
urban local body shall be reserved for women.
• The Legislature of a State may by law entrust on these
bodies such power and authority as may be necessary to
enable them to function as institution of local self
government, including those listed in the Twelfth Schedule.
• The Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution has listed the
following functions of the urban local bodies:—
* Urban Planning including town planning.
* Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings.
* Planning for economic and social development.
* Roads and bridges.
* Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial
purposes.
* Public health, sanitation, conservancy and solid waste
management.
* Fire services.
* Urban forestry, protection of the environment and
promotion of ecological aspects.
4

5
* Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society,
including the handicapped and mentally retarded.
* Slum improvement and upgradation.
* Urban poverty alleviation.
* Provision of Urban amenities and facilities such as parks,
gardens, playgrounds.
* Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects.
* Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds
and electric crematoriums.
* Cattle pounds, prevention of cruelty to animals.
* Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.
* Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus
stops and public conveniences.
* Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.
2.2 In order that the urban local bodies can perform the functions
assigned to them effectively, the said legislation has provided that the
Legislature of a State shall assign them specific taxes, duties, tolls and
levies. It also authorizes them to impose, collect and appropriate the
same. The 74th CAA also provides that:-
• Each State shall also constitute a Finance Commission, which
shall review the financial position of the urban local bodies
and recommend the principles, which should govern the
devolution of resources, including grant-in-aid from the
Consolidated Fund of the State of these bodies.
• The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation
of electoral rolls and the conduct of all elections to the
urban local bodies, shall vest in the State Election
Commission.
• In each district, a District Planning Committee shall be
constituted to consolidate the plan prepared by the urban
and rural local bodies.
• Similarly, for each metropolitan area, a Metropolitan Planning
Committee shall be constituted to prepare a development
plan for the metropolitan area as a whole.

6
2.3 The following are the broad recommendatory provisions
contained in Part IX A of the Constitution:
(i) Power, authority and responsibility of the municipalities—
Under these provisions of the State Legislature may, by law,
make provisions relating to power and authority to
municipal bodies as may be necessary to enable them to
function as institutions of Self Government.
(ii) Power to impose tax by the Municipalities— The State
Legislature may, by law, make provisions regarding powers
of Municipalities to levy, collect and appropriate taxes,
duties, tolls and fees and also receive grants-in-aid from
the State.
(iii) Audit of Accounts of municipalities— The Legislature of a
State, may by law, make provisions with respect to the
maintenance of accounts by the municipalities and the
auditing of such accounts.
2.4 Following are the mandatory provisions contained in Part IXA
of the Constitution:
(i) Constitution of Municipalities
(ii) Composition of Municipalities
(iii) Constitution and composition of Ward Committees
(iv) Reservation of seats
(v) Duration of Municipalities
(vi) Disqualification from membership
(vii) State Finance Commission
(viii) Election to Municipalities
(ix) Application to Union Territories
(x) Part not to apply to certain areas
(xi) Committee for District Planning
(xii) Committee for Metropolitan Planning
(xiii) Continuance of existing laws of Municipalities

7
Further, article 243ZB, specifics application of the provisions contained
in Part IXA to Union Territories also. The Scheduled Areas and the
tribal areas referred to in clause 243ZC have been excluded from the
provisions of Part IXA of the Constitution. (The Provisions of the
Municipalities—Extension to the Scheduled Areas Bill, 2001, as introduced
in Rajya Sabha on 30th July, 2001, was referred to the erstwhile Committee
on Urban and Rural Development on 6th August, 2001 and was duly reported
by the Committee vide their 50th Report, Thirteenth Lok Sabha, on
9th December, 2003)
Constitution of Municipalities
2.5 In accordance with the provision contained in article 243Q of
Part IXA of Constitution, there shall be constituted in every State—
(a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called for a
transitional area, that is to say, an area in transition from a
rural area to an urban area;
(b) a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area; and
(c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area.
2.6 As regards composition of the Municipalities, article 243R(2) of
Part IXA of Constitution states that the Legislature of a State may, by
law, provide—
(a) for the representation in a Municipality of—
(i) persons having special knowledge or experience in
Municipal administration;
(ii) the members of the House of the People and the
members of the Legislative Assembly of the State
representing constituencies which comprise wholly or
partly the Municipal area;
(iii) the members of the Council of States and the members
of the Legislative Council of the State registered as
electors within the Municipal area;
(iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted under
clause (5) of article 243S;
Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph (i)
shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of the Municipality;
(b) for the manner of election of the Chairperson of a
Municipality.

8
2.7 Article 243ZA stipulates the elections to the Municipalities as
under:
(1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation
of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the
Municipalities shall be vested in the State Election
Commission referred to in article 243K.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature
of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to all
matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the
Municipalities.
Constitution and composition of Wards Committees, etc.
2.8 Articles 243S of the Part IXA of the Constitution provides:
(1) There shall be constituted Wards Committees, consisting of
one or more wards, within the territorial area of a
Municipality having a population of three lakh or more.
(2) The Legislature of a State may , by law, make provision with
respect to—
(a) the composition and the territorial area of a Wards
Committee;
(b) the manner in which the seats in a Wards Committee
shall be filled.
(3) A member of a Municipality representing a ward within
the territorial area of the Wards Committee shall be a
member of that Committee.
(4) Where a Wards Committee consists of—
(a) one ward, the member representing that ward in the
Municipality; or
(b) two or more wards, one of the members representing
such wards in the Municipality elected by the members
of the Wards Committee, shall be the Chairperson of
that Committee.
(5) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the
Legislature of a State from making any provision for the
constitution of Committees in addition to the Wards
Committees.

9
2.9 Regarding the dissolution of Municipal bodies Article 243U of
Part IXA provides that:—
(1) Every Municipality , unless sooner dissolved under any law
for the time being in force, shall continue for five years
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer:
Provided that a Municipality shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard before its dissolution.
(2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall
have the effect of causing dissolution of a Municipality at
any level, which is functioning immediately before such
amendment, till the expiration of its duration specified in
clause (1).
(3) An election to constitute a Municipality shall be completed—
(a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1);
(b) before the expiration of a period of six months from
the date of its dissolution:
Provided that where the remainder of the period for which
the dissolved Municipality would have continued is less
than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any
election under this clause for constituting the Municipality
for such period.
(4) A Municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a
Municipality before the expiration of its duration shall
continue only for the remainder of the period for which the
dissolved Municipality would have continued under
clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.
The detailed of articles contained in Part IXA of the constitution
are shown at Annexure I.
Action taken for the Implementation of Part IXA of the Constitution
2.10 The Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Urban
Development vide a written reply that all the States and UTs have
already made necessary, provisions in their municipal laws to
implement the aforesaid provisions of the Part IXA of the Constitution.
These include constitution and composition of municipalities, fixed
duration of municipality, reservation of seats for SC/ST and women;
power, authority and responsibility of municipalities, financial powers,

10
setting up of State Finance Commissions and State Election Commission
and also setting up of District Planning Committees and Metropolitan
Planning Committees. The provisions of the 74th CAA are at various
stages of implementation by the State Governments/UTs. The amended
State Municipal Laws now provide for powers, authority and
responsibility of municipalities and power to impose taxes by the
municipalities.
2.11 When the Committee asked as to whether any State or
Municipality had brought to the notice of the Central Government
certain practical difficulties in carring out the requisite amendments in
their Municipal laws based on the provisions contained in Part IXA of
the Constitution, the Ministry of Urban Development informed in a
written note that no such practical difficulties in implementation of
the said Act had come to the notice of the Ministry.
2.12 On a query as to whether the Central Government had formed
a ‘Review Committee’ to look into the implementation of Part IXA of
the Constitution, the Ministry of Urban Development informed in their
written note that no such Committee had ever been constituted.
2.13 The Ministry of Urban Development had informed in their
written note that the Ministry has persuaded the State Governments
to enact necessary amendments in their State Municipal Laws in
conformity with the provisions laid down under article 243P to 243ZA
of the Constitution of India. As a result of the steps taken by the
Ministry through correspondence and also organizing meetings of the
State Level Secretaries, the State Governments implemented the
Part IXA by amending their municipal laws. As a follow up, the
elections have been conducted by all States except Jharkhand and Union
Territory of Pondicherry. State Finance Commissions have also been
constituted to review the financial position of ULBs. However, ULBs
do not exist in Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Sikkim, Lakshadweep
and Dadra & Nagar Haveli. For the reasons for not setting up of
ULBs in the State of Arunachal Pradesh and UT Lakshadweep, the
Ministry informed that information was awaited from these State
Governments.
2.14 As regards delay in formation of ULBs in Mizoram, the
Ministry of Urban Development have stated that the State Government
has informed that autonomous districts of Lai, Mara and Chakma are
tribal areas and are out of the purview of Part IXA of the Constitution.
The rationale behind keeping the tribal areas out of the purview of
the Part IXA is that an alternative to municipality or Nagarpalika, in

11
the form of ‘Town Committee’ has been provided in the Sixth Schedule
to the Constitution and that the requisite population for applying the
Constitutional provision is not there in any of the tribal areas of the
State. The State Government has further mentioned that a Municipal
Bill has been prepared by the Local Administration Department and is
under consideration.
2.15 With regard to the position of the State of Sikkim, the Ministry
have stated that the State Government has intimated that there is no
urban local body in the State. However, the State Government has
already enacted the Sikkim Municipal Act enacted in 1995 in accordance
with the Constitution (74th Amendment) Act. The State Government
has further mentioned that the people of adjoining areas of the capital
town of Gangtok and its suburbs in Sikkim are not willing for inclusion
into the municipalities on the ground that till date these areas fall
under the rural areas. Nevertheless, the Government is actively
considering holding elections to the municipalities.
2.16 With regard to Dadra & Nagar Haveli, the Ministry have
stated that the UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli has intimated that there
is no municipality existing in the Union Territory. However, they have
sent a proposal for setting up a Municipality to the Ministry of Home
Affairs.
2.17 As regards the holding of Municipal elections in various
States/UTs, the Ministry of Urban Development have submitted that
the elections to Municipalities have been conducted by all States except
Jharkhand and Union Territory of Pondicherry. The Government of
Jharkhand has informed that the reasons for pendency of the election
for ULBs is that after the creation of new State, action has been taken
up to adopt the Acts and Rules which were regulated in the State of
Bihar. The Government of Pondicherry has informed that following
the judgement of High Court of Madras regarding reservation for
backward classes, the UT Administration is taking necessary action to
complete the civic elections.
Role of Ministry of Urban Development & Poverty Alleviation in
implementation of Part IXA of the Constitution
2.18 When asked about the work done so far by the Ministry of
Urban Development in the implementation of Part IXA of the
Constitution, the Ministry in a written reply furnished to the Committee
stated that the Ministry has been in constant touch with the State
Governments in the task of implementation of Part IXA of the

12
Constitution. The States/UTs have not brought any specific difficulties
to the notice of the Ministry. Meetings/Conferences with Ministers/
Secretaries in-charge of Local Self-Government of States/UTs and also
elected representatives of local bodies have been held from time to
time to impress upon them the need for proper implementation of
Part IXA. The Ministry has conducted meetings/conferences with the
representatives of States/UTs on implementation of Part IXA of the
Constitution as per the following details:—
1. Meeting of Central Council of Local Government and Urban
Development—May, 1994.
2. Meeting of Central Council of Local Government and Urban
Development—May, 1999.
3. Four Regional Meets with the elected representatives held
at Delhi (December, 1998), Hyderabad, (January, 1999),
Mumbai (January, 1999), Kolkata (February, 2000).
4. Conference of Local Self-Governments (LSG)/UD Ministers
of States/UTs—January, 2000.
5. National Conference of Mayors—April, 2002.
6. Conference of UD/LSG Ministers of States/UTs—September,
2002.
7. Meetings with the Secretaries of LSG of States/UTs—
15th December, 2003.
2.19 In the above meetings suggestions were made for devolution
of functional and financial powers to ULBs, delegating powers to ULBs
to fix tax rates, users charges to ULBs, setting up of DPCs/MPCs,
enhancing capacity of municipal employees, participation of private
sector in municipal/urban services etc. In the recent meetings of
Secretariat of LSG of States/UTs held on 15.12.2003, the position relating
to implementation of various positions of Part IXA. All States/UTs
were emphasized to implement the provisions of Part IXA in a time
bound manner.
2.20 As a result of various steps taken by the Ministry, the State
Finance Commissions have been set up in all States/UTs excepting
Jharkhand. Elections to ULBs have been held in all States/UTs, except
Jharkhand and Pondicherry. Similarly, District Planning Committees
have been set up in 20 States/UTs. 6 States/UTs have taken under
their consideration to set up these bodies. In 2 States (Meghalaya and

13
Mizoram), these Committees have not been set up, as they do not
have any urban local body. The UT of Lakshadweep is entirely rural
area. Delhi is exempted. In Nagaland and Gujarat, District Planning
Boards are working as DPCs. To enhance the capacity of elected women
councillors, this Ministry has initiated a training programme under
which all women councillors will be provided trainings through State
identified training institutions for which this Ministry provides needed
financial assistance. As for the training programmes approved by this
Ministry to various training institutions involving an expenditure of
Rs. 175.03 lakh, a total number of 8709 elected women councillors are
to be trained. Besides, a cell is being set up in National Institute of
Urban Affairs to monitor the implementation of Part IXA of
Constitution on regular basis. This Ministry has prepared Activity
Mapping and circulated to all States/UTs for devolution of functional
powers to urban local bodies. A ‘Task Force’ consisting representatives
of States and the Ministry of Urban Development has been constituted
to look into the devolution of functions into specific operational and
activity related responsibilities of ULBs and suggest administrative and
managerial measures to bring into operation the administrative
decentralization and rationalization of delivery mechanism, to ensure
effective planning and implementation of development programmes
by municipalities.
2.21 The Committee definitely regard the Constitutional
(74th Amendment) Act, 1992 as a path-breaking piece of legislation
by which Constitution of India had been amended to incorporate a
separate Chapter on Urban Local Bodies (ULB) by emphasising the
deserved significance of local self-governance in line with the
democratic set-up of the country. The 74th CAA has redefined the
role, power function and finances of ‘Municipalities’ or ULBs across
the country. The Committee, therefore, are of the firm view that
with the complete and proper implementation of the provisions under
article 243P to 243ZG of Part IXA of the Constitution, better control
and effective working of the ULBs in passing on the economic
benefits and suitable urban infrastructure to the people at large,
would be achieved. The Committee also recommend that innovative
and good governance methods be adopted by ULBs with proper
information and training inputs, data base, as required, for improving
the living conditions and quality of life of urban residents in the
country.
2.22 The Committee note that the 74th CAA aims at a
Constitutional guarantee to safeguard the interest of Urban Local

14
Bodies (ULBs) to enable them to function as effective, democratic
and self-governing institutions at grass root level. The Committee
strongly emphasize that suitable steps be taken to ensure the
following:—
— regularity in elections under the supervision of the State
Election Commission;
— a clear tenure of five years for the elected body;
— protection for the elected body against arbitrary
dissolution;
— constitution of Ward Committees for greater proximity to
the citizens;
— mandate to State Legislature to endow the ULBs with such
powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them
to function as institution of Self-Government;
— the functions enumerated in Twelfth Schedule are
effectively transferred to the ULBs;
— the constitution of State Finance Commission (SFCs) to
review municipal finances and make recommendations
regarding distribution of the proceeds of State-level taxes
between the State Governments and the ULBs, criteria for
grants-in-aid, measures needed to improve the financial
position of the ULBs and compliance of the
recommendations of the State Finance Commissions; and
— urgent formation of District Planning Committees (DPCs)
and Metropolitan Planing Committees (MPCs) for
integrated as well as coordinated planning for urban and
rural areas.
2.23 The Committee also find that all States except Jharkhand
and Union Territory of Pondicherry conducted initial elections to
Municipal bodies. Also ULBs, do not exist in Arunachal Pradesh,
Mizoram, Sikkim, Lakshadweep and Dadra & Nagar Haveli. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Union Government hold
municipal elections in the Union Territory of Pondicherry at the
earliest. The Committee further urge Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram,
Sikkim, Lakshadweep and Dadra & Nagar Haveli for early setting
up of ULBs so that the system of self-governing institutions at
grassroots level could be established without any delay and the
development Schemes/Programmes are implemented effectively.

15
2.24 The Committee note that the responsibility of
implementation of all matters relating to Municipalities has been
entrusted to the Ministry of Urban Development and the Ministry
has been in constant touch with the State Governments in the task
of implementation of Part IXA of the Constitution. Also Meetings/
Conferences with Ministers/Secretaries-in-Charge of local self-
Government to States/UTs and elected representatives of Urban Local
Bodies have been held from time to time to impress upon them the
need for proper implementation of Part IXA. While the Committee
are quite convinced that coordinative efforts are being made by the
Ministry of Urban Development for the implementation of
Part IX A of the Constitution the Committee feel that the mandatory
as well as recommendatory provisions of Part IXA of the Constitution
are not being properly implemented by the respective State
Governments/UTs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Union
Government should make a comprehensive study of the existing
situation and ensure that mandatory as well as recommendatory
provisions of Part IXA are followed by the State Governments/UTs
in letter and spirit. Since UTs are under its direct administrative
control, an example in local self governance to be followed by others
can be set up in UTs by the Government of India.
2.25 The Committee are informed that a ‘Task Force’ consisting
of representatives of States and the Ministry of Urban Development
has been constituted to look into devolution of function into specific
operational and activity related responsibilities of ULBs and suggest
administrative and managerial measures to bring into operation the
administrative decentralization and rationalization of delivery
mechanism and implementation of urban development programmes
by municipalities/ULBs. In this regard, the Committee recommend
that a high level body, or ‘Review Committee’ at the Central level
may be constituted so as to review the proper and timely
implementation of the norms and conditions laid down in Part IXA
and the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution relating to ULBs.

CHAPTER III
PROCESS OF DEVOLUTION OF POWERS TO THE
MUNICIPALITIES
In order to initiate a process of participative and decentralized
democratic government of urban areas, the 74th Constitutional
(Amendment) Act, 1992 has given significant constitutional status to
the Municipalities. Article 243W of the Constitution, as reproduced
below, specifies the Power, Authority and Responsibilities of
Municipalities:
“Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a
State may, by law, endow-
(a) the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may
be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of
self-Government and such law may contain provisions for
the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon
Municipalities, subject to such conditions as may be specified
therein with respect to-
(i) the preparation of plans for economic development and
social justice;
(ii) the performance of functions and the implementation
of Schemes as may be entrusted to them including
those in relation to the matter listed in the Twelfth
Schedule;
(b) the Committees with such powers and authority as may be
necessary to enable them to carry out the responsibilities
conferred upon them including those in relation to the
matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.”
3.2 As regards, the process of devolution of funds, functions and
functionaries to the Municipalities, the Ministry of Urban Development
have informed the Committee that the Constitutional (74th Amendment)
Act seeks to devolve functional and financial powers to ULBs as the
article 243W requires the State Legislatures to make law to endow the
Municipalities with such powers and authority, as may be necessary,
to enable them to function as institutions of self-Government,
16

17
particularly with respect to preparation of plans for economic
development and social justice and perform functions and implement
all Schemes as may be entrusted to them including matters listed in
the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution. Similarly, as per Article 243X,
it has been left to the Legislature of the State to specify by law matters
relating to imposition of taxes. Such law may specify:
• Taxes duties, fees, etc. which could be levied and collected
by the Municipalities, as per the procedure to be laid down
in the State law.
• Taxes, duties, fees, etc. which would be levied and collected
by the State Government and a share passed on to the
Municipalities.
• Grants-in-aid that would be given to the Municipalities from
the State.
• Constitution of funds for crediting and withdrawal of
moneys by the Municipality.
3.3 When asked about the repercussions of the transfer of powers
and responsibilities to the Municipal Bodies and ULBs, the Ministry of
Urban Development submitted to the Committee that the States had
made provisions and their municipal laws to provide for financial and
functional powers to ULBs. The details regarding State-wise position
of devolution of functional and financial powers, as given by the
Ministry, may be seen at Annexures-II and III.
When asked about the details of funds, functions and functionaries,
which have been transferred to Municipalities, the Ministry in a written
note stated that Part IXA of the Constitution does not prescribe any
list of Municipal functions/finances, which may be transferred by the
State Governments to the Municipalities. Article 243W and 243X leave
it to the State Legislatures to endow Municipalities with such powers,
authorities and powers relating to imposing of taxes as may be specified
in the concerned Municipal laws. Accordingly, State Governments have
made provisions in their respective Municipal was specifying their
functional and financial powers.
3.4 On a query as to whether State Governments have been
suggested any time-period by the Union Government to achieve
complete devolution of functional powers and funds etc., the Ministry
stated that as Municipality is a ‘State Subject’, no such suggestion has
been made to the State Governments.

18
3.5 The Committee took the oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Urban Development at their sitting held on 4th
December, 2003. During the course of evidence, Secretary Urban
Development conceded before the Committee that:—
“With time we expect that this movement of devolution of financial
powers shall progressively improve. As you are aware, the
amendment itself gives a lot of flexibility to the States. It gives an
illustrative list of powers in an appendix, perhaps 18 of them. But
these are essentially illustrative, not binding, mandatory and
exhaustive. They are illustrative because situation in each State is
variable.
Secondly, if local-government indeed is a State Subject, then the
State legislatures must be permitted to apply their own minds to
their own local conditions to try and see how best they can handle
the law as has been incorporated in the Constitutional amendment.”
3.6 When asked about the steps taken for conducting a detailed
study on devolution of funds, functions and functionaries to
Municipalities, the Ministry stated that they have invited proposals
from the Regional Centres for Urban and Environmental Studies
(REUES) to conduct detailed study on devolution of funds, functions
and functionaries to Municipalities. The study proposals were examined
from the point of view of cost and terms of reference. Accordingly, the
revised proposals have been obtained and RCUES at Hyderabad,
Lucknow, Mumbai and Centre for Urban Studies at IIPA, New Delhi
had been entrusted with the said study. Under this study, the
implementation of various provision of Part IX-A will be studied and
the areas, which need further reforms and improvement will be
identified. Besides, the ‘Task Force’ consisting representatives of States
and this Ministry also substantiates the devolution of functions into
specific operational and activity related responsibilities of ULBs and
suggest administrative and managerial measures.
Parallel bodies
3.7 On the question of existence of any parallel bodies set up by
the different States and the functioning of these parallel bodies which
affect the implementation of certain provisions of Part IXA of the
Constitution, the Ministry of Urban Development have informed the
Committee that no such study has been made by the Ministry in this
regard. However, the Committee gather from an expert that a major
problem with the municipal functional domain is the continuation of

19
parallel bodies set up by the State Governments dealing with even
basic municipal functions like water supply, state level water and
sewerage boards. In many cases, the capital works are executed by the
special agencies, though the loan liability is passed on to the
‘Municipality’. These agencies are not accountable to the citizens of
any particular municipality. Their priorities are claimed to be state-
wise and, therefore, not responsive to local needs.
3.8 The Committee note that the Constitutional (74th Amendment)
Act seeks to devolve functional and financial powers to ULBs. Article
243W requires the State Legislatures to make law to endow the
municipalities with such powers and authority, as may be necessary
to enable them to function as institutions of self-governance,
particularly, with respect to preparation of plans for economic
development and social justice, and perform functions and implement
all Schemes as are entrusted to them including matters listed in the
Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution. Similarly, as per Article 243X,
it has been left to the Legislature of the State to specify by law the
matters relating to imposition of taxes. The Committee would like
to emphasize that measures must be taken by the Union Government
so as to ensure that the stipulated functions, powers and finances
actually devolve on the ULBs. The Committee find that any mismatch
between functions and finances of the ULBs may slacken the growth
of ULBs and optimum utilization of the available resources and
infrastructure for the various urban developmental schemes. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Urban
Development should draw upon the suggestions of the expert bodies
like National Institute of Urban Affairs by Maintaining proper data
base and utilization of the state-of-the-art technologies. The
Committee also recommend that Community Based Information
System formulated by National Institution of Urban Affairs be made
available to the municipalities etc. for better resource management
and planning.
3.9 Regarding, the formulation of development plans, the
Committee note that a three tier planning structure comprising of
Municipal level/District level, Metropolitan level and State level is
envisaged in 74th CAA. Under this framework, the Municipalities
would prepare plans for their area which would be consolidated at
the District level in the form of a District Development Plan. These
District Development Plans would lead to formulation of the State
level plans. In this regard, the Committee desire that comprehensive
and coordinative efforts be made by the Central Government to

20
impress upon the States and required UTs to formulate their
development plans in time.
3.10 The Committee also note that the State Governments specify
the taxes that the Municipalities could levy and collect which are
largely taken from the State List in the 7th Schedule of the
Constitution of India. Since no distinctive tax domain has been
specified for the Municipalities, the State Municipal Laws are non-
uniform in respect of municipal taxes. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Union Government should emphasize on the
States/UTs for clear-cut-tax domain for municipalities in all the State
Governments/UTs so as to ensure more methodical and proper fiscal
management by Municipal bodies.
3.11 The Committee note that the Ministry had invited proposals
from the Regional Centres for Urban and Environmental Studies
(RCUES) to conduct detailed study on devolution of funds, functions
and deployment of functionaries to municipalities. A ‘Task Force’
consisting of representatives of States and the Ministry has been
constituted to look into the devolution of functions into specific
operational and activity related responsibilities of ULBs and suggest
administrative and managerial measures. The Committee would like
that an in depth study is made on the suggestions/recommendations
of RCUES by a High level Governmental Committee or a Review
Committee, and suitable procedural amendments/modifications, if
required, by advised to the State Governments for effective
functioning of the ULBs and ensure good governance and adequate
financial resources for the Municipalities.
3.12 The Committee are perturbed to note that with the presence
of various other governmental and on-governmental bodies there is
considerable encroachment upon the functional domain of the
‘Municipalities’. The Committee also note that such bodies are not
accountable to ‘Municipalities’, although such agencies deal with even
basic municipal functions like water supply, sewerage and capital
works etc. The Committee have been informed by an expert that in
certain cases, the capital works are executed by a Specialised Agency
and their loan liability is passed on to the Municipalities. The
Committee can not approve of this kind of practice. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the functional domain of the
‘Municipalities’ must be exclusive and clearly demarcated to check
any kind of encroachment and confusion. If due to special and
technical reasons other bodies are required, the Committee

21
recommend that such bodies should be made accountable and
answerable to the Municipalities.
Financial Position of Municipalities
3.13 The Tenth Finance Commission was the first Finance
Commission after the Constitution (74th Amendment) Act came into
force to review the financial position of ULBs. It covered the period
from 1995-2000. In its report, it did not make any detailed analysis of
financial status of ULBs. However, it recommended for a provision of
Rs. 1000 crore to enable the ULBs to meet their primary obligations.
It also desired that local bodies should provide suitable matching
contribution by raising resources. The grant recommended by the Tenth
Finance Commission was not intended for expenditure on salaries and
wages.
3.14 The Eleventh Finance Commission has, however, studied the
financial position of ULBs in detail. The Commission emphasized need
for meeting the revenue mobilization by the local bodies themselves.
It suggested for suitable reforms in property/house tax system need
for replacing octroi/entry tax with a suitable tax and also revising the
rate structure of user charges on a regular basis. The Eleventh Finance
Commission has recommended for devolution of Rs. 2000 crore to
ULBs for 5 years period (2000-2005). The basic objective of these grant
is to finance the maintenance of civic services which include provision
for primary schools, safe drinking water, street lighting, sanitation etc.
The State-wise details of the grants recommended by the 10th and
11th Finance Commission to Municipalities are given in the Annexures
IV and V .
3.15 When asked about the financial position of the Municipalities
and steps taken by the Union Government to augment the resources
of ULBs, the Ministry in their written note submitted to the Committee
had informed that the financial position of Municipalities has always
been an issue at various forums. It has been an acknowledged fact
that financial position of ULBs is in a very deplorable condition. Many
of the Municipalities are not able to carry out their assigned civic
functions and not able to pay salaries and wages to their employees.
However, the financial conditions of bigger Municipal Corporations
are not as bad as of smaller Municipalities. There is always a mismatch
between the responsibilities and duties assigned to Municipalities and
their resources. As evident from the information received from 11 States
for the year 1999-2000, 2000-01, 2001-02 (Annexure-VI) Municipalities
have experienced a resource gap between revenue generated and

22
expenditure incurred. Ministry of Urban Development is taking
necessary steps to strengthen the financial position of ULBs and urban
reform agenda is underway which provides for the Urban Reforms
Incentive Funds, City Challenge Fund, State Level Pooled Financing
Structure, Tax Free Municipal Bonds, Foreign Direct Investment and
Public Private Partnership guidelines.
3.16 When asked about the statistical details relating to the financial
status of ULBs and the Data Base for the funding patterns of the
Municipalities etc., the Ministry stated that the Eleventh Finance
Commission (EFC) has suggested for developing a ‘Data Base’ on the
finances of the Panchayats and Municipalities at the District, State and
Central Government level. It has further suggested that Director, Local
Fund Audit or the authority prescribed for conducting the audit of
accounts of the local bodies may be made responsible for this task.
The Chief Secretary of the State may do the State level coordination
and monitoring. The Eleventh Finance Commission (EFC) has suggested
that this responsibility may be undertaken by the Comptroller &
Auditor General of India at the Central level. The Commission has
estimated a cost of Rs. 200 crore for the above purpose both for
Panchayats and Municipalities. The estimated cost for Municipalities
come to Rs. 293.72 lakh. Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure have issued the guidelines for the utilisation of local body
grants as recommended by the EFC. As per these guidelines, the
amount provided for development of database for different States shall
be the first charge on the local body grants as recommended by the
EFC. The guidelines further lay down that the Director, Local Fund
Audit or the authority prescribed for conducting the audit of accounts
of the local bodies shall be made responsible for this task of creation
of database. A statement received from Ministry of Finance, Department
of Expenditure showing State-wise details of provision for creation of
Database and utilisation thereof as reported by State Governments is
given in the Annexure VII.
3.17 As regards the accounting reform made by the State
Governments in order to ensure proper financial management of the
ULBs and Municipalities, the Ministry of UD in their written note
informed that State Government are also being persuaded to bring
needed reforms in the existing Municipal Accounting System of Urban
Local Bodies. The Task Force constituted by the Comptroller & Auditor
General of India has suggested for adoption of double entry accounting
system in place of the existing cash based system. The Task Force has
also suggested municipal accounting and budget formats for

23
maintenance of accounts by urban local bodies. The report of the Task
Force has been circulated to all the State for necessary action. Recently
a National Workshop of Secretaries Incharge of Local Funds Audit of
all States has been convened at New Delhi on 26.9.2003 in which the
roadmap for implementation of the Municipal Accounting Reforms in
the urban local bodies was discussed in detail.
3.18 The above reform agenda has been initiated by this Ministry
with a view to strengthening the capacity of ULBs to perform their
assigned function in an effective manner. The initiatives of this Ministry
will supplement the efforts of the States in streamlining the functioning
of ULBs.
3.19 The Committee express their deep anguish to note that most
of the Municipalities etc., which are statutorily responsible for
provisioning and maintenance of basic infrastructure and services in
cities and towns are under fiscal stress. They are given to understand
that many of the municipalities have not been able to carry out
their assigned civic functions and pay salaries and wages to their
employees, although, the financial conditions of bigger municipal
corporations has not been as bad as of smaller municipalities. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development
should coordinate and persuade the concerned State Governments/
UTs to take the necessary corrective measures on their part by
adopting suitable taxation methods, accounting standards etc. to
enable the municipalities to generate their own funds. The Committee
desire that the Ministry of Urban Development should persuade the
State Governments to link their development plans with resources
mobilization plans and credit enhancement mechanisms keeping in
view the long-term perspective and aims of the institutions of urban
local self government. The Committee recommend that cost recovery
procedures and revenue collection methods of such bodies should
be strengthened in a scientific and prudent manner. As regards the
action taken on the suggestions of the ‘Task Force’ as constituted by
the Ministry, the Committee would like to be apprised about the
latest position in the matter.
3.20 The Committee note that the Eleventh Finance Commission
(EFC) has suggested for developing a data base on the finances of
the Panchayats and Municipalities at the District, State and Central
Government level. It has further suggested that Director, Local Fund
Audit or the authority prescribed for conducting the audit of accounts
of the local bodies may be assigned responsibility for this task. The

24
Chief Secretary of the State may do the State level coordination and
monitoring and the Comptroller and Auditor General of India do
the same at the Central level. The Committee are of the firm view
that this would ensure greater accountability in matters relating to
municipal management and transparency in their functioning. The
Committee recommend that proper and timely follow-up action
should be taken up by the Ministry of Urban Development for
updating and maintenance of the ‘Data Base’ of the finances of the
Municipalities as the planning exercise needs continuous ‘Data Base’
analysis. The Committee also recommend that a computer generated
data base and information system be developed at various levels
which would provide support to planners in development planning.
3.21 The Committee note that the Tenth Finance Commission
recommended for a provision of Rs. 1000 crore to enable ULBs to
meet their primary obligations. It also desired that Local Bodies
should provide suitable matching contribution by raising resources.
The Committee further note that the Eleventh Finance Commission
had emphasized the need for meeting the revenue mobilizations by
the local bodies themselves. It suggested for suitable reforms in
property/house tax system and the need for replacing octroi/entry
tax with a suitable tax and also revising the rate structure of user
charges on a regular basis. The Eleventh Finance Commission has
recommended for devolution of Rs. 2000 crore to ULBs for 5 year
period from 2000 to 2005. While the Committee are happy to note
that financial provision by way of devolution of Rs. 2000 crore to
ULBs has been made by Eleventh Finance Commission, but the
Municipalities/ULBs are still unable to perform well due to lack of
funds. The Committee desire to know why the resource crunch still
exists inspite of the recommendation of devolution of a considerable
amount by the Eleventh Finance Commission. The Committee
recommend that the Union Government should impress upon the
State Governments to bring up proper reforms of Municipal taxes,
including property tax system so that ULBs could generate sufficient
resources to finance the maintenance of civic services. The Committee
also recommend that loopholes in collection of municipal taxes,
leakage/diversion of funds etc. are plugged and action is taken
against any misuse of funds.
3.22 The Committee note with optimism the various reform
initiatives taken by the Union Government to strengthen the capacity
of ULBs to perform their assigned functions in an effective manner.
The Committee should be kept informed about the achievements

25
made out of the reform agenda and the steps taken by the States in
streamlining the functioning of ULBs in pursuance thereof.
The State Finance Commissions
3.23 Article 243Y of Part IX A of the Constitution provides for the
setting up of Finance Commissions to review the financial position of
the Municipalities and make recommendations to the Governor of the
State as to:—
(1) (a) the principles which should govern—
(i) the distribution between the State and the
Municipalities of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties,
tolls and fees leviable by the State, which may be
divided between them under this Part and the
allocation between the Municipalities at all levels of
their respective shares of such proceeds;
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees
which may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the
Municipalities;
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the
Consolidated Fund of the State;
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of
the Municipalities;
(c) Any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by
the Governor in the interests of sound finance of the
Municipalities;
(2) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by
Commission under this article together with an explanatory
memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before
the Legislature of the State.
Article 243Y of the Constitution further provides that the Finance
Commission constituted under Article 243-I shall make similar
recommendation vis-a-vis municipalities.
3.24 On the issue of setting up of the State Finance Commissions
and the action taken on the suggestions of this Commission, the
Ministry of Urban Development in their written note informed the
Committee that all the States and UTs had constituted SFCs out 28

26
States and 7 UTs. The SFCs of 17 States viz., Andhra Pradesh, Assam,
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal had submitted SFCs Reports to
respective State Governments. As per Entry ‘5’ of the State List of the
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, ‘Municipality’ is a State subject.
The State Finance Commission reviewed the financial position of the
ULBs and gave its recommendations to the Governor of the State. The
Governor causes every recommendation of this Commission together
with a explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be
laid before the legislature of the State. Hence, a mechanism already
exists under the article 243Y for implementation of the recommendation
of the State Finance Commission.
3.25 During the course of oral evidence held on 4th December,
2003, the Committee asked the witnesses of the Ministry of Urban
Development that SFCs must come into existence within a reasonable
time limit. Therefore, proactive monitoring by the Ministry to ensure
that the Country is run according to the spirit of Constitution should
be urged upon.
3.26 On the reasons for delay in the constitution of the SFCs, the
Ministry of Urban Development informed the Committee that there
was delay in constitution of the First SFC in Arunachal Pradesh, Goa,
Manipur, Jharkhand, Orissa, Sikkim, Tripura and Pondicherry. As per
the information received from the State Government of Goa and
Government of Pondicherry the reasons of delay were:
Goa — After the enactment of the 73rd and 74th
Constitutional Amendment, the Goa Panchayat Raj
Act, 1994 was enacted and the Goa Municipalities
Act, 1968 was amended in 1994 to give effect to
the Constitutional amendment. Efforts were made
by the Government to constitute the SFC in
accordance with the provisions in the Act. However,
on account of frequent changes in the Government
and other administrative reasons, the appointment
of the Commission was delayed. The first
notification constituting the SFC was issued on
29.9.1997. However, due to demise of the Chairman
of the Commission, the same had to be
reconstituted on 1.4.1999.
Pondicherry — The State Government of Pondicherry had initiated
action in 1994 itself for the constitution of the First

27
SFC. However, various options regarding
constitution and composition of the Members of
the Commission were examined and there were
suggestions and counter suggestions leading to
administrative delay. The first SFC was constituted
on 12.3.1997.
Jharkhand — The case regarding constitution of SFC was held
up due to court case in the High Court. The
Hon’ble Court since disposed of the case. They
have further mentioned, since the Government has
approved the constitution of SFC, it shall become
functional shortly.
3.27 The Committee were informed that the First SFCs was
constituted in Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Orissa, Sikkim and Tripura
on dates/year mentioned against each:
Arunachal Pradesh — 21.5.2003
Manipur — 1996
Orissa — 2.11.1996
Sikkim — 1999
Tripura — 19.11.1998
3.28 The gist of the recommendations of the State Finance
Commissions, State-wise and the position of their acceptance by the
State Government as submitted by the Ministry are given in the
Annexure VIII.
3.29 In a subsequent written note, the Ministry informed the
Committee that only in Pondicherry, the Second SFC had not been re-
constituted and the Second SFC had been set up in Assam,
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Chandigarh, GNCT of Delhi, Andaman
and Nicobar Islands, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep and Dadra &
Nagar Haveli.
3.30 Regarding the Second SFC in Jharkhand, the Ministry informed
that the State Government had cleared the proposal for SFC, but due
to some litigation pending in High Court, it had been held up.

28
3.31 The Committee note that the State Finance Commissions
are required to be set up under Article 243-I of the Constitution.
There was delay in Constitution of First SFC in Goa, Pondicherry
and Jharkhand and Second SFC is yet to be constituted in
Pondicherry. Keeping in view the gist of recommendations of the
various SFCs and the action taken thereon as Annexed (Annexure
VIII) to the Report, the Committee observe that most of the
recommendations made by the various State Finance Commissions
have been accepted by the respective State Governments. The
Committee desire that the State Governments should take expeditious
measures to ensure that all recommendations of the respective State
Finance Commissions are implemented through relevant
administrative, legislative and financial measures within a given time
frame. The Committee also recommend that the Union Government
should pursue with the respective State Governments/UTs which are
lagging behind in the setting up of the SFCs within the prescribed
time limit and give their recommendations/observations to the
Governor of the State so as to facilitate better fiscal management by
the ULBs. Since the administration of UTs is directly under the Union
Government an example could be set up in regard to the role of the
State Finance Commissions by accepting its recommendations
regarding the concerned UTs.
3.32 The Committee note Article 243Y accords the primary
responsibility to oversee the financial position of the Municipalities
to State Finance Commission with a view to make recommendations
to the Governor of the State relating to the principles which should
govern (i) the distribution between the State and the Municipalities
of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by
the state, which may be divided between them and the allocation
between the Municipalities at all levels of their respective shares of
such proceeds; (ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and
fees which may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the Municipalities;
and the grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the Consolidated
Fund of the State. The SFCs then given their suggestions and the
measures need to improve the financial position of the Municipalities
and report to the Governor of the State. In this regard, the Committee
recommend that appropriate steps should be taken up by the Union
Government to impress upon the State Governments to implement
all recommendations of the respective State Finance Commission
within a given time frame and in the case of Union Territories,
Government of India should take necessary steps in this regard.

29
Audit of Accounts of Municipalities
3.33 Article 243Z provides that the legislature of a State may, by
law, make provision with respect to the maintenance of accounts by
the municipalities and the auditing of such accounts. In pursuance to
the above, the State Municipal Acts have incorporated the relevant
provisions regarding maintenance and audit of accounts of municipal
bodies. The accounts of municipal bodies are accordingly audited and
maintained as per the provisions of the respective municipal act.
3.34 When asked as to whether the Tenth and Eleventh Central
Finance Commissions have issued any guidelines in respect of audit
of accounts maintained by Municipalities, the Ministry stated that the
Tenth and Eleventh Central Finance Commission have not issued any
guidelines in respect of audit of accounts to be maintained by the
municipalities. However, Eleventh Finance Commission have made
certain suggestions for proper upkeep of accounts of municipalities
and their audit. The following are the broad suggestions in this
regard—
(i) Study and review the existing account heads under which
the funds are being transferred to ULBs
(ii) The Comptroller & Auditor General of India should be
entrusted with the responsibility of exercising control and
supervision over the proper maintenance of accounts and
their audit by the ULBs
(iii) The Director, Local Fund Audit or any other agency be
made responsible for the audit of the accounts of local
bodies, and work under technical and administrative
supervision of C&AG.
(iv) C&AG should prescribe formats for the preparation of
budgets and for keeping of accounts of the local bodies.
3.35 On being enquired as to whether the audit of accounts has
been done by all the States and Union Territories, the Ministry in a
written reply stated that the accounts of municipal bodies are audited
and maintained as per the provisions of the respective municipal acts.
Since this is a continuous process, the information whether, the accounts
of all municipalities have been audited as per Article 243Z, is not
maintained by this Ministry.

30
3.36 The Committee note that the Eleventh Finance Commission
have made certain suggestions for proper upkeep of accounts of
municipalities and their audit. The Committee desire that State
Government should be persuaded to bring needed reforms in the
existing Municipal Accounting System of Urban Local Bodies as
suggested by the Eleventh Finance Commission. The Committee
further desire that Municipal Accounting System should be
overhauled and made transparent with a view to ensure acceptance
by lending agencies and financial market so that ULBs could have
proper access to debt funds to finance and maintain the civic
amenities which are suffering due to lack of funds.

CHAPTER IV
DISTRICT PLANNING COMMITTEES
Article 243ZD of the Constitution provided as below:
(1) There shall be constituted in every State at the district level
a District Planning Committee to consolidate the plans
prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the
district and to prepare a draft development plan for the
district as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may , by law, make provision with
respect to—
(a) the composition of the District Planning Commission;
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees
shall be filled:
Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total
number of members of such Committee shall be elected
by, and from amongst, the elected members of the
Panchayat at the district level and of the Municipalities
in the district in proportion to the ratio between the
population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in
the district;
(c) the functions relating to district planning which may
be assigned to such Committees;
(d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such
Committees shall be chosen.
(3) Every District Planning Committee shall, in preparing the
draft development plan,—
(a) have regard to—
(i) matters of common interest between the Panchayats
and the Municipalities including spatial planning,
sharing of water and other physical and natural
resources, the integrated development of infrastructure
and environmental conservation.
31

32
(ii) the extent and type of available resources whether
financial or otherwise;
(b) consult such institutions and organizations as the
Governor may, by order, specify.
(4) The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall
forward the development plan, as recommended by such
Committee, to the Government of the State.
Constitution of DPCs in States/UTs
4.2 As per the written note furnished by the Ministry of Urban
Development, DPCs have already been constituted in Haryana,
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, West
Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Daman and Diu, Dadar & Nagar
Haveli and Lakshadweep. The DPCs have also been constituted in
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Manipur,
Mizoram, Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Orissa, Sikkim and
Uttaranchal. Delhi has been exempted from setting up of DPC. In
Pondicherry and Jharkhand, elections are yet to be held. Tripura
Government has informed that constitution of DPC in the State is
under-consideration. Punjab Government has informed that the
necessary action is being initiated. The Government of Jammu and
Kashmir has informed that there is no provision for DPC in the State.
Hence, District Development Boards in each district under single line
administration has been under operation since 1976. Chandigarh
Administration is considering to set up DPC. Meghalaya Government
has informed that the State is exempted from Part IXA in view of
Article 243ZC. In Nagaland, no municipality has been constituted so
far. Hence, District Planning and Development Boards also function as
DPC in the State as informed by the State Government. The defaulting
States have been asked to furnish the reasons. The current update as
constitution of DPCs in different States is given in Annexure-IX.
4.3 On being asked whether any guidelines have been issued by
the Union Government regarding setting up of DPCs by the State
Governments in a given time frame, the Ministry stated in a written
reply that in order to assist the State Governments to implement the
provision of constitution of DPCs, the Ministry of Urban Development
and Poverty Alleviation had drafted the guidelines and issued the
same to all State Governments. These guidelines have been prescribed
for composition and function of District Planning Committees,
integration of the plans prepared by the Panchayats and municipalities
at the District level. The State Governments were requested to consider

33
the draft guidelines, and if found by and large adequate to serve the
purpose of operation of the District Planning Committees and
Metropolitan Planning Committees, to adopt them with such
modifications and additions as the State Government may deem proper.
The Constitution (74th Amendment) Act does not specify any time
limit within which District Planning Committees are required to be
made operational. In view of this, no such directions have been issued
to the States. However, State Governments are being requested from
time to time to constitute DPCs urgently.
4.4 The Ministry further stated that the Central Council of Local
Government and Urban Development in its 26th Meeting held in
May 1999 under the Chairmanship of Minister of Urban Development
and Poverty Alleviation and attended by Ministers in charge of local
Self-Governments of all States unanimously resolved that State
Governments immediately constitute the District Planning Committees.
The Ministry also organised conference of local Self-Government and
Urban Development Ministers of all States and Union Territories in
January 2000 at New Delhi followed by National Conference of Mayors
in April 2000 and Conference of Ministers of Urban Development,
local Self-Government and Housing of States and Union Territories in
September 2002 at New Delhi. In these conferences, a need was
expressed for setting up of DPCs. As the issue of DPC falls within the
purview of State Governments, the minutes of conferences were
circulated to them for taking necessary action.
4.5 When enquired whether the Municipalities are getting adequate
representation in the District Planning Committees, the Ministry in
their written reply stated that as per the provisions of Article 243ZD
(2)(b), the manner in which the seats in DPCs shall be filled will be
prescribed by the State Legislature, provided that not less than four-
fifths of the total number of members of such Committee shall be
elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the Panchayat
at the district level and of the Municipalities in the district in proportion
to the ratio between the population of the rural areas and of the
urban areas in the district. In view of this, it may be seen that
provisions already exist for adequate representation of Municipalities
in DPCs.
4.6 On being asked whether DPCs are being chaired by Ministers
of the respective State Governments, the Ministry in a written reply
stated that as per Article 243ZD of the Constitution, the Legislature of
States has been empowered to make laws with respect to composition

34
of the DPCs including the manner in which the Chairpersons of such
Committees shall be chosen. Accordingly, DPCs are chaired by the
Chairpersons, as chosen according to the provisions made by the State
Legislature in this regard. As regards the fact that DPCs are being
chaired by Ministers of the respective State Governments, no such
instance has come to the notice of this Ministry.
4.7 In this regard, it needs to be pointed out that in a Memorandum
submitted to the Committee by a Research Fellow, it has been stated
that in Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh, a
Minister of the State Government is the chairperson of the DPC.
4.8 The Committee note that almost a decade has elapsed since
the enactment of the Constitution (74th Amendment) Act w.e.f.
01.06.1993, however, a number of States are yet to constitute District
Planning Committees although this is a mandatory provision under
article 243ZD of the Constitution. In the circumstance, the Committee
are distressed over the fact that the constitutional obligation to
constitute the DPCs in the defaulting States has not been fulfilled.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Central
Government should urge such States, where DPC has not yet been
constituted yet, to form their respective DPCs within a specified
time frame. If necessary, suitable provisions in this regard should
be incorporated in the Constitution by bringing up the required
amendment to the Constitution. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the position in this regard. In case of UTs, the
Government of India should ensure immediate constitution of DPCs
in all UTs.
4.9 The Committee note that in order to assist the State
Governments to implement the provision of constitution of DPCs,
the Ministry has drafted the guidelines and issued the same to all
State Governments. These guidelines prescribe for composition and
function of District Planning Committees, integration of the plans
prepared by the Panchayats and Municipalities at the District level.
The Committee desire that the Union Government should persuade
the State Government to scrupulously implement the guidelines. The
Committee also desire that Government should also provide for
association and involvement of the NGOs, professionals, experts in
the DPCs. The Committee further urge the Union Government to
make adequate provisions by amending Article 243ZD to secure the
participation of MPs and MLAs in DPCs.
4.10 The Committee are informed that in some of the States,
DPCs are being chaired by Ministers in the State Governments. The

35
Committee fear that this may not be in consonance with the true
aim and spirit of the decentralization of responsibilities under the
Constitution of India.
4.11 The Committee note that article 243ZD(3) stipulates that every
District Planning Committee (DPC) shall draft development plans
and also one of the main functions of the District Planning
Committee is in regard to formulation of the District Development
Plans and allocation of resources to local bodies for implementation
of the local level projects in urban areas. The Committee have been
given to understand that under the framework of the Constitution,
the District Development Plans, Metropolitan Plans would lead to
formulation of the State Plans. The Committee are distressed to find
that in the absence of the DPC in certain States, the Planning Process
would lose the intending meaning behind it. The Committee
recommend that concerted and earnest action should be initiated by
the Union Government to urge upon the States/UTs to formulate
District development plans so as to benefit the people at large.
4.12 The Committee note that as per article 243ZD (3), draft
development plans of DPC should take into consideration, (i) the
matters of common interest between the Panchayats and the
Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and other,
physical and natural resources, the integrated development of
infrastructure and environmental conservation, (ii) the extent and
type of available resources whether financial or otherwise; and
(iii) consult such institution and organisation as the Governor may,
by order, specify. Keeping in view the main aims and objectives of
this said proviso of Part IX A of Constitution, the Committee desire
that the planning process be completed with a positive perspective
and by taking into account of the following:
(i) each level of Plan must include measures for infrastructure
development and environment conservation;
(ii) these development Plans must be flexible to provide for
the ever-growing and ever-expanding city boundaries and
provide quality life to its inhabitants;
(iii) people’s participation in formulation of perspective plans
be ensured through the elected bodies;
(iv) given the paucity of resources, proper measures are taken
to utilize strategic methods in selected urban areas as
‘Core’ development plans; and
(v) cost recovery methods of ULBs are strengthened. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken
in the matter.

CHAPTER V
METROPOLITAN PLANNING COMMITTEE
Article 243ZE of the Constitution provides as below:
(1) There shall be constituted in every Metropolitan area a
Metropolitan Planning Committee to prepare a draft
development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may , by law, make provision with
respect to—
(a) the composition of the Metropolitan Planning
Committees;
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees
shall be filled:
Provided that no less than two-thirds of the members of
such Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the
elected members of the Municipalities and Chairpersons of
the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area in proportion to
the ratio between the population of the Municipalities and
of the Panchayats in that area;
(c) the representation in such Committees of the Government
of India and the Government of the State and of such
organizations and Institutions as may be deemed necessary
for carrying out the functions assigned to such Committees;
(d) the functions relating to planning and coordination for the
Metropolitan area which may be assigned to such
Committees;
(e) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees
shall be chosen.
(3) Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, in preparing
the draft development plan,—
(a) have regard to—
(i) the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the
Panchayats in the Metropolitan areas;
36

37
(ii) matters of common interest between the Municipalities
and the Panchayats, including coordinated spatial
planning of the area, sharing of water and other
physical and natural resources, the integrated
development of infrastructure and environmental
conservation;
(iii) the overall objectives and priorities set by the
Government of India and the Government of the State;
(iv) the extent and nature of investments likely to be made
in the Metropolitan area by agencies of the Government
of India and of the Government of the State and other
available resources whether financial or otherwise;
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor
may, by order, specify.
(3) The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee
shall forward the development plan, as recommended by
such Committee, to the Government of the State.
5.2 As per written information furnished by the Ministry, there are
35 urban agglomerations with population of more than one million in
the country. State Government of Maharashtra have issued on ordinance
dated 26 September, 1999 for constitution of MPCs for Mumbai, Pune
and Nagpur. The ordinance was converted into the Maharashtra
Metropolitan Planning Committees (Constitution and Functions)
(Continuance of provisions) Act, 1999 dated 7th January, 2000. State
Government of Tamil Nadu has informed that action is being taken to
constitute the MPC by introducing a Legislation. The Government of
Delhi has already been granted exemption from setting up of MPC.
5.3 The Committee note that there are 35 urban agglomerations
with population of more than one million in the country and for
these areas, the Metropolitan Planning Committee (MPC) is a
constitutional requirement under article 243ZE of the Constitution.
The Committee are dismayed to note that only State Government of
Maharashtra have made an Act for constitution of MPCs for Mumbai,
Pune and Nagpur till date but other States are lagging behind. The
Committee take serious note of it and feel that this amounts to
serious infringement of mandatory constitutional provisions. The
Committee urge upon the Union Government to ensure that in all
remaining Urban agglomerations with population of more than one
million MPCs are constituted within a stipulated time period. The

38
Committee further urge the Union Government to make adequate
provisions by amending Article 243ZE to secure the participation of
MPs and MLAs in MPCs.
5.4 The Committee note that one of the main aims of the MPC
is to formulate the Metropolitan Development Plans and to help the
planning process so as to provide the various urban services to the
urban population. The Committee are, however, perturbed to find
that the due cognizance has  not been given to the planning aspect
of the ULBs/Municipalities in most of the States/UTs in the country.
The Committee recommend that proper attention must be given
towards the formulation of development plans at district,
metropolitan and State levels so as to ensure local self-governance
be an effective instrument of economic and infrastructural growth
in the urban areas.

CHAPTER VI
TRAINING OF ELECTED MEMBERS OF MUNICIPALITIES
On training arrangements available for elected members of
municipalities, the Ministry stated in a written reply that, as
‘Municipality’ is a State subject, it is for the State Governments to
look into the issue of providing training to elected representatives of
municipalities. However, to supplement the efforts of the State
Governments and to provide needed training facilities to elected
members of municipalities, Ministry of Urban development and
Poverty Alleviation provides financial assistance to certain training
institutions. These Training Centres conduct training programmes on
various subjects of municipal bodies. The Ministry of Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation had initiated a plan to train
women elected Councillors of all municipalities. For this purpose,
proposals have been invited from various State Governments. Ministry
of Urban development and Poverty Alleviation will provide 50% of
the total expenditure on training of elected women Councillors as per
the criteria of the plan. The first instalment of funds has been released
to Kerala (Rs. 1.5 lakh), Uttaranchal (Rs. 4.77 lakh), Madhya Pradesh
(Rs. 17.32 lakh) and Maharashtra (Rs. 18.00 lakh). Further, proposals
are under consideration for release of funds to West Bengal (Rs. 13.41
lakh), Tripura (Rs. 1.82 lakh), Chhattisgarh (Rs. 3.47 lakh) and
Karnataka (Rs. 14.42 lakh).
6.2 The Committee note that to supplement the efforts of the
State Government and to provide needed training facilities to elected
members of municipalities, the Ministry provides financial assistance
to certain training institutions. The Ministry has initiated a plan to
train women elected councillors of all municipalities and the
Ministry will provide 50 per cent of the total expenditure on training
of elected women councillors. The Committee are of the firm view
that potentiality of all the elected members of the Municipalities
could be enhanced by giving proper training. The Committee,
therefore, desire that concerted efforts are made to provide for
training by utilization of latest training methods and computerization
network for capacity building of all the elected members of
municipalities.
39

CHAPTER VII
ROLE OF WOMEN
Part IX A of the Constitution under article 243T(3) prescribes
mandatory provision for reservation of not less than one-third
(including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of
seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall be
reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to
different Constituencies in a municipalities.
7.2 When enquired about the steps initiated by the Union
Government and as well as States Government for effective
participation of women in Municipalities, the Ministry in a written
reply informed the Committee that in pursuance of stipulation made
in Article 243T, provisions have been made by the State Governments
in the Municipal laws for reservation of not less than one-third of
total number of seats in municipalities for women to ensure their
effective participation in municipalities. As a result women are now
coming up as members of Municipal bodies and have an active
participation in democratic process at the local level.
7.3 When asked about the guidelines issued by the Union
Government to the State Governments to ensure attendance of women
in the meetings of municipalities, the Ministry vide their note informed
that no such guidelines have been issued by their Ministry to the
State Governments.
7.4 The Committee note that article 243T(3) of the Constitution
recognized the role of women in local self-governance and the
functioning of the Municipalities. In this regard, the Committee are
of the firm view that the women participation in ‘Municipalities’
being a mandatory provision under the constitution, the Union
Government should issue guidelines to encourage and promote
effective participation of women in the deliberations and decision
making process of municipalities.
   N
EW D ELHI; MOHD. SALIM,
30 November, 2004 Chairman,
9 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban
Development.
40

ANNEXURE-I
RECOMMENDATORY/MANDATORY PROVISION’S CONTAINED
IN PART IXA OF THE CONSTITUTION
The following provisions of Part IXA of the Constitution are
recommendatory in nature:
Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, etc. 243W
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a
State may, by law, endow—
(a) the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may
be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of
self-government and such law may contain provisions for
the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon
Municipalities, subject to such conditions as may be specified
therein,
With respect to—
(i) the preparation of plans for economic development and
social justice;
(ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of
schemes as may be entrusted to them including those in
relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule;
(b) the Committees with such powers and authority as may be
necessary to enable them to carry out the responsibilities
conferred upon them including those in relation to the
matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.
243X Power to impose taxes by and Funds of the Municipalities
The Legislature of a State may, by law—
(a) authorised a Municipality to levy , collect and appropriate
such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such
procedure and subject to such limits;
(b) assign to a Municipality such taxes, duties, tolls and fees
levied and collected by the State Government for such
purpose sand subject to such conditions and limits;
41

42
(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Municipalities
from the Consolidated Fund of the State; and
(d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all
moneys received, respectively, by or on behalf of the
Municipalities and also for the withdrawal of such moneys
therefrom, as may be specified in the law.
Audit of accounts of Municipalities 243Z
The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with
respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Municipalities and the
auditing of such accounts.
The mandatory provisions contained in Part IXA of the
Constitution are as follows:
Constitution of Municipalities 243Q
(1) There shall be constituted in every State—
(a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called for a
transitional area, that is to say, an area in transition from a
rural area to an urban area;
(b) a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area; and
(c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area, in
accordance with the provisions of this Part.
Provided that a Municipality under this clause may not be
constituted in such urban area or part thereof as the Governor may ,
having regard to the size of the area and the municipal services being
provided or proposed to be provided by an industrial establishment
in that area and such other factors as he may deem fit, by public
notification, specify to be an industrial township.
(2) In this article, “a transitional area”, “a smaller urban area”
or a “a larger urban area” means such area as the Governor
may, having regard to the population of the area, the density
of the population therein, the revenue generated for local
administration, the percentage of employment in non-
agricultural activities, the economic importance or such other
factors as he may deem fit, specify by public notification
for the purpose of this part.

43
Composition of Municipalities 243R
(1) Save as provided in clause (2) all the seats in a Municipality
shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from the
territorial constituencies in the Municipal area and for this
purpose each Municipal area shall be divided into territorial
constituencies to be known as wards.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide—
(a) for the representation in a Municipality of—
(i) persons having special knowledge or experience in
Municipal administration;
(ii) the members of the House of the People and the
members of the Legislative Assembly of the State
representing constituencies which comprise wholly or
partly the Municipal area;
(iii) the members of the Council of States and the members
of the Legislative Council of the State registered as
electors within the Municipal area;
(iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted under
clause (5) of article 243S.
Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph
(i) shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of the
Municipality;
(b) the manner of election of the Chairperson of a Municipality .
Constitution and composition of Wards Committees, etc. 243S
(1) There shall be constituted Wards Committees, consisting of
one or more wards, within the territorial area of a
Municipality having a population of three lakhs or more.
(2) The legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with
respect to—
(a) the composition and the territorial area of a Wards
Committee;
(b) the manner in which the seats in a Wards Committee
shall be filled.

44
(3) A member of a Municipality representing a ward within
the territorial area of the Wards Committee shall be a
member of that Committee.
(4) Where a Wards Committee consists of—
(a) one ward, the member representing that ward in the
Municipality; or
(b) two or more wards, one of the members representing
such wards in the Municipality elected by the members
of the Wards Committee, shall be the Chairperson of
that Committee.
(5) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the
Legislature of a State from making any provision for the
constitution of Committees in addition to the Wards
Committees.
Reservation of seats 243T
(1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in every Municipality and the number of
seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same
proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct
election in that Municipality as the population of the
Scheduled Castes in the Municipal area or of the Scheduled
Tribes in the Municipal area bears to the total population of
that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to
different constituencies in a Municipality.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved
under clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to
the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled
Tribes.
(3) Not less than one third (including the number of seats
reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled
by direct election in every Municipality shall be reserved
for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to
different constituencies in Municipality.
(4) The offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall be
reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may,
by law, provide.

45
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the
reservation of offices of Chairpersons (other than the
reservation for women) under clause (4) shall cease to have
effect on the expiration of the period specified in article
334.
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State
from making any provision for reservation of seats in any
Municipality or offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities
in favour of backward class of citizens.
Duration of Municipalities, etc. 243U
(1) Every Municipality , unless sooner dissolved under any law
for the time being in force, shall continue for five years
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer.
Provided that a Municipality shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard before its dissolution.
(2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall
have the effect of causing dissolution of a Municipality at
any level, which is functioning immediately before such
amendment, till the expiration of its duration specified in
clause (1).
(3) An election to constitute a Municipality shall be completed—
(a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1);
(b) before the expiration of a period of six months from
the date of its dissolution.
Provided that where the remainder of the period for which
the dissolved Municipality would have continued is less
than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any
election under this clause for constituting the Municipality
for such period.
(4) A Municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a
Municipality before the expiration of its duration shall
continue only for the remainder of the period for which
the dissolved Municipality would have continued under
clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.

46
Disqualifications for membership 243V
(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for
being, a member of a Municipality—
(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the
time being in force for the purposes of elections to the
Legislature of the State concerned:
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the
ground that he is less than twenty-five years of age, if
he has attained the age of twenty-one years;
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by
the Legislature of the State.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a
Municipality has become subject to any of the
disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the question shall
be referred for the decision of such authority and in such
manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
Finance Commission 243Y
(1) The Finance Commission constituted under article 243-I shall
also review the financial position of the Municipalities and
make recommendations to the Governor as to—
(a) the principles which should govern—
(i) the distribution between the State and the
Municipalities of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties,
tolls and fees leviable by the State, which may be
divided between them under this Part and the
allocation between the Municipalities at all levels of
their respective shares of such proceeds;
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties tolls and fees
which may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the
Municipalities;
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the
Consolidated Fund of the State;
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of
the Municipalities;
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by
the Governor in the interests of sound finance of the
Municipalities.

47
(2) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by
the Commission under this article together with an
explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to
be laid before the Legislature of the State.
Elections to the Municipalities 243ZA
(1) The superintendence, direction and control of the
preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all
elections to the Municipalities shall be vested in the State
Election Commission referred to in article 243K.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature
of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to all
matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the
Municipalities.
Application to Union Territories 243ZB
The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union territories
and shall, in their application to a Union territory, have effect as if
the references to the Governor of a State were references to the
Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article 239 and
references to the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a State
were references in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative
Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly .
Provided that the President may , by public notification, direct that
the provisions of this Part shall apply to any Union territory or part
thereof subject to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify
in the notification.
Part not to apply to certain areas 243ZC
(1) Nothing in this Part shall apply to the Scheduled Areas
referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in
clause (2), of article 244.
(2) Nothing in this Part shall be construed to affect the functions
and powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council
constituted under any law for the time being in force for
the hill areas of the district of Darjeeling in the State of
West Bengal.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution Parliament
may by law extend the provisions of this Part to the
Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (1)

48
subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be
specified in such law, and no such law shall be deemed to
be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of
article 368.
Committee for district planning 243ZD
(1) There shall be constituted in every State at the district level
a District Planning Committee to consolidate the plans
prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the
district and to prepare a draft development plan for the
district as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law, make provision with
respect to—
(a) the composition of the District Planning Committees;
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees
shall be filled;
Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total
number of members of such Committee shall be elected
by and from amongst the elected members of the
Panchayat at the district level and of the Municipalities
in the district in proportion to the ratio between the
population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in
the district;
(c) the functions relating to district planning which may
be assigned to such Committees;
(d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such
Committees shall be chosen.
(3) Every District Planning Committee shall, in preparing the
draft development plan,
(a) have regard to—
(i) matters of common interest between the Panchayats
and the Municipalities including spatial planning,
sharing of water and other physical and natural
resources, the integrated development of infrastructure
and environmental conservation;
(ii) the extent and type of available resources whether
financial or otherwise;

49
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the
Governor may, by order, specify.
(4) The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall
forward the development plan, as recommended by such
Committee, to the Government of the State.
Committee for Metropolitan Planning 243ZE
(1) There shall be constituted in every Metropolitan area a
Metropolitan Planning Committee to prepare a draft
development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law, make provision with
respect to—
(a) the composition of the Metropolitan Planning
Committees;
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees
shall be filled;
Provided that not less than two-thirds of the members
of such Committee shall be elected by and from
amongst the elected members of the Municipalities and
Chairpersons of the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area
in proportion to the ratio between the population of
the Municipalities and of the Panchayats in that area;
(c) the representation in such Committees of the
Government of India and the Government of the State
and of such organisations and Institutions as may be
deemed necessary for carrying out the functions
assigned to such Committees;
(d) the functions relating to planning and coordination for
the Metropolitan area which may be assigned to such
Committees;
(e) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such
Committees shall be chosen.
(3) Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall in preparing
the draft development plan—
(a) have regard to—
(i) the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the
Panchayats in the Metropolitan area;

50
(ii) matters of common interest between the Municipalities
and the Panchayats, including coordinated spatial
planning of the area, sharing of water and other
physical and natural resources, the integrated
development of infrastructure and environmental
conservation.
(iii) the overall objectives and priorities set by the
Government of India and the Government of the State;
(iv) the extent and nature of investments likely to be made
in the Metropolitan area by agencies of the Government
of India and of the Government of the State and other
available resources whether financial or otherwise;
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the
Governor may be order, specify.
(4) The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee
shall forward the development plan, as recommended by
such Committee, to the Government of the State.
Continuance of existing laws and Municipalities 243ZF
Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any law
relating to Municipalities in force in a State immediately before the
commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act,
1992 which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall
continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent
Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration of
one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier:
Provided that all the Municipalities existing immediately before
such commencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration,
unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the
Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having a
Legislative Council by each House of the Legislature of that State.
Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters 243ZG
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution:
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of
constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies,
made or purporting to be made under article 243ZA shall
not be called in question in any court;

51
(b) no election to any Municipality shall be called in question
except by an election petition presented to such authority
and in such manner as is provided for by or under any
law made by the Legislature of a State.

ANNEXURE VII
STATEMENT SHOWING STATE-WISE DETAILS OF PROVISION
FOR CREATION OF DATA BASE AND UTILIZATION THEREOF
AS REPORTED BY STATE GOVTS.
(Rs. in lakhs)
ULBs creation of data base
Sl.No. Name of State Allocation by Utilisation
Eleventh Finance Reported
Commission
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 9.25 IA
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0.00 IA
3. Assam 6.30 IA
4. Bihar 9.81 IA
5. Chhattisgarh 5.91 IA
6. Goa 1.12 IA
7. Gujarat 11.89 IA
8. Haryana 6.54 IA
9. Himachal Pradesh 3.83 IA
10. Jammu & Kashmir 5.50 IA
11. Jharkhand 3.75 IA
12. Karnataka 17.15 IA
13. Kerala 4.63 1625.11
14. Madhya Pradesh 26.32 IA
15. Maharashtra 19.46 IA
16. Manipur 2.23 IA
64

65
17. Meghalaya 0.48 IA
18. Mizoram 0.48 0.16
19. Nagaland 0.72 IA
20. Orissa 8.14 7.20
21. Punjab 10.93 IA
22. Rajasthan 14.60 IA
23. Sikkim 0.00 IA
24. Tamil Nadu 59.35 23.74
25. Tripura 1.04 IA
26. Uttar Pradesh 49.41 IA
27. Uttaranchal 5.15 IA
28. West Bengal 9.73 IA
Total 293.72
IA: Information awaited
Note: In Tamil Nadu above mentioned amount has been kept reserve for want of
finalisation of account format and software for data base.
(Source: Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure).
12 3 4

ANNEXURE IX
DISTRICT PLANNING COMMITTEE
Name of the Whether If not, the status
State DPC set up
12 3
Andhra Pradesh Yes —
Arunachal Pradesh Yes —
Assam — Constitution of DPC is under
progress.
Bihar Yes —
Chhattisgarh Yes —
Goa Yes —
Gujarat Yes —
Haryana Yes —
Himachal Pradesh Yes —
J&K — There is no provision for
constitution of DPCs in the
State. District Development
Boards in each District under
single line administration has
been under operation since
1976.
Jharkhand — The State Govt. has informed
DPCs have not been set up
because elections of ULBs and
Panchayats have not been
held. As soon as elections are
completed, DPCs will be
formed.
Karnataka Yes —
Kerala Yes —
99

100
Madhya Pradesh Yes —
Maharashtra Yes —
Manipur Yes —
Meghalaya — DPCs have not been set up
in the State due to no ULBs.
Mizoram Yes The State Govt. have
informed that District
Planning Board has been
constituted for one District i.e.
Lunglei on a pilot basis.
Nagaland — No municipality has been
constituted so far. So, District
Planning & Development
Boards have also to function
as DPC in the State. After
the constitution of the
municipalities, the Planning
Boards will be re-constituted.
Orissa Yes —
Punjab — Action initiated to constitute
DPCs.
Rajasthan Yes —
Sikkim Yes —
Tamil Nadu Yes —
Tripura — State Govt. have informed
that a Bill for DPCs is
pending in the State
Legislative Assembly.
Uttaranchal Yes —
Uttar Pradesh — DPC not constituted.
West Bengal Yes —
A&N Islands Yes —
12 3

101
Chandigarh — Chandigarh Admn. has
informed that they are
considering to set up DPC.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli Yes —
Daman & Diu Yes —
GNCT of Delhi Exempted —
Pondicherry — Not set up. The UT Govt. has
informed that Pondicherry
District Planning Committee
Act, 1994 has already been
enacted. It is yet to be
constituted as the elections
have not been held.
Lakshadweep Yes —
DPCs set up — 24 States/UTs
Under Consideration/not set up — 5 States/UTs
Not set up due to non-election of ULBs — 2 (Jharkhand &
Pondicherry)
Not set up due to no ULBs — 1 (Meghalaya)
Exempted — 2 (J&K and Delhi)
District Planning Board working as DPC — 1 (Nagaland)
12 3

ANNEXURE X
COMMITTEE ON URBAN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2002)
(Sub-Committee II to examine the subject ‘Implementation
of Part IXA of the Constitution)
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE II
OF THE COMMITTEE ON URBAN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
The sub-Committee met on Thursday, the 6 th June, 2002 from
1515 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete —  Chairman
Prof. (Shrimati) A.K. Premajam — Alternate Convenor
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
3. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
4. Shri G. Putta Swamy Gowda
5. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
6. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
Rajya Sabha
7. Shrimati Shabana Azmi
8. Shrimati Prema Cariappa
9. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
10. Shri Man Mohan Samal
11. Shrimati Maya Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.C. Rastogi — Joint Secretary
3. Shri K. Chakraborty — Deputy Secretary
4. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Under Secretary
5. Shri N.S. Hooda — Assistant Director
102

103
2. At the outeset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the
first sitting of the sub-Committee. He thereafter welcomed
Shrimati Prema Cariappa and Shrimati Maya Singh, M.Ps. from
Rajya Sabha who have recently been nominated to this Committee.
The Chairman then informed the members that the subject
‘Implementation of Part IX A of the Constitution’ was examined by
the sub-Committee of the Committee during 2001. The said sub-
Committee invited memoranda from various experts in the field,
besides they also conducted a study visit to Hyderabad on 17th and
18th November, 2001 and held informal discussions with the
representatives of State Governments and Panchayati Raj Institutions
of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. They also
heard the views of some of the experts from Delhi and Dehradun on
3rd December, 2001 at New Delhi. However, before the sub-Committee
could finalise their next course of action, the term of the Committee
expired on 31st December, 2001. He also apprised the sub-Committee
that the next course for examination of the subject was to take oral
evidence of the representatives of concerned Ministry/Department.
He requested the members to give their valuable suggestions on the
said subject.
3. The sub-Committee thereafter decided that the next sitting to
take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation on the said subject might be
held during the next session of Parliament which is likely to commence
sometime in the middle of July, 2002.
The sub-Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE XI
COMMITTEE ON URBAN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2003)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2003
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1700 hours in Committee
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Chandrakant Khaire — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
3. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar
4. Shri Padmanava Behera
5. Shri Shriram Chauhan
6. Shri Shamsher Singh Dullo
7. Shrimati Hema Gamang
8. Shri G. Putta Swamy Gowda
9. Shri Jaiprakash
10. Shri Savshibhai Makwana
11. Shri Mahendra Singh Pal
12. Prof. (Shrimati) A.K. Premajam
13. Shri Maheshwar Singh
14. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
15. Shri Pradeep Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shrimati Prema Cariappa
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri N.R. Dasari
19. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap
20. Shrimati Gurcharan Kaur
21. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
104

105
22. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
23. Shri Harish Rawat
24. Shri Man Mohan Samal
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Sapra — Joint Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director
Expert
Shri K.C. Sivaramakrishnan, IAS, Former Secretary to
Government of India & Visiting Professor, Centre for Policy
Research
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee and apprised them briefly about the work
done by the earlier Committee and the Sub-Committee regarding the
examination of the subject, ‘Implementation of Part IXA of the
Constitution’.
3. Thereafter, the expert was called in to present his views on the
subject, ‘Implementation of Part IXA of the Constitution’. Before he
was asked to present his views on the said subject, the Chairman
welcomed him to the sitting of the Committee and drew his attention
to the provision of direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker.
4. The expert then presented his views on the various issued
related to the subject, ‘Implementation of Part IXA of the Constitution.
The members raised clarificatory queries on the said subject. Most of
them were answered by the expert. For others, the expert was
requested to send replies/information to the Secretariat within a week.
5. The Committee thereafter decided to take the oral evidence of
the representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty
Alleviation (Department of Urban Development) on the subject
‘Implementation of Part IXA of the Constitution’ on 4 and 5 December
2003.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE XII
COMMITTEE ON URBAN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2003)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY, 4 DECEMBER 2003
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1615 hours in Committee
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Chandrakant Khaire — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
3. Shri Ranen Barman
4. Shri Padmanava Behera
5. Shri Haribhai Chaudhary
6. Shrimati Hema Gamang
7. Shri Hassan Khan
8. Shri Mahendra Singh Pal
9. Shri Chandresh Patel
10. Prof. (Shrimati) A.K. Premajam
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri S. Agniraj
12. Shrimati Prema Cariappa
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Shrimati Gurcharan Kaur
15. Shri Man Mohan Samal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Sapra — Joint Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director
106

107
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development and
Poverty Alleviation (Department of Urban Development)
1. Shri N.N. Khanna — Secretary
2. Shri M. Rajamani — Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee and apprised them briefly about the work
done by the Committee on the subject, ‘Implementation of Part IXA
of the Constitution’.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation (Department of Urban
Development) were called in. The Chairman welcomed the
representatives of the Ministry to the sitting and drew their attention
to the direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’.
4. The Committee then took the oral evidence of the representatives
of the aforesaid Ministry/Department on the subject ‘Implementation
of Part IXA of the Constitution’. The members raised clarificatory
queries on various aspects of the said subject. Most of them could
not be answered satisfactorily by the representatives of the Ministry
as the requisite information was not readily available with them.
Moreover, the Committee found that the replies given by the
representatives in response to questionnaire sent by the Secretariat as
well as during the course of oral evidence, were evasive in nature.
The Committee took strong exception to such casual deposition by
the Secretary of the Ministry before the Parliamentary Committee. In
view of this, the Committee directed the Ministry to furnish
comprehensive written replies to queries raised by the members of
the Committee during evidence within two weeks’ time. They also
desired that legal opinion, if deemed necessary, on some of the points
be obtained. The Committee also directed that the Ministry should
carefully study the recommendations of the Committee contained in
their 37th Report on ‘Implementation of Part IX of the Constitution’,
presented to the House on 20 November, 2002 and forward their
considered views, as the substance of the Part IX and Part IXA was
more or less similar. Such an approach would also enable the
Committee to prepare a Comprehensive Report based on facts and
logical conclusions.
5. In view of above, the Committee decided to cancel the sitting
of the Committee scheduled to be held on 5 December, 2003, to take
further oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation (Department of Urban
Development) on the above subject.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE XIII
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT  (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON MONDAY, THE 4TH OCTOBER 2004
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Amitava Nandy
4. Shri D. Vittal Rao
5. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
6. Shri Sugrib Singh
7. Shri K. Subbarayan
8. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
9. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
11. Shri Jayantilal Barot
12. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Shri Faqir Chand Mullana
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
3. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
108

109
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of
draft Report on the subject ‘Implementation of Part IXA of the
Constitution’. The Chairman, thereafter briefed the members about
the work done by the earlier Committees regarding examination of
the above subject. The Chairman then pointed out that the Committee
on Urban Development (2004-2005) has taken up this unfinished work
of the earlier Committee (2003-2004) and a draft Report on the above
subject has been prepared by the Secretariat based on the findings of
the earlier Committee and latest information received from the Ministry
of Urban Development.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report
on ‘Implementation of Part IXA of the Constitution’. The consideration
of the draft Report remained inconclusive. The Committee, therefore,
decided to hold their next sitting on 25th October 2004, to further
consider and adopt the draft Report on the above subject.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE XIV
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON MONDA Y, THE 25 TH OCTOBER, 2004
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Room No. 139,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Mohd. Salim — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
3. Shri Surendra Prakash Goyal
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
6. Shri Devidas Anandrao Pingale
7. Shri D. Vittal Rao
8. Shri Sudhangshu Seal
9. Shri Sugrib Singh
10. Shri K. Subbarayan
11. Shri Suresh Ganpat Wagmare
12. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
14. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
15. Shri Urkhao Gwra Brahma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Chakraborty — Director
2. Smt. Neera Singh — Under Secretary
110

111
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to
the sitting of the Committee convened to further consider and adopt
the draft report on the subject ‘Implementation of Part IXA of the
Constitution.’
3. The Committee then resumed the consideration of the draft
report. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft report
with slight modifications.
4. The Committee then authorized the Hon’ble Chairman to finalise
the report on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Ministry and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE XV
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Sl.No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations
12 3
1. 2.21 The Committee definitely regard the
Constitutional (74th Amendment) Act,
1992 as a path-breaking piece of
legislation by which Constitution of
India had been amended to incorporate
a separate Chapter on Urban Local
Bodies (ULB) by emphasising the
deserved significance of local self-
governance in line with the democratic
set-up of the country. The 74th CAA
has redefined the role, power function
and finances of ‘Municipalities’ or ULBs
across the country . The Committee,
therefore, are of the firm view that with
the complete and proper
implementation of the provisions under
article 243P to 243ZG of Part IXA of
the Constitution, better control and
effective working of the ULBs in
passing on the economic benefits and
suitable urban infrastructure to the
people at large, would be achieved. The
Committee also recommend that
innovative and good governance
methods be adopted by ULBs with
proper information and training inputs,
data base, as required, for improving
the living conditions and quality of life
of urban residents in the country.
2. 2.22 The Committee note that the 74th CAA
aims at a Constitutional guarantee to
112

113
12 3
safeguard the interest of Urban Local
Bodies (ULBs) to enable them to
function as effective, democratic and
self-governing institutions at grass root
level. The Committee strongly
emphasize the suitable steps be taken
to ensure the followings:—
— regularity in elections under the
supervision of the State Election
Commission;
— a clear tenure of five years for the
elected body;
— protection for the elected body
against arbitrary dissolution;
— constitution of Ward Committees
for greater proximity to the
citizens;
— mandate to State Legislature to
endow the ULBs with such powers
and authority as may be necessary
to enable them to function as
institution of self-Government;
— the functions enumerated in
Twelfth Schedule are effectively
transferred to the ULBs;
— the constitution of State Finance
Commission (SFCs) to review
municipal finances and make
recommendations regarding
distribution of the proceeds of
State-level taxes between the State
Governments and the ULBs, criteria
for grants-in-aid, measures needed
to improve the financial position of
the ULBs and compliance of the
recommendations of the State
Finance Commissions; and

114
— urgent formation of District
Planning Committees (DPCs) and
Metropolitan Planing Committees
(MPCs) for integrated as well as
coordinated planning for urban and
rural areas.
3. 2.23 The Committee also find that all States
except Jharkhand and Union Territory
of Pondicherry conducted initial
elections to Municipal bodies. Also
ULBs, do not exist in Arunachal
Pradesh, Mizoram, Sikkim,
Lakshadweep and Dadra & Nagar
Haveli. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Union Government
hold municipal elections in the Union
Territory of Pondicherry at the earliest.
The Committee further urge Arunachal
Pradesh, Mizoram, Sikkim,
Lakshadweep and Dadra & Nagar
Haveli for early setting up of ULBs so
that the system of self-governing
institutions at grassroots level could be
established without any delay and the
development Schemes/Programmes are
implemented effectively.
4. 2.24 The Committee note that the
responsibility of implementation of all
matters relating to Municipalities has
been entrusted to the Ministry of Urban
Development and the Ministry has been
in constant touch with the State
Governments in the task of
implementation of Part IXA of the
Constitution. Also Meetings/
Conferences with Ministers/Secretaries-
in-Charge of local self-Government to
States/UTs and elected representatives
12 3

115
of Urban Local Bodies have been held
from time to time to impress upon
them the need for proper
implementation of Part IXA. While the
Committee are quite convinced that
coordinative efforts are being made by
the Ministry of Urban Development for
the implementation of Part IXA of the
Constitution, the Committee feel that
the mandatory as well as
recommendatory provisions of Part IXA
of the Constitution are not being
properly implemented by the respective
State Governments/UTs. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that
Union Government should make a
comprehensive study of the existing
situation and ensure that mandatory as
well as recommendatory provisions of
Part IXA are followed by the State
Governments/UTs in letter and spirit.
Since UTs are under its direct
administrative control, an example in
local self governance to be followed by
others can be set up in UTs by the
Government of India.
5. 2.25 The Committee are informed that a
‘Task Force’ consisting of representatives
of States and the Ministry of Urban
Development has been constituted to
look into devolution of function into
specific operational and activity related
responsibilities of ULBs and suggest
administrative and managerial measures
to bring into operation the
administrative decentralization and
rationalization of delivery mechanism
and implementation of urban
development programmes by
municipalities/ULBs. In this regard, the
Committee recommend that a high level
12 3

116
body, or ‘Review Committee’ at the
Central level may be constituted so as
to review the proper and timely
implementation of the norms and
conditions laid down in Part IXA and
the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution
relating to ULBs.
6. 3.8 The Committee note that the
Constitutional (74th Amendment) Act
seeks to devolve functional and
financial powers to ULBs. Article 243W
requires the State Legislatures to make
law to endow the municipalities with
such powers and authority, as may be
necessary to enable them to function
as institutions of self-governance,
particularly, with respect to preparation
of plans for economic development and
social justice, and perform functions
and implement all schemes as are
entrusted to them including matters
listed in the Twelfth Schedule of the
Constitution. Similarly, as per Article
243X, it has been left to the Legislature
of the State to specify by law the
matters relating to imposition of taxes.
The Committee would like to
emphasize that measures must be taken
by the Union Government so as to
ensure that the stipulated functions,
powers and finances actually devolve
on the ULBs. The Committee find that
any mismatch between functions and
finances of the ULBs may slacken the
growth of ULBs and optimum
utilization of the available resources and
infrastructure for the various urban
developmental schemes. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that
12 3

117
the Ministry of Urban Development
should draw upon the suggestions of
the expert bodies like National Institute
of Urban Affairs by Maintaining proper
data base and utilization of the state-
of-the-art technologies. The Committee
also recommend that Community Based
Information System formulated by
National Institution of Urban Affairs be
made available to the municipalities etc.
for better resource management and
planning.
7. 3.9 Regarding, the formulation of
development plans, the Committee note
that a three tier planning structure
comprising of Municipal level/District
level, Metropolitan level and State level
is envisaged in 74th CAA. Under this
framework, the Municipalities would
prepare plans for their area which
would be consolidated at the District
level in the form of a District
Development Plan. These District
Development Plans would lead to
formulation of the State level plans. In
this regard, the Committee desire that
comprehensive and coordinative efforts
be made by the Central Government
to impress upon the States and required
UTs to formulate their development
plans in time.
8. 3.10 The Committee also note that the State
Governments specify the taxes that the
Municipalities could levy and collect
which are largely taken from the State
List in the 7th Schedule of the
Constitution of India. Since no
distinctive tax domain has been
12 3

118
specified for the Municipalities, the
State Municipal Laws are non-uniform
in respect of municipal taxes. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Union Government should
emphasize on the States/UTs for clear-
cut-tax domain for municipalities in all
the State Governments/UTs so as to
ensure more methodical and proper
fiscal management by Municipal bodies.
9. 3.11 The Committee note that the Ministry
had invited proposals from the Regional
Centres for Urban and Environmental
Studies (RCUES) to conduct detailed
study on devolution of funds, functions
and deployment of functionaries to
municipalities. A ‘Task Force’ consisting
of representatives of States and the
Ministry has been constituted to look
into the devolution of functions into
specific operational and activity related
responsibilities of ULBs and suggest
administrative and managerial
measures. The Committee would like
that an in depth study is made on the
suggestions/recommendations of
RCUES by a High level Governmental
Committee or a Review Committee, and
suitable procedural amendments/
modifications, if required, be advised to
the State Governments for effective
functioning of the ULBs and ensure
good governance and adequate financial
resources for the Municipalities.
10. 3.12 The Committee are perturbed to note
that with the presence of various other
governmental and on-governmental
bodies there is considerable
encroachment upon the functional
domain of the ‘Municipalities’. The
Committee also note that such bodies
are not accountable to ‘Municipalities’,
although such agencies deal with even
basic municipal functions like water
supply, sewerage and capital works etc.
12 3

119
The Committee have been informed by
an expert that in certain cases, the
capital works are executed by a
Specialised Agency and their loan
liability is passed on to the
Municipalities. The Committee cannot
approve of this kind of practice. The
Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the functional domain
of the ‘Municipalities’ must be exclusive
and clearly demarcated to check any
kind of encroachment and confusion. If
due to special and technical reasons
other bodies are required, the
Committee recommend that such bodies
should be made accountable and
answerable to the Municipalities.
11. 3.19 The Committee express their deep
anguish to note that most of the
Municipalities etc., which are statutorily
responsible for provisioning and
maintenance of basic infrastructure and
services in cities and towns are under
fiscal stress. They are given to
understand that many of the
municipalities have not been able to
carry out their assigned civic functions
and pay salaries and wages to their
employees, although, the financial
conditions of bigger municipal
corporations has not been as bad as of
smaller municipalities. The Committee
recommend that the Ministry of Urban
Development should coordinate and
persuade the concerned State
Governments/UTs to take the necessary
corrective measures on their party by
adopting suitable taxation methods,
accounting standards etc. to enable the
municipalities to generate their own
funds. The Committee desire that the
Ministry of Urban Development should
persuade the State Governments to link
their development plans with resources
mobilization plans and credit
enhancement mechanisms keeping in
12 3

120
view the long-term perspective and
aims of the institutions of urban local
self government. The Committee
recommend that cost recovery
procedures and revenue collection
methods of such bodies should be
strengthened in a scientific and prudent
manner. As regards the action taken on
the suggestions of the ‘Task Force’ as
constituted by the Ministry, the
Committee would like to be apprised
about the latest position in the matter.
12. 3.20 The Committee note that the Eleventh
Finance Commission (EFC) has
suggested for developing a data base
on the finances of the Panchayats and
Municipalities at the District, State and
Central Government level. It has further
suggested that Director, Local Fund
Audit or the authority prescribed for
conducting the audit of accounts of the
local bodies may be assigned
responsibility for this task. The Chief
Secretary of the State may do the State
level coordination and monitoring and
the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India do the same at the Central
level. The Committee are of the firm
view that this would ensure greater
accountability in matters relating to
municipal management and
transparency in their functioning. The
Committee recommend that proper and
timely follow-up action should taken up
by the Ministry of Urban Development
for updating and maintenance of the
‘Data Base’ of the finances of the
Municipalities as the planning exercise
needs continuous ‘Data Base’ analysis.
The Committee also recommend that a
computer generated data base and
information system be developed at
various levels which would provide
support to planners in development
planning.
12 3

121
13. 3.21 The Committee note that the Tenth
Finance Commission recommended for
a provision of Rs. 1000 crore to enable
ULBs to meet their primary obligations.
It also desired that Local Bodies should
provide suitable matching contribution
by raising resources. The Committee
further note that the Eleventh Finance
Commission had emphasized the need
for meeting the revenue mobilizations
by the local bodies themselves. It
suggested for suitable reforms in
property/house tax system and the
need for replacing octroi/entry tax with
a suitable tax and also revising the rate
structure of user charges on a regular
basis. The Eleventh Finance
Commission has recommended for
devolution of Rs. 2000 crore to ULBs
for 5 years period from 2000 to 2005.
While the Committee are happy to note
that financial provision by way of
devolution of Rs. 2000 crore to ULBs
has been made by Eleventh Finance
Commission, but the Municipalities/
ULBs are still unable to perform well
due to lack of funds. The Committee
desire to know why the resource crunch
still exists inspite of the
recommendation of devolution of a
considerable amount by the Eleventh
Finance Commission. The Committee
recommend that the Union Government
should impress upon the State
Governments to bring up proper
reforms of Municipal taxes, including
property tax system so that ULBs could
generate sufficient resources to finance
the maintenance of civic services. The
Committee also recommend that
loopholes in collection of municipal
taxes, leakage/diversion of funds etc.
are plugged and action is taken against
any misuse of funds.
14. 3.22 The Committee note with optimism the
various reform initiatives taken by the
12 3

122
Union Government to strengthen the
capacity of ULBs to perform their
assigned functions in an effective
manner. The Committee should be kept
informed about the achievements made
out of the reform agenda and the steps
taken by the States in streamlining the
functioning of ULBs in pursuance
thereof.
15. 3.31 The Committee note that the State
Finance Commissions are required to be
set up under Article 243-I of the
Constitution. There was delay in
Constitution of First SFC in Goa,
Pondicherry and Jharkhand and Second
SFC is yet to be constituted in
Pondicherry. Keeping in view the gist
of recommendations of the various
SFCs and the action taken thereon as
Annexed ( Annexure VIII ) to the Report,
the Committee observe that most of the
recommendations made by the various
State Finance Commissions have been
accepted by the respective State
Governments. The Committee desire
that the State Governments should take
expeditious measures to ensure that all
recommendations of the respective State
Finance Commissions are implemented
through relevant administrative,
legislative and financial measures
within a given time frame. The
Committee also recommend that the
Union Government should pursue with
the respective State Governments/UTs
which are lagging behind in the setting
up of the SFCs within the prescribed
time limit and give their
recommendations/observations to the
Governor of the State so as to facilitate
better fiscal management by the ULBs.
Since the administration of UTs is
directly under the Union Government
an example could be set up in regard
to the role of the State Finance
Commission by accepting its
12 3

123
12 3
recommendations regarding the
concerned UTs.
16. 3.32 The Committee note Article 243Y
accords the primary responsibility to
oversee the financial position of the
Municipalities to State Finance
Commission with a view to make
recommendations to the Governor of
the State relating to the principles
which should govern (i) the distribution
between the State and the
Municipalities of the net proceeds of the
taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by
the State, which may be divided
between them and the allocation
between the Municipalities at all levels
of their respective shares of such
proceeds; (ii) the determination of the
taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may
be assigned to, or appropriated by, the
Municipalities; and the grants-in-aid to
the Municipalities from the
Consolidated Fund of the State. The
SFCs then given their suggestions and
the measures need to improve the
financial position of the Municipalities
and report to the Governor of the State.
In this regard, the Committee
recommend that appropriate steps
should be taken up by the Union
Government to impress upon the State
Governments to implement all
recommendations of the respective State
Finance Commission within a given
time frame and in the case of Union
Territories, Government of India should
take necessary steps in this regard.
17. 3.36 The Committee note that the Eleventh
Finance Commission have made certain
suggestions for proper upkeep of
accounts of municipalities and their
audit. The Committee desire that State
Government should be persuaded to
bring needed reforms in the existing
Municipal Accounting System of Urban

124
12 3
Local Bodies as suggested by the
Eleventh Finance Commission. The
Committee further desire that Municipal
accounting system should be
overhauled and made transparent with
a view to ensure acceptance by lending
agencies and financial market so that
ULBs could have proper access to debt
funds to finance and maintain the civic
amenities which are suffering due to
lack of funds.
18. 4.8 The Committee note that almost a
decade has elapsed since the enactment
of the Constitution (74th Amendment)
Act w.e.f. 01.06.1993, however, a number
of States are yet to constitute District
Planning Committees although this is
a mandatory provision under article
243ZD of the Constitution. In the
circumstance, the Committee are
distressed over the fact that the
constitutional obligation to constitute
the DPCs in the defaulting States has
not been fulfilled. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the
Central Government should urge such
States, where DPC has not yet been
constituted yet, to form their respective
DPCs within a specified time frame. If
necessary, suitable provisions in this
regard should be incorporated in the
Constitution by bringing up the
required amendment to the
Constitution. The Committee would like
to be apprised about the position in this
regard. In case of UTs, the Government
of India should ensure immediate
constitution of DPCs in all UTs.
19. 4.9 The Committee note that in order to
assist the State Governments to
implement the provision of constitution
of DPCs, the Ministry has drafted the
guidelines and issued the same to all
State Governments. These guidelines
prescribe for composition and function

125
12 3
of District Planning Committees,
integration of the plans prepared by the
Panchayats and Municipalities at the
District level. The Committee desire that
the Union Government should persuade
the State Government to scrupulously
implement the guidelines. The
Committee also desire that Government
should also provide for association and
involvement of the NGOs, professionals,
experts in the DPCs. The Committee
further urge the Union Government to
make adequate provisions by amending
Article 233ZD to secure the
participation of MPs and MLAs in
DPCs.
20. 4.10 The Committee are informed that in
some of the States, DPCs are being
chaired by Ministers in the State
Governments. The Committee fear that
this may not be in consonance with the
true aim and spirit of the
decentralization of responsibilities under
the Constitution of India.
21. 4.11 The Committee note that article
243ZD(3) stipulates that every District
Planning Committee (DPC) shall draft
development plans and also one of the
main functions of the District Planning
Committee is in regard to formulation
of the District Development Plans and
allocation of resources to local bodies
for implementation of the local level
projects in urban areas. The Committee
have been given to understand that
under the framework of the
Constitution, the District Development
Plans, Metropolitan Plans would lead
to formulation of the State Plans. The
Committee are distressed to find that
in the absence of the DPC in certain
States, the Planning Process would lose
the intending meaning behind it. The
Committee recommend that concerted
and earnest action should be initiated

126
12 3
by the Union Government to urge upon
the States/UTs to formulate District
development plans so as to benefit the
people at large.
22. 4.12 The Committee note that as per article
243ZD (3), draft development plans of
DPC should take into consideration,
(i) the matters of common interest
between the Panchayats and the
Municipalities including spatial
planning, sharing of water and other,
physical and natural resources, the
integrated development of infrastructure
and environmental conservation, (ii) the
extent and type of available resources
whether financial or otherwise; and
(iii) consult such institution and
organisation as the Governor may, by
order, specify. Keeping in view the main
aims and objectives of this said proviso
of Part IXA of Constitution, the
Committee desire that the planning
process be completed with a positive
perspective and by taking into account
of the following:
(i) each level of Plan must include
measures for infrastructure
development and environment
conservation;
(ii) these development Plans must be
flexible to provide for the ever-
growing and ever-expanding city
boundaries and provide quality life
to its inhabitants;
(iii) people’s participation in
formulation of perspective plans be
ensured through the elected
bodies;
(iv) given the paucity of resources,
proper measures are taken to
utilize strategic methods in
selected urban areas as ‘Core’
development plans; and

127
12 3
(v) cost recovery methods of ULBs are
strengthened. The Committee
would like to be apprised about
the steps taken in the matter.
23. 5.3 The Committee note that there are
35 urban agglomerations with
population of more than one million in
the country and for these areas, the
Metropolitan Planning Committee
(MPC) is a constitutional requirement
under article 243ZE of the Constitution.
The Committee are dismayed to note
that only State Government of
Maharashtra have made an Act for
constitution of MPCs for Mumbai, Pune
and Nagpur till date but other States
are lagging behind. The Committee take
serious note of it and feel that this
amounts to serious infringement of
mandatory constitutional provisions.
The Committee urge upon the Union
Government to ensure that in all
remaining Urban agglomerations with
population of more than one million
MPCs are constituted within a
stipulated time period. The Committee
further urge the Union Government to
make adequate provisions by amending
Article 243ZE to secure the participation
of MPs and MLAs in MPCs.
24. 5.4 The Committee note that one of the
main aims of the MPC is to formulate
the Metropolitan Development Plans
and to help the planning process so as
to provide the various urban services
to the urban population. The
Committee are, however, perturbed to
find that the due cognizance has  not
been given to the planning aspect of
the ULBs/Municipalities in most of the
States/UTs in the country. The
Committee recommend that proper
attention must be given towards the

128
12 3
formulation of development plans at
district, metropolitan and State levels so
as to ensure local self-governance be an
effective instrument of economic and
infrastructural growth in the urban
areas.
25. 6.2 The Committee note that to supplement
the efforts of the State Government and
to provide needed training facilities to
elected members of municipalities, the
Ministry provides financial assistance to
certain training institutions. The
Ministry has initiated a plan to train
women elected councillors of all
municipalities and the Ministry will
provide 50 per cent of the total
expenditure on training of elected
women councillors. The Committee are
of the firm view that potentiality of all
the elected members of the
Municipalities could be enhanced by
giving proper training. The Committee,
therefore, desire that concerted efforts
are made to provide for training by
utilization of latest training methods
and computerization network for
capacity building of all the elected
members of municipalities.
26. 7.4 The Committee note that article 243T(3)
of the Constitution recognized the role
of women in local self-governance and
the functioning of the Municipalities.
In this regard, the Committee are of
the firm view that the women
participation in ‘Municipalities’ being
a mandatory provision under the
Constitution, the Union Government
should issue guidelines to encourage
and promote effective participation of
women in the deliberations and
decision making process of
municipalities.

52
ANNEXURE II
DEVOLUTION OF FUNCTIONS TO THE MUNICIPALITIES AS PER
TWELFTH SCHEDULE OF THE CONSTITUTION
Major States Orders issued by the Functions to be performed as per twelfth schedule
State for Devolution
of Functions Functional Code
1 2 3 4 56 78 91 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 41 5 1 6 1 71 8
Andhra Pradesh — √√√√√√ — √√√√√√√√√√√
Assam NA √√√√√ — √√ — √√ — √ —————
Bihar — √√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√
Gujarat √√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√
Himachal Pradesh √√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√
Madhya Pradesh NA — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —
Maharashtra √ —— √ ———— √ — √√ ———————
Orissa — — — — √ —— √ ———— √√√√√√√
Punjab — √ — √√√√√√√√√√√√√√√√
Rajasthan √√ ————— √√√√√√√√√√√√
Tamil Nadu — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — √√√
West Bengal √√ —— √√√√ —— √ — √ ——— √√√
Note: ( √) Yes: (—) No; (NA)—Not available.
(Source: National Institute of Urban Affairs, 1998)

53
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46
Andhra Pradesh —————————— — — ————————————————
Assam —————————— — — ————————————————
Bihar —————————— — — ————————————————
Gujarat —————————— — — — — — √√√ ——————————
Himchal Pradesh —————————— — — ————————————————
Madhya Pradesh —————————— — — ——————— √ ————————
Maharashtra —————————— — — ————————————————
Orisa —————————— — — ———————— √ ———————
Punjab —————————— — — ————————— √ ——————
Rajasthan —————————— — — ————————————————
Tamil Nadu —————————— — — ————————————————
West Bengal —————————— — — —————————————— √√
Note: ( √) Yes: (—) No; (NA)—Not available.
(Source: National Institute of Urban Affairs, 1998)

54
FUNCTIONAL CODES
Functions as per Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution (74th) Amendment Act
1. Urban Planning including town planning.
2. Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings.
3. Planning for economic and social development.
4. Roads and Bridges.
5. Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purpose.
6. Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management.
7. Fire services.
8. Urban Forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects.
9. Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including the handicapped and mentally retarded.
10. Slum improvement and upgradation.
11. Urban poverty alleviation.
12. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds.
13. Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects.
14. Burial, and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds and electric crematoriums.

55
15. Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals.
16. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.
17. Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences.
18. Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.
Additional Functions Assigned by the States
19. Licensing of trades & factories.
20. Reclamation of unhealthy localities, removal of noxious vegitation.
21. Erection of boundary marks, defining limits.
22. Regulation of offensive, dangerous trades.
23. Preparing returns, statements & reports.
24. Reclamation of unhealthy localities, removal of noxious vegitation, general abetment of all nuisances.
25. Giving relief, establishment in times of scarcity or general calamity.
26. Erection and maintenance of boundary marks defining the limits, alternation in the limits.
27. Construction, maintaining; aiding libraries.
28. Establishing scholarships.
29. Regulation of offensive & dangerous trades.

56
30. Encouragement of pisci culture, cultivation of vegetables.
31. Establishment of consumer cooperative stores & cottage industries.
32. Payment of rewards for the destruction of noxious animals or unclaimed dogs.
33. Enforcing building control.
34. Providing special medical aid for the sick in time of dangerous diseases, suppress, prevent the recurrence of
diseases.
35. Giving immediate relief to persons rendered destitute by natural calamities.
36. Regulating or abatting offensive or dangerous trade or practices.
37. Maintenance of monuments & memorials.
38. Provision of traffic signals.
39. Establishment of scholarships.
40. Crop protection & development.
41. Organisation, maintenance, management of chemical, bacteriological labs, examination of water.
42. Provision of anti-rabic treatment.
43. Regulation of traffic & traffic lights.
44. Establishing, maintaining, aiding physical culture.
45. Redevelopment of congested areas.
46. Abatement of pollutions of all kinds.

57
ANNEXURE III
TAXATION POWERS OF THE MUNICIPALITIES
Major States Major taxes that could be levied as per the State Municipal Act
Property Octroi Water Lighting Drainage Animal Professional Trade & Entertainment Terminal Advertisement Education Others
Tax/House Tax Tax & Consery & Vehicle Tax Callings Tax Tax Tax Cess
Tax ancy Cess tax Tax
1 2 3 4 56 78 9 1 01 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
Andhra Pradesh √ — √√√√√√ —— √ — √
Assam √ — √√√√ —————— √
Bihar √ — √√√√√√√ — √√√
Goa √ — √√√√√√√ NA √√√
Gujarat √ √ √√√√ ————— √√
Haryana √ — √√√√√√√√ NA √√
Himachal Pradesh √ —— √√√√√ —N A — √√
Karnataka √ — √√√√√ ——— √ — √
Kerala √ — √√√√√ NA √ NA √ NA √

58
Madhya Pradesh √ — √√√√√√√√√ — √
Maharashtra √ √ √√√√√√√ — √√√
Orissa √ √ √√√√√√ ———— √
Punjab √ — √ — √√√√ —————
Rajasthan √ √ √√√√√√ —————
Tamil Nadu √ — √√√√√√ —N AN A √√
Uttar Pradesh √ — √√√√√√√√ —— √
West Bengal √ — √√√√√√ ———— √
Note ( √) Yes; (—) No; (NA)—Not available.
(Source: National Institute of Urban Affairs, 1998)
1 2 3 4 56 78 9 1 01 1 1 2 1 3 1 4

59
ANNEXURE IV
STATE-WISE ALLOCATION OF LOCAL BODIES GRANTS BY TENTH FINANCE COMMISSION
URBAN LOCAL BODIES
(Rs. in crores)
Sl.No. Name of States 1995-96 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 Total
1 2 345 67 8
1. Andhra Pradesh 0.00 18.48 18.38 18.49 18.49 73.94
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0.00 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.12
3. Assam 0.00 3.55 3.55 3.55 3.55 14.20
4. Bihar 0.00 16.77 16.77 16.78 16.77 67.09
5. Goa 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
6. Gujarat 0.00 16.87 16.86 16.86 16.87 67.46
7. Haryana 0.00 4.15 4.15 4.14 4.14 16.58
8. Himachal Pradesh 0.00 0.51 0.51 0.51 0.52 2.05
9. Jammu & Kashmir 0.00 3.02 3.02 3.02 3.03 12.09
10. Karnataka 0.00 17.54 17.55 17.55 17.55 70.19

60
11. Kerala 0.00 6.36 6.36 6.36 6.35 25.43
12. Madhya Pradesh 0.00 15.44 15.44 15.43 15.43 61.74
13. Maharashtra 0.00 33.24 33.24 33.23 33.24 132.95
14. Manipur 0.00 0.56 0.56 0.56 0.55 2.23
15. Meghalaya 0.00 0.37 0.37 0.37 0.36 1.47
16. Mizoram 0.00 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.38
17. Nagaland 0.00 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.56
18. Orissa 0.00 4.78 4.78 4.78 4.77 19.11
19. Punjab 0.00 7.65 7.65 7.65 7.65 30.60
20. Rajasthan 0.00 10.80 10.80 10.79 10.79 43.18
21. Sikkim 0.00 0.14 0.14 0.15 0.15 0.58
22. Tamil Nadu 0.00 28.88 28.88 28.88 28.88 115.52
23. Tripura 0.00 0.26 0.26 0.25 0.26 1.03
24. Uttar Pradesh 0.00 30.29 30.29 30.30 30.30 121.18
25. West Bengal 0.00 30.08 30.08 30.08 30.08 120.32
Total 0.00 250.00 250.00 250.00 250.00 1000.00
1 2 345 67 8

61
ANNEXURE V
STATE-WISE ALLOCATION OF LOCAL BODIES GRANTS BY ELEVENTH FINANCE COMMISSION
URBAN LOCAL BODIES
(Rs. in lakhs)
Sl.No. Name of States 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 Total
1 2 345 67 8
1. Andhra Pradesh 3293.14 3293.14 3293.14 3293.14 3293.14 16465.7
2. Arunachal Pradesh 13.67 13.67 13.67 13.67 13.67 68.35
3. Assam 430.84 430.84 430.84 430.84 430.84 2154.2
4. Bihar 1340.94 1340.94 1340.94 1340.94 1340.94 6704.7
5. Chhattisgarh 572.23 572.23 572.23 572.23 572.23 2681.15
6. Goa 92.73 92.73 92.73 92.73 92.73 463.65
7. Gujarat 2650.46 2650.46 2650.46 2650.46 2650.46 13252.3
8. Haryana 732.8 732.8 732.8 732.8 732.8 3664
9. Himachal Pradesh 77.84 77.84 77.84 77.84 77.84 389.2
10. Jammu & Kashmir 313.16 313.16 313.16 313.16 313.16 1565.8
11. Jharkhand 537 537 537 537 537 2685

62
12. Karnataka 2496.39 2496.39 2496.39 2496.39 2496.39 12481.95
13. Kerala 1504.91 1504.91 1504.91 1504.91 1504.91 7524.55
14. Madhya Pradesh 2548 2548 2548 2548 2548 12740
15. Maharashtra 6325.09 6325.09 6325.09 6325.09 6325.09 31625.45
16. Manipur 87.92 87.92 87.92 87.92 87.92 439.6
17. Meghalaya 53.98 53.98 53.98 53.98 53.98 269.9
18. Mizoram 76.89 76.89 76.89 76.89 76.89 384.45
19. Nagaland 35.72 35.72 35.72 35.72 35.72 178.6
20. Orissa 799.2 799.2 799.2 799.2 799.2 3996
21. Punjab 1094.53 1094.53 1094.53 1094.53 1094.53 5472.65
22. Rajasthan 1988.32 1988.32 1988.32 1988.32 1988.32 9941.6
23. Sikkim 4.16 4.16 4.16 4.16 4.16 20.8
24. Tamil Nadu 3867.34 3867.34 3867.34 3867.34 3867.34 19336.7
25. Tripura 80.32 80.32 80.32 80.32 80.32 401.6
26. Uttar Pradesh 4557.64 4557.64 4557.64 4557.64 4557.64 22788.2
27. Uttaranchal 475 475 475 475 475 2375
28. West Bengal 3949.78 3949.78 3949.78 3949.78 3949.78 19748.9
Total 40000 40000 40000 40000 40000 200000
1 2 345 67 8

63
ANNEXURE VI
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ULBs DURING 1999-2000 TO 2001-2002
(Rs. in crore)
Revenue generated Expenditure Gap
State 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02 Total 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02 Total 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02 Total
Assam 19 26 28 73 21 28 30 79 -2 -2 -2 -6
Chhattisgarh 154 213 252 619 158 230 258 646 -4 -17 -6 -27
Haryana 80 79 101 260 93 88 101 282 -13 -9 0 -22
Himachal Pradesh 18 20 20 58 45 50 56 151 -27 -30 -36 -93
Jammu & Kashmir 10 11 12 33 58 70 80 208 -48 -59 -68 -175
Punjab 663 721 714 2098 495 704 728 1927 168 17 -14 171
Rajasthan 527 629 758 1914 512 617 689 1818 15 12 69 96
Tamil Nadu 243 564 507 1314 475 532 541 1548 -232 32 -34 -234
Tripura 2237 1 6 1 7 2 0 5 3 - 1 4 - 1 5 - 1 7 - 4 6
Uttar Pradesh 230 244 277 751 959 987 1016 2962 -729 -743 -739 -2211
West Bengal 362 379 424 1165 1032 1172 1249 3453 -670 -793 -825 -2288
Grand Total 2308 2888 3096 8292 3864 4495 4768 13127 -1556 -1607 -1672 -4835

66
ANNEXURE VIII
GIST OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF SFCs (STATE-WISE)
Sl. Name of the Main recommendations of SFC Action taken
No. State/UT
12 3 4
1. Karnataka 1. Transfer of one consolidated share in the
entire non-loan gross revenue receipt of
the State Govt. to ULBs and Panchayati
Raj Institutions.
2. Replacement of the system of share of a
portion of some specific taxes of State
Govt. by a share in the total ‘non-loan
gross own revenue receipts’ of the State
Govt. This divisible pool of the resources
between the State and local bodies would
include gross yield from all taxes, duties
and the State’s share of Central revenues
transferred on the recommendations of the
National Finance Commission. However,
loan receipts from the divisible pool may
be excluded as they involve repayment
obligation.
Though Government of Karnataka has
accepted the report of SFC, it could not
regulate the release of funds to the ULBs
on the same principles and quantum
recommended in the report, because of
the developments that took place
subsequent to submission of the report
like several new areas were converted
into ULBs, areas which were earlier in
notified area around Bangalore,
subsequent to submission of report of
SFC were converted into seven city
municipal Council, and some variance
was also found with the parameters used
in the report to that of actuals as per
Government documents.

67
12 3 4
3. The share of ULBs and Panchayat Raj
Institutions in the divisible pool may be
increased from the present 34.27% to 36%
starting with 1996-97 up to 2000-2001.
4. The recommendations of the Commission
with regard to financial devolution should
be implemented in percentage Terms and
not in absolute amounts.
5. For the purpose of allocating these funds
between urban and rural areas, the
Commission recommends the use of the
5 indicators—population (1991 census),
area (1991 census), illiteracy (1991 census),
number of persons per hospital bed (1991
census/1995) and road lengths per sq. km
(1991 census)
6. The respective weights to these indicators
shall be—population (33.33%), area
(33.33%), illiteracy (11.11%), number of
persons per hospital bed (11.11%) and

68
12 3 4
road length per sq. km. (11.12%). A share
of 15% out of the total amount devolved
to ULBs and other non-municipal urban
areas and 85% to Panchayat Raj
institutions for a period of 5 years starting
from 1996-97 is recommended.
7. The funds made available to ULBs under
the award of the Tenth Finance
Commission should be treated as
additionally and not as a part plan funds
as misinterpreted by Union Finance
Ministry and earmarked entirely for
reconstruction, improvement and repair
purposes.
8. Karnataka’s share as per recommendations
of the Tenth Finance Commission for
improved and repairs of specific assets of
ULBs over the next five years and should
not be used for any other purpose.
9. This amount may be distributed among
the ULBs on the same criteria, which has

69
12 3 4
been used by the commission to
recommend their share in the State Govt.’s
revenue.
2. Chhattisgarh Recommendations of the Madhya Pradesh
State Finance Commission have been made
applicable in relation to the State of
Chhattisgarh. The main recommendations
are indicated against S.No. 3 below.
3. Madhya Pradesh 1. In order to enable the ULBs to render
basic services, the State Govt. should
release to the ULBs Rs. 407 crores in 1996-
97 from its Consolidated Fund, in terms
of Article 243Y(a) of the Constitution.
2. The above funds accounting for 8.669%
of tax and non-tax revenue of the
preceding year would be in accordance
with the principle of “global sharing”
which means the principle of universal
partnership of resources. On the basis of
Though Chhattisgarh State Finance
Commission is still to be constituted, the
report accepted by the Govt. of Madhya
Pradesh is in force in this State.
The SFC had suggested release of grants
at the    rate of 8.66 per cent of the
receipt to the State from tax and non-tax
revenue. The State Govt. has principally
accepted the recommendations of the SFC
to release the share of its receipts to ULBs
at a lower rate of 0.516 percent.

70
12 3 4
this percentage, funds are to be released
in the coming years also.
3. For district-wise allocation of the above
funds, 40% weightage should be given to
urban population, 35% to sales tax
contribution, 15% to backwardness, SC/
ST population (Urban) and 10% to the
level of infrastructure for development
(inverse of per capita electricity
consumption in urban areas).
4. There should be no deduction of any type
from the funds to be devolved to ULBs
and payment should be made in twelve
equal monthly instalments.
5. The State Govt. should continue to
transfer to the ULBs, the special grant-in-
aid in lieu of abolition of passenger tax,
and payment of fees, penalties and other
receipts, payable to them under different
Acts.

71
12 3 4
6. The base of entry tax should be made
practical and broad and its rate structure
should be rationalized.
7. With the objectives of balancing revenue
and expenditure of ULBs, the cost of
public utility services should be recovered
by charging appropriate fees from the
users of services.
8. An Urban Infrastructure Development
Fund should be created for investment in
infrastructure development of the urban
local bodies.
9. A data bank should be developed to
ensure the availability of up-to-date
reliable data for making financial review
of urban local bodies.
4. Uttar Pradesh 1. Devolution of the 7% of the net proceeds
of the total tax revenue of the state
Government to the ULBs.
The State Govt. has accepted the
recommendation of the SFC.

72
12 3 4
2. The inter-se distribution of the 7% of net
proceeds is, 3.12% each for Municipal
Corporations and Municipalities and the
remaining 0.76% for Town Panchayats.
3. SFC has recommended the criteria of 80%
population and 20% area for devolution
of net proceeds for state’s tax revenue to
the three categories of ULBs and
determine their inter-se percentage share
accordingly in 3.12% of net proceeds
earmarked each for Municipal Corporations
and Municipalities and 0.76% of net
proceeds earmarked for Town Panchayats.
5. Tamil Nadu 1. In levy of property tax, the system of
assessing property tax on plinth area
method may be introduced, dispensing
with the rental-basis method.
2. Computerization of property tax register
for quick service delivery. The State Govt.
has accepted the recommendation. The
On the basis of the recommendations of
Ist SFC following funds have been
developed to the local bodies year-wise:
1997-98 440.83 crore
1998-99 537.33 crore
1999-2000 573.55 crore
2000-01 621.87 crore
Recommendations are accepted and
implemented.

73
12 3 4
issue of birth and death certificate,
property tax, water charges accounts etc.
have been computerized in municipalities.
3. SFC has recommended the levy of
advertisement charges on advertisement
boards and Cable TVs.
4. SFC has suggested that an initial share of
8% of the total income of the State earned
tax revenue and an incremental increase
going up to 12% at the end of the award
period. The State Govt. has accepted the
recommendation giving 8% but did not
give any incremental increase.
5. SFC has recommended to approach the
capital market for borrowing to meet the
civil norms set by the SFC.
6. Haryana 1. Transfer of 20% of the net receipts on
account of taxes on vehicles to the ULBs
and the said recommendations have
already been implemented;
Recommendations are accepted.

74
12 3 4
2. To transfer 25% of the net income from
entertainment duty to the ULBs on the
basis of origin instead of 50% of the net
proceeds. The entire net income from
show tax is also to be transferred to the
ULBs on the basis of origin. Total
devolution for 2000-2001—Rs. 3.5 crore
approx. and the said recommendations
have already been implemented.
3. Increase in tax on consumption of
electricity within the municipal limits
from 1 paisa to 5 paise per unit. Total
devolution for 2000-2001 is likely to be
Rs. 8.32 crore and the said
recommendations have already been
implemented; and
4. Rs. 35.34 crore including waiver of loans
of Rs. 32.50 crores outstanding against
MCs from 70-71 to 95-96, waiver of
Rs. 2.66 crore outstanding against MCs
towards Local Bodies Dte. and Rs. 0.18 crore

75
12 3 4
for strengthening of Local Govt. Dte. and
the said recommendations have already
been implemented.
7. Assam 1. The ULBs have been instructed to
maintain Registers and Forms for proper
accounts and records.
2. The existing rates and units of taxes may
continue for transfer as share to local
bodies with an additional 10% of net
proceeds of Motor Vehicle Tax. The total
percentage of share of State Taxes for
transfer to local bodies should be 2% in
each year.
3. Funds may be provided by the State Govt.
to Local Bodies for implementation of
development programmes of core subjects.
The funds as per 10
th Finance Commission
recommendations to be distributed to local
bodies as per 1971 census population
basis.
The State Govt. accepted the
recommendations of the SFC with respect
to Debt Relief of the Municipality/Town
Committee.

76
12 3 4
4. The SFC recommended that assessment of
Property Tax should be made in every 5
years and user charges should be levied
for services rendered by the local bodies
on parks, public toilets, public health
centres etc.
5. The Commission recommended for
transfer of subjects for registration of Birth
and Death Certificate from Health and
Family Welfare Deptt. to Local Bodies so
that they can earn revenue by issuing the
said Certificates.
6. Besides, Local Bodies have been instructed
from time to time to gear up the resources
through proper collection of taxes on
property on the basis of existing rules.
7. Outstanding State Govt. loan as on
31.3.1996 against the municipalities is to
be consolidated into a single block loan
to be repaid in 30 annual equal

77
12 3 4
instalments with interest of 5% per
annum, with effect from 1996-97.
8. Rajasthan Details of recommendations of the SFC have
not been received.
9. Punjab 1. The Commission had recommended
devolution of 20% of the net proceeds of
the state taxes  i.e.  Stamp Duty, Punjab
Motor Vehicles Tax, Electricity duty and
Cinematography Shows Tax, to the local
bodies and PRIs in accordance with the
recommended principles of sharing.
2. The 1
st FC had recommended 3 types of
grants to urban local bodies and PRIs:
(i) General Purpose Grants (ii) Specific
purpose grants for specific projects and
(iii) Incentive grants to encourage own
efforts of the local bodies to raise internal
resources.
The State Govt. has mentioned that they
have acepted all the recommendations of
the SFC and have implemented the same.
1. This recommendation has been
accepted by the Govt.
2. No decision has been taken by the
State Government on this
recommendation.

78
12 3 4
3. Enhancement of Additional Excise Duty:
The Commission recommended that
additional excise duty may be enhanced
from 7% to 10% on country liquor and
16% to 20% on Indian made liquor and
whole amount passed on to the urban
local bodies.
4. The SFC observed that the fundamental
domain of the municipalities suffered
from lack of clarity and precisions.
Keeping in view of the illustrative list
given in the twelfth schedule the SFC had
recommended a set of duties classified as
obligatory and discretionary.
10. Himachal Pradesh Details of main recommendations of SFC
have not been received.
3. The State Government has accepted
the recommendation to enhance
additional excise duty payable to
ULBs from 7% to 10%.
4. The State Govt. had passed a
comprehensive municipal bill which
clearly sets out in detail the
obligatory and discretionary
functions of the municipalities.
The 1
st State Finance Commission has
submitted its report to the Govt., which
was accepted by the Govt. in toto and
the recommendations thereof are being
implemented by the State for improving
the financial position of the ULBs.

79
12 3 4
11. Maharashtra Action taken report on the recommendations
made in the 1 st  Maharashtra Finance
Commission to the Govt. on 31.1.1997.
The State Finance Commission of
Maharashtra have made recommendations
covering the following topics:
1. Devolution of grants and taxes:
(a) Percentage of Dearness Allownace grant
should be 90% for A Class and 100% for
B and C Class Municipalities.
(b) The amount of grant to Municipalities by
way of land revenue be increased from
15% to 75%.
Budgetary provisions are being made as
per the scheme of devolution
recommended by the SFC and funds are
being released to the ULBs strictly as per
their recommendations.
State Govt. has accepted the most of the
recommendations of the SFC. However,
certain recommendations relating to
devolution and Profession tax share to
Nagar Palikas not accepted by the State
Govt.

80
12 3 4
(c) The revised share of entertainment tax
should be 50%, 90% and 100% for A, B
and C class Municipalities respectively
and 25% for Municipal Corporation.
(d) 25% of net income from vehicle tax
should be allocated as “Tax share” to all
Urban Local Bodies.
2. Taxes and Fees:
(a) Revaluation of the properties in Urban
Areas should be done on regular basis.
(b) In the rate of Property Tax, the maximum
limit of the range should be removed and
only the minimum rates should be kept.
(c) Efforts should be made through frequent
revisions to reach the maximum limit of
rates of tax as fixed in the relevant Acts.
(d) The user charges and fees should be
commensurate with the cost of providing
the service to increase the revenue.

81
12 3 4
3. Administrative Reforms:
(a) To keep a control on establishment
expenditures, a common policy of pay
scales and allowances for all Urban Local
Bodies is necessary.
(b) All municipalities should prepare a
separate budget for water supply to
evaluate the performance of the activity.
(c) Areas like garbage collection, maintenance
of street lights/parking lots could be
considered for privatisation.
4. Audit Inspection:
(a) Each Municipality should have a Small
Integral Audit Wing.
(b) The recoveries should be completed
within 2 years from the concerned persons
or organizations and technical objections,
if any, should be got settled.

82
12 3 4
5. Statistical Data Bank:
(a) There is a need for setting up of a Data
Bank on the financial position of Local
Bodies.
The State Government after considering the
above recommendations have accepted most
of them.
12. Gujarat 1. Urban Local Bodies are paid grant-in-aid
for various types of roads as per the rates
per kilometer. Grant in aid should be paid
for construction of roads as per the
recommendations of study group of the
Tenth Central Finance Commission. Grant
in aid for this purpose should be paid at
the rate of 4% of expenditure incurred for
constructing new road till the percentages
are worked out according to the new
formula. As the amount collected by the
municipalities by way of motor vehicle
1. Grant in aid for maintenance of roads
should be given as per the present
formula of Roads & Buildings
Department.
Recommendation of discontinuing grant
in aid under the Motor Vehicles Tax Act
is accepted.

83
12 3 4
tax is meagre, collection of this tax should
be discontinued. Grant in aid being given
for this tax should also be discontinued.
2. As the professional tax is of the nature of
local tax, urban local bodies should be
paid 50% of the amount of recovered by
it.
3. Process of allocating entertainment tax is
complex. Therefore, it is required to be
simplified. Municipal Finance Board
should be given an autonomous status so
that it has not to approach frequently for
making proposals to the government.
Board can refinance after obtaining loan
from national and international
institutions. At present 50% amount of
entertainment tax is given to urban local
bodies. This should be increased to 75%.
As the incentive scheme introduced by the
Gujarat Municipal Finance Board is not
effective, it should be discontinued. For
2. Recommendation accepted.
3. Recommendation of giving 75%
amount of entertainment tax instead
of 50%, is accepted. However,
additional amount of 25% should be
allotted to municipalities for Bajpai
Nagar Vikas Yojana.

84
12 3 4
improving basic facilities, urban local
bodies should deposit 1% revenue of tax.
Against this, State Government should
given double the amount deposited by the
urban local bodies. Out of this amount
Board may give loan to municipalities at
two-percent less than the average rate of
interest charged by the Board.
4. Changes should be made in the rates of
recovery expenses. At present non-
authorised municipalities are paid 5% of
the amount of education cess recovered
by them. It is recommended that non-
authorised municipalities should be paid
10% of the amount recovered, if recovery
is made is more than 50% of the demand,
no recovery expenses should be paid.
Urban Local Bodies, which undertake the
work of primary education, will be
entitled to receive 100% of the amount
collected by them. Non-authorised
4. Recommendation is accepted.

85
12 3 4
municipalities should be given 10%
instead of 5% as recovery expenses.
5. 75% of assessment on agricultural land is
paid as grant-in-aid to the urban local
bodies. This should be raised to 85%.
Amount of conversion tax of agricultural
land to non-agricultural land is not being
paid to urban local bodies as grant-in-aid.
85% non-agricultural assessment should
be paid in one instalment through
Collector.
6. Land revenue (agricultural) should be
continued. At present 35% of land revenue
amount is given as grant-in-aid. This
should be increased to 85%.
7. Local cess shall be increased from 50 paise
to one rupee. Rates of land revenue
should be doubled which will result in
fourfold increase in the amount of local
cess.
5. It has been decided to give 100%
amount of non-agricultural
assessment through Collector instead
of 85% as recommended.
Recommendation of giving grant-in-
aid in respect of conversion tax of
land is not accepted.
6. Recommendation is not accepted.
7. It has been decided to discontinue
collecting local cess and irrigation
cess.

86
12 3 4
8. With a view to give grant-in-aid, the State
Government has imposed surcharges at
the rate of 25% of stamp duty since 1988-
89 on documents of property of urban
local bodies. This amount has since not
been paid to the urban local bodies. The
amount of surcharge amounting to
Rs. 12708 lakhs accumulated for the years
1988-89 to 1997-98 should be credited to
the Revolving Fund of Gujarat Municipal
Finance Board in five instalments for
development works. Urban local bodies
should be paid the amount of surcharge
from the year 1998-99.
9. As entertainment tax on cable TV/dish
antenna is of the nature of local tax, it
should be given to urban local bodies. It
should be distributed on 50%-50% basic
between the State Government and urban
local bodies. Urban local bodies should
collect this tax under the supervision of
Commissioner of Entertainment.
8. Recommendation is accepted, but its
implementation will be made from
the year 2000-01. Amount available
from stamp duty surcharge will have
to be given to municipalities for
Bajpai Nagar Vikas Yojana.
9. Recommendation is accepted.

87
12 3 4
10. Wherever grant-in-aid is given on the
basis of 1981 census, figures of 1991
should be taken into account.
11. At present urban local bodies are given
grant-in-aid in respect of pay and
allowances at the rate of 33 1/3% of total
expenditure incurred for sanctioned post
keeping in view in the rates of property
tax/consolidated tax.
12. Authorised municipality should keep
100% amount of education cess and non-
authorised municipalities should keep 10%
as recovery expenses and 90% should be
given to district Panchayat.
13. If “A” and “B” class municipalities does
not want to get this work done by Gujarat
Water Supply and Sewerage Board, they
should be allowed to do this work. “C”
and “D” class municipalities will have to
get this work done by the Board.
10. Recommendation is accepted.
11. After taking into consideration of the
recommendation Nos. 11 & 15 for
grant in aid, it has been decided to
club both the recommendations and
give grant in aid of Rs. 35 per capita.
This should be increased, after every
three/four years.
12. Recommendation is accepted.
13. All the municipalities, which desire
to undertake the work of water
supply and drainage on its own,
should be allowed to do such work.

88
12 3 4
14. At the time of natural calamities,
municipal corporations, “A” & “B” class
municipalities and “C” & “D” class
municipalities should be provided 25%,
50% & 75%, respectively of the relief
expenditure incurred by them.
15. Rates of grant-in-aid in respect of per
capita basic grant given to various types
of urban local bodies should be doubled.
The grant should be paid at Rs. 2, 3, 5
per head to class A, B and C&D
respectively.
16. Dispensaries, hospitals, maternity homes
and child welfare centres should be paid
grant-in-aid at the rate of 40% for “A”
class, 50% for “B” class and 60% for “C”
& “D” class municipalities of the total
admissible expenditure. Upper ceiling
fixed in this regard should be removed.
17. 20% of the amount of district plan
earmarked for decentralized district plan
14. All possible relief should be provided
at the time of natural calamities
keeping in view of the expenditure
incurred by urban local bodies.
15. As mentioned again Recommendation
No. 11.
16. Recommendation is accepted.
17. Present system of utilizing grant of
district planning board should be

89
12 3 4
is to be allocated. This amount should be
distributed and the municipalities shall get
10.78% and municipal corporation 8.146%
of the total grant.
18. Director of municipalities and Gujarat
Municipal Finance Board should
periodically review the position of
Government dues for each urban local
body.
19. Two percent rebate should be given to
those urban local bodies which pay loan
instalment regularly.
20. A tax/Tariff Commission should be
constituted to fix minimum and maximum
rate of tax in every five years.
21. To make compulsory for municipalities to
impose property tax, water tax and
sanitation tax.
22. Octroi should be continued till its
alternative is found. Recommendations of
continued. As far as possible, 20%
amount should be distributed.
18. Recommendation is accepted.
19. Recommendation is accepted.
20. Recommendation is accepted.
21. Recommendation is accepted.
22. Recommendation is accepted.

90
12 3 4
the report of the committee appointed for
fixing minimum/maximum rates of octroi
should be implemented.
23. Licence fee should be introduced for
drawing water from underground water
resources. Tax/tariff commission should
fix rate of licence fee.
24. Assessment of property tax should be
made keeping in view the nature of
assets, carpet area, age of assets and use
of the assets.
25. Property tax on open private plots should
be assets keeping in view its market
prices.
26. Urban local bodies should be empowered
to collect tax on all advertisements except
newspaper advertisements.
27. Privatisation of services should be
introduced wherever it is possible.
23. Recommendation is accepted.
24. Recommendation is accepted.
25. Recommendation is accepted.
26. Recommendation is accepted.
27. Recommendation is accepted.

91
12 3 4
28. Urban local bodies should be empowered
to fix rates of transport and there should
be no need to get the sanction from
Regional Transport Authority or the State
Government.
29. A Special tribunal should be constituted
to settle the disputes of employees of
urban local bodies. And Urban local
bodies should be excluded from the
purview of Industrial Disputes Act.
30. Books of Municipal Account Code should
be made available. An expert committee
should be formulated to suggest
amendments.
31. Financial powers under section 65(2) of
the Gujarat Municipalities Act 1963 should
be amended to provide for the ceiling to
be fixed by way of notification as may
be decided by the State Government from
time to time.
28. Recommendation is not accepted in
view of the legal provision.
29. Recommendation is not accepted.
30. Recommendation is accepted.
31. Recommendation is not accepted.

92
12 3 4
32. State Government should bear the
expenditure in respect of elections to
municipalities.
33. Government open land in urban areas
should be handed over to municipalities
for maintenance.
34. Urban local bodies should be exempted
from paying sales tax on the basis of “P”
Form as applicable to government offices,
for purchase of material performing the
functions of compulsory and discretionary
duties prescribed in the Act.
35. Recommendation should be sent to the
Central Government for declaring
“Ahmedabad” as mega city.
36. The term of office of the President/Mayor
should be increase to two and a half years
from present one year.
32. Municipalities having population
more than 1 lakh should bear the
expenditure of election. Election
expenditure for other urban local
bodies should be borne by the State
Government.
33. Recommendation is not accepted.
34. Recommendation is accepted.
35. Recommendation is accepted.
36. Recommendation is accepted.

93
13. Andhra Pradesh 1. Govt. may provide Rs. 31 crores per
annum for the year 1998-99 and 1999-2000
for developmental works in municipal
bodies.
2. Rs. 18 crores may be provided from 1997
onwards for water supply schemes in
municipal areas after setting off the Tenth
Finance Commission grant.
3. Municipal Councils may be empowered
to enhance the user charges for water
supply.
4. As regards ULBs, an amount of Rs. 94.00
crores recommended may be released
based on per capital requirement grade-
wise, as per weightage i.e. population—
40%, area (excluding slum area)—40%,
and area of slums in each municipality—
20%.
5. Property tax compensation may be
enhanced by 5% every year.
12 3 4
The State Govt. has accepted these
recommendations of the SFC.

94
6. Octroi compensation may be increased by
10% every year.
7. Increase of Motor Vehicle Tax
compensation to municipal bodies.
8. Per capita grant to municipal bodies may
be increased from Rs. 4 to Rs. 8.
9. A special grant of Rs. 50,000 may be
sanctioned as and when a Gram
Panchayat is converted into a
municipality.
10. The Govt. should give grant-in-aid to the
municipal bodies towards payment of
pension to the non-teaching municipal
employees by following the procedure
being adopted in the case of payment of
salaries to the Panchayat Raj Teachers.
11. There should be no government
interference in matters relating to taxation.
14. Kerala Information sought from the State
Government.
12 3 4

95
12 3 4
15. Manipur Information sought from the State
Government.
16. Orissa Surcharge on Entertainment Tax: (a) Rs. 44.85
lakhs per annum from 1998-99 be released
to ULBs. This should not include surcharge
payable by Cuttack, Bhubaneswar, Puri,
Berhampur, Sambalpur and Rourkela
municipalities. (b) Surcharge collected
through compounding system in the above
six municipalities be paid to them.
Surcharge on Stamp Duty: (a) Surcharge on
Stamp Duty should be levied @ 3% both in
urban and rural areas of the State and not
necessarily be confined to the areas coming
under the Planning Authority/Improvement
Trust/Dev. Authority. (b) Collection charges
and incidental charges should be at a
uniform rate of 2% for all the areas. (c) From
1998-99 pending amendment of Act and
Rules Rs. 200.91 lakhs be paid to different
Dev. Authorities/Planning Authorities.
These recommendations have been
accepted and approved by the State
Government.

96
Apportionment of Motor Vehicle Tax: From
1998-99 Rs. 15.00 crores be given as grant to
municipalities and NACs from the collections
of M.V . Tax for maintenance of roads
(Rs. 9.00 crore to the municipalities +
Rs. 6.00 crore to the NACs.
Imposition of Entry Tax in lieu of Octroi:
Follow up action would be taken by F.D. in
consultation with H&UD Dept.
Grant-in-aid to ULBs for salaries, etc.: (a) As
per the agreed pattern, Govt. to bear 53% to
pay and 50% of D.A. for the non-teaching
posts approved up to 1.1.74 (6984 posts) and
for the teaching posts (1510) approved prior
to 1.11.76 of 80 ULBs. 22 ULBs emerging
after 1.1.74 and 1.11.76 will not be eligible
for any grants.
Utilization of T.F.C. Grants: In respect of
ULBs State’s matching share comprising
2/3
 of the TFC’s award is to be borne by
12 3 4

97
the State Government. Total TFC Grant is
Rs. 19.11 crores.
Other Recommendations:
1. The ULBs should be empowered to issue
no due certificate to the aspirant loanee
for availing loans from Govt., Semi-Govt.
and financial institutions.
2. Various departmental roads along with
proportionate maintenance grant be
transferred to ULBs.
3. Administrative control & the salary cost
etc. of health staff working in ULBs be
transferred and also the maintenance of
electricity (street lights) and sewerage line.
4. Garbage disposal and improvement of
sanitation in ULBs could be privatised.
5. Govt. of India be moved to provide funds
for upgrading the market places, library,
play grounds and rehabilitation centres of
the ULBs.
12 3 4

98
12 3 4
6. H&UD Dept. & P .R. Dept. to be provided
Rs. 5.00 lakhs each to impart training to
officials and selected representatives of
ULBs.
17. West Bengal Information sought from the State
Government.