STANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENTURBAN DEVELOPMENTURBAN DEVELOPMENTURBAN DEVELOPMENTURBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND
URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2009-2010)
1111111111
ELEVENTH REPORTELEVENTH REPORTELEVENTH REPORTELEVENTH REPORTELEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Urban Development on the ‘Demands for Grants (2009-10)’ of
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation]

ELEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2009-2010)
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Urban Development on the ‘Demands for Grants (2009-10)’ of
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation]
Presented to Lok Sabha on __________
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ___________
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2010/Shravana, 1932 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.U.D. No. 62C.U.D. No. 62C.U.D. No. 62C.U.D. No. 62C.U.D. No. 62
Price : Rs. 60.00
© 2010 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by The Indian
Press, Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
18
27
28
38
50
52
C
OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................................................
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................
REPORT
PART-I
CHAPTER I Report…………..……………………......……………......…..
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government……………………..................................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies….………
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee…..................................................................................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited………………………
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee
held on 20.07.2010..................................................................
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Second Report
of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha).........................
P
AGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
Shri Sharad Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri J.P. Agarwal
3. Shri Praveen Singh Aron
4. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
5. Shri Pratap Singh Bajwa
6. Shri Ambica Banerjee
7. Smt. Priya Dutt
8. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad
9. Shri Kailash Joshi
10. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
11. Shri Ramesh Kumar
12. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
13. Shri P.C. Mohan
14. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
15. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao
16. Shri Baijayant ‘Jay’ Panda
17. Prof. Ramshankar
18. Shri Kadir Rana
19. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
20. Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath
21. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Parvez Hashmi
23. Shri Rajeev Shukla
24. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel
25. Shri Manohar Joshi
26. Shri Shyam Benegal
27. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
28. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Shri K.D. Muley — Director
3. Ms. Amita Walia — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Priyadarshan — Senior Committee Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2009-2010) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Eleventh Report on the action taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Second
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban
Development on ‘Demands for Grants (2009-2010)’ related to the Ministry
of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation.
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 December,
2009.  The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received in March, 2010.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
20 July, 2010.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.
  N
EW DELHI; SHARAD YADAV,
20 July , 2010 Chairman,
29 Asadha , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

CHAPTER ICHAPTER ICHAPTER ICHAPTER ICHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2009-10) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in their Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants 2009-10 of the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation which was presented to Lok Sabha on 17th December,
2009.
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 12 recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted
by the Government (Chapter – II):
Para Nos. 2, 6, 9 and 10Para Nos. 2, 6, 9 and 10Para Nos. 2, 6, 9 and 10Para Nos. 2, 6, 9 and 10Para Nos. 2, 6, 9 and 10
(Total - 04)(Total - 04)(Total - 04)(Total - 04)(Total - 04)
(Chapter-II)(Chapter-II)(Chapter-II)(Chapter-II)(Chapter-II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies
(Chapter –III):
NILNILNILNILNIL
(Total - Nil)(Total - Nil)(Total - Nil)(Total - Nil)(Total - Nil)
(Chapter-III)(Chapter-III)(Chapter-III)(Chapter-III)(Chapter-III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 3, 5, 7 and  12Para Nos. 3, 5, 7 and  12Para Nos. 3, 5, 7 and  12Para Nos. 3, 5, 7 and  12Para Nos. 3, 5, 7 and  12
(Total - 04)(Total - 04)(Total - 04)(Total - 04)(Total - 04)
(Chapter-IV)(Chapter-IV)(Chapter-IV)(Chapter-IV)(Chapter-IV)

2
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited
Para Nos. 1, 4, 8 and 11Para Nos. 1, 4, 8 and 11Para Nos. 1, 4, 8 and 11Para Nos. 1, 4, 8 and 11Para Nos. 1, 4, 8 and 11
(Total - 04)(Total - 04)(Total - 04)(Total - 04)(Total - 04)
(Chapter-V)(Chapter-V)(Chapter-V)(Chapter-V)(Chapter-V)
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
by the Ministry to the implementation of their Recommendations. In
cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement the
Recommendation(s) either fully or partially, for any reason, the matter
may be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation.
1.4 The Committee further desire that action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report
and final replies in respect of the Recommendations for which only
interim replies have been furnished by the Government (included in
Chapter-V) may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, not
later than three months of the presentation of this Report.
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Recommendation (Serial No.3)Recommendation (Serial No.3)Recommendation (Serial No.3)Recommendation (Serial No.3)Recommendation (Serial No.3)
Unspent balances and funds release under SJSRY
1.6 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that upto 30.09.2009, under the Swarna Jayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), an amount of Rs.58,196.36 lakh is
still available with States/UTs. They have been informed that the
Centre have so far not received Utilisation Certificates (UCs) for an
amount of Rs.8250.84 lakh, which was released upto 2007-2008. The
Committee fail to understand why such a huge amount has
remained to be shown as utilized. The Committee are particularly
perturbed by the inability of States like, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh,
Rajasthan and Jammu and Kashmir, to submit utilization
certificates for a huge amount of funds which they have received
for implementing SJSRY. They are of the view that such a huge
amount of unspent balance is a serious matter affecting the overall

3
performance of the scheme since non submission of UCs result in
delay of further release of funds. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Government to take measures to motivate States to do the
needful well in time otherwise it may lead to reduction in the
budgetary plan allocation in their favour. The Committee also take
note of the fact that Central funds have not been released to many
States/Union Territories till 30 September, 2009. The bulk of the
funds, therefore, is likely to be released to them in the third and
fourth quarters of this financial year, thus making it difficult for
the States to release their share of funds. The Committee, therefore,
feel that appropriate steps needs to be taken to address this issue
urgently so as to achieve the financial as well as physical targets
fixed under the scheme. ”
1.7 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as
follows:—
“The Ministry is making consistent efforts for utilization of funds
remaining unspent with the States/Union Territories. As per the
updated Reports/Utilisation Certificates received from the States/
Union Territories, utilization certificates for an amount of Rs 25.66
Crore for the funds released upto 2007-2008 with 14 States/UTs
(which is about 9.80% of the total funds released to these States/
UTs) are pending, as given below:—
Unspent balances with State Governments under SJSRYUnspent balances with State Governments under SJSRYUnspent balances with State Governments under SJSRYUnspent balances with State Governments under SJSRYUnspent balances with State Governments under SJSRY
As on 2.3.2010
(Rs. in crores)
Sl. Names of States/UTs Central Funds UC received Balance fund
No released till now available
(including with States/
Opening UTs for
Balance) which UCs
upto 2007- are due
2008
12 3 4 5
1 Bihar 52.11 51.00 1.11

4
12 3 4 5
2 Chhattisgarh 29.82 29.92 0.00
3 Goa 2.23 1.64 0.59
4 Jammu & Kashmir 19.48 19.23 0.25
5 Jharkhand 15.56 11.01 4.55
6 Meghalaya 7.87 5.32 2.55
7 Punjab 16.55 14.98 1.57
8 Rajasthan 69.80 65.90 3.90
9 Tripura 18.85 17.97 0.88
10 A & N Islands 3.61 3.06 0.55
11 Chandigarh 7.83 2.63 5.20
12 Daman & Diu 2.43 0.20 2.23
13 Delhi 4.30 2.06 2.24
14 Puducherry 11.36 11.32 0.04
TOTAL 261.80 236.24 25.66
The State of Jharkhand has now submitted substantial amount of
UCs after much efforts of this Ministry. In case of Jammu &
Kashmir, UCs for an amount of Rs. 24.78 Lakhs only (out of the
Rs. 849.375 Lakhs released to it under special Prime Minister
Reconstruction Plan in 2006-2007 is pending now. Chhattisgarh has
since submitted all the required UCs. Rajasthan has also submitted
Utilisation Certificates for some amount. It may also be mentioned
here that due to the preoccupation of the States/UTs with the
General Elections of Lok Sabha and also because the revised
Guidelines of SJSRY have come into effect since 1st April 2009, the
pace of expenditure has been somewhat slower in the first half of
the year.”

5
1.81.81.81.81.8 The ComThe ComThe ComThe ComThe Com mittee regret to note that even though SJSRYmittee regret to note that even though SJSRYmittee regret to note that even though SJSRYmittee regret to note that even though SJSRYmittee regret to note that even though SJSRY
is the lone poverty alleviation programme in the urban area, theis the lone poverty alleviation programme in the urban area, theis the lone poverty alleviation programme in the urban area, theis the lone poverty alleviation programme in the urban area, theis the lone poverty alleviation programme in the urban area, the
Ministry has time and again failed to utilize the funds allocatedMinistry has time and again failed to utilize the funds allocatedMinistry has time and again failed to utilize the funds allocatedMinistry has time and again failed to utilize the funds allocatedMinistry has time and again failed to utilize the funds allocated
to them under this head in time. The action taken reply shows theto them under this head in time. The action taken reply shows theto them under this head in time. The action taken reply shows theto them under this head in time. The action taken reply shows theto them under this head in time. The action taken reply shows the
figures of the funds released by the Ministry during 2007-2008 andfigures of the funds released by the Ministry during 2007-2008 andfigures of the funds released by the Ministry during 2007-2008 andfigures of the funds released by the Ministry during 2007-2008 andfigures of the funds released by the Ministry during 2007-2008 and
their utilization certificates obtained as on date. Moreover, the repliestheir utilization certificates obtained as on date. Moreover, the repliestheir utilization certificates obtained as on date. Moreover, the repliestheir utilization certificates obtained as on date. Moreover, the repliestheir utilization certificates obtained as on date. Moreover, the replies
do not show the figures of successive years. The Committee stronglydo not show the figures of successive years. The Committee stronglydo not show the figures of successive years. The Committee stronglydo not show the figures of successive years. The Committee stronglydo not show the figures of successive years. The Committee strongly
feel that such a huge amount of unspent balance is a serious matterfeel that such a huge amount of unspent balance is a serious matterfeel that such a huge amount of unspent balance is a serious matterfeel that such a huge amount of unspent balance is a serious matterfeel that such a huge amount of unspent balance is a serious matter
affecting the overall performance of the scheme since non-submissionaffecting the overall performance of the scheme since non-submissionaffecting the overall performance of the scheme since non-submissionaffecting the overall performance of the scheme since non-submissionaffecting the overall performance of the scheme since non-submission
of UCs by the States/UTs results in delay of further release of funds.of UCs by the States/UTs results in delay of further release of funds.of UCs by the States/UTs results in delay of further release of funds.of UCs by the States/UTs results in delay of further release of funds.of UCs by the States/UTs results in delay of further release of funds.
The Committee further note that though the Government’s replyThe Committee further note that though the Government’s replyThe Committee further note that though the Government’s replyThe Committee further note that though the Government’s replyThe Committee further note that though the Government’s reply
tries to justify the reasons for non utilization of funds during thetries to justify the reasons for non utilization of funds during thetries to justify the reasons for non utilization of funds during thetries to justify the reasons for non utilization of funds during thetries to justify the reasons for non utilization of funds during the
early part of 2009-2010, it is, however, silent on the reasons for theearly part of 2009-2010, it is, however, silent on the reasons for theearly part of 2009-2010, it is, however, silent on the reasons for theearly part of 2009-2010, it is, however, silent on the reasons for theearly part of 2009-2010, it is, however, silent on the reasons for the
non utilization of funds and subsequent release of funds in thenon utilization of funds and subsequent release of funds in thenon utilization of funds and subsequent release of funds in thenon utilization of funds and subsequent release of funds in thenon utilization of funds and subsequent release of funds in the
previous years. It is not clear what steps had been taken by theprevious years. It is not clear what steps had been taken by theprevious years. It is not clear what steps had been taken by theprevious years. It is not clear what steps had been taken by theprevious years. It is not clear what steps had been taken by the
Ministry to ensure that utilization certificates are received in timeMinistry to ensure that utilization certificates are received in timeMinistry to ensure that utilization certificates are received in timeMinistry to ensure that utilization certificates are received in timeMinistry to ensure that utilization certificates are received in time
from the States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, desire that thefrom the States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, desire that thefrom the States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, desire that thefrom the States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, desire that thefrom the States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Ministry should take up the matter with the State Governments andMinistry should take up the matter with the State Governments andMinistry should take up the matter with the State Governments andMinistry should take up the matter with the State Governments andMinistry should take up the matter with the State Governments and
ensure that adequate measures are being taken to utilize the fundsensure that adequate measures are being taken to utilize the fundsensure that adequate measures are being taken to utilize the fundsensure that adequate measures are being taken to utilize the fundsensure that adequate measures are being taken to utilize the funds
allocated for the purpose especially keeping in view the steadyallocated for the purpose especially keeping in view the steadyallocated for the purpose especially keeping in view the steadyallocated for the purpose especially keeping in view the steadyallocated for the purpose especially keeping in view the steady
increase in the number of poor in urban areas. The Committee alsoincrease in the number of poor in urban areas. The Committee alsoincrease in the number of poor in urban areas. The Committee alsoincrease in the number of poor in urban areas. The Committee alsoincrease in the number of poor in urban areas. The Committee also
strongly recommend that the Ministry should ensure that the States/strongly recommend that the Ministry should ensure that the States/strongly recommend that the Ministry should ensure that the States/strongly recommend that the Ministry should ensure that the States/strongly recommend that the Ministry should ensure that the States/
UTs submit the utilization certificate to the Centre in a timelyUTs submit the utilization certificate to the Centre in a timelyUTs submit the utilization certificate to the Centre in a timelyUTs submit the utilization certificate to the Centre in a timelyUTs submit the utilization certificate to the Centre in a timely
manner for further release of funds.manner for further release of funds.manner for further release of funds.manner for further release of funds.manner for further release of funds.
Recommendation (Serial No.5)
Housing ShortageHousing ShortageHousing ShortageHousing ShortageHousing Shortage
1.9 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that as per the estimates the total urban
housing shortage in the country has been projected to go up to
26.53 million during the 11th Five Year Plan (2007-2012), out of
which a major portion pertains to economically weaker sections and
the low income group category. Together, these two groups account
for 99% of the total housing deficit. Though the Ministry prepared
the National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy (NUHHP) in the
year 2007 with special focus on the needs of urban poor, which

6
provides a road map to the State Governments to comprehensively
address the issue of housing by preparing their own policy in
accordance with the NUHHP, 2007, but unfortunately it has not
materialized so far. Only a few States are preparing their urban
housing policy in consonance with NUHHP, 2007. The Committee
are appalled at the gross insufficiency of houses for the urban poor
which is a result of the fact that urban planners have always
marginalized the housing needs of urban poor, despite being
well aware of their requirements of dwelling units. In this regard,
the Committee have already made several recommendations in
their 40th Report on ‘Urban Housing’ and they still await the
response of the Ministry on the same. Meanwhile the Committee
acknowledge the fact that as against Rs.120.71 crore which was
allocated under BE 2008-2009, an amount of Rs. 207.97 crore has
been allocated in BE 2009-2010 under the head ‘Housing’. Though
the actual requirement may be much more, the Committee feel that
still it is a step in the right direction and recommend that the
Government should strive to address the urban housing shortage
on a priority basis.”
1.10 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as
follows:—
“The Ministry has submitted Action Taken Report on the Fortieth
Report of the Standing Committee on ‘Urban Housing’ on
19th February, 2010. The Hon’ble Committee has been informed
that the ministry is aware of the need and is striving to direct the
policy and programme initiatives towards housing needs of urban
poor and directed its efforts in this direction.
The Ministry has also taken several initiatives revolved around
facilitating affordable housing to the urban poor. The Ministry
formulated the first National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy, 2007
focusing on needs of urban area focused to promote a symbiotic
development of rural and urban areas with focus on provision of
“Affordable Housing For All” with special emphasis on vulnerable
sections of society such as Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes,
Backward Classes, Minorities and the urban poor.

7
Since the Policy did not define affordability the Ministry set
up a Task Force under the Chairmanship of Mr. Deepak Parekh,
Chairman – HDFC Ltd. to study and make recommendations as to
affordability and the strategy to provide affordable housing
pursuance of the Policy.
At the same time, aware that finance is a critical issue and
noting that the Policy aims at promoting larger flow of funds from
governmental and private sources for meeting housing needs, with
suitably designed fiscal concessions, the Ministry set up the Ashok
Jha Committee to study if HUDCO can be rejuvenated and restored
to make construction and social housing programmes.
The Ministry has also launched several schemes in the recent
years to encourage the State Governments to participate in social
housing in big way.
In 2005, the Government launched the Jawaharlal Nehru
National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), to make provision,
inter-alia, of housing and basic services for the urban poor by a
holistic and integrated development of slums in 65 specified cities
under the Sub Mission Basic Services to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and
in other cities and towns under the Integrated Housing and Slum
Development Programme (IHSDP).
In December 2008, another new scheme – Interest Subsidy
Scheme for Housing for the Urban Poor (ISHUP) was announced
for providing interest subsidy to make housing loans affordable
and within the repayment capacity of Economically Weaker
Sections (EWS)/Low Income Group (LIG). The scheme makes
available loans upto Rs.1 lakh through Commercial Banks/Housing
Finance Companies for the purposes of construction/acquisition of
houses with an interest subsidy of 5%.
With a view to encourage allotment of land for EWS housing,
another Scheme for ‘Affordable Housing in Partnership’, was
started under which Central Government assistance is available for
infrastructure connectivities for housing projects which provide
houses upto 80 Sq.mt. carpet area of which at least 25% are for EWS/
LIG.

8
In June 2009, with the intention to comprehensively address
the issue of slums, and to provide for housing in urban areas the
Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) has been announced.
The initiatives of the Govt. of India need to be supported and
supplemented by the efforts at the level of State Governments and
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). The emphasis of State Housing Boards
needs to be calibrated to address the needs of Economically
Weaker Sections (EWS) and Low Income Group (LIG) housing and
policy initiatives for legal and regulatory reforms implemented by
the States for bringing in more land for urban housing.”
1.111.111.111.111.11 The Committee note the initiatives and schemes of theThe Committee note the initiatives and schemes of theThe Committee note the initiatives and schemes of theThe Committee note the initiatives and schemes of theThe Committee note the initiatives and schemes of the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation in addressing theMinistry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation in addressing theMinistry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation in addressing theMinistry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation in addressing theMinistry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation in addressing the
issue of urban housing shortages. However, the reply merelyissue of urban housing shortages. However, the reply merelyissue of urban housing shortages. However, the reply merelyissue of urban housing shortages. However, the reply merelyissue of urban housing shortages. However, the reply merely
highlights the policies and schemes which have been formulated andhighlights the policies and schemes which have been formulated andhighlights the policies and schemes which have been formulated andhighlights the policies and schemes which have been formulated andhighlights the policies and schemes which have been formulated and
being undertaken by the Ministry. Year after year they are comingbeing undertaken by the Ministry. Year after year they are comingbeing undertaken by the Ministry. Year after year they are comingbeing undertaken by the Ministry. Year after year they are comingbeing undertaken by the Ministry. Year after year they are coming
with new schemes. Merely introduction of new schemes is not awith new schemes. Merely introduction of new schemes is not awith new schemes. Merely introduction of new schemes is not awith new schemes. Merely introduction of new schemes is not awith new schemes. Merely introduction of new schemes is not a
solution of any problem. The reply does not specify the actualsolution of any problem. The reply does not specify the actualsolution of any problem. The reply does not specify the actualsolution of any problem. The reply does not specify the actualsolution of any problem. The reply does not specify the actual
achievement of the Government in solving the housing shortage inachievement of the Government in solving the housing shortage inachievement of the Government in solving the housing shortage inachievement of the Government in solving the housing shortage inachievement of the Government in solving the housing shortage in
urban areas. The Committee feel that even after three years of theurban areas. The Committee feel that even after three years of theurban areas. The Committee feel that even after three years of theurban areas. The Committee feel that even after three years of theurban areas. The Committee feel that even after three years of the
formulation of the National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy, 2007formulation of the National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy, 2007formulation of the National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy, 2007formulation of the National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy, 2007formulation of the National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy, 2007
States have not fully endorsed the NUHHP, 2007 policy as very fewStates have not fully endorsed the NUHHP, 2007 policy as very fewStates have not fully endorsed the NUHHP, 2007 policy as very fewStates have not fully endorsed the NUHHP, 2007 policy as very fewStates have not fully endorsed the NUHHP, 2007 policy as very few
States have prepared their own urban policy and majority of theStates have prepared their own urban policy and majority of theStates have prepared their own urban policy and majority of theStates have prepared their own urban policy and majority of theStates have prepared their own urban policy and majority of the
States are not coming forward in preparing their own urban housingStates are not coming forward in preparing their own urban housingStates are not coming forward in preparing their own urban housingStates are not coming forward in preparing their own urban housingStates are not coming forward in preparing their own urban housing
policy in consonance with it. Moreover, the Committee feel that thepolicy in consonance with it. Moreover, the Committee feel that thepolicy in consonance with it. Moreover, the Committee feel that thepolicy in consonance with it. Moreover, the Committee feel that thepolicy in consonance with it. Moreover, the Committee feel that the
schemes like ISHUP are not well received among the beneficiariesschemes like ISHUP are not well received among the beneficiariesschemes like ISHUP are not well received among the beneficiariesschemes like ISHUP are not well received among the beneficiariesschemes like ISHUP are not well received among the beneficiaries
and also despite good intentions of the Government privateand also despite good intentions of the Government privateand also despite good intentions of the Government privateand also despite good intentions of the Government privateand also despite good intentions of the Government private
participation is not forthcoming when it comes to development ofparticipation is not forthcoming when it comes to development ofparticipation is not forthcoming when it comes to development ofparticipation is not forthcoming when it comes to development ofparticipation is not forthcoming when it comes to development of
affordable housing projects. The Committee, therefore, reiterate thataffordable housing projects. The Committee, therefore, reiterate thataffordable housing projects. The Committee, therefore, reiterate thataffordable housing projects. The Committee, therefore, reiterate thataffordable housing projects. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that
there is need for a more proactive approach in addressing the problem
there is need for a more proactive approach in addressing the problemthere is need for a more proactive approach in addressing the problemthere is need for a more proactive approach in addressing the problemthere is need for a more proactive approach in addressing the problem
of urban housing shortage especially for people belonging to theof urban housing shortage especially for people belonging to theof urban housing shortage especially for people belonging to theof urban housing shortage especially for people belonging to theof urban housing shortage especially for people belonging to the
economically weaker sections and low income group. Since theeconomically weaker sections and low income group. Since theeconomically weaker sections and low income group. Since theeconomically weaker sections and low income group. Since theeconomically weaker sections and low income group. Since the
success of existing and future schemes to address the issue of housingsuccess of existing and future schemes to address the issue of housingsuccess of existing and future schemes to address the issue of housingsuccess of existing and future schemes to address the issue of housingsuccess of existing and future schemes to address the issue of housing
shortage is heavily depended on the initiative and cooperation theshortage is heavily depended on the initiative and cooperation theshortage is heavily depended on the initiative and cooperation theshortage is heavily depended on the initiative and cooperation theshortage is heavily depended on the initiative and cooperation the
Central Government receives from the States/UTs,–a series ofCentral Government receives from the States/UTs,–a series ofCentral Government receives from the States/UTs,–a series ofCentral Government receives from the States/UTs,–a series ofCentral Government receives from the States/UTs,–a series of
deliberations between the Centre and States Government is ofdeliberations between the Centre and States Government is ofdeliberations between the Centre and States Government is ofdeliberations between the Centre and States Government is ofdeliberations between the Centre and States Government is of

9
utmost importance. The Committeutmost importance. The Committeutmost importance. The Committeutmost importance. The Committeutmost importance. The Committe e would like to be apprised ofe would like to be apprised ofe would like to be apprised ofe would like to be apprised ofe would like to be apprised of
the specific and effective steps taken by the Government along withthe specific and effective steps taken by the Government along withthe specific and effective steps taken by the Government along withthe specific and effective steps taken by the Government along withthe specific and effective steps taken by the Government along with
their actual achievement towards solving this problem.their actual achievement towards solving this problem.their actual achievement towards solving this problem.their actual achievement towards solving this problem.their actual achievement towards solving this problem.
Recommendation (Serial No.7)Recommendation (Serial No.7)Recommendation (Serial No.7)Recommendation (Serial No.7)Recommendation (Serial No.7)
Interest Subsidy Scheme on Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP)Interest Subsidy Scheme on Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP)Interest Subsidy Scheme on Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP)Interest Subsidy Scheme on Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP)Interest Subsidy Scheme on Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP)
1.12 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that in order to make housing for the urban
poor affordable, the recently launched ISSHUP seeks to provide
interest subsidy of 5% per annum to the urban poor for loans of
Rs.1 lakh, taken during the 11th Plan, with the loan repayment
period of 15-20 years. The Committee have been informed that the
subsidy is fixed keeping in mind the repayment capacity of the EWS
and LIG categories with estimated income range of Rs. 3300 and
Rs. 3301 to Rs. 7300 per month, respectively. Further, if the loan
sanctioned is Rs.1 lakh for 15 years, the Net Present Value (NPV)
of the 5% interest subsidy would amount to Rs. 28985/-. The amount
released would be Rs.1 lakh.  However, repayment would be only
Rs.71,015/- and regular bank rate of interest would be charged,
which currently is  8% to 8.5% for housing loans of this size. As
per the Ministry, a subsidy of Rs.1100 crore is envisaged under the
Scheme which would result in creation of additional housing stock
of 3.10 lakh for EWS/LIG segments till 2012. In this regard, the
Committee note that the Scheme was introduced in the year
2008-2009, but it failed to take off during that year. Besides, the
Ministry has already informed the Committee about the proposal
to merge ISSHUP with another recently announced scheme entitled
‘Rajiv Awas Yojana’. Although the Ministry has submitted before
the Committee that the response of the States to ISSHUP has been
encouraging but the claim of the Ministry is yet to be substantiated
by figures. The Committee would like to be informed about the
physical progress of the Scheme.
The budgetary allocation for the financial year 2009-2010 for the
Scheme is a meagre Rs. 180.59 crore which is expected to cover only
51000 beneficiaries during the period. The Committee while

10
agreeing that ISSHUP is a good initiative, feel that it is not likely
to achieve much success on ground particularly in the mega cities
like Delhi, Mumbai and Bangalore because of two main factors i.e.
the cost of even one-room house/dwelling unit being much higher
than their repaying capacity and secondly, the subsidy would be
provided only for Rs. 1 lakh and for the remaining cost, the
borrower would have to borrow from other sources at a much higher
rate of interest, which would again be beyond his capacity to afford
a house. The Committee feel that this scheme overlooks the interests
of a huge portion of urban poor, who do not own any land yet are
in need on a roof of their heads. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the maximum limit of the amount comprising the
subsidy component should be revised keeping in view the present
situation and make it more realistic so that more beneficiaries are
covered under the Scheme.”
1.13 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as
follows:—
“The Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISHUP)
is the first scheme aimed at extending institutional housing finance
by the banks and the Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) to the
Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) and Low Income Group (LIG)
households in the urban areas. The two Central Nodal Agencies
(CNAs) under the scheme, namely, National Housing Bank (NHB)
and Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd. (HUDCO)
have actively followed up the scheme with various banks and HFCs.
NHB has signed MOA with 16 banks and 6 HFCs while HUDCO
has signed Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) with 11 banks and
02 HFCs. The Ministry has held meetings with the Banks and
Financial Institutions on board on 14.12.2009 and 19.2.2010 and
encouraged them to review and follow the scheme through the State
Level Bankers Committee (SLBC). Ministry officers have gone to
several states to explain and persuade. The assessment of the
Ministry is that the scheme is popular with banks and the
beneficiaries are also happy with it. The main difficulty in the
scheme taking off is the ability of the beneficiary to approach the

11
banks and transact the paperwork.  Therefore, the Ministry’s effort
is to get the beneficiaries to put forward applications and to create
cells to help loanees.
Government of Andhra Pradesh has assigned a target of 2.36
lakh beneficiaries district-wise and bank-wise. AP State Housing
Corporation Ltd. (APSHCL), the State level nodal agency has already
identified and sanctioned 43,711 applications in convergence with
a State Government Housing Scheme i.e. INDIRAMMA, with loan
amount involving 51.17 crore and disbursement of Rs. 19.76 crore
has taken place. Government of Karnataka too has identified the
State level Nodal Agency and the scheme is to be implemented at
District Level by the concerned District Collector while in case of
ULBs the onus is with the Municipal Commissioner.  A target of
two lakhs beneficiaries under the scheme has been assigned among
banks. Government of Tamil Nadu too is likely to arrive at targets
shortly.
As regard the loan limit under the Scheme, the same for EWS
and LIG is Rs.1 lakh and Rs. 1.6 lakh respectively. However, the
subsidy under the Scheme is available for loan amount  upto
Rs. 1 lakh only. The income ceilings of EWS and LIG are presently
defined as household having an average monthly income upto
Rs. 3300 and household having an average monthly income
between Rs. 3301 and Rs. 7300 respectively. The repayment capacity
of EWS and LIG category is generally taken as 25% — 30% and
30%  respectively.   The present loan ceilings have been arrived at
on the basis of this repaying capacity and if the loan amount is
raised it will go beyond the repayment capacity of these income
categories thus driving out the intended beneficiaries. Besides banks
are not likely to be forthcoming with larger loans, even
Rs. 1 lakh loan to the EWS category households is pathbreaking.”
1.141.141.141.141.14 The Committee regret to note that the entire ISHUPThe Committee regret to note that the entire ISHUPThe Committee regret to note that the entire ISHUPThe Committee regret to note that the entire ISHUPThe Committee regret to note that the entire ISHUP
Scheme has failed to take off on the expected lines even when itScheme has failed to take off on the expected lines even when itScheme has failed to take off on the expected lines even when itScheme has failed to take off on the expected lines even when itScheme has failed to take off on the expected lines even when it
is scheduled to expire in 2012. The Committee are not convincedis scheduled to expire in 2012. The Committee are not convincedis scheduled to expire in 2012. The Committee are not convincedis scheduled to expire in 2012. The Committee are not convincedis scheduled to expire in 2012. The Committee are not convinced
with the assessment of the Ministry that the scheme is popular withwith the assessment of the Ministry that the scheme is popular withwith the assessment of the Ministry that the scheme is popular withwith the assessment of the Ministry that the scheme is popular withwith the assessment of the Ministry that the scheme is popular with
banks and the beneficiaries are also happy with it, especially keepingbanks and the beneficiaries are also happy with it, especially keepingbanks and the beneficiaries are also happy with it, especially keepingbanks and the beneficiaries are also happy with it, especially keepingbanks and the beneficiaries are also happy with it, especially keeping
in mind the dismal performance of the scheme in last two yearsin mind the dismal performance of the scheme in last two yearsin mind the dismal performance of the scheme in last two yearsin mind the dismal performance of the scheme in last two yearsin mind the dismal performance of the scheme in last two years .....

12
The Committee further feel that though certain targets have beenThe Committee further feel that though certain targets have beenThe Committee further feel that though certain targets have beenThe Committee further feel that though certain targets have beenThe Committee further feel that though certain targets have been
assigned to the banks but the scheme has not been properlyassigned to the banks but the scheme has not been properlyassigned to the banks but the scheme has not been properlyassigned to the banks but the scheme has not been properlyassigned to the banks but the scheme has not been properly
popularized and advertised as has been  done by the Governmentpopularized and advertised as has been  done by the Governmentpopularized and advertised as has been  done by the Governmentpopularized and advertised as has been  done by the Governmentpopularized and advertised as has been  done by the Government
in other schemes like NREGS. Absence of retail participation fromin other schemes like NREGS. Absence of retail participation fromin other schemes like NREGS. Absence of retail participation fromin other schemes like NREGS. Absence of retail participation fromin other schemes like NREGS. Absence of retail participation from
the above scheme is as endorsement of this fact. The example ofthe above scheme is as endorsement of this fact. The example ofthe above scheme is as endorsement of this fact. The example ofthe above scheme is as endorsement of this fact. The example ofthe above scheme is as endorsement of this fact. The example of
Andhra Pradesh is an illustration as to how the scheme should haveAndhra Pradesh is an illustration as to how the scheme should haveAndhra Pradesh is an illustration as to how the scheme should haveAndhra Pradesh is an illustration as to how the scheme should haveAndhra Pradesh is an illustration as to how the scheme should have
been promoted from the very beginning. Even in this case, also retailbeen promoted from the very beginning. Even in this case, also retailbeen promoted from the very beginning. Even in this case, also retailbeen promoted from the very beginning. Even in this case, also retailbeen promoted from the very beginning. Even in this case, also retail
participation is almost absent and it merely talks about disbursementparticipation is almost absent and it merely talks about disbursementparticipation is almost absent and it merely talks about disbursementparticipation is almost absent and it merely talks about disbursementparticipation is almost absent and it merely talks about disbursement
of loan amount of Rs.19.76 crore while the total outlay proposedof loan amount of Rs.19.76 crore while the total outlay proposedof loan amount of Rs.19.76 crore while the total outlay proposedof loan amount of Rs.19.76 crore while the total outlay proposedof loan amount of Rs.19.76 crore while the total outlay proposed
during the Eleventh plan period is Rs.1100 crore. The Committeeduring the Eleventh plan period is Rs.1100 crore. The Committeeduring the Eleventh plan period is Rs.1100 crore. The Committeeduring the Eleventh plan period is Rs.1100 crore. The Committeeduring the Eleventh plan period is Rs.1100 crore. The Committee
while appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry to convince thewhile appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry to convince thewhile appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry to convince thewhile appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry to convince thewhile appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry to convince the
banks and financial institutions, would also like to be apprised ofbanks and financial institutions, would also like to be apprised ofbanks and financial institutions, would also like to be apprised ofbanks and financial institutions, would also like to be apprised ofbanks and financial institutions, would also like to be apprised of
the efforts put in by the Government to popularize this schemethe efforts put in by the Government to popularize this schemethe efforts put in by the Government to popularize this schemethe efforts put in by the Government to popularize this schemethe efforts put in by the Government to popularize this scheme
among the beneficiaries and the steps taken by the Ministry towardsamong the beneficiaries and the steps taken by the Ministry towardsamong the beneficiaries and the steps taken by the Ministry towardsamong the beneficiaries and the steps taken by the Ministry towardsamong the beneficiaries and the steps taken by the Ministry towards
creation of a dedicated cell for assisting the loanees. The Committeecreation of a dedicated cell for assisting the loanees. The Committeecreation of a dedicated cell for assisting the loanees. The Committeecreation of a dedicated cell for assisting the loanees. The Committeecreation of a dedicated cell for assisting the loanees. The Committee
feel that the scheme has feel that the scheme has feel that the scheme has feel that the scheme has feel that the scheme has failed to gain any significant momentumfailed to gain any significant momentumfailed to gain any significant momentumfailed to gain any significant momentumfailed to gain any significant momentum
due to existing difference between subsidized loan component ofdue to existing difference between subsidized loan component ofdue to existing difference between subsidized loan component ofdue to existing difference between subsidized loan component ofdue to existing difference between subsidized loan component of
Rs.1 Lakh and the costs of the dwelling units in major cities whichRs.1 Lakh and the costs of the dwelling units in major cities whichRs.1 Lakh and the costs of the dwelling units in major cities whichRs.1 Lakh and the costs of the dwelling units in major cities whichRs.1 Lakh and the costs of the dwelling units in major cities which
is much higher than that. The Committee reiterate that there is anis much higher than that. The Committee reiterate that there is anis much higher than that. The Committee reiterate that there is anis much higher than that. The Committee reiterate that there is anis much higher than that. The Committee reiterate that there is an
urgent need to revisit the entire scheme and increase the subsidisedurgent need to revisit the entire scheme and increase the subsidisedurgent need to revisit the entire scheme and increase the subsidisedurgent need to revisit the entire scheme and increase the subsidisedurgent need to revisit the entire scheme and increase the subsidised
loan component.loan component.loan component.loan component.loan component.
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)Recommendation (Serial No. 11)Recommendation (Serial No. 11)Recommendation (Serial No. 11)Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
Social Auditing and Monitoring of SchemesSocial Auditing and Monitoring of SchemesSocial Auditing and Monitoring of SchemesSocial Auditing and Monitoring of SchemesSocial Auditing and Monitoring of Schemes
1.15 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are happy to learn that in line with their
recommendation in the earlier Demands for Grants Report
(2008-2009) suggesting social auditing of various schemes run by
the Ministry for an assessment of the Government’s endeavour to
provide infrastructure and basic services to the urban poor, the
Ministry has introduced the concept of social Audit in the
monitoring of schemes supported by them. The Committee were
convinced that such a procedure can demonstrate the social,
economic benefits of various schemes and also pinpoint limitations,
if any in the same. In their view, such an effort would enable the

13
Government to increase accountability as well as enhance people’s
participation in the democratic process in the country. In this
connection, the Committee have now been informed that for social
auditing, the Government is trying to bring on board some
Non-Governmental Organisations to work with the municipalities
to do a people-to-people audit of houses constructed and the projects
under various schemes for urban poor. Besides, a manual on Social
Audit is under process of validation and two projects under BSUP
and IHSDP, in Andhra Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh respectively,
are currently being run as pilot projects having independent social
audits. The Committee hope that the Manual on Social Auditing
would be validated expeditiously and the 2 pilot social audits, as
initiated, will be completed within a set timeframe. They would like
to know the results achieved in the said pilot projects.
In this context, the Committee further feel that involving the
elected representatives of the people in the Parliament/State
Assemblies in social auditing of schemes can be very beneficial.
The Committee are aware that the Ministry of Rural Development
has  developed a procedure whereby a ‘Vigilance Committee’ under
the chairmanship of the local member of Parliament looks into the
progress of various ongoing schemes supported by that Ministry.
The Committee further note that the Union Government
has recently decided to involve MPs/MLAs for monitoring the
implementation of some of its welfare schemes viz. the Prime
Minister’s new 15 point programme for minorities which includes
UIG and UIDSSMT run by the Ministry of Urban
Development. The Committee are confident that MPs/MLAs, who
represent common people at the grass root level are aware of the
slippages in implementation of Schemes and thus well-suited to
monitor as to whether the credit facilities are  actually reaching the
beneficiaries or the construction of houses under JNNURM
is qualitatively better. The direct involvement of the elected
representatives in the process would also help in improving the
delivery mechanism as well as ensuring that middlemen and other
persons responsible for sabotaging various schemes for the
urban poor do not go scot-free. The Committee, therefore,

14
recommend that the Ministry should explore the possibility of
involving people’s representatives in the process of social audit of
projects/schemes supported by the Government, and advise the
States too, accordingly. The Committee further desire that the
findings of social audit, once received, should be seriously
considered by the Government to ensure that projects having
substandard quality are rectified on an  urgent basis.”
1.16 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as
follows:—
“Regarding the manual on Social Auditing and pilot projects of
Social Auditing, draft manual on social auditing and toolkit have
been prepared by the Centre for Good Governance, Hyderabad. The
guidelines have been tested through two pilot projects.  The Ministry
of HUPA has sought comments of the Technical Advisory Group
under JNNURM on the same, before finalizing the Manual. The
version 1 of the manual and toolkit have been supplied to States
as a guide for social audit of BSUP and IHSDP projects. Being a
new initiative of this kind in the area of slum upgradation/urban
housing for the poor, it has taken more than the expected time to
complete the process of preparing manual and toolkit.
On the suggestion to involve elected representatives of the
people in the Parliament/State Assemblies in social auditing, the
Ministry is in the process of preparing an Advisory to States for
their involvement in JNNURM (BSUP and IHSDP) processes
including social audit. Regarding the concern expressed by the
Committee to seriously consider the findings of Social Audit to
ensure quality projects, Ministry would take appropriate action.”
1.171.171.171.171.17 The Committee note that from the action taken repliesThe Committee note that from the action taken repliesThe Committee note that from the action taken repliesThe Committee note that from the action taken repliesThe Committee note that from the action taken replies
that the manual on the toolkit has been drafted and sent to thethat the manual on the toolkit has been drafted and sent to thethat the manual on the toolkit has been drafted and sent to thethat the manual on the toolkit has been drafted and sent to thethat the manual on the toolkit has been drafted and sent to the
Technical Advisory Group under JNNURM for their comments. TheTechnical Advisory Group under JNNURM for their comments. TheTechnical Advisory Group under JNNURM for their comments. TheTechnical Advisory Group under JNNURM for their comments. TheTechnical Advisory Group under JNNURM for their comments. The
Committee would like to emphasize that since it has already beenCommittee would like to emphasize that since it has already beenCommittee would like to emphasize that since it has already beenCommittee would like to emphasize that since it has already beenCommittee would like to emphasize that since it has already been
delayed, there should be no further loss of time in this regard anddelayed, there should be no further loss of time in this regard anddelayed, there should be no further loss of time in this regard anddelayed, there should be no further loss of time in this regard anddelayed, there should be no further loss of time in this regard and
utmost importance be accorded in finalizing thutmost importance be accorded in finalizing thutmost importance be accorded in finalizing thutmost importance be accorded in finalizing thutmost importance be accorded in finalizing the manual. As regards,e manual. As regards,e manual. As regards,e manual. As regards,e manual. As regards,
involvement of elected representatives in social auditing andinvolvement of elected representatives in social auditing andinvolvement of elected representatives in social auditing andinvolvement of elected representatives in social auditing andinvolvement of elected representatives in social auditing and

15
monitoring of schemes and setting umonitoring of schemes and setting umonitoring of schemes and setting umonitoring of schemes and setting umonitoring of schemes and setting up of Vigilance Committees underp of Vigilance Committees underp of Vigilance Committees underp of Vigilance Committees underp of Vigilance Committees under
the Chairmanship of the local Members of Parliament to monitorthe Chairmanship of the local Members of Parliament to monitorthe Chairmanship of the local Members of Parliament to monitorthe Chairmanship of the local Members of Parliament to monitorthe Chairmanship of the local Members of Parliament to monitor
the progress of various ongoing schemes supported by the Ministry,the progress of various ongoing schemes supported by the Ministry,the progress of various ongoing schemes supported by the Ministry,the progress of various ongoing schemes supported by the Ministry,the progress of various ongoing schemes supported by the Ministry,
the Ministry is still in the process of preparing advisory for the Statesthe Ministry is still in the process of preparing advisory for the Statesthe Ministry is still in the process of preparing advisory for the Statesthe Ministry is still in the process of preparing advisory for the Statesthe Ministry is still in the process of preparing advisory for the States
in this regard. The Committee reiterate that immediate steps bein this regard. The Committee reiterate that immediate steps bein this regard. The Committee reiterate that immediate steps bein this regard. The Committee reiterate that immediate steps bein this regard. The Committee reiterate that immediate steps be
taken to make it mandatory for greater involvement of electedtaken to make it mandatory for greater involvement of electedtaken to make it mandatory for greater involvement of electedtaken to make it mandatory for greater involvement of electedtaken to make it mandatory for greater involvement of elected
members in the process of monitoring and evaluation of schemes/members in the process of monitoring and evaluation of schemes/members in the process of monitoring and evaluation of schemes/members in the process of monitoring and evaluation of schemes/members in the process of monitoring and evaluation of schemes/
projects undertaken by the Ministry.projects undertaken by the Ministry.projects undertaken by the Ministry.projects undertaken by the Ministry.projects undertaken by the Ministry.
Recommendation (Serial No.12)Recommendation (Serial No.12)Recommendation (Serial No.12)Recommendation (Serial No.12)Recommendation (Serial No.12)
Community Development NetworksCommunity Development NetworksCommunity Development NetworksCommunity Development NetworksCommunity Development Networks
1.18 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that to enable the urban poor to form their
own organizations for monitoring the Government programmes
meant for them through a collective voice, it has been envisaged
to establish Community Development Networks (CDNs) with the
provision of funding upto Rs.10 lakh. The Committee, however, fail
to understand as to why no proposal has been received so far
despite the Ministry’s efforts with the States to this effect. They feel
that the Government may counsel the States to popularize the
concept and seek assistance of the officers dealing with the SJSRY
and JNNURM in this direction. The Committee are of the firm
opinion that the participation of the Communities is the best way
to ensure the quality and performance of the schemes as well as
maintenance of the assets since they, being beneficiaries, are aware
of practical glitches in availing benefits of the schemes. The
Committee desire to know the progress of the concept in the future
course.”
1.19 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as
follows:—
“Regarding the progress of Community Development Network, the
Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation is pursuing with
the States for submission of innovative proposals. Guidelines have
been formulated and circulated. Under JNNURM currently States

16
and UTs are focusing on projects already approved with JNNURM
financing pattern involving Central share, State share and
beneficiary contribution.  More than 1300 projects covering more
than 14.5 lakh houses have been approved and the States are
focusing on implementation of the same.
Community Development Network projects are small innova-
tive projects which are to be sanctioned involving community
contribution to the tune of 10%. It is understood that such
contribution is not forthcoming. However, once the main BSUP and
IHSDP projects sanctioned are implemented, it is hoped that
communities coming forward with innovative projects would be
encouraged by States to fill in the gap in infrastructure facilities in
these colonies or for unforeseen but justified requirements. The
Ministry will continue to pursue with the States the adoption of
attitudes and strategies that give voice and space to the community
to play a decisive participatory role.”
1.201.201.201.201.20 The Committee in their recommendation had stressedThe Committee in their recommendation had stressedThe Committee in their recommendation had stressedThe Committee in their recommendation had stressedThe Committee in their recommendation had stressed
the need to involve local communities by promoting Communitythe need to involve local communities by promoting Communitythe need to involve local communities by promoting Communitythe need to involve local communities by promoting Communitythe need to involve local communities by promoting Community
Development Network (CDN) and counsel the States to popularizeDevelopment Network (CDN) and counsel the States to popularizeDevelopment Network (CDN) and counsel the States to popularizeDevelopment Network (CDN) and counsel the States to popularizeDevelopment Network (CDN) and counsel the States to popularize
the concept and seek assistance of the officers dealing with thethe concept and seek assistance of the officers dealing with thethe concept and seek assistance of the officers dealing with thethe concept and seek assistance of the officers dealing with thethe concept and seek assistance of the officers dealing with the
SJSRY and JNNURM in this direction. The Ministry in their actionSJSRY and JNNURM in this direction. The Ministry in their actionSJSRY and JNNURM in this direction. The Ministry in their actionSJSRY and JNNURM in this direction. The Ministry in their actionSJSRY and JNNURM in this direction. The Ministry in their action
taken reply have merely stated they are pursuing with the Statestaken reply have merely stated they are pursuing with the Statestaken reply have merely stated they are pursuing with the Statestaken reply have merely stated they are pursuing with the Statestaken reply have merely stated they are pursuing with the States
for submission of innovative proposals in this regards. However,for submission of innovative proposals in this regards. However,for submission of innovative proposals in this regards. However,for submission of innovative proposals in this regards. However,for submission of innovative proposals in this regards. However,
States and UTs are currently focusing on projects already approvedStates and UTs are currently focusing on projects already approvedStates and UTs are currently focusing on projects already approvedStates and UTs are currently focusing on projects already approvedStates and UTs are currently focusing on projects already approved
under JNNURM and once the main BSUP and IHSDP projectsunder JNNURM and once the main BSUP and IHSDP projectsunder JNNURM and once the main BSUP and IHSDP projectsunder JNNURM and once the main BSUP and IHSDP projectsunder JNNURM and once the main BSUP and IHSDP projects
sanctioned are implemented, it is hoped that communities comingsanctioned are implemented, it is hoped that communities comingsanctioned are implemented, it is hoped that communities comingsanctioned are implemented, it is hoped that communities comingsanctioned are implemented, it is hoped that communities coming
forward with innovative projects would be encouraged by States. Theforward with innovative projects would be encouraged by States. Theforward with innovative projects would be encouraged by States. Theforward with innovative projects would be encouraged by States. Theforward with innovative projects would be encouraged by States. The
Committee are perturbed to note that the Government has notCommittee are perturbed to note that the Government has notCommittee are perturbed to note that the Government has notCommittee are perturbed to note that the Government has notCommittee are perturbed to note that the Government has not
accorded due importance to the suggestion for establishment ofaccorded due importance to the suggestion for establishment ofaccorded due importance to the suggestion for establishment ofaccorded due importance to the suggestion for establishment ofaccorded due importance to the suggestion for establishment of
CDNs. It is not clear as to why the CDNs cannot be promotedCDNs. It is not clear as to why the CDNs cannot be promotedCDNs. It is not clear as to why the CDNs cannot be promotedCDNs. It is not clear as to why the CDNs cannot be promotedCDNs. It is not clear as to why the CDNs cannot be promoted
simultaneously and why the Government is waiting for the Statessimultaneously and why the Government is waiting for the Statessimultaneously and why the Government is waiting for the Statessimultaneously and why the Government is waiting for the Statessimultaneously and why the Government is waiting for the States
to complete the ongoing 1300 projects and then pay attention towardsto complete the ongoing 1300 projects and then pay attention towardsto complete the ongoing 1300 projects and then pay attention towardsto complete the ongoing 1300 projects and then pay attention towardsto complete the ongoing 1300 projects and then pay attention towards
the mechanism suggesthe mechanism suggesthe mechanism suggesthe mechanism suggesthe mechanism suggested by the Committee (CDN) to monitor theseted by the Committee (CDN) to monitor theseted by the Committee (CDN) to monitor these
ted by the Committee (CDN) to monitor theseted by the Committee (CDN) to monitor these
very schemes. There is no doubt that participation of the communityvery schemes. There is no doubt that participation of the communityvery schemes. There is no doubt that participation of the communityvery schemes. There is no doubt that participation of the communityvery schemes. There is no doubt that participation of the community
is the best way to ensure the quality and performance of the variousis the best way to ensure the quality and performance of the variousis the best way to ensure the quality and performance of the variousis the best way to ensure the quality and performance of the variousis the best way to ensure the quality and performance of the various

17
schemes including maintenance of the assets. The Committee,schemes including maintenance of the assets. The Committee,schemes including maintenance of the assets. The Committee,schemes including maintenance of the assets. The Committee,schemes including maintenance of the assets. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Ministry and State Governments shouldtherefore, desire that the Ministry and State Governments shouldtherefore, desire that the Ministry and State Governments shouldtherefore, desire that the Ministry and State Governments shouldtherefore, desire that the Ministry and State Governments should
accord due importance to the suggestions put forward byaccord due importance to the suggestions put forward byaccord due importance to the suggestions put forward byaccord due importance to the suggestions put forward byaccord due importance to the suggestions put forward by
the Committee and simultaneous promote involvement of thethe Committee and simultaneous promote involvement of thethe Committee and simultaneous promote involvement of thethe Committee and simultaneous promote involvement of thethe Committee and simultaneous promote involvement of the
communities through CDNs and not wait for implementations ofcommunities through CDNs and not wait for implementations ofcommunities through CDNs and not wait for implementations ofcommunities through CDNs and not wait for implementations ofcommunities through CDNs and not wait for implementations of
BSUP and IHSDP projects, after which these CDNs would have veryBSUP and IHSDP projects, after which these CDNs would have veryBSUP and IHSDP projects, after which these CDNs would have veryBSUP and IHSDP projects, after which these CDNs would have veryBSUP and IHSDP projects, after which these CDNs would have very
little role left in evaluation and monitoring of the schemes, the verylittle role left in evaluation and monitoring of the schemes, the verylittle role left in evaluation and monitoring of the schemes, the verylittle role left in evaluation and monitoring of the schemes, the verylittle role left in evaluation and monitoring of the schemes, the very
purpose for which they were conceptualized.purpose for which they were conceptualized.purpose for which they were conceptualized.purpose for which they were conceptualized.purpose for which they were conceptualized.

18
CHAPTER IICHAPTER IICHAPTER IICHAPTER IICHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) – Operation of the
modified scheme
2.1 SJSRY, the lone poverty alleviation scheme for urban dwellers,
has been under implementation since 1997. However, the scheme has so
far failed to make a difference in the lives of urban poor due to several
deficiencies, on which the Committee have been commenting in their
reports since 2005. Now they note that substantial modifications in the
guidelines of the scheme have been affected and the modified scheme
has been operating since 1st April, 2009. Among the major improvements
brought about in the guidelines of the scheme are revision of funding
share between the Centre and the States in the ratio of 90:10,
removal of educational criteria limit for a beneficiary under its USEP
component, revision of individual category self-employment project
ceiling as Rs. 2,00,000 and enhancement of subsidy to 25% of the project
cost up to Rs. 50,000, etc. The Committee find that the modifications are
comparatively closer to the ground reality now and hope
that the scheme would be received better by the beneficiaries. However,
the Committee gather an impression from their past interaction with
SJSRY beneficiaries that perhaps the scheme has not been publicised in
a vigorous manner in many States, in the way rural job scheme like
NREGS (National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme),
is being projected. Besides, the Public Sector banks, through which
subsidies are disbursed under the SJSRY, also need to show more
enthusiasm towards the scheme and also extend cooperation towards the
potential beneficiaries. The Committee hope that the implementing
agencies of SJSRY would be sensitized by the Ministry on these aspects.
They are convinced that once these issues are taken care of, the SJSRY

19
would not only receive a better response from the urban poor but would
also be able to make a substantial difference in their lives.
Reply of the Government
2.2 The Ministry has taken various steps to publicize the scheme
of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) and also to sensitize
the programme functionaries, Banks, NGOs and other stakeholders
through capacity building activities. Under the Information,
Education and Communication (IEC) component of the scheme, training
programmes, workshops and other publicity works are done so that the
scheme is disseminated to the grass root level effectively. Ministry will
further promote publicity campaigns so as to publicize the scheme in
urban poor more effectively.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No.H-11013/11/2009-Bt.(HUPA) dated 15.03.2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)Recommendation (Serial No. 6)Recommendation (Serial No. 6)Recommendation (Serial No. 6)Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
BSUP and IHSDPBSUP and IHSDPBSUP and IHSDPBSUP and IHSDPBSUP and IHSDP
2.3 The Committee note that under Jawaharlal Nehru National
Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation has been entrusted with the nodal responsibility for
an integrated slum development in the 65 Mission cities under the BSUP
and for providing shelter and basic amenities in other non-Mission cities
under the IHSDP. They further note that these programmes focus on
improving the living conditions of the urban poor, especially those
residing in slums. The Committee are aware that there is a tremendous
demand for approval of slum development projects from small and
medium towns and the present allocation of fund is insufficient. The
Committee further note that in pursuance of the Government’s 100 Days
Agenda, the Ministry has now further identified 28 cities with population
of 5 lakh and more to be covered under JNNURM, of which the BSUP
is a Sub-Mission. The Committee feel that the inclusion of 28 more cities
under the Mission would automatically require more Additional Central
Assistance. The Committee note that the Government have allocated

20
Rs. 2524.65 crore as ACA for BSUP and Rs. 1117.58 crore as ACA for
IHSDP to provide a boost to these schemes. However, they feel that the
said allocation may need to be augmented further to match the intended
targets.
The Committee note that the duration of the JNNURM is 7 years
beginning from 2005-06 till 2011-12 and that even after 4 years of its
commencement, out of 1459272 sanctioned dwelling units only 130428
units have been completed and construction of 383779 units is in progress
under both the BSUP and IHSDP components. It is a matter of deep
concern as the Mission has already reached its mid term. The Committee
are pained to note that some of the States/Union Territories viz. Daman
and Diu, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Manipur, Sikkim and
Uttarakhand portray a dismal picture showing nil performance in these
schemes. The reasons attributed to this slow progress, according to the
Ministry, are cropping up of litigation and delay in starting the housing
projects due to non-availability of encumbrance-free lands for housing
the poor. The Committee feel that problem of encumbrance-free lands
and litigations are common in the acquisition of lands for housing and
the onus is on the State Governments as well as on the courts to ensure
a speedier solution. The Committee feel that specific policies for
acquisition and development of lands for housing activity should be
formulated. Besides, certain other bottlenecks as highlighted by the
Ministry, for instance, difficulties in deciding list of beneficiaries, non-
release of State share in time, inability of beneficiaries to contribute
10-12% of the cost of housing and increase in costs due to cost escalation
etc. need to be addressed early so as to avoid delays in the completion
of targets. The Committee expect that the Ministry has already taken up
the matter with the States with a view to addressing these shortcomings.
The Committee further observe from the statement furnished by the
Ministry that the performance of States in terms of timely submission
of Utilization Certification (UC) is also extremely dismal right from the
commencement of JNNURM. The Committee deplore this fact and expect
the Ministry to issue directions to the States to furnish the UCs within
the given time frame so that the progress of projects is not hampered
for want of funds in time. The Committee desire that with the help of
PEARL (Peer Experience and Reflective Learning) programme, it should

21
be ensured that allocated funds are utilized by the slow moving States
too so that the impact of the BSUP and the IHSDP is holistically visible
in all the States and the projects are completed within the stipulated time.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
2.4 The proposal to allocate funds and increase the number of cities
covered under JNNURM by 28 cities has not been accepted. A new
scheme, Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) has been announced which envisages
a ‘Slum-free India’ by supporting States and Union Territories which are
willing to accord property rights to the urban poor. Any further allocation
for slum re-development is expected to be covered under RAY.
As on 31.1.2010, States have reported the completion of 2,02,730
dwelling units and ongoing work for 6,59,282 dwelling units.  Thus, the
mid-term target of 5 lakh in terms of houses completed/in progress has
been achieved.
With reference to policies for acquisition and development of land
for housing activity, the Ministry of HUPA has always impressed upon
the States to give priority to allocate land for housing the urban poor.
Land being a State subject, the role of Central Government is limited.
A proposal for a Committee to relook the policies for the acquisition and
development of lands for housing is currently under consideration.
With reference to the Committee’s concerns regarding certain lagging
states, the Ministry is pleased to report considerable progress. Over 70%
of their ACA allocation has been committed for the States of
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Manipur, and Sikkim as on 31.1.2010.
In the case of Sikkim, this figure is 94%.  Further, acknowledging the
lag in physical progress in the aforementioned States, the Ministry has
sanctioned projects to provide dwelling units in all these States and
additional efforts are underway to facilitate the completion of projects
in these States.
In so far as the bottlenecks highlighted by the Ministry such as the
identification of beneficiaries, the inability of beneficiaries to contribute
their share of  10-12% of the cost of housing, etc., the Ministry is
constantly exhorting and guiding the States through the Central
Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee and review meetings.  Where it

22
was found that the States have not released their share along with the
Central share to the Urban Local Bodies, the Ministry has advised them
to do so immediately. This aspect is being taken into consideration when
the release of the next installment of central assistance is to be sanctioned.
States have further been advised to take the initiative to arrange for bank
loans at a Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) for the beneficiary
contribution. They have been advised to exercise extreme care in deciding
the contribution of the State and ULB in order to ensure that the
beneficiary share does not put a burden on the beneficiaries beyond their
capacity.
States have further been advised that increases in cost escalations
have to be met by the provision of necessary assistance by the states by
way of State share.
In so far as submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) is concerned,
no subsequent installment is being sanctioned until the UC for the
previous/past installment has been submitted in the formats prescribed
for this purpose. The submission of UCs is directly linked to the progress
on the ground. The UCs are submitted by the state on utilization of 70%
of the funds released.  As on 31.12.2009, cumulatively the Ministry has
got UCs for an amount of 1908.33 crore (BSUP and IHSDP together).  No
project is being delayed on this count, as there is sufficient unutilized
Central, State and ULB and beneficiary share for work to continue
uninterrupted even as these formalities are completed.  It may be noted
that the cumulative amount of UCs received as on 31.12.2008 was
Rs. 1036.89 crore.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No.H-11013/11/2009-Bt.(HUPA) dated 15.03.2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)Recommendation (Serial No. 9)Recommendation (Serial No. 9)Recommendation (Serial No. 9)Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
Easier Credit facilities for urban poor under SJSRY, ISSHUP &Easier Credit facilities for urban poor under SJSRY, ISSHUP &Easier Credit facilities for urban poor under SJSRY, ISSHUP &Easier Credit facilities for urban poor under SJSRY, ISSHUP &Easier Credit facilities for urban poor under SJSRY, ISSHUP &
JNNURMJNNURMJNNURMJNNURMJNNURM
2.5 The Committee appreciate that schemes like SJSRY, ISSHUP
and JNNURM intend to provide credit facilities to urban poor for
supporting various activities like self-employment, construction of house

23
etc. However, the experience of the Committee so far suggests that
whenever urban poor go to the bank or a Government agency with a
loan request most of them return without any loans. There are lots of
formalities or guarantees required which poor people are not able to
complete. The Ministry has also admitted before the Committee that
getting the credit facility is the biggest problem for urban poor.
The Committee further find that though the provisions for providing
loans to the urban poor have been made and funds have been earmarked
for subsidised loans against dwelling units/houses under various
schemes for the EWS/LIG segments people, the disbursement of loans
to them is not a smooth process given the fact that this segment of
population do not have any credit history of loans. Further, since most
of the urban poor are  employed in informal sector and do not reside
in authorized areas, they face difficulty in producing proofs for regular
income  and residences and their requests for loans are declined by the
financial institutions.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the procedure for granting
the loans to the urban poor should be simplified and guidelines/norms
be relaxed/ revised so that more and more urban poor can avail credit
facilities easily and set up their own ventures and avail loans for housing
under the schemes. State level and District level Committees, which set
up targets for the banks or lending institutions, should also be instructed
in this regard to provide loans on softer terms to the intended
beneficiaries.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
2.6 The Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor
(ISHUP), as the first scheme aimed at extending institutional housing
finance by the banks and the Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) to the
Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) and Low Income Group (LIG)
households in the urban areas, has recognized the difficulty being faced
by the beneficiaries in obtaining collaterals and guarantees.  The scheme
provides that mortgage of the dwelling unit may be accepted as primary
security and that there would be no collateral security/third party
guarantee for loans upto and inclusive of Rs.1 lakh.  The scheme also
seeks to involve the State Government /Urban Local Bodies in facilitating

24
creation of a cell/desk and providing a social worker to assist the
beneficiaries understand the details of the scheme, the size of the Equated
Monthly Installments (EMI), the procedures and paperwork of the bank
and with obtaining the requisite certificates to get the loan and receipt
of repayment.
The credit provided by the Banks to urban poor under the scheme
of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) comes in the category
of priority sector lending and no collateral/guarantee is required from
the beneficiaries, as per the Reserve Bank of India directions.  The issue
of non-cooperation by Banks is taken up in the State Level Bankers
Committee Meetings, whenever required. In the capacity building
programmes/workshops on Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
(SJSRY), representatives from Banking Institutions are also invited so as
to sensitize them on the urban poverty alleviation issues.
Under JNNURM, the beneficiary contribution prescribed is mini-
mum 10-12 % of the cost of dwelling unit.  Where this contribution is
sourced through loan from banks, the ULBs generally make the upfront
payment. Thereafter, the beneficiary contribution is collected through
EMIs.  The EMIs are in the range of 10-15% of the monthly income of
the beneficiaries.  The repayment is to be made over a period of 10-15
years.  The States/ULBs have also been requested from time to time to
arrange for loans at Differential Rate of Interest.
Regarding the granting of home loans for the urban poor, a committee
has been convened for making recommendation on “Housing Micro
Finance”. In addition, the Ministry of Finance is in the process of
developing rules for microfinance institutions that will be applicable to
the urban poor.
Meanwhile, bearing in mind that not all slum dwellers may want
or may be able to access loans, it is planned to make provision in the
RAY for rental social housing in which no loan or down payment would
be required.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No.H-11013/11/2009-Bt.(HUPA) dated 15.03.2010]

25
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)Recommendation (Serial No. 10)Recommendation (Serial No. 10)Recommendation (Serial No. 10)Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
Third Party Monitoring of SchemesThird Party Monitoring of SchemesThird Party Monitoring of SchemesThird Party Monitoring of SchemesThird Party Monitoring of Schemes
2.7 The issue regarding Third Party Monitoring of schemes run by
Ministry of Urban Housing and Poverty Alleviation has engaged the
attention of the Committee for quite some time. They note that under the
BSUP and IHSDP component of JNNURM, around 15 lakh houses are
sanctioned for the urban poor all over the country under about
1300 projects. The Committee feel that examining the quality of the
houses built so far is a very important requirement before releasing
further funds to the States. During the evidence, the Committee have been
informed that apart from conducting technical scrutiny through agencies
engaged by the State/ULB and internal inspections through State PWD,
the Government is trying to establish a framework for third party
monitoring system for the same and asking the States to engage agencies
to monitor the quality of the construction of dwelling units/houses. In
this connection, the Committee feel that third party assessment needs to
be a very objective one wherein there is a nil chance of any fabrication
or manipulation of results or suppressing of facts. The Ministry has tried
to convince the Committee during evidence that an agency appointed by
them may not get requisite cooperation from the State Government.
However, the Committee are of the view that since the funds for the
Mission  are released from the Central Government’s Budget the Ministry
should insist upon the State Governments to appoint an assessing agency
from the agencies empanelled by the Ministry, as a mandatory
requirement to avail funds, so as to ensure the objectivity of the results.
The Committee would like to suggest that such empanelled agencies
should submit their independent feedback to the Central Government so
that the aim and objective of having a thirty party monitor is actually
realised.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
2.8 Taking into due consideration, the concern and suggestions
made by the Committee on Third Party Inspection of BSUP and IHSDP
projects, the Ministry is insisting upon a report by the Third Party
Inspection and Monitoring Agency (TPIMA) or by an independent

26
inspection team (where TPIMA has not been established) before releasing
subsequent instalments of Central assistance for the projects.
States are advised to appoint a TPIMA either from agencies
empanelled by the Central Government or agencies of their choice
following a transparent process. These agencies, once selected, are
required to submit one copy of their report to the Ministry also along
with comments of State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA).  Further, a direct
monitoring system has been proposed, as suggested by the Committee,
and approved, and Monitoring Agencies have been engaged directly by
the Ministry who would do sample project monitoring on the instructions
of the Ministry and would report directly to it.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No.H-11013/11/2009-Bt.(HUPA) dated 15.03.2010]

27
CHAPTER IIICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IIICHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
-NIL-

28
CHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)Recommendation (Serial No. 3)Recommendation (Serial No. 3)Recommendation (Serial No. 3)Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
Unspent balances and funds release under SJSRYUnspent balances and funds release under SJSRYUnspent balances and funds release under SJSRYUnspent balances and funds release under SJSRYUnspent balances and funds release under SJSRY
4.1 The Committee note that upto 30.09.2009, under the Swarna
Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), an amount of Rs. 58,196.36 lakh
is still available with States/UTs. They have been informed that the Centre
have so far not received Utilisation Certificates (UCs) for an amount of
Rs. 8250.84 lakh, which was released upto 2007-2008. The Committee fail
to understand why such a huge amount has remained to be shown as
utilized. The Committee are particularly perturbed by the inability of
States like, Jharkhand, Chattisgarh, Rajasthan and Jammu and Kashmir,
to submit utilization certificates for a huge amount of funds which they
have received for implementing SJSRY. They are of the view that such
a huge amount of unspent balance is a serious matter affecting the overall
performance of the scheme since non-submission of UCs result in delay
of further release of funds. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Government to take measures to motivate States to do the needful well
in time otherwise it may lead to reduction in the budgetary plan allocation
in their favour. The Committee also take note of the fact that Central
funds have not been released to many States/Union Territories till
30 September, 2009. The bulk of the funds, therefore, is likely to be
released to them in the third and fourth quarters of this financial year,
thus making it difficult for the States to release their share of funds. The
Committee, therefore, feel that appropriate steps needs to be taken to
address this issue urgently so as to achieve the financial as well as
physical targets fixed under the scheme.

29
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
4.2 The Ministry is making consistent efforts for utilization of
funds remaining unspent with the States/UTs. As per the updated
Reports/Utilisation Certificates received from the States/UTs, UCs for an
amount of Rs 25.66 Crore for the funds released upto 2007-2008 with
14 States/UTs (which is about 9.80% of the total funds released to these
States/UTs) are pending, as given below:
Unspent balances with State Governments under SJSRYUnspent balances with State Governments under SJSRYUnspent balances with State Governments under SJSRYUnspent balances with State Governments under SJSRYUnspent balances with State Governments under SJSRY
As on 2.3.2010
(Rs. in crores)
Sl. Names of States/ Central Funds UC Balance fund
No. UTs  released (including received available with
Opening Balance) till now States/UTs for
upto 2007-2008   which UCs are
due
12 3 4 5
11. Bihar 52.11 51.00 1.11
12. Chhattisgarh 29.82 29.92 0.00
13. Goa 2.23 1.64 0.59
14. Jammu & Kashmir 19.48 19.23 0.25
15. Jharkhand 15.56 11.01 4.55
16. Meghalaya 7.87 5.32 2.55
17. Punjab 16.55 14.98 1.57
18. Rajasthan 69.80 65.90 3.90
19. Tripura 18.85 17.97 0.88
10. A & N Islands 3.61 3.06 0.55

30
12 3 4 5
11. Chandigarh 7.83 2.63 5.20
12. Daman & Diu 2.43 0.20 2.23
13. Delhi 4.30 2.06 2.24
14. Puducherry 11.36 11.32 0.04
TOTAL 261.80 236.24 25.66
The State of Jharkhand has now submitted substantial amount of
UCs after much efforts of this Ministry. In case of Jammu & Kashmir,
UCs for an amount of Rs. 24.78 Lakhs only (out of the Rs. 849.375 Lakhs
released to it under special Prime Minister Reconstruction Plan in 2006-
2007 is pending now. Chhattisgarh has since submitted all the required
UCs. Rajasthan has also submitted Utilisation Certificates for some
amount. It may also be mentioned here that due to the preoccupation
of the States/UTs with the General Elections of Lok Sabha and also
because the revised Guidelines of SJSRY have come into effect since
1st April 2009, the pace of expenditure has been somewhat slower in
the first half of the year.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/11/2009-Bt.(HUPA) dated 15.03.2010]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
4.3 For the Comments of the Committee please see paragraph
no. 1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)Recommendation (Serial No. 5)Recommendation (Serial No. 5)Recommendation (Serial No. 5)Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
Housing ShortageHousing ShortageHousing ShortageHousing ShortageHousing Shortage
4.4 The Committee note that as per the estimates the total urban
housing shortage in the country has been projected to go up to
26.53 million during the 11th Five Year Plan (2007-2012), out of which
a major portion pertains to economically weaker sections and the low

31
income group category. Together, these two groups account for 99% of
the total housing deficit. Though the Ministry prepared the National
Urban Housing and Habitat Policy (NUHHP) in the year 2007 with
special focus on the needs of urban poor, which provides a road map
to the State Governments to comprehensively address the issue of housing
by preparing their own policy in accordance with the NUHHP, 2007, but
unfortunately it has not materialized so far. Only a few States are
preparing their urban housing policy in consonance with NUHHP, 2007.
The Committee are appalled at the gross insufficiency of houses for the
urban poor which is a result of the fact that urban planners have always
marginalized the housing needs of urban poor, despite being well aware
of their requirements of dwelling units. In this regard, the Committee
have already made several recommendations in their 40th Report on
‘Urban Housing’ and they still await the response of the Ministry on the
same. Meanwhile the Committee acknowledge the fact that as against
Rs. 120.71 crore which was allocated under BE 2008-2009, an amount
of Rs. 207.97 crore has been allocated in BE 2009-2010 under the head
‘Housing’. Though the actual requirement may be much more, the
Committee feel that still it is a step in the right direction and recommend
that the Government should strive to address the urban housing shortage
on a priority basis.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
4.5 The Ministry has submitted Action Taken Report on the Fortieth
Report of the Standing Committee on ‘Urban Housing’ on 19th February,
2010. The Hon’ble Committee has been informed that the ministry is
aware of the need and is striving to direct the policy and programme
initiatives towards housing needs of urban poor and directed its efforts
in this direction.
The Ministry has also taken several initiatives revolved around
facilitating affordable housing to the urban poor. The Ministry
formulated the first National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy, 2007
focusing on needs of urban area focused to promote a symbiotic
development of rural and urban areas with focus on provision of
“Affordable Housing For All” with special emphasis on vulnerable

32
sections of society such as Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, Backward
Classes, Minorities and the urban poor.
Since the Policy did not define affordability the Ministry set up a
Task Force under the Chairmanship of Mr. Deepak Parekh, Chairman
— HDFC Ltd. to study and make recommendations as to affordability
and the strategy to provide affordable housing pursuance of the Policy.
At the same time, aware that finance is a critical issue and noting
that the Policy aims at promoting larger flow of funds from governmental
and private sources for meeting housing needs, with suitably designed
fiscal concessions, the Ministry set up the Ashok Jha Committee to study
if HUDCO can be rejuvenated and restored to make construction and
social housing programmes.
The Ministry has also launched several schemes in the recent years
to encourage the State Governments to participate in social housing in
big way.
In 2005, the Government launched the Jawaharlal Nehru National
Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), to make provision, inter-alia, of
housing and basic services for the urban poor by a holistic and integrated
development of slums in 65 specified cities under the Sub Mission Basic
Services to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and in other cities and towns under
the Integrated Housing and Slum Development Programme (IHSDP).
In December 2008, another new scheme—Interest Subsidy Scheme
for Housing for the Urban Poor (ISHUP) was announced for providing
interest subsidy to make housing loans affordable and within the
repayment capacity of Economically Weaker Sections (EWS)/Low
Income Group (LIG).   The scheme makes available loans upto Rs.1 lakh
through Commercial Banks/Housing Finance Companies for the
purposes of construction/acquisition of houses with an interest subsidy
of 5%.
With a view to encourage allotment of land for EWS housing, another
Scheme for ‘Affordable Housing in Partnership’, was started under
which Central Government assistance is available for infrastructure
connectivities for housing projects which provide houses upto 80 Sq.mt.
carpet area of which at least 25% are for EWS/LIG.

In June 2009, with the intention to comprehensively address the issue
of slums, and to provide for housing in urban areas the Rajiv Awas
Yojana (RAY) has been announced.
The initiatives of the Govt. of India need to be supported and
supplemented by the efforts at the level of State Governments and Urban
Local Bodies (ULBs). The emphasis of State Housing Boards needs to be
calibrated to address the needs of Economically Weaker Sections (EWS)
and Low Income Group (LIG) housing and policy initiatives for legal and
regulatory reforms implemented by the States for bringing in more land
for urban housing.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/11/2009-Bt.(HUPA) dated 15.03.2010]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
4.6 For the Comments of the Committee please see paragraph
no. 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)Recommendation (Serial No. 7)Recommendation (Serial No. 7)Recommendation (Serial No. 7)Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
Interest Subsidy Scheme on Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP)Interest Subsidy Scheme on Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP)Interest Subsidy Scheme on Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP)Interest Subsidy Scheme on Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP)Interest Subsidy Scheme on Housing the Urban Poor (ISSHUP)
4.7 The Committee note that in order to make housing for the urban
poor affordable, the recently launched ISSHUP seeks to provide interest
subsidy of 5% per annum to the urban poor for loans of Rs. 1 lakh, taken
during the 11th Plan, with the loan repayment period of 15-20 years. The
Committee have been informed that the subsidy is fixed keeping in mind
the repayment capacity of the EWS and LIG categories with estimated
income range of Rs. 3300 and Rs. 3301 to Rs. 7300 per month, respectively.
Further, if the loan sanctioned is Rs. 1 lakh for 15 years, the Net Present
Value (NPV) of the 5% interest subsidy would amount to Rs. 28985/-.
The amount released would be Rs. 1 lakh.  However, repayment would
be only Rs. 71,015/- and regular bank rate of interest would be charged,
which currently is  8% to 8.5% for housing loans of this size. As per
the Ministry, a subsidy of Rs. 1100 crore is envisaged under the Scheme
which would result in creation of additional housing stock of 3.10 lakh
for EWS/LIG segments till 2012. In this regard, the Committee note that
33

the Scheme was introduced in the year 2008-2009, but it failed to take
off during that year. Besides, the Ministry has already informed the
Committee about the proposal to merge ISSHUP with another recently
announced scheme entitled ‘Rajiv Awas Yojana’. Although the Ministry
has submitted before the Committee that the response of the States to
ISSHUP has been encouraging but the claim of the Ministry is yet to be
substantiated by figures. The Committee would like to be informed about
the physical progress of the Scheme.
The budgetary allocation for the financial year 2009-2010 for the
Scheme is a meagre Rs. 180.59 crore which is expected to cover only 51000
beneficiaries during the period. The Committee while agreeing that
ISSHUP is a good initiative, feel that it is not likely to achieve much
success on ground particularly in the mega cities like Delhi, Mumbai and
Bangalore because of two main factors i.e. the cost of even one-room
house/dwelling unit being much higher than their repaying capacity and
secondly, the subsidy would be provided only for Rs. 1 lakh and for the
remaining cost, the borrower would have to borrow from other sources
at a much higher rate of interest, which would again be beyond his
capacity to afford a house. The Committee feel that this scheme overlooks
the interests of a huge portion of urban poor, who do not own any land
yet are in need on a roof of their heads. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the maximum limit of the amount comprising the
subsidy component should be revised keeping in view the present
situation and make it more realistic so that more beneficiaries are covered
under the Scheme.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
4.8 The Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor
(ISHUP) is the first scheme aimed at extending institutional housing
finance by the banks and the Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) to the
Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) and Low Income Group (LIG)
households in the urban areas. The two Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs)
under the scheme, namely, National Housing Bank (NHB) and Housing
& Urban Development Corporation Ltd. (HUDCO) have actively followed
up the scheme with various banks and HFCs. NHB has signed MOA
34

with 16 banks and 6 HFCs while HUDCO has signed Memorandum of
Agreement (MOA) with 11 banks and 02 HFCs. The Ministry has held
meetings with the Banks and Financial Institutions on board on
14.12.2009 and 19.2.2010 and encouraged them to review and follow the
scheme through the State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC). Ministry
officers have gone to several States to explain and persuade. The
assessment of the Ministry is that the scheme is popular with banks and
the beneficiaries are also happy with it. The main difficulty in the scheme
taking off is the ability of the beneficiary to approach the banks and
transact the paperwork.  Therefore, the Ministry’s effort is to get the
beneficiaries to put forward applications and to create cells to help
loanees.
Government of Andhra Pradesh has assigned a target of 2.36 lakh
beneficiaries district-wise and bank-wise. AP State Housing Corporation
Ltd. (APSHCL), the State level nodal agency has already identified and
sanctioned 43,711 applications in convergence with a State Government
Housing Scheme i.e. INDIRAMMA, with loan amount involving
51.17 crore and disbursement of Rs. 19.76 crore has taken place.
Government of Karnataka too has identified the State level Nodal Agency
and the scheme is to be implemented at District Level by the concerned
District Collector while in case of ULBs the onus is with the Municipal
Commissioner.  A target of two lakhs beneficiaries under the scheme has
been assigned among banks. Govt. of Tamil Nadu too is likely to arrive
at targets shortly.
As regard the loan limit under the Scheme, the same for EWS and
LIG is Rs. 1 lakh and Rs. 1.6 lakh respectively. However, the subsidy
under the Scheme is available for loan amount  upto Rs. 1 lakh only.
The income ceilings of EWS and LIG are presently defined as household
having an average monthly income upto Rs. 3300 and household having
an average monthly income between Rs. 3301 and Rs. 7300 respectively.
The repayment capacity of EWS and LIG category is generally taken as
25%-30% and 30%  respectively.   The present loan ceilings have been
arrived at on the basis of this repaying capacity and if the loan amount
is raised it will go beyond the repayment capacity of these income
35

categories thus driving out the intended beneficiaries.  Besides banks are
not likely to be forthcoming with larger loans, even Rs. 1 lakh loan to
the EWS category households is pathbreaking.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/11/2009-Bt.(HUPA) dated 15.03.2010]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
4.9 For the Comments of the Committee please see paragraph
no. 1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)Recommendation (Serial No. 12)Recommendation (Serial No. 12)Recommendation (Serial No. 12)Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
Community Development NetworksCommunity Development NetworksCommunity Development NetworksCommunity Development NetworksCommunity Development Networks
4.10 The Committee note that to enable the urban poor to form their
own organizations for monitoring the Government programmes meant
for them through a collective voice, it has been envisaged to establish
Community Development Networks (CDN) with the provision of funding
upto Rs. 10 lakh. The Committee, however, fail to understand as to why
no proposal has been received so far despite the Ministry’s efforts with
the States to this effect. They feel that the Government may counsel the
States to popularize the concept and seek assistance of the officers dealing
with the SJSRY and JNNURM in this direction. The Committee are of
the firm opinion that the participation of the Communities is the best
way to ensure the quality and performance of the schemes as well as
maintenance of the assets since they, being beneficiaries, are aware of
practical glitches in availing benefits of the schemes. The Committee
desire to know the progress of the concept in the future course.
Reply of the Government
4.11 Regarding the progress of Community Development Network,
the Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation is pursuing with
the States for submission of innovative proposals.  Guidelines have been
formulated and circulated.  Under JNNURM currently States and UTs
are focusing on projects already approved with JNNURM financing
pattern involving Central share, State share and beneficiary contribution.
36

More than 1300 projects covering more than 14.5 lakh houses have been
approved and the States are focusing on implementation of the same.
Community Development Network projects are small innovative
projects which are to be sanctioned involving community contribution
to the tune of 10%. It is understood that such contribution is not
forthcoming. However, once the main BSUP and IHSDP projects
sanctioned are implemented, it is hoped that communities coming
forward with innovative projects would be encouraged by States to fill
in the gap in infrastructure facilities in these colonies or for unforeseen
but justified requirements.  The Ministry will continue to pursue with
the States the adoption of attitudes and strategies that give voice and
space to the community to play a decisive participatory role.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/11/2009-Bt.(HUPA) dated 15.03.2010]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
4.12 For the Comme nts of the Committee please see paragraph no.
1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report.
37

CHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)Recommendation (Serial No. 1)Recommendation (Serial No. 1)Recommendation (Serial No. 1)Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
Budgetary Allocation for the Ministry and reduction of targetsBudgetary Allocation for the Ministry and reduction of targetsBudgetary Allocation for the Ministry and reduction of targetsBudgetary Allocation for the Ministry and reduction of targetsBudgetary Allocation for the Ministry and reduction of targets
5.1 The Committee observe that the concentration of population in
cities mostly due to economic considerations, has become a fact of life
in India. However, this has led to a near explosion in the number of urban
poor in the four metropolises as well as other big cities. The situation
in small and medium towns is hardly better. Thus, the task of housing
the poor and alleviation of poverty is a huge challenge. In this backdrop,
the Committee note that the Plan allocation of Rs.850.00 crore as BE 2009-
10 has remained unchanged from the figures of BE 2008-09 of the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. They feel that the
allocation is very insufficient keeping in view the rapidly growing urban
poverty as well as the introduction of certain new schemes like
‘Affordable Housing in Partnership’ and ‘Interest Subsidy Scheme for
Housing the Urban Poor’, which have been added to the portfolio of the
Ministry. In fact, the Ministry has already admitted in the case of
revamped SJSRY that as the fund allocations remain the same and the
aforesaid scheme calls for greater per capita subsidies, they are
constrained to reduce the physical targets during the current financial
year in the number of urban poor to be assisted for individual /group
enterprises from 1,20,000 in 2008-09 to mere 50,000. The Committee find
it very unfortunate.
Although the Committee note that Additional Central Assistance to
the tune of Rs. 3642.23 crore has been given this year for Basic Services
for Urban Poor (BSUP) and IHSDP – the two Sub-Missions of JNNURM
being run by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation,
yet they fear that other schemes funded with the Budgetary allocation
38

of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation this year are
likely to be affected due to lack of appropriate funding. The Committee
are aware of the tight fiscal situation of the Government this year still
they feel that the allocation of funds should be proportionate to the
progress of the ongoing schemes. In so far as the newly launched schemes
are concerned, the Committee are not very hopeful of their successful run
in the absence of proper funding. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the Ministry needs to pursue with the Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance for better funding in the coming
financial year. The Committee further recommend that no financial cuts
should be imposed on the Ministry at the RE stage. While recommending
for higher outlay, the Committee would like the Ministry to strive for
better implementation of their schemes too which would justify their
demand for an increased allocation for various programmes being
implemented by the Government.”
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
5.2  The Plan allocation for the Ministry has been increased to
Rs. 1000 crore for 2010-2011. In addition, an allocation of Rs. 4583.23 crore
has been set aside in the budget of Ministries of Finance and Home
Affairs for Rajiv Awas Yojana, BSUP and IHSDP for the year 2010-2011.
Utilization of the allocated Budget for the current year 2009-2010
under BSUP and IHSDP is dependent upon the ability of the States to
submit requisite proposals for seeking 2nd and subsequent installment
of ACA for projects already approved and new projects. Ministry has
taken vigorous persuasive action with the States and UTs in this regard
such as review meeting with State Secretaries, field visits, monitoring of
progress reports, capacity building workshops etc. The Ministry, however,
found the States constrained by the engagement of their personnel and
attention in the General Elections (and in 4 large States thereafter in the
State Assembly Elections) for the first 3-5 months of the year, with the
result that their requests for sanctions to subsequent releases under both
JNNURM and SJSRY were slow in coming. The Ministry of Finance,
going by the pace of expenditure and their own urgencies imposed a
cut on this Ministry’s budget as with all other Ministries. The BE of
39

Rs. 850 crore was cut to Rs.575 crore. Against Rs.515 crore in 2009-10
for SJSRY, the amount for 2010-2011 has been increased to Rs.564 crore.”
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No.H-11013/11/2009-Bt.(HUPA) dated 15.03.2010]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
5.35.35.35.35.3 The Committee are of the firm view that for successfulThe Committee are of the firm view that for successfulThe Committee are of the firm view that for successfulThe Committee are of the firm view that for successfulThe Committee are of the firm view that for successful
implementation of various Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviationimplementation of various Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviationimplementation of various Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviationimplementation of various Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviationimplementation of various Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
Schemes, the much required funds for these programmes should beSchemes, the much required funds for these programmes should beSchemes, the much required funds for these programmes should beSchemes, the much required funds for these programmes should beSchemes, the much required funds for these programmes should be
adequate and timely allocated. The Committee recommend that theadequate and timely allocated. The Committee recommend that theadequate and timely allocated. The Committee recommend that theadequate and timely allocated. The Committee recommend that theadequate and timely allocated. The Committee recommend that the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation should take theMinistry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation should take theMinistry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation should take theMinistry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation should take theMinistry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation should take the
matter of enhancement of funds for its various schemes with thematter of enhancement of funds for its various schemes with thematter of enhancement of funds for its various schemes with thematter of enhancement of funds for its various schemes with thematter of enhancement of funds for its various schemes with the
Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission with convincingMinistry of Finance and the Planning Commission with convincingMinistry of Finance and the Planning Commission with convincingMinistry of Finance and the Planning Commission with convincingMinistry of Finance and the Planning Commission with convincing
reasons at the highest level and the Committee should be apprisedreasons at the highest level and the Committee should be apprisedreasons at the highest level and the Committee should be apprisedreasons at the highest level and the Committee should be apprisedreasons at the highest level and the Committee should be apprised
accordingly in this regard. The Committee feel that financial cutsaccordingly in this regard. The Committee feel that financial cutsaccordingly in this regard. The Committee feel that financial cutsaccordingly in this regard. The Committee feel that financial cutsaccordingly in this regard. The Committee feel that financial cuts
imposed at the RE stage due to underutilization of funds allocatedimposed at the RE stage due to underutilization of funds allocatedimposed at the RE stage due to underutilization of funds allocatedimposed at the RE stage due to underutilization of funds allocatedimposed at the RE stage due to underutilization of funds allocated
to the Ministry and its improper delivery mechanism needs an urgentto the Ministry and its improper delivery mechanism needs an urgentto the Ministry and its improper delivery mechanism needs an urgentto the Ministry and its improper delivery mechanism needs an urgentto the Ministry and its improper delivery mechanism needs an urgent
attention. The Committee are also of the firm opinion that thereattention. The Committee are also of the firm opinion that thereattention. The Committee are also of the firm opinion that thereattention. The Committee are also of the firm opinion that thereattention. The Committee are also of the firm opinion that there
are serious problems at the implementation stage of various schemes.are serious problems at the implementation stage of various schemes.are serious problems at the implementation stage of various schemes.are serious problems at the implementation stage of various schemes.are serious problems at the implementation stage of various schemes.
The Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need to reviewThe Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need to reviewThe Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need to reviewThe Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need to reviewThe Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need to review
the situation scheme-wise and project-wise and an appropriatethe situation scheme-wise and project-wise and an appropriatethe situation scheme-wise and project-wise and an appropriatethe situation scheme-wise and project-wise and an appropriatethe situation scheme-wise and project-wise and an appropriate
corrective action in this regard should be taken immediately andcorrective action in this regard should be taken immediately andcorrective action in this regard should be taken immediately andcorrective action in this regard should be taken immediately andcorrective action in this regard should be taken immediately and
the Committee informed accordingly.the Committee informed accordingly.the Committee informed accordingly.the Committee informed accordingly.the Committee informed accordingly.
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)Recommendation (Serial No. 4)Recommendation (Serial No. 4)Recommendation (Serial No. 4)Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
Conversion of Dry latrines under Integrated Low Cost SanitationConversion of Dry latrines under Integrated Low Cost SanitationConversion of Dry latrines under Integrated Low Cost SanitationConversion of Dry latrines under Integrated Low Cost SanitationConversion of Dry latrines under Integrated Low Cost Sanitation
SchemeSchemeSchemeSchemeScheme
5.4 The Committee note from the information provided by the
Ministry that based on the feedback received from the States, there were
about 6 lakh dry latrines required to be converted into water sealed toilets
under the ILCS. However, the house to house survey conducted by the
Ministry has shown that the estimated number of dry latrines yet to be
constructed is about 337250 units. Under the revised guidelines of ILCS,
the Ministry has sanctioned 2,49,534 units for conversion of dry latrines
40

and 36336 units for construction of new latrines. The Ministry has tried
to convince the Committee that they have set a target for eradication of
dry latrines in the year 2010 and that it would be achieved. Nonetheless,
the Committee are quite apprehensive because the pace at which the
scheme is progressing leaves much to be desired. The Committee also
lament the attitude of the States like Bihar, J&K, Uttarakhand and Uttar
Pradesh, which are yet to be declared as dry latrines free States.  Moreover,
the Committee find it reprehensible that manual scavenging which is a
matter of national shame, still exists despite the law prohibiting it. It is
unfortunate that the State of Jammu and Kashmir has not even adopted
the law for Prevention, Abolition and Regulation of Manual Scavenging.
The Committee desire that the Ministry should take up the matter with
these States vigorously and remove the impediments, whatsoever, in
achieving the target by 2010. The Committee further desire the
Government to consider  the feasibility of forgoing the beneficiary share
of 10% also as the onus to eradicate manual scavenging is on the
Government and a little more spending of 10% of the total cost will go
down well with these poor people.
With regard to revision in the guidelines of the ILCS, the Committee
note that the scheme would now be directly implemented by the Ministry
instead of HUDCO, which perhaps, was not keen on implementing it.
The Committee further note that the monetary ceiling costs of a unit of
twin-pit pour-flush individual latrine has been raised to Rs.10,000 and
that NGOs are proposed to be involved for motivating the community
and for technical help. The Committee expect an early action on the
revised guidelines as the Ministry has taken over the task from HUDCO.
They desire earnest efforts to be taken so that the conversion of 3.35 lakh
dry units could be completed by the targeted year 2010.
The Committee further observe that the biggest problem in urban
sanitation is open defecation by the urban poor. They note that the revised
ILCS Scheme does not address open defecation. In this regard, the
Committee note that the subject of urban sanitation and open-defecation
free cities is a part of the business allocated to Ministry of Urban
Development under the National Urban Sanitation Policy. The Committee
desire that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation may
41

convey the concern of the Committee to the Ministry of Urban
Development and urge them to find out a practical solution to this
problem early.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
5.5 This Ministry has released Central Subsidy under the Revised
Guidelines of Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme to the States of
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu & Kashmir who have
reported the existence of dry latrines. The updated status in respect of
these states is as follows:—
Uttar Pradesh: Uttar Pradesh: Uttar Pradesh: Uttar Pradesh: Uttar Pradesh: This Ministry has sanctioned a total Central Subsidy
of Rs.181.66 crore in the various Coordination Committees during
2008-09 and 2009-10 for conversion of 2,38,253  latrines into twin
pit pour flush ones in 390 towns. Out of the sanctioned amount
of Rs. 181.66 crore, an amount of Rs. 84.00 crore has been released.
As per the progress report received for the quarter ending December
2009, 46766 units have been completed and 80,000 units are under
construction. Further, proposals are being received from Uttar
Pradesh for release of second installment for completion of
sanctioned units. Uttar Pradesh expects to complete the conversion
task by the year 2010.
Uttrakhand:Uttrakhand:Uttrakhand:Uttrakhand:Uttrakhand:     This Ministry has released Rs.0.31 crore as first
installment out of the total sanctioned subsidy of Rs.1.23 crore for
conversion of 1613 dry latrines into twin pit pour flush latrines
during 2009-10 to Uttrakhand. Proposals are being obtained for
release of second installment for completion of these many units.
Uttrakhand also expects to complete conversion in 2010.
Bihar:Bihar:Bihar:Bihar:Bihar:     The State has initially reported as per 1989 survey the
existence of around two lakh dry latrines. After a resurvey, the State
has now reported 931 latrines in 138 towns.  Bihar had obtained
sanction for Central Subsidy of Rs. 7.92 crore in the year 2008-09
and 2009-10  for conversion of an estimated 3545 dry latrines into
twin pit pour flush latrines and for construction of 8586 new units
42

in 11 towns. As per the progress report received for the quarter
ending June 2009, 342 units have been completed and 341 are in
progress. The state however is reluctant to fix a target for elimination
of dry latrines and has asked for time to verify the results of the
resurvey. It may still be hoped that this State will also be declared
dry latrines free by 2010.
Jammu & Kashmir: Jammu & Kashmir: Jammu & Kashmir: Jammu & Kashmir: Jammu & Kashmir:      The State has initially reported as per
1995-96 survey the existence of around sixty thousand dry latrines.
However, the State has been asked to conduct resurvey in Jammu
and Srinagar towns. The survey is being undertaken by the State
and the report is awaited. This Ministry has sanctioned a total
central subsidy of Rs. 5.54 crore during 2008-09 and 2009-10 for
conversion of 5624 dry units and construction of 273 new units in
56 towns. The progress report and Utilization Certificates are still
pending from the State Government. The State has been impressed
upon many a time through letters, review meetings and regional
consultations to avail the Central Subsidy under the Scheme for
conversion of all existing dry latrines into twin pit pour flush
latrines and for adoption of “The Employment of Manual
Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act,
1993”. Secretary, Ministry of HUPA visited the State of J&K on
22nd-23rd November 2009, as a follow up action on the progress
of decisions/actionable points arising from the meetings held on
5th-6th October 2009 during Cabinet Secretary’s visit to Srinagar.
During this visit Secretary, Min. of HUPA  emphasized that the State
should adopt the Employment of Manual Scavenger’s and
Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993, and should
undertake the survey work for Jammu & Srinagar towns and  avail
Central Subsidy for conversion of all existing dry latrines into twin
pit pour flush latrines by the year 2010. The elimination of dry
latrines and manual scavenging had also been emphasized by the
Cabinet Secretary to the Chief Secretaries in the Conference of Chief
Secretaries on 1st/2nd Feb. 2010.
As regards the 10% beneficiary share, in most of the cases, the States
are bearing the share on behalf of the beneficiary or in the form of labour
43

from the beneficiaries. As the implementation of the scheme is well
carried out with the present pattern of funding, (i.e. 75% Central Subsidy,
15% of State subsidy and 10% beneficiary share), the need for foregoing
the beneficiary share is not projected by the State Government.
Under the Revised Guidelines of ILCS, funds are released directly by
this Ministry to the States and not through HUDCO. The progress is
monitored by the Ministry itself through quarterly reports and review
meetings and it is expected that the conversion task of dry latrines will
be completed by the year 2010.
As regards the observation of the Committee regarding the problem
of open defecation in urban sanitation, the concern of the Committee is
being conveyed to Ministry of Urban Development for an urgent action.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/11/2009-Bt.(HUPA) dated 15.03.2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)Recommendation (Serial No. 8)Recommendation (Serial No. 8)Recommendation (Serial No. 8)Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
RAJIV AWAS YOJANARAJIV AWAS YOJANARAJIV AWAS YOJANARAJIV AWAS YOJANARAJIV AWAS YOJANA
5.6 The Committee note the importance of the theme of the
proposed ‘Rajiv Awas Yojana’ (RAY) for the slum dwellers and urban
poor, which aims to make India slum-free in next five years. The Ministry
is stated to be still working on the modalities of the scheme.  Further,
funds for RAY would come from JNNURM allocation.  The Committee
further note that RAY is proposed to cover about 132 cities with a
population of 3 lakh and above, initially. The Committee also learn note
that Rajiv Awas Yojana proposes to focus on according property rights
to slum dwellers/urban poor wherein States would be required to prepare
slum-free State/City plans by adopting a ‘whole city/whole slum’
approach. It would also emphasise on re-development of slums and in-
situ development and would explore partnerships among the urban poor,
municipalities, State and Central Governments and private developers,
to enable the construction of affordable houses by the slum-dwellers/
urban poor through access to subsidized credit. The Committee feel that
44

Government should extend support to States that are willing to assign
property rights to people living in slum areas.
In this connection, the Committee in their previous reports, have
observed that in many cases allottees sell their houses and again go to
reside in slum areas, thereby defeating the very purpose. The Committee
are of the strong view that if the house is allotted in the name of the
woman, there are less chances of those being re-sold in the market. They,
therefore, reiterate that State Governments should be impressed upon to
register houses preferably in the names of the ladies or in the joint names
of husband and wife.
The Committee further desire that a model legal framework for
consideration by States/UTs for according property rights to slum-
dwellers/urban poor should be chalked out and circulated to States/UTs
to enable them to establish their own legal-regulatory frameworks suiting
local conditions. It should cover the provision of security of tenure to the
urban poor and also making land available for affordable housing, basic
amenities and informal sector activities of the poor through the process
of urban planning. The Committee further desire that it should include
reservation of land for housing the urban poor as the City Master Plans
have led, by and large, to their exclusion from the city development
process and driven them to illegal settlements. An arrangement between
the stakeholders should be chalked out so as to appropriately alter the
existing city master plans and prepare such Master Plans that adequately
address the concerns of the urban poor for affordable housing and
informal sector activities, which engage most of the urban poor. The
Committee trust that these aspects have been taken care of since
modalities for RAY are currently under process.  They are hopeful that
with active participation between Centre and State Governments, the
Rajiv Awas Yojana could be implemented successfully and its objective
to create a slum free India could be achieved.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
5.7 Regarding the allotment of property (houses) in the name of
ladies or in joint name of husband and wife, the Ministry has always
45

requested the States to do so and most of the houses sanctioned under
BSUP and IHSDP under JNNURM on their completion will be allotted
to women or in the joint name of husband and wife, as promised by
the States/ULBs.
Regarding selling of properties and seeking benefit again under
slum development projects, the Ministry is of the view that two strategies
may work as preventive – to provide the house to the slum dweller at
a monthly outgo not more than he/she can afford, or paid for the slum
dwelling; and secondly, networking of data on the basis of biometric
identification coupled with GIS mapping would go a long way to put
an end to this practice.  Simultaneously, ULBs should ensure that
properties vacated after slum rehabilitation are not further encroached
upon and the lands are utilized for the purpose for which they were
earmarked. The States have been requested (in the meetings of CSMC/CSC)
to take action on this.  Regarding the concern and suggestions expressed
by the Committee on the proposed RAY, the Ministry would be keeping
the same in mind while formulating the programme.
The Ministry is in the process of drafting a model legal framework
to accord property rights to the slum dwellers/urban poor. The
suggestions by the Committee will be kept in mind while developing the
model. Inter alia , the model legal framework would seek to make
provision for according property rights to the urban poor (including
housing or land to accommodate such housing) along with the basic
amenities such as water and sanitation.
As regards reservation of land for the poor, this is one of the reforms
under JNNURM, and States and cities are beginning to accept and require
reservation for EWS in all new housing developments. The Ministry
intends to pursue this reform even under Rajiv Awas Yojana.  In addition,
as earlier mentioned, the Ministry has prepared a proposal to set up a
Committee to review the approach of States and ULBs to expansion of
land for urban use and its land use.
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/11/2009-Bt.(HUPA) dated 15.03.2010]
46

Recommendation (Serial No. 11)Recommendation (Serial No. 11)Recommendation (Serial No. 11)Recommendation (Serial No. 11)Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
Social Auditing and Monitoring of SchemesSocial Auditing and Monitoring of SchemesSocial Auditing and Monitoring of SchemesSocial Auditing and Monitoring of SchemesSocial Auditing and Monitoring of Schemes
5.8 The Committee are happy to learn that in line with their
recommendation in the earlier Demands for Grants Report (2008-2009)
suggesting social auditing of various schemes run by the Ministry for
an assessment of the Government’s endeavour to provide infrastructure
and basic services to the urban poor, the Ministry has introduced the
concept of social Audit in the monitoring of schemes supported by them.
The Committee were convinced that such a procedure can demonstrate
the social, economic benefits of various schemes and also pinpoint
limitations, if any in the same. In their view, such an effort would enable
the Government to increase accountability as well as enhance people’s
participation in the democratic process in the country. In this connection,
the Committee have now been informed that for social auditing, the
Government is trying to bring on board some Non-Governmental
Organisations to work with the municipalities to do a people-to-people
audit of houses constructed and the projects under various schemes for
urban poor. Besides, a manual on Social Audit is under process of
validation and two projects under BSUP and IHSDP, in Andhra Pradesh
and Madhya Pradesh respectively, are currently being run as pilot
projects having independent social audits. The Committee hope that the
Manual on Social Auditing would be validated expeditiously and the
2 pilot social audits, as initiated, will be completed within a set
timeframe. They would like to know the results achieved in the said pilot
projects.
In this context, the Committee further feel that involving the elected
representatives of the people in the Parliament/State Assemblies in social
auditing of schemes can be very beneficial. The Committee are aware
that the Ministry of Rural Development has developed a procedure
whereby a ‘Vigilance Committee’ under the chairmanship of the local
member of Parliament looks into the progress of various ongoing
schemes supported by that Ministry. The Committee further note that the
47

Union Government has recently decided to involve MPs/MLAs for
monitoring the implementation of some of its welfare schemes viz. the
Prime Minister’s new 15 point programme for minorities which includes
UIG and UIDSSMT run by the Ministry of Urban Development. The
Committee are confident that MPs/MLAs, who represent common people
at the grass root level are aware of the slippages in implementation of
Schemes and thus well-suited to monitor as to whether the credit facilities
are actually reaching the beneficiaries or the construction of houses under
JNNURM is qualitatively better. The direct involvement of the elected
representatives in the process would also help in improving the delivery
mechanism as well as ensuring that middlemen and other persons
responsible for sabotaging various schemes for the urban poor do not
go scot-free. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the  Ministry
should explore the possibility of involving people’s representatives in the
process of social audit of projects/schemes supported by the Government,
and advise the States too, accordingly. The Committee further desire that
the findings of social audit, once received, should be seriously considered
by the Government to ensure that projects having substandard quality
are rectified on an  urgent basis.”
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
5.9 Regarding the manual on Social Auditing and pilot projects of
Social Auditing, draft manual on social auditing and toolkit have been
prepared by the Centre for Good Governance, Hyderabad. The guidelines
have been tested through two pilot projects.  The Ministry of HUPA has
sought comments of the Technical Advisory Group under JNNURM on
the same, before finalizing the Manual. The version 1 of the manual and
toolkit have been supplied to States as a guide for social audit of BSUP
and IHSDP projects. Being a new initiative of this kind in the
area of slum upgradation/urban housing for the poor, it has taken more
than the expected time to complete the process of preparing manual and
toolkit.
On the suggestion to involve elected representatives of the people in
the Parliament/ State Assemblies in social auditing, the Ministry is in
48

the process of preparing an Advisory to States for their involvement in
JNNURM (BSUP and IHSDP) processes including social audit. Regarding
the concern expressed by the Committee to seriously consider the findings
of Social Audit to ensure quality projects, Ministry would take
appropriate action.”
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation O.M.
No. H-11013/11/2009-Bt.(HUPA) dated 15.03.2010]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
5.10 For the Comments of the Committee please see paragraph
no. 1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report.
  N
EW DELHI; SHARAD YADAV,
20 July , 2010 Chairman,
29 Asadha , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
49

50
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, 20 JULY, 2010
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sharad Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
3. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar
6. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik
7. Shri Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
8. Shri P.C. Mohan
9.  Shri Baijayant ‘Jay’ Panda
10.  Dr. (Prof.) Ramshankar
11.  Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath
12.  Shri Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Manohar Joshi
14. Shri Rajeev Shukla
15. Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Shri K.D. Muley — Director
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa — Under Secretary

51
WWWWWITNESSESITNESSESITNESSESITNESSESITNESSES
1. Shri Navin Kumar — Secretary (UD)
2. Shri B.K. Chugh — DG (CPWD)
3. Shri A.K. Mehta — Joint Secretary (UD)
4. Shri P.K. Srivastava — Joint Secretary (Mission)
5. Smt. Sudha Krishnan — JS & FA
6. Shri K.S. Mehra — Commissioner, MCD
7. Shri Parimal Rai — Chairman, NDMC
8. Shri A.K. Bajaj — Engineer Member, DDA
9. Shri S.K. Singh — Joint Secretary (Housing)
10. Shri R.S. Thakur — Addl. Chief Engineer (NDMC)
11. Shri Anshu Prakash — Addl. Commissioner (Eng.), MCD
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft
Actions Taken Reports on the Fortieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Urban Housing’, First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for
Grants (2009-2010)’ of Ministry of Urban Development and Second
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2009-2010)’ of the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. The Committee
recommended some minor changes and thereafter adopted the draft
Reports without any further changes.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present these
Reports to Lok Sabha.
4. *** *** *** *** ***
5. *** *** *** *** ***
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

52
APPENDIX-IIAPPENDIX-IIAPPENDIX-IIAPPENDIX-IIAPPENDIX-II
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN
DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 12
II. Recommendations which have been accepted 04
by the Ministry
(Para Nos.   2, 6, 9, 10)
Percentage to total recommendations 33.33%
III. Recommendations/Observations, which the  NIL
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of Government’s replies
Percentage to total recommendations NIL
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect 04
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
(Para Nos. 3, 5, 7, 12)
Percentage to total recommendations 33.33%
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect 04
of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited
(Para Nos. 1, 4, 8, 11)
Percentage to total recommendations 33.33%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale
at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”