-: 1 :- 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2013-2014) 
                                
                           FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
                 MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2013-2014) 
  
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on 
Demands for Grants (2013-2014) ) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation) 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February,2014/Magha,1935 (Saka) 
 
28 


-: 2 :- 
 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2013-2014) 
                                
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on 
Demands for Grants (2013-2014) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation] 
   
Presented to Lok Sabha on  17.02.2014 
         Laid in Rajya Sabha on        13.02.2014 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February,2014/Magha,1935 (Saka) 
 


-: 3 :- 
 
 
   C.U.D No. 82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2014 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Thirteenth Edition) and printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 
 

-: 4 :- 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .....................…………....................….. (ii) 
INTRODUCTION ..........................................………………………………………. (v) 
 
REPORT  
 
CHAPTER I  
Report 
1 
CHAPTER II  
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
12  
CHAPTER III  Observations /Recommendations  which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
24  
CHAPTER IV  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and require reiteration  
26  
CHAPTER V  Observations /Recommendations  in respect of which 
final  replies of the Government are still awaited 
35  
ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the Seventh  sitting of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2013-
14) held on 12 th    February, 2014 ………………………    
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty Eighth Report of the Committee (15 th  Lok Sabha)…..  
 
 
 (i) 
 
 

-: 5 :- 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
3. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
4. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
7. Smt. Kaisar Jahan 
8. Shri Kailash Joshi 
9. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
10 Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
11. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
12. Shri P.C. Mohan 
13. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
14. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
15. Dr. Ramshankar  
16. Shri Ratan Singh 
17. Shri Anjan Kumar M. Yadav 
18. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Anil Desai 
23. Dr. M.S. Gil 
24. Md. Nadimul Haque 
25. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
27. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
28. Shri Avinash Pande 
29. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
30. Shri Amar Singh 
31. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 
 
 
(ii)  
  

-: 6 :- 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M.Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K.Rangamani  N.  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 

-: 7 :- 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2013-2014) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Repo rt on their behalf, present the Twenty 
Eighth Report (15 th  Lok Sabha) on the action taken by the Government o n the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth Repor t (15 th  Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Urban Development on “Demands for Gran ts (2013-2014) " of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
2. The Twenty Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sab ha on 23 
rd  April, 2013.  Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received in July, 2013.  
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development cons idered and adopted this Report at 
their sitting held on 12 February, 2014. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations contained 
in the Twenty Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, t he Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                                SHARAD YADAV  
12 
th   February,  2014                       Chairman,                                         
23 Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 (v)  
  

-: 8 :- 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Deve lopment (2013-14) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the reco mmendations contained in their 
Twenty Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demand s for Grants (2013-14) of the 
Ministry of  Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation which was presented to Lok Sabha on  
23 April, 2013. 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all      
15 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations /Observations, which have been accepted by the Government. 
 (Chapter-II): 
Recommendation serial Nos. 2,6,7,8,9, 11,12,13 and 14                  (Total -09) 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations /Observations, which the Commi ttee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government's   replies. (Chapter-III): 
Recommendation serial No. 5            (Total -01) 
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter-IV): 
Recommendation serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 10 and 15         (Total -05) 
(Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of w hich final replies of the 
Government  are, still awaited (Chapter-V): 
          (Total -Nil) 
(Chapter-V) 
 
 
 
 

-: 9 :- 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to t he comments contained in Chapter-I 
of this Report may be furnished to them at the earl iest and in any case, not later than 
three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on some of 
their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.    
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
 
 
Underutilization of funds 
 
1.5 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Allev iation has been, inter-alia, entrusted 
with implementation of the specific programmes of u rban employment and poverty alleviation 
including housing sector programmes in urban areas.   Its functions include coordinating and 
monitoring rules besides supporting these programme s through Centrally Sponsored Schemes.  
During the 12 
th  Five Year Plan, the Ministry is in the process of revamping some of its old 
schemes and also introducing new programmes for the  benefit of urban poor.  For carrying out 
these programmes and schemes, the Ministry is state d to have been allocated Rs.7850 crore 
for the 12 th  Plan period as against the proposed outlay of Rs.27,028 crore . 
The Committee’s examination has however, revealed that while the projections made by 
the Ministry to Planning Commission stood drastical ly reduced at BE and subsequently at RE 
stages in each of the last five years 2008-09 to 20 12-13, the expenditure in each of these years 
lagged far behind even these decreased allocations.   In the opinion of the Committee, this is 
clear indication of the failure of the Ministry to optimally utilize the funds allocated for various 
plan schemes.  While expressing their concern over the poor performance of the Ministry in 
expending fully the funds allotted and consequently  its adverse impact on the schemes, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to tone up its machin ery for meaningful utilization of the 
resources made available for implementation of the specific schemes aimed at poverty 
alleviation and provision of shelter and basic amen ities to the urban populace.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the precise and concrete steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
1.6  The Plan allocation of the Ministry for the XII 
th  Plan (2012-17) is Rs. 7850.00 crore 
which is approx 113% higher as compared to allocati on of Rs.3687.00 crore for the XI th  
Plan(2007-12).    Further, details of BE allocation s, reductions at RE stage for the last 5 years 
and expenditure trends with regard to RE for the same period are as under:- 

-: 10 :- 
 
                                                                                                     
 
                                                                                         (Rs. in crore) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As may be seen the reduction at RE stage was 18.4% from BE.  However, the actual 
expenditure during the last five year period was 96 .83% with regard to RE, which is quite 
satisfactory.  Moreover, in respect of the flagship  Scheme of the Ministry viz. Swarna Jayanti 
Shahari Rojgar Yojana(SJSRY), Ministry was able to spend more than the fund allocated under 
the Scheme at the RE stage during the last five yea rs.  The total allocation at RE stage for the 
Scheme during the last five years was Rs. 3039.03 c rore and the expenditure was Rs. 3129.19 
crore which is 3% higher than the allocation.  
 
Reduction at RE stage was mainly due to slow off ta ke of the certain schemes like 
ISSHUP on account of factors which included demand driven nature of the scheme, limited 
bank response due to issues associated with lending  to the informal sectors e.g. high risk 
perception of beneficiaries; banking procedures calling for mortgageable titles to land, approved 
plans, authenticated income certificates, stringent  know your customer norms etc. In order to 
overcome the problem, Ministry has worked out Revised ISHUP to be relaunched as Rajiv Rinn 
Yojana (RRY).  The proposed RRY is supposed to over come the problems experienced during 
the implementation of the ISHUP. There was also sho rtage of staff in the Ministry to look after 
the Schemes relating to Urban Poverty Alleviation.   
Ministry has prepared Monthly Expenditure Projectio n (MEP) and Quarterly Expenditure 
Projection under Cash Flow Management System with a view to ensure that funds allocated are 
utilized. Expenditure is reviewed regularly at higher level.  Ministry would take further necessary 
YEAR BE RE Actual 
Expenditure 
% age w.r.t RE  
 
2008 -09  850.00 670.00 666.03 99.41% 
2009 -10  850.00 575.00 574.71 99.95% 
2010 -11  1000.00 880.00 821.47 93.34% 
2011 -12  1100.00 1000.00 953.82 95.38% 
2012 -13  1155.00 950.00 930.10 97.91% 
Total  4955.00  4075.00  3946.13  96.82%  

-: 11 :- 
 
measures including continued and regular interactio n with the States/UTs and better 
expenditure management plan to ensure fuller utilization of the allocated funds. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.7 Keeping in view the large gap between the proje ction and allocation, and between 
the BE and RE during the last five years and its co nsequential impact on the schemes, 
the Committee had desired the Ministry to tone up i ts machinery for meaningful 
utilisation of the resources made available for imp lementation of schemes, by taking 
concrete steps.The Committee are distressed to note  that still there is reduction  at RE 
stage mainly due to slow off take of certain schemes like ISSHUP and shortage of staff in 
the Ministry to look after the schemes of the Minis try. The Committee are not satisfied 
with the replies of the Ministry that it has spent 96.82% of the allocated amount at RE 
stage during the last five years. The main concern of the Committee was to ensure even 
utilisation of the allocation provided at BE stage and to arrest reduction at RE stage for 
meaningful implementation of the schemes.  
Therefore, the Committee would like to reiterate th eir recommendation that the 
Ministry should make concerted efforts for  utilisa tion of allocation at BE stage and  
implement the schemes related to poverty alleviation in letter and spirit. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM) 
 
1.8 The Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
"The Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) w as launched with effect from 
01.12.1997 after subsuming the earlier Urban Povert y Alleviation Programmes.  The scheme 
was subsequently revamped comprehensively w.e.f. 01 .04.2009.   Now, this scheme is being 
replaced with National Urban Livelihood Mission(NUL M) during 12 
th  Plan for a focused 
approach  towards urban poverty alleviation including support to urban street vendors & shelters 
for urban homeless by enabling them to  access gain ful self-employment, skilled wage 
employment  etc.   
According to the Ministry, it is proposed to develo p a comprehensive and robust MIS 
under NULM for tracking of physical and financial t argets and achievements.  At this stage the 
Committee wish to emphasize that before embarking u pon NULM, an agency should be 
identified and assigned the job of maintaining stat istical data by formulating a foolproof system 
through a periodical progress report so that the ef ficacy of the new scheme could be assessed 

-: 12 :- 
 
concurrently and well in time. The Committee are ha ppy to note that their earlier 
recommendation for assigning the job of maintaining  statistics of generation of employment, 
number of gainful employment trainees and fund utilization for such employment generation has 
been implemented by the Ministry by formulating a s ystem for capturing the desired information 
through a monthly progress report.  The Ministry ha s assured the Committee that NULM will be 
operational during the financial year 2013-14.  The existing scheme of SJSRY will be in force till 
the time NULM becomes operational.  Taking note of the enhanced allocation of Rs. 950 crore 
for NULM, the Committee are apparently convinced that it will become operational in 2013-14. 
 In the above background the Committee desire the M inistry to ensure that necessary 
approvals for introduction of NULM in place of SJSR Y are obtained without any loss of time so 
as to implement the same in the year 2013-14 positively." 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
 
"Ministry has proposed to launch National Urban Liv elihood Mission (NULM) in the     
12 
th  Five Year Plan which will replace the existing Swa rna Jayanti Shahari Rojgar 
Yojana (SJSRY). The Expenditure Finance Committee ( EFC) at its meeting held on 
26.02.2013 has approved the memorandum of NULM. The  minutes of the EFC meeting 
have been issued on 01.04.2013 to concerned Ministr ies/ Departments.  Ministry is in 
process of taking the proposal to Cabinet Committee  on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for 
approval. For effective tracking of physical and fi nancial targets and achievements of 
NULM, it is proposed to develop a comprehensive and  robust Management Information 
System (MIS). The National Informatics Centre (NIC)  has already been given the 
responsibility of development of NULM MIS." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.10 For replacing SJSRY by NULM, the Committee obs erve that though the EFC has 
given its approval to the memorandum on 26 February, 2013, the Minutes of the   meeting 
have been issued to concerned Ministries/Department s on  1 st  April, 2013 i.e. after a gap 
of more than one month. Furthermore, the Ministry a re still in the process of  taking the 
proposal to the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affai rs for approval. At this pace, the 
Committee are doubtful about the replacement of SJS RY by NULM during the current 
financial year. The Committee, therefore, desire th at the Ministry should cut short their 
procedural delays and ensure launching of NULM in t he current financial year itself. The 
Committee are happy to note that their recommendati on regarding identifying and 
assigning the job of maintaining stastical data has  been  suitably taken care of by 
assigning the same to NIC. However, the Committee d esire that MIS development for 
NULM should be completed within this financial year only. 

-: 13 :- 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
Shelters for Urban Homeless 
 
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee informed that a concept paper on Nat ional Programme for Urban 
Homeless (NPHUH) has been prepared on the recommend ations of National Advisory 
Council to build permanent Shelters for the Urban Homeless people.  These shelters are 
proposed to be all weather and 24 hour shelters wit h basic amenities for a life with 
dignity. The Committee, however, note that the Mini stry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation is still in the process of getting the necessary approvals from Competent 
Authority for  launching of Shelters for Urban Home less (SUH) with National Urban 
Livelihood Mission (NULM).  The Committee are disma yed to observe that the Ministry 
does not maintain any data on available night shelt ers.  It is strange to note as to how in 
the absence of any data to this effect the necessary approvals would be obtained.   
The Committee therefore desire that Ministry should  take necessary steps to implement 
the scheme of shelters for homeless as part of NULM  during the current financial year (i.e. 
2013-14) and make adequate funds available for the scheme." 
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have  stated as follows:- 
 
"Housing and Colonisation are State subjects and it  is the primary responsibility of the 
State to provide shelters to all urban homeless. Th e earlier scheme of ‘Night Shelter 
Scheme for Urban Shelterless’ was transferred to th e State sector as advised by the 
Planning Commission mainly because of lack of respo nse from the State Government. 
This Ministry has once again initiated to launch a scheme for Urban Homeless’ as part of 
National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM).  Expendit ure Finance Committee (EFC) 
approval has been obtained and proposal for Cabinet  Committee on Economic Affairs 
has been sent to competent authority for approval." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.13 The Committee are happy to note that the Minis try have once again initiated the 
process of launching scheme for Urban Homeless as p art of NULM and the proposal to 
this effect has been approved by EFC. However, the Committee note with disgust that the 
Ministry is  conspicuously silent on the issue of m aintaining any data on availability of 
night shelters. The stoic silence of the Ministry o n this vital issue has demonstrated that 
perhaps the need for such a data was not felt.The C ommittee therefore, wish to stress 
that this  issue be urgently sorted out. Further, the Committee are of the opinion that this 
time the scheme may be framed in such a manner that  all the State Governments 
respond to it in a positive manner. The Committee d esire that the possibility of making 
the scheme for urban homeless as a  mandatory component of NULM should be explored 
and incorporated in NULM guidelines. 

-: 14 :- 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
 
Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) 
 
 
1.14   Rajiv Awas Yojana is aimed at making India s lum free based on Slum free State and 
Slum free City Plans.  RAY envisages creating a slu m free India by encouraging States to 
assign property rights to slum dwellers. In pursuan ce to that the Government has launched 
Rajiv Awas Yojana on 2.06.2011. The phase –I of Raj iv Awas Yojana is for a period of two 
years from the date of approval of the scheme i.e. till June 2013. In this period preparatory 
activities like slum survey, GIS mapping, preparati on of slum free city plans and preparation of 
pilot projects are supposed to be carried out. 195 cities were selected for carrying out the above 
preparatory activities. The Committee are distresse d to note that the entire two years period 
have been lapsed with a very slow progress of work.  Slum survey are being conducted in 28 
States. Data being entered into slum MIS by 17 States. GIS mapping are being carried out in 28 
States. Slum free City Plan of Action is being carried out in 28 cities. Draft Slum free City Plan of 
Action is submitted by only 19 cities. The Committee strongly disapprove such inordinate delays 
in preparing these plans.  Full two years were avai lable with the Ministry and it could have 
completed the work in time bound manner. Therefore,  the Committee strongly desire that the 
Ministry should ensure that all the preparatory act ivities should be completed at the earliest 
without any further delay. The Committee further desire that the scheme should not be limited to 
195 cities only rather it should be spread to all t he cities in the country as stated by the 
Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Al leviation so that they can carry out the 
survey and make realistic assessment to make India a slum free country. 
The Central assistance under RAY is conditional to reforms by the States. The reforms 
required here is directly linked to the objectives of the scheme and necessary for the scheme to 
be successful. The key reform under the scheme for availing financial assistance is enactment 
of law for assigning of property rights by concerne d States/UTs. The other mandatory reforms 
include reservation of 20-25% of develop land for E WS/LIG housing in every new public/private 
residential development and for a non-lapsable earn ing 25% of the budget of all municipalities 
and other bodies provide municipal basic services. The Committee are distressed to note that 
only 4 States viz. Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra and J&K are having a law for the 
purpose. Only 5 States such as Odisha, Uttarakhand,  Uttar Pradesh, Meghalaya and Bihar are 
having policies. Only 4 States such as Andhra Prade sh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan 
are having executive instructions. In view of the p oor  experience under JNNURM-I the Ministry 

-: 15 :- 
 
of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has launch ed Comprehensive Capacity Building for 
Improved Urban Governance and Poverty Alleviation i n March, 2007 for supporting capacity 
building programmes under various schemes like JNNU RM, SJSRY and RAY etc., to fill in the 
institutional void. The Committee are distressed to note that despite so much efforts put forth by 
the Ministry the results are very low. Another prob lem with regard to the implementation of the 
scheme of RAY is that State Government like Maharas htra had committed to provide property 
rights to the slum dwellers upto the year 1995. But  as per the RAY guidelines the State 
Government is supposed to provide property rights u pto the year 2005. Another problem is that 
Maharashtra Government is providing house under oth er scheme. On the other hand under 
RAY 50% of the amount is to be borne by the municip ality and slum dwellers as a result the 
scheme under RAY is not well taken up. Still anothe r problem is that under JNNURM the 
Ministry is extending 80% support while in RRY the Ministry is extending 50 % support. To 
mitigate the above problems the Ministry is now going to move a proposal to the Cabinet for not 
to insist upon 50% criteria under RAY. It is proposing flexible criteria like for big cities the criteria 
should be 60% while in small cities it may be enhanced to 80% and for the North-Eastern States 
it may be kept 90%. The Committee hope that the Min istry will move proposals at the earliest 
and get it cleared by the Cabinet for the speedy implementation of the scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
 
1.15 Rajiv Awas Yojana  (RAY) was launched in June 2011 with a vision of a S lum free India. 
Under the scheme, 196 cities have been approved for  preparing the slum free city plan of 
action. Twenty One draft Slum Free City Plan of Act ion (SFCPoA) have been prepared and 
submitted by the Urban Local Bodies/State Governments till date. 
ii. Ministry is supporting the States/UTs to draw u p Slum Free City Plan of Action 
(SFCPoA) through various Regional and State level c apacity building workshops. A number of 
Guidelines have also been prepared and issued to facilitate the preparation of SFCPoA. Ministry 
has been reviewing the progress of RAY with the Sta tes/UTs intensively and regularly in areas 
identified to expedite the process.  
iii. Rajiv Awas Yojana is a demand- and reform-driv en scheme. Progress would depend on 
the commitment of States to mobilize technical and financial resources to conduct slum survey, 
develop slum-free city plan, prepare Pilot Detailed  Project Reports, provide for State share and 
seek Central Assistance support, while agreeing to assign property rights to slum dwellers. As 

-: 16 :- 
 
per the approved scheme, there is no upfront allocation of funds to States. Central assistance is 
provided as per projects submitted by states and approved by Government of India. 
iv. The key reform under RAY is the assignment of p roperty rights to slum dwellers and 
States/UTs are being pursued to legislate the prope rty rights Act. All other reforms are 
continuation of the pro-poor reforms under JNNURM I. It may also be noted that the preparatory 
phase is presently being implemented and sanction o f projects under this phase was not based 
on any reform conditionalities. The States/UTs are in various stages of undertaking the various 
reforms.  
v. Guidelines for all the reforms stipulated under RAY have been circulated to all the 
States/UTs after approval of the Scheme by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 
2nd June 2011. In respect of property rights this M inistry has prepared a draft Model Property 
Rights to Slum Dwellers Act, 2011 and comments rece ived from few States/UTs are currently 
being reviewed by this Ministry.  Towards the refor ms regarding ‘Earmarking of at-least 25% of 
developed land in all housing projects (developed b y both public and private agencies) for 
EWS/LIG categories through a system of cross subsid ization’ and ‘Earmarking of non-lapsable 
25% of the budget of all municipalities/other bodie s’, the Ministry had prepared and circulated 
draft Model Provisions for Reservation of Land/FAR for EWS/LIG housing in February 2011, as 
a template to assist the States. 
vi. Based on the feedback received and discussions with various stakeholders including 
State Governments and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), mi nistry has moved the Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) Memo on RAY which is presently under inter-ministerial consultation.  
vii. In line with the suggestion of Standing Commit tee, the EFC Memo prepared for RAY 
under JNNURM II, proposes to extend the scheme to a ll Cities/towns. Cities having population 
more than 5 lakhs are proposed to be included autom atically; for smaller cities & towns, the 
choice would be made by the States, according to th eir aspirations, financial and resource 
arrangements and manpower capacity installed in con sultation with the Centre that will 
oversight as to adherence to the spirit and guideli nes of the scheme. The suggestions of the 
Standing Committee on the funding pattern of RAY ha ve been incorporated in the EFC Memo, 
which is presently under inter-ministerial consultation prior to seeking Cabinet approval. 
 
 
 

-: 17 :- 
 
viii. The set of mandatory reforms as proposed in the EFC Memo are as given below:  
"Commitment and willingness to assign property righ ts (ownership/long-term lease) to 
slum dwellers, preferably in the name of the wife o r in the name of both wife and 
husband – executive order/instruction within one ye ar of the first project sanctioned; 
enactment of legislation within 2 years of the first project sanctioned with Property rights 
to be defined as: “legal document of entitlement”, providing tenure security to the slum 
dwellers either in the form of long-term leasehold rights for a specified period or 
freehold rights, as the case may be by the Govt. of  State or urban local body or any 
other agency which exercises ownership over the lan d on which the slum is located; 
Reservation of 15% of residential FAR or 35% of dwelling units for EWS/LIG categories, 
whichever is higher in all future housing projects,  taking into account reservation at (i) 
land development approval stage and (ii) housing de velopment approval stage 
together, is envisaged under revision of RAY Guidel ines. A non-lapsable earmarking of 
25% of the budget of all municipalities/ other bodi es providing municipal basic services; 
and Creating and establishing a municipal cadre for social/community development and 
urban poverty alleviation." 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.16 The Committee note that RAY was launched on 2. 6.2011 with an aim to make India 
slum free based on Slum Free State and Slum Free Ci ty Plans. The phase –I of RAY was 
for  a period of two years from the date of approva l of the scheme i.e. till June 2013 for 
carrying out preparatory activities. Initially 195 cities were selected for the preparatory 
activities. The Committee are distressed to note th at even after lapse of precious two 
years, only 21 draft Slum Free City Plan of Action have been prepared and submitted by 
the Urban Local Bodies/State Governments till date.  The Ministry in its Action Taken 
Replies has furnished that it has proposed to extend the scheme to all cities/towns in the 
EFC memo prepared for RAY under JNNURM. The funding  pattern of RAY has been 
incorporated in the EFC memo as suggested by the Co mmittee and that is presently 
under Inter-Ministrial consultations. The Committee are perturbed to note that in this way 
it will take considerable amount of time to complet e the preparatory activities of phase-I 
of RAY and the motto of RAY to make India slum free  will remain a distant dream only. 
The Committee have serious doubts, over the Governm ent's intention to expedite the 
scheme. Therefore, the Committee wish to reiterate its earlier recommendation to 
complete the preparatory activities i.e., survey at the earliest without wasting of precious 
time any more. The Committee would like to be appri sed of the progress made in this 
regard every month.  
 

-: 18 :- 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
 
National Scheme for support to Street Vendors  
 
1.17 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The National scheme for support to street vendors proposes to include support to State 
Governments and Urban Local Bodies to create data b ase and issue identity cards 
including providing of vending zones/vending outlets kiosks and vending equipments etc. 
The scheme also stresses on interest subsidy suppor t for working capital to street 
vendors as well as coverage under Swasthya Bima Yoj ana. The scheme has been 
merged with SJSRY/NULM. The Committee are given to understand that upto 5 % of the 
total NULM budget will be spent on this component. The Committee strongly feel that 
enactment of the Street Vendors (Protection of Live lihood and Regulation of Street 
Vending) Bill, 2012 will have a far reaching impact  on the implementation of the scheme 
and the meager amount of 5% of NULM budget will not be sufficient. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the allocatio n for NULM should be suitably enhanced in 
anticipation of the enactment of the Street Vendors  (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of 
Street Vending) Bill, 2012   to provide necessary assistance to the street vendors." 
1.18 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have  stated as follows:- 
 
"It is estimated that up to 2% of the urban populat ion resort to some form of Street 
Vending. Therefore, 5% of total National Urban Live lihoods Mission (NULM) funds are 
sufficient for the Street Vendors. However, the all ocation for implementation of this 
component may change depending on availability of f unds and expenditure pattern 
during the course of implementation." 
Comments of the Committee 
1.19  The Committee are not convinced with the repl y of the Ministry that the allocation 
for implementation of this component may change depending on availability of funds and 
expenditure pattern during the course of implementa tion. The Committee would recall 
that they had recommeded for suitable enhancement  in allocation in anticipation of 
enactment of "The Street Vendors (Protection of Liv elihood and Regulation of Street 
Vending) Bill, 2012," in order to safeguard the int erests of the street vendors. Since "The 
Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regula tion of Street Vending) Bill, 2012," 
has been passed by both the Houses of Parliamehnt, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation in this regard so that question of availability of funds does not arise. 
  

-: 19 :- 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDTIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GORERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill 
 
2.1 The Committee observe that presently the real e state and housing sector is largely 
unregulated with the result that consumers are unab le to procure complete information or 
enforce accountability against builders and developers in the absence of effective mechanism in 
place.  Against this backdrop, the Ministry of Hous ing and Poverty Alleviation is proposing to 
bring forward  the Real Estate (Regulation and Deve lopment) Bill for establishing an oversight 
mechanism to enforce accountability of the Real Est ate sector and  also to provide adjudication 
machinery for speedy dispute redressal. The Committ ee understand that the proposed action is 
being resisted by certain vested interests because they do not want to be regulated.  The 
Committee feel if the mechanism is put in place, instances of building collapse could be reduced 
drastically and consequent saving of precious lives.  The Committee are of the view that there is 
no reason why this sector should not be regulated.  They take note of assurances given by the 
Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Al leviation that the Bill will be introduced in 
the Parliament during the ongoing Budget Session, 2 013 and want the Ministry to stick to its 
promise and enact the Bill without any delay.   
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2  As assured to the Standing Committee, Ministry  of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation has taken the task of introduction of R eal Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill 
in right earnestness. The Cabinet has given its app roval to the above Bill on 04 
th  June, 2013 
and this Ministry intends to introduce this Bill in  the Parliament during the ensuing Monsoon 
Session, 2013.  
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
 
Central Government Employees Welfare Housing Organizations (CGEWHO) 
 
2.3 The Committee observe that CGEWHO is a welfare organisation which constructs 
dwelling units exclusively for Central Government e mployees serving or retired and spouses of 

-: 20 :- 
 
deceased employees on no profit no loss basis. Howe ver, as per State-wise and year-wise 
information provided by the Ministry on the projects taken up and completed by the organization 
during last twenty years revealed that no scheme ha s been announced after 1992 in West 
Bengal; after 1996 in Chandigarh, after 1997 in Karnataka and Kerala; after 2002 in Tamil Nadu 
and Haryana; after 2005 in UP; after 2006 in Andhra  Pradesh and after 2008 in Rajasthan and 
in Gujarat.   The Committee fail to understand the reasons behind such a long gap in 
announcing new schemes at some places/States where it has already launched its projects.  
The Committee are aware that CGEWHO is known for its integrity and is reputed for fulfilling the 
housing needs of Central Government Employees.  Hen ce, they want that new projects be 
launched at regular intervals in almost all importa nt cities to accommodate more and more 
central Government Employees.  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 The details on the housing projects in States m entioned in observations/ 
recommendations are given below: 
 
a) West Bengal 
 – It is confirmed that after announcement of Kolka ta (Ph- I) project in 
West Bengal in 1992 another scheme consisting of 58 2 Dwelling Units (DUs) was 
announced named Kolkata (Ph-II) in Jun 2010 and the  project is progressing well 
and expected to be completed by March2014. Simultan eous to completion of the 
project of Kolkata (Ph II), CGEWHO shall plan to ta ke up another project in Kolkata, 
West Bangal or nearby Municipal towns and the schem e shall be announced as and 
when contract is finalized. 
 
b) Chandigarh  – After announcement of Chandigarh project in 1996  since no land was 
available in Chandigarh. Projects named Mohali (Ph I) & (Ph II) consisting of 1148 
DUs were announced in the State of Punjab in Nov ‘2006 and Oct ‘2010 respectively.  
Mohali is in close proximity  to Chandigarh and is almost a satellite town of 
Chandigarh. Another project at SAS Nagar, Mohali is  under planning where 
CGEWHO has got 05 acres of land. 
 
c) Karnataka  – After completion of Bangalore project in Karnata ka which was 
announced in 1997, CGEWHO made lot of efforts to ge t the turnkey project, as no 
Govt land was available, which is yet to be materialized. 
 

-: 21 :- 
 
d) Kerala – CGEWHO has requested Govt of Kerala to allot 15 a cres of land at 
Thiruvananthapuram to take up a housing project.  W e are yet to hear from Kerala 
Govt.  
 
e) Tamil Nadu – CGEWHO is holding approx. 12 acres of land at Chennai and a project 
shall be taken up on an appropriate time after comp leting the activities of Chennai 
(Ph II) project which was announced in the year 2005. 
 
f) Haryana – CGEWHO shall take up action towards taking up a h ousing project in 
State of Haryana through a turnkey project, as no G overnment land is available to 
CGEWHO by Government authorities. 
 
g) Uttar Pradesh – A project consisting of 90 DUs was announced in M eerut in Oct 
‘2007 and another project comprising of approx. 600 DUs is planned in Meerut which 
is expected to be announced during the financial ye ar 2013-14. Another project 
consisting of 2130 DUs has been announced for regis tration in the month of Jan, 
2011 in Greater NODIA, UP wherein the construction is expected to be announced in 
the later part of 2014. 
 
h) Andhra Pradesh – CGEWHO has announced a scheme at Vishakhapatnam w hich 
could not be subscribed and the scheme is being rep lanned on a different 
configuration. Further, since Hyderabad (Ph III) an nounced in Jan 2006 has been 
completed, CGEWHO shall take up necessary action fo r another project at 
Hyderabad where there is a much requirement from Central Govt. employees. 
 
 In accordance to the recommendations of the Standi ng Committee, new projects shall 
be planned at important cities by conducting demand  survey towards taking up housing project 
in major cities of the States mentioned above along with Rajasthan and Gujarat and other 
States. 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
 
Interest Subsidy Scheme of Housing for the Urban Poor (ISHUP)/Rajiv Rinn Yojana (RRY) 
 
2.5  Interest Subsidy Scheme of Housing for the Urban Po or (ISHUP) was implemented on 
pilot basis in the 11 th  Five Year Plan and 3.10 lakhs borrowers were suppo sed to be supported 

-: 22 :- 
 
under this scheme. However, only 12182 beneficiarie s could be covered and there have been 
huge gaps between BE and RE and the actual expendit ure during 2008-09 to 2012-13.  
According to the Ministry, the reasons for such low  physical and financial achievements were  
because of  insufficiency of  ceiling of  Rs.1 lakh  for Economically Weaker Section and Rs. 1.6 
lakhs for Low Income Group,  the eligibility criter ia for new construction only and not for 
expansion/alteration,  lack of mortgageable title t o the land, non-availability of land, 
authenticated income certificates or documents, dif ficulty in  dealing with scattered distributed 
applicants , non-availability of approved plans, hi gh cost of processing fees charged by the 
banks and inadequate credit-worthiness of the borro wers and high risk perception. The 
Committee have now been informed that the Ministry is in the process to rechristen the scheme 
in the name of Rajiv Rinn Yojana(RRY) in the 12 th  five Year Plan in its revised form by 
addressing all the above mentioned constraints.   
  Considering the fact that a technical group const ituted by the Ministry has estimated the 
housing shortages in urban areas in the beginning o f 12 
th  Five Year Plan as 18.78 million, the 
Committee urge upon the Ministry to get the necessa ry clearances from the Cabinet Committee 
on Economic Affairs and the Ministry of Finance exp editiously and implement the scheme for 
providing affordable housing to the EWS and Lower I ncome Group without any further delay. 
The Committee further desire that the Ministry shou ld give wide publicity to the scheme through 
print and electronic media about its nature and sco pe for successful implementation of the 
scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The Ministry is in the process of getting neces sary clearances from Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) and the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs expeditiously and implement 
the scheme for providing affordable housing to the Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) and 
Lower Income Group. The Ministry has noted the advi ce of the Standing Committee and will 
publicise the scheme widely through print and elect ronic media as and when the scheme of 
Rajiv Rinn Yojana (RRY) is launched.  
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
Capacity Building for Urban Development Project (CBUD) 
 
2.7 Capacity Building for Urban Development Project (CBUD) is a Technical Assistance 
credit in the amount of USD 60 million funded by the World Bank and implemented jointly by the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation a nd the Ministry Urban Development. The 

-: 23 :- 
 
project's objective is to assist selected Urban Loc al Bodies to improve their system and skills 
with respect to urban management and urban poverty reduction. The Project was signed in 
December 2011 and will be implemented in five years  i.e. till 30 th  June 2016. The Committee 
observe that there has been an allocation of Rs. 0. 50 crore during the year 2011-12 and Rs. 
20.00 crore during 2012-13.  An allocation of Rs. 1 5.00 crore has been made during the current 
financial year 2013-14. The Committee are dismayed to note that almost no expenditure under 
this project could be incurred in the initial two y ears due to delay in approval of financial 
management and procurement manuals.  While taking due note of the Ministry’s assertions that 
the major procurements  under the project are expec ted only in 2013-14, the Committee desire 
the Ministry to streamline its procedures and effec tively utilize the available funds in a time 
bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 The Ministry appreciates the concern expressed by the Committee on the slow progress 
in implementation of the CBUD project. Ministry wou ld however like to submit the project got 
deferred beyond the envisaged time due to the proce ss involved in putting framework in place 
like finalizing and approval of Financial Managemen t Manual and Procurement Manual etc. as 
per World Bank guidelines. Also based on the alread y ongoing activities in the different projects 
of Ministry, some of the sub-components as per the project appraisal document were also 
revisited. Based on this, the work plan and the pro curement plan were developed and the 
procurement process was initiated.  
Ministry has taken note of the observations of the standing committee and is internally 
discussing and holding discussion with the World Bank officials and expects for streamlining the 
implementation process to meet and effectively utilize the targeted budgeted expenditure for the 
year 2013-14. Ministry has detailed out   quarterly  expenditure of the sanctioned Rs.  15 crore 
budget for 2013-14 and expect to meet the envisaged  targets both for this year and during the 
project period.  
Recommendation  (Serial No. 9) 
 
 Integrated Low Cost Sanitation (ILCS) 
 
2.9 Manual Scavenging is an obnoxious and inhuman p ractice which should be done away 
with immediately.  It is unfortunate that in spite of monitoring by the Supreme Court and 
continuous emphasis of this Committee the issue of converting dry latrines into twin-pit/pour 
flush toilets, has not still been implemented fully .  In this regard the Committee were informed 

-: 24 :- 
 
that in view of the provisional figures released by  census of India 2011 that there are 7,94,390 
latrines serviced  by humans out of which 2,08,323 are located in urban areas, the ILCS 
scheme has now been extended upto March 2014 with r evised features to cover all existing dry 
latrines.   
In this connection, the Committee find that the bud get allocation for the year 2011-12 
was Rs.71 Crores which was subsequently reduced to Rs.55 crores at RE Stage.  The budget 
allocation for the year 2012-13 was Rs.25 Crores wh ich was subsequently enhanced to Rs.100 
crores at RE Stage.  The actual expenditure during 2011-12 and 2012-13 was Rs.30.70 crores 
and Rs.19.20 crores respectively.  The Committee ob served that the actual expenditure has 
been less than the BE during the last two years.   The budget allocation for the current financial 
year 2013-14 is Rs.125 crores.   
The Committee desire that the issue should be taken  up at the highest level and the 
scheme should be implemented sincerely.   New innov ations such as adoption of eco-friendly 
and maintenance free toilets like bio-digesters and  ecosan toilets should be encouraged at a 
faster pace.  The Ministry should ensure that the allocation of Rs.125 crore is utilized fully during 
the year 2013-14.  The Committee further desire tha t as ensured in their action taken replies to 
the 19th Report of the Committee, the Ministry should complete the construction of new toilets in 
addition to conversion of all the dry latrines. 
  The Committee strongly recommend that the Central  Ministry should clearly issue a 
time- frame to be followed by the States and UTs to  accomplish both the tasks of conducting 
surveys as well as conversion/ construction of sanctioned latrine units. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 Being deeply concerned with the existence of d ry latrines as reported to the Standing 
Committee, this Ministry has obtained extension of ILCS with a budgetary allocation of Rs. 
367.16 crore. However, expenditure under the scheme would largely depend upon identification 
of dry latrines and the States’ initiatives to reco nstruct sanitary latrines in its place. This Ministry 
has been vigorously pursuing with the State governm ents authorities through various 
correspondences and review meetings including Video  Conferences. In order to encourage 
usage of environment friendly ecosan and bio digester toilets, additional central subsidy of 25 % 
over and above the normal cost have been offered. T he Ministry has been closely monitoring 
the survey of dry latrines and its conversion to be completed by March, 2014. 

-: 25 :- 
 
 
 
Recommendation  (Serial No. 11) 
 
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM)  
 
2.11 The Committee observe that the BSUP and IHSDP components of JNNURM were 
launched on 3rd December, 2005 for a period of 7 ye ars in order to give focused attention for 
the improvement of infrastructure and basic service s in the cities and towns of India. The 
mission period has been extended by two years upto end of financial year 2013-14 for 
completion of project sanctioned upto March 2012 an d to implement the three propoor reforms. 
Against the total allocation of ACA i.e., Rs.3347.50 crore the achievement as on 6.2.2013 is Rs. 
1114.08 crore. The percentage is only 33.28 %.  It is stated that 15, 69,328 dwelling units were 
sanctioned under BSUP and IHSDP components. Against  that only 6, 73, 229 DUs have been 
completed and the remaining 366823 DUs are in different stages of construction. It accounts for 
66% of the total DUs sanctioned. It is astonished t o note that the remaining DUs are yet to be 
started. Out of 673229 completed DUs only 446657 ha ve been occupied. The Committee 
further observe that to achieve the outcome under J NNURM States are making endeavour to 
complete the projects in the shortest possible time  span. However, with the rise in prices of 
steel, cement, raw material, non-availability of litigation free land, reluctance of the beneficiaries 
to shift to relocated projects, weak financial posi tion of ULBs are the major constraints in 
achieving the target. On the top of that the Minist ry is asking the State government to bear the 
cost escalation of the projects as per the guidelin es on BSUP and IHSDP. The Ministry had 
proposed to enhance the ceiling of unit cost for nonstarter units under IHSDP from Rs. 1 lakh to 
Rs. 1, 75,000 for determining central share. An add itional allocation of Rs. 1584.18 crore was 
proposed towards the enhancement in the ceiling of unit cost of DUs under IHSDP spread over 
two years i.e 2012-13 and 2013-14. However, this wa s not agreed to by the Ministry of Finance 
and the Planning Commission. The Committee disappro ve the attitude of Ministry of Finance 
and the Planning Commission. In the above backdrop the Committee strongly feel that even in 
the extended period of JNNURM it will be difficult to realize the targets. The Committee strongly 
desire that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Pover ty Alleviation should take up this matter at 
the highest level and get the approval at the earli est. The Committee want that the Government 
should not burden the States for cost escalation an d explore the other ways for this purpose. 
The Committee further desire that the Ministry shou ld issue advisory to all the States to ensure 
that the occupancy of completed houses should be taken as early as possible. 
 

-: 26 :- 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.12 The Additional Central Assistance(ACA) allocat ions under the Basic Service to the 
Urban Poor (BSUP) and  Integrated Housing Scheme De velopment Programme (IHSDP) 
components of JNNURM was Rs.3347.50 crore during th e financial year 2012-13.  It was 
revised to Rs.2003.24 crore at RE stage.  Against t his, ACA of Rs.1923.63 crore was released 
under BSUP and IHSDP components of JNNURM to the St ate /UT Governments which 
constitutes 96.03 % of RE. 
2. Out of 15, 65,646 dwelling units (DUs) sanctione d till 03.05. 2013 under BSUP & IHSDP 
components of JNNURM, 10,59,282 DUs are in differen t stages of completion. Important 
reasons for delay in completion of dwelling units are as under:- 
 
(i) Cost escalations, due to rising prices of steel  and cement amongst other factors 
and the reluctance of States, Urban Local Bodies to  meet such cost escalation.  
Government of India’s contribution under the scheme s remains frozen to the 
original sanction and the cost escalation is to be borne by the States / ULBs / 
Beneficiaries.  
 
(ii) In the IHSDP component, which is meant for sma ll and medium towns, cost 
ceiling was artificially imposed at Rs 80,000 per D welling Unit which was revised 
in 2009 to Rs.1 lakh per DU with effect from 1.4.20 08 of which Government of 
India contribution was 80%. This ceiling resulted i nto a heavier burden on the 
States / ULBs resulting in stalling of projects.    
(iii) Lack of project management capacity at State/ Implementing Agency/ Urban 
Local Body (ULB) levels 
(iv) Difficulties in making slum residents temporar ily relocate in the case of in situ 
projects; and Lack of availability of encumbrance-free land. 
3. To complete these projects, States/UTs have been  advised: 
(i) To provide additional State share to implementi ng agencies to meet cost escalation; 
 
 
(ii) To resort to beneficiary led execution of proj ects to avoid cost and time overruns. 
The States may fund the cost of escalations in the projects from their own resources 
or through loan from financial institutions like HU DCO to complete it within the 
stipulated time.  

-: 27 :- 
 
(iii) To draw up Plan of Action and set clear miles tones.     
4. Duration of the Mission was for a period of seve n years beginning from December, 2005.  
However, the Government has extended the Mission Pe riod upto March 2014 to facilitate 
completion of on-going projects sanctioned till Mar ch, 2012 and implementation of 3 pro-poor 
reforms.    
5. The States/UTs have been asked to allot the comp leted DUs to the beneficiaries in the 
review meetings.  Secretary (HUPA) has requested th e Chief Secretaries /Administrators of the 
States/UTs on 23.4.2013 to allot the already comple ted dwelling units to the beneficiaries 
immediately and to complete all the sanctioned proj ects in accordance with the set milestones 
for physical and financial progress.   
6. Further, the Ministry is again taking up the mat ter with the Planning Commission and the 
Ministry of Finance for enhancing the ceiling of un it cost for nonstarter dwelling units under 
IHSDP from Rs. 1 lakh to Rs.1.75 lakh for determini ng Central share, as desired by the 
Committee. 
 
Recommendation(Serial No. 12) 
 
 
Project Implementation Units for monitoring BSUP and IHSDP Projects  
2.13 The Committee observe that against the approve d 124 Project Implementation Units 
only 110 PIUs are operative throughout India for su pervising and monitoring of BSUP and 
IHSDP projects. The remaining PIUs are under proces s of getting established. The Ministry has 
submitted the fact that in one of its review it has been revealed that most of the ULBs are finding 
hard to get suitable manpower to handle the specifi ed job. The role of this Ministry is in funding 
the establishment of the Cells to facilitate the St ates in smooth implementation and monitoring 
of JNNURM projects. The PMU cells are providing the  information to the ministry on the 
JNNURM progress as required from time to time. The Committee are not happy with the reply of 
the Ministry that the performance of the PIUs could be judged by the respective States only. The 
Committee condemn this attitude of the Ministry. Mo nitoring mechanism is an important aspect 
in ensuring completion of the projects in a time-bo und manner. Therefore, the Ministry should 
not leave it entirely to the State Governments rath er they should actively assist the State 
Governments in establishing the PIUs and judge their performance by putting sound mechanism 
in place from time to time. 
 
 

-: 28 :- 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.14 The Project Implementation units are constitut ed with an array of experts having rich 
qualifications and experience in their respective f ields. The entire selection process of these 
professionals is carried out by the respective Stat es only. Most of the ongoing projects under 
JNNURM have a good progress in terms of Dwelling Un its being completed or under progress. 
A total of 6.9 lakh houses are complete throughout India whereas about 3.6 lakh houses are 
under progress/nearing completion. The completed ho uses are part of the projects which are 
directly handled and implemented by the PIUs. The e xperts are working on the field level with 
many of them posted on the project site most of the times. This, in a way signifies the active role 
of Project Implementation Unit (PIUs) in defining t he progress of JNNURM (BSUP & IHSDP) 
projects. Since the overall progress is good, Minis try is satisfied with the working of the existing 
PIUs and hence their performance may be rated as ‘s atisfactory’. Further, it has been decided 
that a team of officers from Building Materials & T echnology Promotion Council and Housing & 
Urban Development Corporation Ltd. will visit  2 -3  States to study the functioning of 
Programme Management Unit (PMU)/PIU. However, the o bservations of the Standing 
Committee regarding establishment and monitoring of  the PMU/PIU cells are noted for future 
compliance. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
 
 Affordable Housing Scheme 
 
2.15 The Committee in their 19 
th  Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Ho using 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation had recommended that for successful implementation of the 
scheme, it is desirable that the scheme be modified  on the patter of Rajasthan to a certain 
extent wherein the Government had attracted the private builders by providing relaxation in floor 
area ratio and floor space index. In addition Transferable Development Rights (TDR) and rebate 
in local tax have also been given to them. 
The Committee are given to understand by the Secretary that the Government no longer 
intends to build houses with the help of Government  and it is difficult to leverage the 
government money. Hence, for enforcing the scheme t he Central Government, the State 
Government and the private sector have to be involv ed. If extra effort is made to convince a 
promoter or builder apart from giving relief in loc al taxation, including service tax as on the lines 
of Rajasthan, then the pricing can be reduced to a great extent i.e upto16 to 17 %. In additional, 

-: 29 :- 
 
if TDR is emphasized then there can be a decline of  10 to 15 % depending on the location 
pricing. They have been further informed that the same pattern is being followed in the States of 
Odisha, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh also. 
The Committee while agreeing  with the view of the Ministry desire that when giving all 
the aforesaid rebates for implementing the affordab le housing scheme, the Ministry needs to 
devise a mechanism of effective checks and balances  to strictly ensure that the benefit is 
percolated to the actual beneficiaries.  The Committee also feel that the financial institutions and 
public sector banks may also be actively involved i n the process of enforcing the scheme as 
part of their social obligations. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.16 The Scheme of Affordable Housing in Partnershi p was launched in February 2009. The 
Ministry has issued guidelines on Affordable Housin g in Partnership Scheme to ensure that 
benefits are accruing to the actual beneficiaries.  
ii. A Task Force (TF) was set up by Ministry to def ine various aspects related to affordable 
housing, thereby formulating recommendations for cr eating enabling environment for increased 
private sector participation and PPP projects in af fordable housing. The Task Force has also 
reviewed the existing scheme to analyse the key rea sons for slow off-take. The report of the 
Task Force has been finalized and shall provide policy inputs for the revised scheme.  
iii. The affordable housing policy of Rajasthan Gov t. has been circulated by Ministry for 
information of the other State Governments/UTs who are free to adopt the same considering its 
replicability suited to their local conditions. As the parameters of the said scheme include TDR 
etc. which lie in State domain, Govt. of India has no role to adopt the same. 
iv. A Credit Risk Guarantee Fund Trust (CRGFT) for Low Income Housing with an initial 
corpus of Rs.1,000 crore from the Central Governmen t has been established under RAY to 
facilitate credit enablement of the urban poor as i t is intended to act as a strong risk-mitigant 
and enhance the confidence of the lending instituti ons in the lending to this segment. The Trust 
will guarantee the housing loans not exceeding Rs.  5 lakh per loan to new or existing individual 
EWS/LIG borrowers and eligible borrowers without an y collateral security and/or third party 
guarantees. The Credit Risk Guarantee Fund will fac ilitate the flow of credit to the low income 
housing sector and create the enabling environment for creation of affordable housing stock. 
v. The RAY EFC Memo which is under inter-ministeria l consultation has also suggestions 
to improve the present scheme to make it more implementable.  

-: 30 :- 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
 
Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council (BMTPC) 
 
2.17 The Committee observe that the BMTPC mainly endeavo rs to promote the use of 
innovative and environment- friendly building mater ials and construction technologies and have 
initiated services of multifaceted activities for t he accomplishment of its objectives enshrined in 
the mandate of the council. 
The council is also working towards bringing emergi ng technologies from all over the 
world such as disaster mitigation and management, s eismic strengthening Capacity building 
and skill development by working as a training Reso urce Centre, project management and 
consulting etc. Further the council proposes to foc us on selection and evaluation of newer 
methods and process, upscaling and modernization of homegrown production technologies, use 
of bamboo in housing and building construction in bamboo growing regions etc. 
The Committee find that grants-in-aid for the year 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-
13 were Rs. 7.00, Rs. 5.50 crore. Rs. 5.50 crores a nd Rs. 7.20 crores and the actual 
expenditure incurred was Rs. 7.89 crores, Rs. 7.04 crores, Rs. 8.22 crores and Rs. 6.33 crores 
respectively.  The Committee observe that the actua l expenditure has been more than the 
Budget allocation during all the years. The budget allocation for the current year is also only 
5.00 crore which is less than the last year’s actua l expenditure. The Committee are not happy 
with the casual approach of the Ministry with regar d to allocations.  They should have asked for 
the higher allocations on the basis of previous yea rs’ expenditure. The Committee therefore, 
recommend that for undertaking important and huge t ask of this nature, the Ministry must 
approach the Planning Commission and the Ministry o f Finance for increasing the grants in aid 
for BMPTC. 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 The actual expenditure has been slightly highe r in the previous financial years when 
compared to the budgetary support extended by the M inistry.  This was due to internal revenue 
generated by BMTPC through consultancy, sale of books and other literature etc. As reflected in 
the 2012-13 annual accounts, there is a surplus off  nearly Rs. 12 crore which has been utilised 
in carrying out the mandated activities of BMTPC. T herefore the Ministry does not intend to 
increase budgetary support while at same time the M inistry will encourage BMTPC to become 
self–sustained.  

-: 31 :- 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW 
OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
Urban Statistics for HR and Assessment Scheme (USHA)   
 
The Committee note that National Building Organizat ion (NBO) is under taking various 
surveys, data collections/assessment training requirement etc. under the Urban Statistics for HR 
and Assessment Scheme. The Committee have also been  informed that  USHA will continue to 
play a pivotal role in data based needs of ministry  as it is decided by the Ministry that the 
coordination of all survey and statistics matters s hould be through a single source rather than 
duplicating through individual schemes like JNNURM, RAY, SJSRY, etc.  The Committee are of 
the view that such activities by a single agency wi ll go a long way for maintaining better 
statistics and monitoring.  
The Committee, however, find that as against the to tal allocation of Rs. 15.00 crore for 
the year 2012-13, the utilization for the scheme wa s only Rs. 4.49 crore.  According to the 
Ministry, the reason attributed to this less expend iture is mainly due to the activities of 
preparation of slum free city plan of action being undertaken under RAY w.e.f 2012-13 which 
was being incurred by NBO till 2011-12.  In the absence of any plausible explanation for change 
in funding pattern for activities of preparation of  slum free city plan of action, the Committee 
would like to be apprised of the precise reasons wh ich necessitated change in funding pattern 
on this account under RAY w.e.f. 2012-13 instead under USHA. 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 The Scheme of Urban Statistics for HR and Asses sment Scheme (USHA) mainly aims at 
development and maintenance of data base relating t o Slums, Housing and Urban Poverty.  As 
a part of its mandate, the conduct of slum survey w as undertaken as one of the major activities 
under USHA Scheme, major parts of the funds were re leased for this activity for 2007-08 to 
2011-12. The funding was released in installment to  states for conducting slum survey in 988 
cities/towns having above forty thousand population s as per census 2001. Reasons which 
necessitated change in funding pattern for slum survey under RAY w.e.f. 2012-13 instead under 
USHA. 

-: 32 :- 
 
While the slum survey operation in 988 cities were under progress with partial fund 
released in USHA scheme, in the year 2012-13, the Ministry came up with the scheme of “Slum 
Free City Plane of Action” (SFCPA) under which slum  survey was one of the admissible 
components. SFCPA is preparatory part of Rajiv Awas  Yojana (RAY) scheme. The slum data is 
essential component of SFCPA.The slum data collecte d under USHA and the slum data 
requirement of SFCPA is same. The state nodal agencies   for USHA and SFCPA are same. 
Since slum data requirement of SFCPA is already ini tiated and in progress through 
USHA scheme it was decided to transfer the slum sur vey work for those cities which are under 
the coverage of SFCPA and balance of fund requireme nt for slum survey would be meet out 
from SFCPA. 
 
Slum free City plan has the coverage of 185 cities in the country which includes 132 
major cities covered under USHA Scheme for slum sur vey.  While the slum survey was in 
progress with  part of finance released under USHA for these 132 cities, it was decided to 
discontinue the  further funding requirement of 132  cities under USHA scheme and continued 
the funding for completion of slum survey  under RA Y/SFCPA with due adjustment as per the 
financial rule. 
Hence, there was no expenditure on account of slum survey for USHA Scheme during 
2012-13. 
  

-: 33 :- 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial  No. 1) 
 
 
Underutilization of Funds 
 
4.1 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Allev iation has been, inter-alia, entrusted 
with implementation of the specific programmes of u rban employment and poverty alleviation 
including housing sector programmes in urban areas.   Its functions include coordinating and 
monitoring rules besides supporting these programme s through Centrally Sponsored Schemes.  
During the 12 
th  Five Year Plan, the Ministry is in the process of revamping some of its old 
schemes and also introducing new programmes for the  benefit of urban poor.  For carrying out 
these programmes and schemes, the Ministry is state d to have been allocated Rs.7850 crore 
for the 12 th  Plan period as against the proposed outlay of Rs.27,028 crore . 
The Committee’s examination has however, revealed that while the projections made by 
the Ministry to Planning Commission stood drastical ly reduced at BE and subsequently at RE 
stages in each of the last five years 2008-09 to 20 12-13, the expenditure in each of these years 
lagged far behind even these decreased allocations.   In the opinion of the Committee, this is 
clear indication of the failure of the Ministry to optimally utilize the funds allocated for various 
plan schemes.  While expressing their concern over the poor performance of the Ministry in 
expending fully the funds allotted and consequently  its adverse impact on the schemes, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to tone up its machin ery for meaningful utilization of the 
resources made available for implementation of the specific schemes aimed at poverty 
alleviation and provision of shelter and basic amen ities to the urban populace.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the precise and concrete steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2  The Plan allocation of the Ministry for the XII 
th  Plan (2012-17) is Rs. 7850.00 crore 
which is approx 113% higher as compared to allocati on of Rs.3687.00 crore for the XI th  
Plan(2007-12).    Further, details of BE allocation s, reductions at RE stage for the last 5 years 
and expenditure trends with regard to RE for the same period are as under:- 
                                                                                                     

-: 34 :- 
 
 
                                                                                         (Rs. in crore) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As may be seen the reduction at RE stage was 18.4% from BE.  However, the actual 
expenditure during the last five year period was 96 .83% with regard to RE, which is quite 
satisfactory.  Moreover, in respect of the flagship  Scheme of the Ministry viz. Swarna Jayanti 
Shahari Rojgar Yojana(SJSRY), Ministry was able to spend more than the fund allocated under 
the Scheme at the RE stage during the last five yea rs.  The total allocation at RE stage for the 
Scheme during the last five years was Rs. 3039.03 c rore and the expenditure was Rs. 3129.19 
crore which is 3% higher than the allocation.  
 
Reduction at RE stage was mainly due to slow off ta ke of the certain schemes like 
ISSHUP on account of factors which included demand driven nature of the scheme, limited 
bank response due to issues associated with lending  to the informal sectors e.g. high risk 
perception of beneficiaries; banking procedures calling for mortgageable titles to land, approved 
plans, authenticated income certificates, stringent  know your customer norms etc. In order to 
overcome the problem, Ministry has worked out Revised ISHUP to be relaunched as Rajiv Rinn 
Yojana (RRY).  The proposed RRY is supposed to over come the problems experienced during 
the implementation of the ISHUP. There was also sho rtage of staff in the Ministry to look after 
the Schemes relating to Urban Poverty Alleviation.   
Ministry has prepared Monthly Expenditure Projectio n (MEP) and Quarterly Expenditure 
Projection under Cash Flow Management System with a view to ensure that funds allocated are 
utilized. Expenditure is reviewed regularly at higher level.  Ministry would take further necessary 
measures including continued and regular interactio n with the States/UTs and better 
expenditure management plan to ensure fuller utilization of the allocated funds. 
YEAR BE RE Actual 
Expenditure 
% age w.r.t RE  
 
2008 -09  850.00 670.00 666.03 99.41% 
2009 -10  850.00 575.00 574.71 99.95% 
2010 -11  1000.00 880.00 821.47 93.34% 
2011 -12  1100.00 1000.00 953.82 95.38% 
2012 -13  1155.00 950.00 930.10 97.91% 
Total  4955.00  4075.00  3946.13  96.82%  

-: 35 :- 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
4.3  For comments of the Committee please see parag raph  no. 1.7 of Chapter 1 of the 
Report. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM) 
 
4.4 The Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
"The Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) w as launched with effect from 
01.12.1997 after subsuming the earlier Urban Povert y Alleviation Programmes.  The scheme 
was subsequently revamped comprehensively w.e.f. 01 .04.2009.   Now, this scheme is being 
replaced with National Urban Livelihood Mission(NUL M) during 12 
th  Plan for a focused 
approach  towards urban poverty alleviation including support to urban street vendors & shelters 
for urban homeless by enabling them to  access gain ful self-employment, skilled wage 
employment  etc.   
According to the Ministry, it is proposed to develo p a comprehensive and robust MIS 
under NULM for tracking of physical and financial t argets and achievements.  At this stage the 
Committee wish to emphasize that before embarking u pon NULM, an agency should be 
identified and assigned the job of maintaining stat istical data by formulating a foolproof system 
through a periodical progress report so that the ef ficacy of the new scheme could be assessed 
concurrently and well in time. The Committee are ha ppy to note that their earlier 
recommendation for assigning the job of maintaining  statistics of generation of employment, 
number of gainful employment trainees and fund utilization for such employment generation has 
been implemented by the Ministry by formulating a s ystem for capturing the desired information 
through a monthly progress report.  The Ministry ha s assured the Committee that NULM will be 
operational during the financial year 2013-14.  The existing scheme of SJSRY will be in force till 
the time NULM becomes operational.  Taking note of the enhanced allocation of Rs. 950 crore 
for NULM, the Committee are apparently convinced that it will become operational in 2013-14. 
 In the above background the Committee desire the M inistry to ensure that necessary 
approvals for introduction of NULM in place of SJSR Y are obtained without any loss of time so 
as to implement the same in the year 2013-14 positively." 
 
 
 

-: 36 :- 
 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
4.5 Ministry has proposed to launch National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM) in the 12 th  
Five Year Plan which will replace the existing Swar na Jayanti Shahari Rojgar Yojana (SJSRY). 
The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) at its meeting held on 26.02.2013 has approved the 
memorandum of NULM. The minutes of the EFC meeting have been issued on 01.04.2013 to 
concerned Ministries/ Departments.  Ministry is in process of taking the proposal to Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for approval. For effective tracking of physical and 
financial targets and achievements of NULM, it is p roposed to develop a comprehensive and 
robust Management Information System (MIS). The Nat ional Informatics Centre (NIC) has 
already been given the responsibility of development of NULM MIS. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
4.6  For comments of the Committee please see parag raph 1.10 of Chapter 1 of the Report. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
Shelters for Urban Homeless 
 
4.7 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee informed that a concept paper on Nat ional Programme for Urban 
Homeless (NPHUH) has been prepared on the recommend ations of National Advisory 
Council to build permanent Shelters for the Urban Homeless people.  These shelters are 
proposed to be all weather and 24 hour shelters wit h basic amenities for a life with 
dignity. The Committee, however, note that the Mini stry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation is still in the process of getting the necessary approvals from Competent 
Authority for  launching of Shelters for Urban Home less (SUH) with National Urban 
Livelihood Mission (NULM).  The Committee are disma yed to observe that the Ministry 
does not maintain any data on available night shelt ers.  It is strange to note as to how in 
the absence of any data to this effect the necessary approvals would be obtained.   
The Committee therefore desire that Ministry should  take necessary steps to implement 
the scheme of shelters for homeless as part of NULM  during the current financial year (i.e. 
2013-14) and make adequate funds available for the scheme." 
 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
4.8 Housing and Colonisation are State subjects and  it is the primary responsibility of the 
State to provide shelters to all urban homeless. The earlier scheme of ‘Night Shelter Scheme for 

-: 37 :- 
 
Urban Shelterless’ was transferred to the State sec tor as advised by the Planning Commission 
mainly because of lack of response from the State G overnment. This Ministry has once again 
initiated to launch a scheme for Urban Homeless’ as  part of National Urban Livelihood Mission 
(NULM).  Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) approv al has been obtained and proposal for 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs has been sent to competent authority for approval. 
Comments of the Committee 
4.9 For  comments of the Committee please see parag raph 1.13 of Chapter 1 of the Report. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) 
 
 
4.10   Rajiv Awas Yojana is aimed at making India s lum free based on Slum free State and 
Slum free City Plans.  RAY envisages creating a slu m free India by encouraging States to 
assign property rights to slum dwellers. In pursuan ce to that the Government has launched 
Rajiv Awas Yojana on 2.06.2011. The phase –I of Raj iv Awas Yojana is for a period of two 
years from the date of approval of the scheme i.e. till June 2013. In this period preparatory 
activities like slum survey, GIS mapping, preparati on of slum free city plans and preparation of 
pilot projects are supposed to be carried out. 195 cities were selected for carrying out the above 
preparatory activities. The Committee are distresse d to note that the entire two years period 
have been lapsed with a very slow progress of work.  Slum survey are being conducted in 28 
States. Data being entered into slum MIS by 17 States. GIS mapping are being carried out in 28 
States. Slum free City Plan of Action is being carried out in 28 cities. Draft Slum free City Plan of 
Action is submitted by only 19 cities. The Committee strongly disapprove such inordinate delays 
in preparing these plans.  Full two years were avai lable with the Ministry and it could have 
completed the work in time bound manner. Therefore,  the Committee strongly desire that the 
Ministry should ensure that all the preparatory act ivities should be completed at the earliest 
without any further delay. The Committee further desire that the scheme should not be limited to 
195 cities only rather it should be spread to all t he cities in the country as stated by the 
Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Al leviation so that they can carry out the 
survey and make realistic assessment to make India a slum free country. 
 
The Central assistance under RAY is conditional to reforms by the States. The reforms 
required here is directly linked to the objectives of the scheme and necessary for the scheme to 

-: 38 :- 
 
be successful. The key reform under the scheme for availing financial assistance is enactment 
of law for assigning of property rights by concerne d States/UTs. The other mandatory reforms 
include reservation of 20-25% of develop land for E WS/LIG housing in every new public/private 
residential development and for a non-lapsable earn ing 25% of the budget of all municipalities 
and other bodies provide municipal basic services. The Committee are distressed to note that 
only 4 States viz. Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra and J&K are having a law for the 
purpose. Only 5 States such as Odisha, Uttarakhand,  Uttar Pradesh, Meghalaya and Bihar are 
having policies. Only 4 States such as Andhra Prade sh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan 
are having executive instructions. In view of the p oor  experience under JNNURM-I the Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has launch ed Comprehensive Capacity Building for 
Improved Urban Governance and Poverty Alleviation i n March, 2007 for supporting capacity 
building programmes under various schemes like JNNU RM, SJSRY and RAY etc., to fill in the 
institutional void. The Committee are distressed to note that despite so much efforts put forth by 
the Ministry the results are very low. Another prob lem with regard to the implementation of the 
scheme of RAY is that State Government like Maharas htra had committed to provide property 
rights to the slum dwellers upto the year 1995. But  as per the RAY guidelines the State 
Government is supposed to provide property rights u pto the year 2005. Another problem is that 
Maharashtra Government is providing house under oth er scheme. On the other hand under 
RAY 50% of the amount is to be borne by the municip ality and slum dwellers as a result the 
scheme under RAY is not well taken up. Still anothe r problem is that under JNNURM the 
Ministry is extending 80% support while in RRY the Ministry is extending 50 % support. To 
mitigate the above problems the Ministry is now going to move a proposal to the Cabinet for not 
to insist upon 50% criteria under RAY. It is proposing flexible criteria like for big cities the criteria 
should be 60% while in small cities it may be enhanced to 80% and for the North-Eastern States 
it may be kept 90%. The Committee hope that the Min istry will move proposals at the earliest 
and get it cleared by the Cabinet for the speedy implementation of the scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.11 Rajiv Awas Yojana  (RAY) was launched in June 2011 with a vision of a S lum free India. 
Under the scheme, 196 cities have been approved for  preparing the slum free city plan of 
action. Twenty One draft Slum Free City Plan of Act ion (SFCPoA) have been prepared and 
submitted by the Urban Local Bodies/State Governments till date. 
ii. Ministry is supporting the States/UTs to draw u p Slum Free City Plan of Action 
(SFCPoA) through various Regional and State level c apacity building workshops. A number of 

-: 39 :- 
 
Guidelines have also been prepared and issued to facilitate the preparation of SFCPoA. Ministry 
has been reviewing the progress of RAY with the Sta tes/UTs intensively and regularly in areas 
identified to expedite the process.  
iii. Rajiv Awas Yojana is a demand- and reform-driv en scheme. Progress would depend on 
the commitment of States to mobilize technical and financial resources to conduct slum survey, 
develop slum-free city plan, prepare Pilot Detailed  Project Reports, provide for State share and 
seek Central Assistance support, while agreeing to assign property rights to slum dwellers. As 
per the approved scheme, there is no upfront allocation of funds to States. Central assistance is 
provided as per projects submitted by states and approved by Government of India. 
iv. The key reform under RAY is the assignment of p roperty rights to slum dwellers and 
States/UTs are being pursued to legislate the prope rty rights Act. All other reforms are 
continuation of the pro-poor reforms under JNNURM I. It may also be noted that the preparatory 
phase is presently being implemented and sanction o f projects under this phase was not based 
on any reform conditionalities. The States/UTs are in various stages of undertaking the various 
reforms.  
v. Guidelines for all the reforms stipulated under RAY have been circulated to all the 
States/UTs after approval of the Scheme by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 
2nd June 2011. In respect of property rights this M inistry has prepared a draft Model Property 
Rights to Slum Dwellers Act, 2011 and comments rece ived from few States/UTs are currently 
being reviewed by this Ministry.  Towards the refor ms regarding ‘Earmarking of at-least 25% of 
developed land in all housing projects (developed b y both public and private agencies) for 
EWS/LIG categories through a system of cross subsid ization’ and ‘Earmarking of non-lapsable 
25% of the budget of all municipalities/other bodie s’, the Ministry had prepared and circulated 
draft Model Provisions for Reservation of Land/FAR for EWS/LIG housing in February 2011, as 
a template to assist the States. 
vi. Based on the feedback received and discussions with various stakeholders including 
State Governments and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), mi nistry has moved the Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) Memo on RAY which is presently under inter-ministerial consultation.  
vii. In line with the suggestion of Standing Commit tee, the EFC Memo prepared for RAY 
under JNNURM II, proposes to extend the scheme to a ll Cities/towns. Cities having population 
more than 5 lakhs are proposed to be included autom atically; for smaller cities & towns, the 
choice would be made by the States, according to th eir aspirations, financial and resource 
arrangements and manpower capacity installed in con sultation with the Centre that will 

-: 40 :- 
 
oversight as to adherence to the spirit and guideli nes of the scheme. The suggestions of the 
Standing Committee on the funding pattern of RAY ha ve been incorporated in the EFC Memo, 
which is presently under inter-ministerial consultation prior to seeking Cabinet approval. 
viii. The set of mandatory reforms as proposed in the EFC Memo are as given below:  
"Commitment and willingness to assign property righ ts (ownership/long-term lease) to 
slum dwellers, preferably in the name of the wife o r in the name of both wife and 
husband – executive order/instruction within one ye ar of the first project sanctioned; 
enactment of legislation within 2 years of the first project sanctioned with Property rights 
to be defined as: “legal document of entitlement”, providing tenure security to the slum 
dwellers either in the form of long-term leasehold rights for a specified period or 
freehold rights, as the case may be by the Govt. of  State or urban local body or any 
other agency which exercises ownership over the lan d on which the slum is located; 
Reservation of 15% of residential FAR or 35% of dwelling units for EWS/LIG categories, 
whichever is higher in all future housing projects,  taking into account reservation at (i) 
land development approval stage and (ii) housing de velopment approval stage 
together, is envisaged under revision of RAY Guidel ines. A non-lapsable earmarking of 
25% of the budget of all municipalities/ other bodi es providing municipal basic services; 
and Creating and establishing a municipal cadre for social/community development and 
urban poverty alleviation." 
4.12 For  comments of the Committee please see para graph 1.16 of Chapter 1 of the Report. 
Recommendation (Serial No.15) 
 
National Scheme for Support to Street Vendors  
 
4.13 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The National scheme for support to street vendors proposes to include support to State 
Governments and Urban Local Bodies to create data b ase and issue identity cards 
including providing of vending zones/vending outlets kiosks and vending equipments etc. 
The scheme also stresses on interest subsidy suppor t for working capital to street 
vendors as well as coverage under Swasthya Bima Yoj ana. The scheme has been 
merged with SJSRY/NULM. The Committee are given to understand that upto 5 % of the 
total NULM budget will be spent on this component. The Committee strongly feel that 
enactment of the Street Vendors (Protection of Live lihood and Regulation of Street 
Vending) Bill, 2012 will have a far reaching impact  on the implementation of the scheme 
and the meager amount of 5% of NULM budget will not be sufficient. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the allocatio n for NULM should be suitably 
enhanced in anticipation of the enactment of the St reet Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and 
Regulation of Street Vending) Bill, 2012   to provi de necessary assistance to the street 
vendors." 
 
 

-: 41 :- 
 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
4.14 It is estimated that up to 2% of the urban pop ulation resort to some form of Street 
Vending. Therefore, 5% of total National Urban Live lihoods Mission (NULM) funds are sufficient 
for the Street Vendors. However, the allocation for  implementation of this component may 
change depending on availability of funds and expen diture pattern during the course of 
implementation. 
Comments of the Committee 
4.15 For comments of the Committee please see parag raph 1.10 of Chapter 1 of the Report. 
 
   
  

-: 42 :- 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES O F THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                         SHARAD YADAV  
February,  2014 
                                                                                        Chairman,                        
Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
  

-: 43 :- 
 
 
ANNEXURE … 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY,              
12 FEBRUARY, 2014 
       
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Co mmittee Room  ‘C’ Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
3. Shri Kailash Joshi 
4. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
5. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
6. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
7.  Shri Ratan Singh 
8. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Anil Desai 
10. Md. Nadimul Haque  
11. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
12. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
13. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 

-: 44 :- 
 
 
                           SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha  - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.-  Under Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up for consideration the draft  Action Taken Reports on************(ii) 
‘Demands for Grants (2013-2014)’ of the Ministry of  Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation;(iii) 
********************  After deliberations, the Comm ittee adopted all the reports unanimously 
without any change. 
3. ****   ****   *****   ***** 
4. ****   *****   *****   ******* 
 
5.  ******   *****   *****   ******* 
6. ******   *****   *****   ******* 
 
7. ******   *****   *****   ******* 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
**** these portions do not relate to the report 
  

-: 45 :- 
 
 
ANNEXURE … 
                                            [Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON T HE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIFTH REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBANDEVELOPLMENT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                                                    15 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been ac cepted 
by the Government:                  09 
Recommendation Nos.2,6,7,8,9,11,12,13,14 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                         (60%) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                                  01 
Recommendation Nos.5  
Percentage to total recommendations                                                  (6.66%)  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of whic h replies of             05                          
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. 1, 3,4,10 and 15 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                       (33.33%) 
                             
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  final                    
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
-Nil-    
Percentage to total recommendations                                                          (%)  