 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
                                    (2013-2014) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
            MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
 
THE REAL ESTATE (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 2013. 
 
 
 
       THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2014/ Magha,1935 Saka 
 
 
 
 
30 


 
 
2 
 
                                                      THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                    MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
 
THE REAL ESTATE (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 2013. 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.02.2014 
 
                                  Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.02.2014 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2014/ Magha,1935 Saka 
 


 
 
3 
 
 
 
 C.U.D. No.: . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2010 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 

 
 
4 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
                                              
REPORT 
 
                PAGE 
 
Chapter  I             Background of “The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013  1- 4 
Chapter  II Preliminary………………………………………………………………………  5-14 
Chapter  III Registration of Real Estate Project an d Registration of Real Estate Agents 15-43 
Chapter  IV Functions and Duties of Promoter       44-53 
Chapter V  Rights and Duties of Allottees       54- 59  
Chapter VI Real Estate Regulatory Authority       6 0-69 
Chapter VII The Real Estate Appellate Tribunal        70-72 
Chapter VIII Offences, Penalties and Adjudication       73-81 
Chapter IX Miscellaneous          82-85 
 
ANNEXURES  
Organisations/Individuals who submitted written Memorandum/Suggestions to the Committee on The Real Estate  
(Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013         93-94 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  TUESDAY, 08 OCTOBER, 2013                       95-96  
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY,6 th  NOVEMBER,2013                 97-98  
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 6 th  DECEMBER, 2013              99-101 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 11 DECEMBER, 2013                102-104 
MINUTES OFTHE SEVENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY,2 FEBRUARY,2014              105-106  
THE REAL ESTATE(REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT)BILL, 2013                                                                            107- 162   
 
 
 
 
 (ii)   

 
 
5 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
3. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
4. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
7. Smt. Kaisar Jahan 
8. Shri Kailash Joshi 
9. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
10 Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
11. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
12. Shri P.C. Mohan 
13. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
14. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
15. Dr. Ramshankar  
16. Shri Ratan Singh 
17. Shri Anjan Kumar M. Yadav 
18. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Anil Desai 
23. Dr. M.S. Gil 
24. Md. Nadimul Haque 
25. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
27. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
28. Shri Avinash Pande 
29. Shri Ajay Sancheti  
30. Shri Amar Singh 
31. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 
  

 
 
6 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S Malha   -  Director 
3. Smt. J.M.  Sinha   -  Deputy Secretary 
4 Smt. Rangamani N.   -  Under Secretary 
5. Dr.(Maj.) Jagmohan Khatry -  Committee Officer 
6. Shri Sumit Kumar Grover  -  Executive Assistant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
7 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban  Development(2013-14) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Repo rt on their behalf, present the Thirtieth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "The Real Estate (R egulation and Development) Bill, 2013 "  
pertaining to  the Ministry of  Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
  
2. The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Bil l, 2013 was introduced in Rajya 
Sabha on 20 August, 2013 and was referred to Standing Committee on Urban  Development on 
9 September, 2013 for examination and Report thereo n, by the Speaker Lok Sabha under Rule 
331 E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. The Committee had sought public opinion through a press release and analysed the 
memoranda/suggestions received from various stakeho lders/experts such as CII, FICCI and 
Associations working in the field of real estate on  various provisions of the Bill (List of 
organizations is given at Annexure- I).The Committee had the briefing of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviati on on the Bill on 8 October, 2013. The 
Committee heard the views of some of the NGOs worki ng in the field of Real Estate. The 
Committee also took oral evidence of the representa tives of the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty Alleviation, Ministry of Finance (Dep artment of Financial Services, Department 
of Revenue)/Reserve Bank of India, State Bank of In dia, Bank of India, Punjab National Bank, 
National Housing Bank, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice(Department 
of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) and so ught clarifications on various issues that 
were brought to their notice by various stakeholders during their sittings held on 6 November, 
6 and 12 December, 2013 respectively.  
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft R eport at their sitting held on 12 
th  
February, 2014. 
 
5. The Committee express their thanks to the offici als of all the above Ministries and 
banks for placing before them the material and info rmation desired from time to time in 
connection with examination of the Bill and appeari ng before them for further clarifications. 
The Committee would also thank all the stakeholders  for their valuable suggestions on the 
Bill. 
 
5.     For the facility of reference and convenienc e, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
12 th  February, 2014  
23 Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
SHARAD YADAV  
Chairman  
Standing Committee on Urban Development  
 
  
 
(v)  

 
 
8 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT ON THE REAL ESTATE (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 2013  
Background  
Over the past few decades, the demand for housing h as increased manifold. In spite 
of Government’s efforts through various schemes, it  has not been able to cope up with the 
increasing demands. Taking advantage of the situati on, the private players have taken over 
the real estate sector with no concern for the cons umers. Though availability of loan both 
through private and public banks have become easier, the high rate of interest and the higher 
EMI  has posed additional financial burden on the p eople with the largely unregulated Real 
Estate and Housing Sector. Consequently the consume rs are unable to procure complete 
information or enforce accountability against build ers and developers in the absence of an 
effective mechanism in place. At this juncture the need for the Real Estate (Regulation and 
Development) Bill is felt badly for establishing an  oversight mechanism to enforce 
accountability of the Real Estate Sector and provid ing adjudication machinery for speedy 
dispute redressal. 
 
1. 2. The real estate sector plays a catalytic role  in fulfilling the need and demand for 
housing and infrastructure in the country. While th is sector has grown significantly in recent 
years, it has been largely unregulated. There is, t hus, absence of professionalism and 
standardization and lack of adequate consumer prote ction. Though the Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986 is available as a forum to the buyers in the real estate market, the recourse is only 
curative and is inadequate to address all the conce rns of buyers and promoters in that 
sector. The lack of standardization has been a constraint to the healthy and orderly growth of 

 
 
9 
 
industry. Therefore, the need for regulating the se ctor has been emphasised in various 
forums. 
 
1.3.  The proposed Bill provides for the establishm ent of the Real Estate Regulatory 
Authority (the Authority) for regulation and promot ion of real estate sector and to ensure sale 
of plots, apartments or buildings, as the case may be, in an efficient and transparent manner 
and to protect the interest of consumers in real es tate sector and establish the Real Estate 
Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the decisio ns, directions or orders of the Authority. 
This Bill will ensure greater accountability toward s consumers, and significantly reduce 
frauds, arrest delays and  the current high transac tion costs. It attempts to balance the 
interests of consumers and promoters by imposing certain responsibilities on both. It seeks to 
establish symmetry of information between the promo ter and purchaser, transparency of 
contractual conditions, set minimum standards of ac countability and a fast track dispute 
resolution mechanism.  
1.4.  The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013, inter alia , provides for  the 
following, namely:— 
(a)  to impose an obligation upon the promoter not to  book, sell or offer for sale, or invite 
persons to purchase any plot, apartment or building , as the case may be, in any real 
estate project without registering the real estate project with the Authority; 
(b)  to make the registration of real estate project compulsory in case where the area of 
land proposed to be developed exceeds one thousand square meters or number of 
apartments proposed to be developed exceeds twelve; 

 
 
10 
 
(c)  to impose an obligation upon the real estate age nt not to facilitate sale or purchase of 
any plot, apartment or building, as the case may be , without registering himself with 
the Authority; 
(d)  to impose liability upon the promoter to pay suc h compensation to the allottees, in the 
manner as provided under the proposed legislation, in case  he fails to discharge any 
obligations imposed on him under the proposed legislation; 
(e)  to establish an Authority to be known as the Real E state Regulatory Authority by the 
appropriate Government, to exercise the powers conf erred on it and to perform the 
functions assigned to it under the proposed legislation; 
(f)  the functions of the Authority shall, inter alia , include— ( i) to render advice to the 
appropriate Government in matters relating to the d evelopment of real estate sector; 
(ii ) to publish and maintain a website of records of a ll real estate projects for which 
registration has been given, with such details as m ay be prescribed; ( iii ) to ensure 
compliance of the obligations cast upon the promote rs, the allottees and the real 
estate agents under the proposed legislation; 
(g)  to establish an Advisory Council by the Central Government to advice and recommend 
the Central Government on— ( i) matters concerning the implementation of the 
proposed legislation; ( ii ) major questions of policy; ( iii ) protection of consumer interest; 
(iv ) growth and development of the real estate sector; 
(h)  to establish the Real Estate Appellate Tribunal by the appropriate Government to hear 
appeals from the direction, decision or order of the Authority or the adjudicating officer; 
(i)  to appoint an adjudicating officer by the Author ity for adjudging compensation under 
sections 12, 14 and 16 of the proposed legislation; 

 
 
11 
 
(j)  to make provision for punishment and penalties f or contravention of the provisions of 
the proposed legislation and for non-compliance of orders of Authority or Appellate 
Tribunal; 
(k)  to empower the appropriate Government to superse de the Authority on certain 
circumstances specified in the proposed legislation; 
(l)  to empower the appropriate Government to issue d irections to the Authority and obtain 
reports and returns from it 
 
1.5.  The Committee had sought public opinion throu gh a press release and analysed the 
memoranda/suggestions received from various stakeho lders/experts such as CII, FICCI and 
Associations working in the field of real estate on  various provisions of the Bill (List of 
organizations is given at Annexure I). The Committe e heard the views of some of the NGOs 
working in the field of Real Estate. The Committee also took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Housing and Urba n Poverty Alleviation, Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services, Department of Re venue)/Reserve Bank of India, State 
Bank of India, Bank of India, Punjab National Bank,  National Housing Bank, Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice(Depar tment of Legal Affairs and Legislative 
Department) and sought clarifications on various is sues that were brought to their notice by 
various stakeholders.   
 1.6.  The Committee deliberated on the various pro visions of the Bill and commend the Bill 
for enactment with the modifications made by them in the succeeding chapters. 
 
  

 
 
12 
 
CHAPTER-II 
PRELIMINARY 
 Chapter 1 of The Real Estate (Regulation and Devel opment) Bill, 2013 contains 
Clauses 1&2 which deal with short title, extent and  commencement of the proposed Bill, 
2013 and Clause 2 gives definitions and meanings of  certain words and expressions used in 
various provisions contained in the Bill.  The Comm ittee will now deal with some of the 
provisions contained in these clauses: 
 
 
Clause 2(d) 
 
2.2 Clause 2(d) reads as under: 
 
“‘apartment’ whether called dwelling unit, flat, pr emises, suite, tenement, unit or 
by any other name, means a separate and self-contai ned part of any 
immovable property located on one or more floors or  any part thereof, in a 
building or on a plot of land, used or intended to be used for residential 
purposes, or for any other type of independent use ancillary to the purpose 
specified and includes any covered garage, whether or not adjacent to the 
building in which such apartment is located which h as been provided by the 
promoter for the use of the allottee for parking an y vehicle, or as the case may 
be, for the residence of any domestic help employed in such apartment.” 
 
2.3 In its written Memorandum, an NGO has forwarded  the following suggestion: 
"Section 2(d) definition of apartment limits covera ge of this law only to 
residential building.  The coverage of all kinds of  units including non- residential 
units has been removed from the circulated draft.  It should be changed to 
include non-residential unit also." 
 
2.4 On being enquired about the incorporation of th e above suggestion in the present Bill, 
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviati on, in their written replies submitted as 
under: 
"The initial draft of the Bill mooted by the Minist ry was a comprehensive 
regulatory Bill for the real estate sector, which i ncluded both residential and 
commercial properties. However, it was suggested du ring deliberations that the 
initial focus of the Bill should be on ‘residential  real estate’ as most of the 
concerns of consumers are relating to this segment of real estate." 

 
 
13 
 
 
2.5 A suggestion was received stating that the park ing space should be properly defined 
and earmarked to the allottee but open parking area  should be free of charge for 
the allottees. 
2.6 The Ministry of Housing and Poverty alleviation  was asked to clarify this aspect.  They, 
in their written reply, stated as under: 
 
  "The Bill in clause 2(d) provides for definition of ‘apartment’,  which includes 
  ‘any covered garage, whether or not adjacent to t he building’. Thus the Bill 
  prohibits the charging of open garages,  as part of apartment cost." 
 
Clause 2(i) 
 
2.7 Clause 2( i) reads as under: 
 
“‘Building’ includes any structure or erection or p art of a structure or erection 
which is intended to be used for residential or other related purposes.” 
 
2.8 In a written memorandum Sarthak Advocates and S olicitors have observed the the 
definition of the “building” must be changed to inc lude both residential and commercial 
projects and suggested the following change: 
" (i) "building" includes any structure or erection or part of a structure or erection 
which is intended to be used  for residential, comm ercial or other related 
purposes."  
 
2.9 During the Course of oral evidence, Secretary, Department of Financial Services, 
Ministry of Finance deposed as under: 
" (i) "building" includes any structure or erection or part of a structure or erection 
which is intended to be used  for residential, comm ercial or other related 
purposes. in real estate commercial transactions ar e also there alongwith 
residential ones.  Commercial structure are formed,  industrial estates are 
formed.  In our opinion since  banks are financing all types of projects, there 
was no reason to exclude these projects.  Probably it will be appropriate that it 
should have an all encompassing definition includin g residential, commercial 
and industrial projects.  Many a times in commercia l complexes the people 

 
 
14 
 
seek funding from bank.  But the Builder leave it i ncomplete and use the funds 
elsewhere.  If these people can also be covered under the Bill it would be fine  " 
(proceeding Page -7) 
 
2.10 Sub- Clause 2(d) of the Bill defines the term "apartment" that has been used in 
the Bill.  In the context of this sub-clause of Bil l a suggestion was received that the 
definition of "apartment" should cover all kinds of  units including non-residential 
units.  From the submission of the Ministry, the Co mmittee find that the initial draft of 
the Bill mooted by the Ministry was a comprehensive  regulatory Bill for the real estate 
sector, which included  residential, industrial  an d commercial properties. Despite the 
fact that most of the concerns of consumers are rel ating to residential aspect of the 
real estate, the Committee fail to understand why t he comprehensive Bill was at all 
revised to its present form.  The Committee, tend t o agree with the submission made 
by Secretary, Department of Financial Services, tha t banks finance residential as well 
as commercial and industrial units also and they sh ould not be left out of the purview 
of the Bill.  They,  therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should bring back 
the initially proposed comprehensive Bill. The Comm ittee thus recommend that the 
definition of 'building' under Clause 2(i) should h ave an all encompassing definition 
including residential, commercial and industrial projects.     
 
  
Clause 2(j) 
 
2.11 Clause 2(j) reads as under:  
 
“‘carpet area’ means the net usable floor area of a n apartment, excluding the 
area  covered by the walls.” 
 
 
 

 
 
15 
 
2.12 In connection with the provision of clause 2(j), Na tional Real Estate Development 
Council (NAREDCO), in their written memorandum, suggested as under: 
"There is a need for clarity in the definition of t he “carpet area”. It should be 
explicitly clarified that the net usable floor area  includes the area of balconies, 
terraces and verandas as they are part of usable floor area. 
  
Besides, there is also the need to define “Gross sa leable Area /super area” as 
at the time of handing over of the residential comp lex to the Association of 
Apartment Owners, the common areas are also require d to be handed over 
along with the Flats for the joint use of the flat owners, proportionate charges 
for which have been levied on them.  
 
It also violates Apartment Ownership Act, which giv es provision of pro-rata 
loading of common Areas. 
 
Mentioning only Carpet Area will be disastrous as c ommon facilities for 
community living will get compromised. 
 
Therefore, Carpet area as well as Gross Saleable ar ea / pro-rata total 
Common Area provided needs to be mentioned in the agreement while defining 
the price of the apartment.  
 
To remove any possible ambiguity, the two terms sho uld be clearly 
defined in the bill." 
2.13 Andhra Pradesh Builders Federation, in their w ritten memorandum had suggested that  
along with carpet area, plinth area and common area s should also be mentioned clearly in 
the agreement to the purchaser for having clarity a nd transparency. Also, carpet area, plinth 
area and common areas need to be mentioned in the Sale Agreements and Sale Deeds. 
 
2.14 When asked about the advantages and disadvanta ges of incorporation of the above 
suggestions, the Ministry has submitted as under: 
"The definition of carpet area, as used in this Bil l, means the usable and 
 habitable room at any floor level (excluding the a rea of the wall). It includes 
 carpet area of the living room(s), bedroom(s), kit chen area, lavatory(s), 
 bathroom(s), and balcony / verandah, if provided, and any area for domestic 

 
 
16 
 
 help within the apartment, which is an independent  housing unit with separate 
 facilities for living, cooking and sanitary requir ements. 
 
Also, the National Building Code, 2005 defines: 
Balcony as - a horizontal projection, with a handra il or balustrade or a parapet, to 
serve as passage or sitting out place. 
Verandah as – a covered area with at least one side  open to the outside with the 
exception of 1 m high parapet on the upper floors to be provided on the open side. 
 
Accordingly, we may insert a definition for ‘net usable floor area’ in clause 2 of the Bill, 
as follows: 
Net usable floor area means the area sold to the al lottee for his individual use, which 
includes living room, bedroom, kitchen area, lavato ry(s), bathroom(s), balcony/ 
verandah if covered, any area for the residence of domestic help within the apartment, 
and covered parking or any other type of independen t use ancillary to the purpose 
specified." 
 
2.15          
Sub-clause 2(j) of the Bill has defined "carpet are a" as the net usable 
floor area of an apartment, excluding the area cove red by the walls.  On this sub-
clause the suggestion was received that there is a need for clarity in the definition of 
the "carpet area".  It should be explicitly clarifi ed that the net usable floor area 
includes the area of balconies, terraces and verand as as they are part of usable floor 
area.   
 The Committee have been apprised by the Ministry o f Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation that they are not averse to inc lusion of a definition for 'net usable 
floor area' in clause 2 of the Bill. Hence, the Committee recommend that the definition 
of 'net usable floor area' should be included under  clause 2(d) which may contrue 

 
 
17 
 
that net usable floor area means to include the are a sold to the allottee for his 
individual use, which includes living room, bedroom , kitchen area, lavatory(s), 
bathroom(s), balcony/verandah if covered, any area for the residence of domestic 
help within the apartment, and covered parking or a ny other type of independent use 
ancillary to the purpose specified. 
Clause 2(k) 
 
2.16 Clause 2(k) reads as under: 
 
“‘Chairperson’ means the Chairperson of the Real Es tate Regulatory Authority 
appointed under section 19.” 
 
 
2.17 On the above sub clause 2(k), a suggestion has  been received.  This read as under:- 
"The definition 2(k) "chairperson" should also incl ude Chairperson of the 
Appellate Tribunal established under section 37 of the Bill." 
 
 
 
2.18 The Ministry in its written reply submitted as  under: 
 
 " Chairperson and Members, when defined are, generall y referred to as the 
 Chairperson or the Member of the Regulatory Author ity and not the Appellate 
 Tribunal. These being matters of drafting, and not  required to be inserted." 
 
2.19  
The Committee while disagreeing with the opinion pu t forth by the 
Ministry strongly recommend that the definition of "chairperson" under Clause 2(k) 
should also include Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal appointed under Clause 39 
alongwith Chairperson of the Real Estate Regulatory  Authority appointed under 
Clause 19 of the Bill. The Committee are of the vie w that use of same nomenclature 
‘Chairperson’ in both the clauses would create conf usion and in order to prevent the 

 
 
18 
 
ambiguity and confusion in future, there is imperat ive need for defining the 
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal distinctly. 
Clause 2(m) 
2.20 Clause 2(m) reads as under:  
 
(m) ‘‘common areas’’ mean —  
  ( i) the part of the site or plot not occupied by buildings; 
 ( ii ) the stair cases, lifts, staircase and lift lobbies, fire escapes and common 
entrances and exits of  buildings; 
  ( iii ) the common basements, parks, play areas, parking areas and common 
   storage spaces; 
  ( iv ) the premises for the lodging of persons employed for the management of  
   the property including accommodation for watch a nd ward staffs; 
  ( v) installations of central services such as electricity, gas, water and sanitation, 
   air-conditioning and incinerating; 
(vi ) the water tanks, sumps, motors, fans, compressors, ducts and all apparatus 
connected with installations for common use;  
  ( vii ) community and commercial facilities as may be provided; 
  ( viii ) all other portion of the property necessary or convenient for its   
  maintenance, safety, etc., and in common use; 
 
   
2.21 Sub-Clause 2(m) of the Bill defines "common ar eas".  The stakeholders have 
suggested that common areas need to be mentioned in the Sale Agreement and Sale Deeds.   
 
2.22  On being enquired about the possibility of in corporation of the above suggestion in the 
Act, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation submitted as under: 
 "Clause 13(2) makes a reference to a Model Agreeme nt to be prepared under Rules, 
 by the appropriate Government. As the Bill does no t, at this stage provide for any 
 agreement, it would be difficult to reflect on thi s suggestion at this stage, however, 
 States may consider it at the time of making the r ules." 
 
2.23 
The Committee observe that no provision of this Bil l has prescribed making  
mention of common area in the Sale Agreement and Sa le Deeds. The Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has stated th at Clause 13(2) makes a reference 
to a Model Agreement to be prepared under rules by appropriate Government.  As the 

 
 
19 
 
Bill does not,  at this stage, provide for any agre ement it could be difficult to reflect on 
the suggestion that 'common area' needs to be incor porated in the Bill.  The 
Committee do not agree with the Ministry to leave s uch an important issue to be 
governed by rules. The Committee are of the view th at mention of common area in 
Sale Agreement and Sale Deed will remove the scope of any ambiguity.  Hence the 
Committee recommend that in order to ensure its inc lusion the Ministry should 
provide a Model Agreement which will suitably conta in the mention of common area, 
instead of leaving it to the State Governments/ App ropriate Government.  
Alternatively, the term ‘common area’ may find plac e in the definition clause of the 
Bill.  
 
Clause 2(zh)  
 
2.24  Clause 2(zh) reads as under:  
 
 ‘‘real estate agent’’ means any person, who negoti ates or acts on behalf of one 
 person in a transaction of transfer of his plot, a partment or building, as the case 
 may be, in a real estate project, by way of sale, with another person or transfer 
 of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be , of any other person to him 
 and receives remuneration or fees or any other cha rges for his services 
 whether as a commission or otherwise and includes a person who introduces 
 prospective buyers and sellers to each other for n egotiation for sale or 
 purchase of plot, apartment or building, as the ca se may be, and includes 
 property dealers, brokers, middlemen by whatever n ame called. 
 
 
2.25 In connection with the clause 2(zh), a suggest ion has been received to modify the 
definition, by omitting the phrase "in a real estat e project" in order to make the protection of 
proposed statute inclusive.  (page3, Amit kumar Maihan) 
 
 

 
 
20 
 
 
2.26 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alle viation, in a written reply submitted as 
under: 
  "In regard to the usage of the term ‘real estate project’ in the definition of ‘real 
  estate agent’, the Ministry is willing to conside r its deletion, towards which a 
  reference is being sent to the Ministry of Law (L egislative department) to get 
  their views, as consequent changes would become n ecessary in section 9 and 
  10, which provide for the registration of real es tate agents and their functions, 
  and section 54 which provides for penalty, for co ntravention of clauses 9 & 10. 
  By broadening the scope of real estate agents, co vered under the Bill, we shall 
  be able to regulate the role of real estate agent s in sale of secondary market 
  properties but it will clog the Regulatory Author ity. Hence, appropriate decision 
  may be taken subject to Law Ministry comments." 
 
2.27 
The Committee note that Ministry is willing to cons ider to amend the definition 
of real estate agents by deleting the words “in a r eal estate project” therefrom to 
regulate the role of real estate agents in sale of secondary market properties. The 
Committee feel that such a deletion is desirable as  it would enable to regulate the role 
of estate agents in sale of secondary market proper ties also.  This will also facilitate 
stopping the prevalent fraudulent activities done b y the real estate agents.  Therefore, 
the Committee desire the Ministry to amend the definition accordingly.  
 
Clause 2(zk) 
2.28   It has been suggested  for the addition of sub-clau se under  Clause 2 of the Real 
Estate Bill 2013, which may  be read as under:  
 ‘‘Clause 2 (zk) ‘‘Construction Execution Certificat e’’ means a written, stamped and 
signed certificate issued by the Project Manager af ter completion of all construction 
activities. The certificate shall state that all co nstruction has been executed fully 
compliant to the good for construction drawings iss ued by various design consultants 
and the construction practices followed are as give n in the relevant Indian Standards 
issued by the Bureau of Indian Standards. If projec t management has been 
undertaken by a project management consultancy comp any or in-house project 
managers of the promoter then the Project Manager s hall issue the construction 

 
 
21 
 
execution certificate on the letter head of the pro ject management Consultancy 
Company/ promoter." 
 
2.29 While responding on the above issue the Minist ry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation, in a  written reply, submitted as under: 
 "The Bill is not intended to regulate ‘development ’ of real  estate projects. Its 
mandate is limited to disclosure and transparency i n real estate transactions/sale. 
Additionally, 'construction execution certificate' has not been used in the Bill.  The Bill 
is not intended to regulate 'development' of real e state projects.  Its mandate is limited 
to disclosure and transparency in real estate transactions/ sale."                     
 
2.30 
 The Committee are in full agreement with the sugges tion for  inclusion of 
"construction execution certificate" in the Bill.  The Committee fail to understand the 
view of the Ministry in this regard. The Committee are of the opinion that as  Clause 14 
of the Bill explicitly mentions that the proposed p roject shall be 'developed and 
completed' by the promoter in accordance with the p lans and structural designs and 
specifications as approved by competent authorities , the issue of ‘Construction 
Executive Certificate’ will be deemed as a certific ate for completion of necessary 
formalities relating to construction.  They see no reason as to why this important 
provision does not find place in the Bill.  Thus,  the Committee feel that the inclusion 
of "construction execution certificate" would furth er ensure better development of the 
project and fix responsibility of the promoters/bui lders in clear terms.  Thus, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the "construction  execution certificate" should 
be included in the Bill under all circumstances. 
  

 
 
22 
 
CHAPTER-III 
Registration of Real Estate Project and Registration of Real Estate Agents 
Chapter II of the Bill deals with registration of r eal estate project and registration of real 
estate agents and contains clauses 3 to 10.  The Co mmittee will now give their comments 
and observations on provisions contained in some of clauses of Chapter-II of the Bill.  
Clause 3  
3.2 Clause 3 relates to the prior registration of real estate project with the Real Estate 
Regulatory Authority. This clause provides that no promoter shall book, sell or offer for sale, 
or invite persons to purchase in any manner any plot, apartment or building, as the case may 
be, in any real estate project, or part of it, in a ny planning area, without registering the real 
estate project with the Real Estate Regulatory Auth ority established under the proposed 
legislation . However, no such registration shall be required w here the area of land proposed 
to be developed does not exceed one thousand square  meters or the number of apartments 
proposed to be developed does not exceed twelve or where the promoter has received all 
requisite approvals and the commencement certificat e for the development of immovable 
property prior to commencement of the proposed legislation  or for the purpose of renovation 
or repair or redevelopment which does not involve r e-allotment and marketing of immovable 
property.  
3.3 Clause 3 reads as under: 
  No promoter shall book, sell or offer for sale, o r invite persons to purchase in 
  any Prior manner any plot, apartment or building,  as the case may be, in any 
  real estate project, or part 
 
of it, in any planning area, without registering th e 
  real estate project with the Real Estate Regulato ry Authority established under 
  this Act: 
  Provided that no such registration shall be requi red,— 
(a) where the area of land proposed to be developed doe s not exceed one 
thousand square meters or the number of apartments proposed to be 
developed does not exceed twelve, inclusive of all phases, or an area or 
number of apartments as notified by the Central Gov ernment on 
recommendations from the appropriate Government, which may be different 

 
 
23 
 
for different States or Union territories but not m ore than one thousand 
square meters or twelve apartments, as the case may be; 
(b)  where the promoter has received all requisite appr ovals and the 
commencement certificate for the development of the  real estate project 
prior to commencement of this Act; 
(c) for the purpose of renovation or repair or re-devel opment which does not 
involve re-allotment and marketing of the real estate project. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, where the real estate project is to 
be developed in phases, every such phase shall be c onsidered as a stand 
alone real estate project, and the promoter shall o btain registration under the 
Act for each phase separately. 
 
3.4 It has been observed that under Clause-3 of the Rea l Estate (Regulation and 
Development) Bill 2013, small projects have been ex empted from the purview of the Bill 
where the area of the land is less than 1000 sq met er or where a building does not have 
more than 12 flats. An apprehension has been raised  that large number of small housing 
projects will escape the purview of this law and th e middle class allottee will suffer 
immensely.  
3.5 On being inquired about the apprehension that h as been raised and its possible 
redressal Ministry of Urban Housing and Poverty Alleviation submitted as under: 
  "The initial draft of the Bill had earlier provid ed for registration of properties 
 above 4000 sqm only.  However, on suggestions and consultation with  
 stakeholders, the provision was modified to provid e for 1000 sqm or 12  
 apartments. The reason behind not proposing to reg ister properties below the  
 specified threshold is that the construction compa ny or developer generally  
 develops such properties, with buyer engaged on a day-to-day basis. Interface 
 between the buyer and the promoter is not missing in small development, 
 however, as in the case of large developers, acces s to persons or information 
 is generally very difficult.  It means, informatio n asymmetry is more in large 
 projects. 
  The Bill provides that the threshold can be furth er reduced by the Central 
 Government, on a recommendation to that effect by the State/UT, which can be 
 different for different States/UTs." 
 
 
 

 
 
24 
 
 
The Ministry further stated: 
   "The need for transparency and disclosure is nee ded for projects where 
   there is no monitoring possible in person by the  buyers. In case of small 
   sized projects, the buyers are engaged in monito ring on a day-to-day 
   basis, by making on the spot visits, regular eng agement and involvement 
   with the construction etc." 
 
3.6 In context of clause 3(a), a suggestion has bee n received that State level regulatory 
authority should decide the exclusion criteria for the registration of real estate project. 
 
3.7  The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alle viation were inquired about the 
possibility of incorporation of this suggestion in the proposed Bill.   The Ministry submitted as 
under: 
  "The Bill has in section 3 provided for the exclu sion criteria from registration as 
  development below 1000 sqm or 12 apartments. No p roject of area of 1000 
  sqm and above, or 12 apartments and more can be e xcluded. The power of 
  recommendation by the State Government is restric ted to reduce the threshold 
  further, and not to increase the threshold upward  for exclusion. It being a policy 
  decision, the power to recommend has been given t o the appropriate  
  Government, and cannot be delegated to the Author ity." 
 
3.8 With regard to the Clause 3 of the Bill, the Na tional Housing Bank (NHB), has 
suggested as under: 
"Yes, the NHB is in agreement with various provisio ns of the Bill. It is however, 
further   suggested  that  clause 3  may be  amended       thereby      ensuring 
applicability of the Bill on area of land proposed for residential  construction 
upto  100 square meters and/or number of apartments to be  developed (not 
exceeding 3 numbers) instead of 1000 sq. mtrs. (Apa rtments not exceeding 12 
in numbers) as proposed in the original Bill. Similarly,  amendments in clause 3  
may be considered so that SPVs/Projects undertaken in smaller areas of land 
through bifurcation of the  whole land by the build ers, should be considered as 
One Single Project under the provisions of clause 3  of the Bill. This will ensure 
strict applicability of this clause." 
 
 
 

 
 
25 
 
 
3.9 During the Course of oral evidence, Secretary, Department of Financial Services, 
Ministry of Finance deposed as under: 
 "Hon'ble Chairman has mentioned minimum limit of 1 00 Sqm, it is a good idea.  It may 
 be a bit burden some for regulatory authorities bu t definitely it will be in the benefit of 
 consumer.  If an individual even constructs  3 fla ts commercially, there is no harm in 
 regulating.  In my opinion it should not be twelve .  This is  our suggestion."    
 
3.10 The Committee observe that small projects have been  exempted from the 
purview of the Bill where the area of the land is l ess than 1000 sq meter or where a 
building does not have more than 12 flats. The Comm ittee feel that large number of  
small housing projects will escape the purview of t his law and, therefore,  the middle 
class allottees will suffer.  
The reason put forth by the Ministry  behind not proposing to register properties 
below the specified threshold is that the construct ion company or developer generally 
develops such properties, with buyer engaged on a d ay-to-day basis. Interface 
between the buyer and the promoter is not missing i n small development, however, as 
in the case of large developers, access to persons or information is generally very 
difficult.  It means, information asymmetry is more  in large projects.  However, the 
Ministry added that the Bill provides that the thre shold can be further reduced by the 
Central Government, on a recommendation to that effect by the State/UT, which can be 
different for different States/UTs. 
 The Committee cannot but deplore this callous atti tude of the Ministry to leave 
such  an important issue in the hands of State Gove rnments.  Thus, the Committee 
strongly recommend that clause 3 should be suitably  amended thereby ensuring 
applicability of the Bill on area of land proposed for residential construction upto  100 
square meters and/or number of apartments to be dev eloped (not exceeding 3 

 
 
26 
 
numbers) instead of 1000 sq. mtrs.  And apartments not exceeding 12 in numbers as 
proposed in the Bill. Similarly, amendments in clau se 3 should be carried out so that 
Special Purpose Vehicles(SPVs)/Projects undertaken in smaller areas of land through 
bifurcation of the whole land by the builders, are considered as One Single Project 
under the provisions of clause 3 of the Bill. This will ensure strict applicability of this 
clause. 
3.11 On clause 3, a suggestion has been received that "t he Registration should be online 
and there should be no need for physical submission of applications and documents."                                                      
 
3.12  When asked about their views on the above sug gestion, the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty Alleviation submitted in writing as under: 
  "The thrust of the Bill is to provide for registr ation ultimately in real time through 
  uploading of information by the promoter on the w ebsite of the regulatory  
  authority. Clause 4 provides that the process of submission of application etc. 
  shall be ‘in such form and manner’ as decided by regulations to be framed by 
  the regulatory authority. This flexibility has be en given, as certain parts of the 
  country may not be in a situation to implement on line application/registration 
  from the beginning. Thus, for some time both onli ne and physical submission 
  may coexist, which with time would become complet ely online."  
 
3.13 With regard to online registration of the Real  Estate projects, the Committee are 
in agreement with the Ministry that in the beginnin g it would not be possible to 
implement online application/registration.  Thus fo r some time both  online and 
physical submission may coexist which with passage of time would become 
completely online.  Since online registrations woul d ensure transparency and save 
time, the Ministry should ask the State Governments  to set a time limit by which they 
would  go for online registration.   
 
 

 
 
27 
 
Clause 4  
 
3.14 C
lause 4 relates to the application to Authority.  
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that every promoter shall  make an 
application to the Authority for registration of th e project in such form, manner, 
within such time and accompanied by such fee as may  be specified by the 
regulations made by the Authority.  
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause of the Bill provides the list of d ocuments that the 
promoter is required to enclose along with the application for registration.  
Clause 4(2) (e)  
3.15 Clause 4(2) (e) reads as under: 
"The promoter shall enclose the following documents  along with 
the application referred to in sub-section ( 1), namely:— 
(e) proforma of the agreements proposed to be signed with the 
allottees." 
3.16  It has been suggested that clause 4(2)(e)  needs  to be suitably worded to bring  about 
the uniformity of agreements on the lines of Model Agreement to be devised by Real Estate 
Regulatory Authority (RERA) and scrutiny by RERA of  the proforma agreements be 
mandatory before according registration under clause 5.  
Further it has been suggested that the limitation o f 15 days as brought on RERA in 
clause 5 would commence from the date of RERA being  satisfied that all documentation as 
required under clause 4 including the proforma agre ement referred to in clause 4(2)(e) are in 
order.  
Lastly, it has been added in the suggestions that t he Model Agreement may also 
include provisions regarding the quality of materials and the technology that would be used at 
different stages of construction.  

 
 
28 
 
3.17  The Committee asked the Ministry about their opinion on the inclusion of the above 
suggestions in clause 4(2)(e). The Ministry in their written reply submitted as under: 
  "The Model Agreement is to be provided for by Rul es." 
 
3.18 The Committee observe that under Clause 4(2) t he promoter shall enclose 
certain documents as enumerated in the Bill along w ith the application and one such 
document as mentioned in Clause 4(2) (e) is the pro forma of the agreement proposed 
to be signed with the allottees.   
A suggestion has been received that there is a need  for a mention of draft of the 
'Model Agreement' to bring about uniformity of agre ement throughout the country and 
the 'Model Agreement' should also include provision s regarding the quality of 
materials and technology that would be used at diff erent stages of construction.  The 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation h as apprised the Committee that 
'The Model Agreement' is to be provided for by Rule s.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Model Agreement should include the provision regarding the quality of 
Materials and technology that would be used at diff erent stages of construction. Also, 
it should be obligatory for the Real Estate Regulat ory Authority to ensure strict 
compliance of the Rules and regular monitoring of the same.    
Clause 4(2) (h)  
3.19 Clause 4(2) (h) reads as under: 
(2) The promoter shall enclose the following document s along 
with the application referred to in sub-section ( 1), namely:— 
 (h) the names and addresses of the contractors, archi tect, 
structural engineer, if any, and other persons conc erned with the 
development of the proposed project; 

 
 
29 
 
3.20  The proposed bill has sought to only regulate  the promoter with no focus on other 
entities of the chain like statutory authorities, c ontractors; architects who all contribute to a 
real estate project.  Without monitoring mechanism for these entities, merely regulating the 
promoter in isolation will meet no purpose.  In thi s regard, i t has been suggested to redefine 
the Clause 4(2) (h), which may be read as under:   
  “Incorporate the names and addresses of the contra ctors, project 
 manager/s, site engineer/s, architect, structural,  mechanical, electrical, 
 plumbing, façade, and geo-technical engineers, and  other persons 
 concerned with the design and development of the p roposed project. If 
 some/part of services has been undertaken by a des ign/project 
 management consultancy company or in-house teams o f the promoter 
 then the same shall be clearly mentioned.”  
 
3.21  On the above suggestion, the Ministry of HUPA  submitted as under: 
  "The proposed Bill is limited in applicability, i .e. transaction entered into 
 between the buyer and the promoter, under Entries 6 and 7 of the 
 Concurrent List of the 7 th  Schedule of the Constitution.  Local Authorities 
 are within the State List of the 7th Schedule, for  which the Central 
 Government does not have the powers to make laws.  In regard to 
 contractors and architects the promoter is require d to disclose their 
 names and addresses under clause 4(2)(h).  Also th e promoter shall be 
 responsible for any loss sustained by the allottee s due to actions of the 
 contractor's actions as they are the promoter's ag ents." 
 
3.22 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alle viation in their written reply submitted as 
under: 
 "Clause 4(2)(h) uses the term ‘…….. and  other per sons concerned  with 
the project’, which would cover all the categories of professionals 
suggested, thus there is no need to carry out any revision in the clause." 
 
3.23 In a written memorandum from one of the expert s following suggestions have been 
advanced in the context of 
Clause 4(2)(h) of the Bill : 
(i)  The clause obligates the promoters to provide the details of the 
professionals being involved with the project at the time of registration. It should 
also mandate that any change / additions of such pr ofessionals need to be 
notified to RERA.  

 
 
30 
 
(ii) The Bill in its body does not spell out the re sponsibilities of these 
professionals in relation to the project and conseq uences if such professionals 
are not performing as expected of them.  
(iii) Many a time, investors are encouraged to make  investments in 
the project because of association of “renowned pro fessionals”. Interestingly 
clause 10 of the Bill spells out the duties of real  estate agents. It is for 
consideration if similar clause/clauses need to be incorporated in relation the 
professionals mentioned in clause 4(2)(h). 
 
3.24 When asked about the incorporation of these ch anges in the proposed Bill and 
consequent impact of such inclusion on the implemen tation of the Act, the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, in their reply furnished as under: 
"The Bill provides this clause for the purpose of d isclosure, which would 
 bring transparency, however, further specifying re sponsibilities of the 
 specified professionals is not necessary as they a re regulated under 
 specific laws and professional bodies such as the Architects by the 
 Architects Act, 1972, engineers by AICTE, chartere d accountants by 
 ICAI, lawyers by Bar Council of India etc." 
 
3.25  Sub-Clause 4(2)(h) of the Bill  puts the promoter u nder obligation to enclose the 
names and addresses of the contractors, architect, structural engineer, if any, and 
other persons concerned with the development of the  proposed project, while 
applying for the registration of the project with t he regulatory authority.  It has been 
pointed out that the Bill does not require that the  responsibilities of these 
professionals in relation to the project  are spelt out. 
 The Committee fail to understand as to why the dut ies and responsibilities of 
the professional involved in the project do not fin d mention in the Bill on the lines of 
the responsibilities of Real Estate Agents that hav e been explicitly mentioned in 
Clause 10 of the Bill. 

 
 
31 
 
 The Committee are in agreement with the Ministry t hat the professionals are 
regulated under specific laws and professional bodi es such as the architects by the 
Architects Act, 1972, engineers by AICTE, chartered  accountants by ICAI, lawyers by 
Bar Council of India etc.  Also the Committee concu r with the Ministry that it will be 
the responsibility of Promoter towards any loss of the allottee/ customer due to the 
actions of professionals and contractors associated  with the project. However, the 
Committee feel that the responsibilities of all the  professionals should be clearly 
mentioned at the time of applying for registration of any project by the promoter.  
Though, they will continue to be ruled by the specific laws and professional bodies. 
 Further, the Committee also recommend that any cha nge in the "professionals" 
associated with the projects needs to be disclosed at the earliest. 
Clause 4(2) (i) (D)  
3.26 Clause 4(2) (i) (D) reads as under: 
(2) The promoter shall enclose the following document s along 
with the application referred to in sub-section ( 1), namely:— 
(i) a declaration, supported by an affidavit, which s hall be signed 
by the promoter or any person authorised by the promoter, stating,— 
(D) that seventy per cent., or such lesser per cent. as notified by 
the appropriate Government, of the amounts realised  for the real estate 
project from the allottees, from time to time, shal l be deposited in a 
separate account to be maintained in a scheduled ba nk within a period 
of fifteen days of its realization to cover the cost of construction and shall 
be used only for that purpose. 
3.27 In connection with, clause 4(2) (i) (D)  of the Real Estate (Regulation and 
Development) Bill 2013, it has been submitted that the Builder/Developer initially invests 
huge amounts for procuring the land either by purch ase or development (Security to be paid 
to land owners or goodwill amount). Further huge am ounts are being paid towards payment 

 
 
32 
 
of fees to the authorities for sanctions and other statutory clearances. This involves huge 
amounts  of money to be paid by the builder/develop ers. Hence instead of restricting 30% of 
amounts to be used, the same clause should be amend ed to 50% or more. Furthermore, 
restriction on advance receipts could be relaxed an d left to the discretion of the builder and 
purchaser.  
3.28  Ministry of Urban Housing and Poverty allevia tion on being inquired about their 
opinion on this suggestion and its impact on the im plementation of the Act, submitted as 
under: 
"The said sub-clause does not bind the promoters to  withdraw towards land 
cost or to payment of authorities. The limit of 70%  is only indicative to cover 
“the cost of construction” and the percentage can b e further reduced by the 
State/UT Government through a notification to that effect if the same is sought 
to cover the “cost of construction”.  This will protect the buyer and ensure timely 
completion of the project by preventing from diversion of project funds." 
 
3.29 In connection with clause 4(2) (i) (D) , when inquired by the Committee as to why 
State Governments have been permitted to notify a p ercentage lesser than 70% to be 
deposited in a separate account in a scheduled bank , the  Ministry of Urban Housing and 
Poverty Alleviation has furnished in writing as under:- 
"An upper limit of 70% is provided as it is felt th at approximately 30% of 
project cost includes land and approval cost in a t ypical town/ city. The 
developer/promoter is allowed to withdraw the said 30% upfront as it may 
already have been incurred by him towards land cost , relevant approvals etc. 
Power to notify a lesser percent has been provided,  as in many metropolitan 
cities such as Delhi and Mumbai, the land costs as percentage of the project 
cost could be much higher in comparison to smaller cities. Hence, flexibility has 
been given to the States to determine the percentag e of project cost to be 
deposited in a separate account, by notifications, so that funds are not diverted 
and projects are completed on time, and simultaneou sly promoters are not put 
in difficulty in regard to withdrawal for land and approval costs. However, the 
underlying principle is that the percentage so reta ined must cover the complete 
cost of construction." 
 
 

 
 
33 
 
3.30 In connection with Clause 4 (2) (i)  (D), it h as been feared by Builders' lobby that 
blocking of up to 70% sale proceeds will choke this sector and Indian economy as well.    
3.31 On being enquired by the Committee the Ministr y of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation, opined as under in this regard: 
"The clause does not provide for ‘blocking’ the sai d amount of sale proceeds, it only 
provides for withdrawal for project specific constr uction. The said clause is necessary 
to ensure timely completion of projects by preventing fund diversion." 
3.32  In its written submission the Ministry of Hou sing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
has mentioned that the Bill does not envisage maint enance of an escrow account by the 
promoter.  It just requires the promoter to maintai n a separate account for each project, with 
minimum specified amounts to be deposited in the sa id account, and to be used only for that 
particular project.  The Bill does not envisage the  custody of such an account as per the 
accounting guidelines issued in this regard by the competent authority (Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of India).  If the promoter does not de posit the specified amounts of funds 
collected towards a project, within the specified t ime, he may be penalized under clause 52 
of the Bill. 
3.33 The Department of Legal Affairs, of Ministry o f Law and Justice, in a written reply, 
submitted as under: 
"Clause 4(i)(D) of the Bill provides for maintenanc e of a separate account and 
on submission of declaration (through affidavit), authority shall grant registration 
in terms of Clause 3.32  The penalty provisions are  available in Clause 52 of 
the Bill.  The penalty provisions in respect of def ault under the said provision 
can be made more stringent and the Administrative M inistry may consider the 
desirability of adding provisions for maintenance o f separate escrow account or 
custody of account with any third party to avoid mi schief on the part of 
promoters." 
 
3.34 In this regard, Legislative Department of Mini stry of Law and Justice has submitted 
that the decision to incorporate the suggestion is to be taken by the administrative Ministry in 
consultation with the Ministry of Consumer Affairs and the Department of Legal Affairs. 

 
 
34 
 
3.35  In connection with the suggestion on sub-clau se 4(2) (i) (D), the National Housing 
Bank opined as under: 
"We feel that the above provision will bring about development in the system 
and will also mitigate risk for all the stakeholder s, particularly the buyers and 
the lenders. The money realized from the buyers wil l be used for the specific 
projects and will not get diverted as it normally h appens. Maintenance of a 
specific dedicated account to the extent of upto 70  per cent of the cost will also 
help the builder in monitoring their cash-flows vis -a-vis stages of construction.  
This will also help in timely completion of the pro ject and will develop 
confidence amongst the buyers/borrowers, lenders an d regulators as well as 
the approving authorities. Besides, this will also make the projects more viable 
on a stand-alone basis and therefore more creditworthy.  
Though this may impact the cost for the builders, i f the money continues 
to remain un-utilized for a long time in the specif ic escrow account. On the flip 
side, this will act as an incentive for the builder s and the lenders to call for the 
amounts commensurate with the stage of construction.     
However, there may be exceptional situations where the amount may 
not be required to be routed through this specific account (such as payments of 
stamp duty/registration charges/fees etc.) which may be provided in the Bill." 
 
3.36 With regard to clause 4(2)(i)(D), representati ve of the RBI during oral evidence on 
06.12.2013, submitted as under: 
"Clause 4(2)(i)(d), the provision in the Bill requi ring the depositing in a 
Scheduled Bank a sizeable portion of the amounts re alized for the real estate 
project from the allottees  is a welcome measure.  In fact, before I go into the 
individual clause, let me say that we very much wel come this Bill because it  
was time that we put this regulatory mechanism so a s to put the real estate 
sector on a sound footing." 
That there is a provision that the sizeable portion  of the amount realised 
from the real estate project from the allottes shou ld be put into banks.  This 
instills confidence in the allottees who need the c omfort that the amount 
collected from them are put to proper use for the c ompletion of the project.   
Our suggestion is that it may be considered whether  such amount should be 
required to be deposited in scheduled commercial ba nks.  That would instill 
more confidence."          
 
 

 
 
35 
 
3.37 With regard to more realistic approach by the RBI/ Ministry of Finance/ Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation towards this sector a few developers feel that finance 
restrictions by  RBI on the 80:20 upfront housing s cheme a lenient view should be taken as 
the sector may grow further.  
 3.38 During the Course of oral evidence, Secretary , Department of Financial Services, 
Ministry of Finance deposed as under: 
 
 "70% will go to escrow account, it is a good sugge stion.  It is very important this will 
 lead to prevention of diversion of funds and black  money both of which are prevalent 
 in real estate sector.  On the whole it is a welco me step."  
 
3.39 Section 4(2)(i)(D) of the Bill provides that “that seventy per cent, or such lesser 
per cent as notified by the appropriate Government,  of the amounts realised for the 
real estate project from the allottees, from time t o time, shall be deposited in a 
separate account to be maintained in a scheduled ba nk within a period of fifteen days 
of its realisation to cover the cost of constructio n and shall be used only for that 
purpose.”   
In this regard the apprehensions were raised by the  stakeholders that blocking 
of up to 70% sale proceeds will choke this sector a nd Indian economy as well.   Hence 
instead of restricting 30% of amounts to be used, t he same may be enhanced to 50% 
or more. Furthermore, restriction on advance receip ts could be relaxed and left to the 
discretion of the builder and purchaser. On this cl ause  of the Bill, the Committee 
concur with the Ministry that the Bill does not env isage maintenance of an escrow 
account by the promoter.  It just requires the prom oter to maintain a separate account 

 
 
36 
 
for each project, with minimum specified amounts to be deposited in the said account, 
and to be used only for that particular project. 
Also, the Committee  feel that this  provision of t he Bill will bring about 
development in the system and will also mitigate ri sk for all the stakeholders, 
particularly the buyers and the lenders. The money realized from the buyers will be 
used for the specific projects and will not get div erted as it normally happens. 
Maintenance of a specific dedicated account to the extent of upto 70 per cent of the 
cost will also help the builder in monitoring their  cash-flows vis-a-vis stages of 
construction.  This will also help in timely comple tion of the project and will develop 
confidence amongst the buyers/borrowers, lenders an d regulators as well as the 
approving authorities. Besides, this will also make  the projects more viable on a 
stand-alone basis and therefore more creditworthy . 
Furthermore, the promoter should be asked to submit  the progress of the 
project alongwith the utilisation certificates ther eof to the Real Estate Regulatory 
Authority.  It should be the duty of Real Estate Re gulatory Authority to monitor the 
physical progress of the project.   
According to the Committee this will further ensure  the timely completion of the 
project as well as proper utilisation of money on t he project without its diversion for 
some other projects.  Therefore, the Committee are not inclined to tinker  with this 
provision of the Bill.  
 
 

 
 
37 
 
Clause 5  
3.40 C lause 5 relates to the grant of registration.  
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Authority shall within a period of fifteen 
days—(a) grant registration subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation  and the rules 
and regulations made thereunder, and provide a regi stration number, including a Login Id 
and password to the applicant for accessing the web site of the Authority and to create his 
web page and to fill therein the details of the proposed project; or ( b) reject the application for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, if such applicat ion does not conform to the provisions of 
the proposed legislation  or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause of the Bill provides that if the A uthority fails to grant the 
registration or reject the application, as the case  may be, as provided within the said fifteen 
days, the project shall be deemed to have been regi stered, and the Authority shall within two 
days of the expiry of the said fifteen days, provid e a registration number and a Login Id and 
password to the promoter for accessing the website of the Authority and to create his web 
page and to fill therein the details of the proposed project.  
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause of the Bill provides that the regi stration granted under this 
clause shall be valid for a period declared by the promoter.  
 
 
Clause 5 (1) (a) 
 
3.41 Clause 5(1) (a)  reads as under: 
(1) On receipt of the application under sub-section  ( 1) of section 4, the 
Authority shall within a period of fifteen days— 
(a) grant registration subject to the provisions of t his Act and the rules 
and regulations made thereunder, and provide a regi stration number, including 
a Login Id and password to the applicant for access ing the website of the 
Authority and to create his web page and to fill th erein the details of the 
proposed project;  
3.42 A suggestion has been received that under Clause 5(1) (a), the e-registration process 
should be decided by the central regulatory authori ty for (a) preliminary e-registration of 
promoters with digital signature allocated by the a uthority and (b) uploading of required 
documents for the projects.  
 

 
 
38 
 
3.43 On being inquired about the opinion on the abo ve suggestion, the Ministry of Urban 
Housing and Poverty Alleviation submitted as under: 
"The registration mechanism proposed under the Bill  was widely deliberated 
with different stakeholders at the time of drafting , wherein it was felt that 
registering promoters company would create immense difficulty, as projects of 
many promoters would spread over to many States. As  the Bill provides for 
State Level Authorities, and not a Central Authorit y, registration of projects and 
not promoter has been envisaged.  
Implementation process/mechanism has been delegated  to the regulatory 
authority, to be decided by regulations. The Bill d oes not propose to set up any 
Central Regulatory Authority, other than for Union territories, as part of the 
definition ‘appropriate Government’." 
 
3.44  
The Committee are in agreement on the view that reg istering the promoters 
companies would create difficulties. Thus the sugge stion of registering the projects is 
well conceived.  But the Committee want  that the a ntecedents of the promoters 
should be checked before registering the projects b eing promoted by them.  If the 
activities of the promoters are not found fit, then  the project should not be registered.  
Further, the promoter should also be blacklisted for doing any further business across 
the country after two such defaults.  
Clause 5(2) 
3.45 Clause 5(2)  reads as under: 
 
"If the Authority fails to grant the registration o r reject the application, as the 
case may be, as provided under sub-section ( 1), the project shall be deemed to 
have been registered, and the Authority shall withi n two days of the expiry of 
the said fifteen days, provide a registration numbe r and a Login Id and 
password to the promoter for accessing the website of the Authority and to 
create his web page and to fill therein the details of the proposed project." 
 
 
3.46 Clause 5(2) has provision for expeditious disp osal of the applications for registration of 
real estate projects.  The stakeholders have expres sed their view that the time limit of 15 

 
 
39 
 
days granted in this provision is not sufficient.  The authority may not be able to make a 
reasonable assessment of the project and take a dec ision on its eligibility for registration 
within the stipulated time frame.  Therefore, it ha s been suggested that this time period may 
be enhanced to one month and it may be provided tha t if nothing is heard from the authority 
within a period of one month the registration may be deemed to be granted. 
 
3.47 The representatives of RBI, during their  oral  evidence before the Committee deposed 
as under: 
"However, we feel that the time limit of 15 days gr anted in the Bill, does not 
appear to be sufficient.  The Authority may not be able to make a reasonable 
assessment of the project and take a decision on it s eligibility for registration 
within the time stipulated.  It is, therefore, for consideration whether it may be 
provided that if not if nothing is heard from the A uthority within a period of one 
month or so, the registration is deemed to have bee n granted.  This will 
facilitate the registration Authority to call for relevant information before granting 
registration if it is required.   
 
The Period required for completing the information may be excluded for the 
computing for the period specified for the issue of  registration but all this period 
sho 
uld also be specified so that the whole thing is ti me bound."                                      
(proceedings page-4) 
 
3.48  In their written reply, the RBI, on the above  suggestion opined as under: 
 
"The proposed Bill provides for registration of rea l estate projects, after 
receiving all approvals from all authorities includ ing the Municipal/ Urban 
Development etc. and prior to commencement of devel opment of a real estate 
project.  The Bill proposes to register projects on  a real time basis, without the 
need for scrutiny.  The applicant/ promoter is requ ired to provide a self- 
declaration supported by affidavit on the contents of the application.  The 
Authority is required to ensure that all the docume nts are in place, without 
checking its veracity, for which the proposed time of 15 days has been felt to be 
sufficient." 
 
3.49  
The Committee are in full consonance with the views  of both the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation and the RBI, regarding 15 days being sufficient 
time for registering the project. The Committee are  also in agreement with the 

 
 
40 
 
suggestion of RBI, to provide for the automatic reg istration of the project if nothing is 
heard from the authority within 30 days of applying  for the registration.  They want the 
Ministry to include this provision in the Bill.  
Clause 6  
3.50 C lause 6 of the Bill relates to the extension of registration.  
This clause provides that the registration granted may be extended by the Authority on 
an application made by the promoter under such cond itions as may be prescribed and in 
such form and on payment of such fee as may be spec ified by the regulations made by the 
Authority.  
3.51 Clause 6  reads as under: 
 
"The registration granted under section 5 may be ext ended by the 
Authority on an Extension of application made by th e promoter under such 
conditions as may be prescribed and in such registr ation. form and on payment 
of such fee as may be specified by the regulations made by the Authority: 
 
Provided that no application for extension of registration shall be rejected 
unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard in the 
matter." 
 
3.52 In connection with clause 6, dealing with exte nsion of registration, the suggestion has 
been received that  
"Bill should deal with delays occurring on account of Government action and 
provision for automatic extension in such cases." 
3.53 On being asked about the feasibility of incorp oration of this suggestion in the proposed 
Bill, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, submitted as under: 
"The criterion and reasons for extension of registr ation under the said clause 
has been provided to be determined by rules, as it may differ from State to 
State, and the powers towards the same has been giv en to the State/UT 
governments." 
 
 

 
 
41 
 
3.54 In connection with the Clause 6; It has been f urther suggested that extension of 
registration does not cater for delays on account o f action or default of Government 
authorities/agencies responsible for the delay, as it happened in the case of land acquisition 
by Noida Authority and High Court stay on the same or orders of Haryana 
Government/Under Ground Water Board/Punjab and Hary ana High Court stopping use of 
underground water for construction purposes in Hary ana. For such delays, authority 
concerned should be held accountable and not the de veloper. Bill should deal with delays 
occurring on account of Government action and provi sion for automatic extension in such 
cases. 
 
 
3.55 When the Committee asked about the views of th e Ministry on this suggestion, they in 
their written replies submitted as under: 
"The criterion and reasons for extension of registr ation under the said clause 
has been provided to be determined by rules, as it may differ from State to 
State, and the powers towards the same has been giv en to the State/UT 
governments." 
 
 
3.56 The Committee are in agreement with the reasons put  forth by the Ministry that 
criterion and reasons for extension of registration  may differ from State to State and 
that this power be delegated to the concerned State / UT government.  However, the 
Committee fail to understand as to why the delays o ccurring on account of 
Government action should not be dealt with by the B ill.  Thus, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the delays on account of Government/ local authorities action should 
be explicitly included in the provisions of the Bill.   
 
 

 
 
42 
 
Clause 7  
 
3.57 This clause relates to revocation of registrat ion.  
Clause 7(4) 
 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that upon the revocation of the registration, the 
Authority,—(a) shall debar the promoter from accessing its websi te in relation to that project 
and specify his name in the list of defaulters on i ts website and also inform the other Real 
Estate Regulatory Authorities in other States and U nion territories about such cancellation; 
(b) may recommend to the competent authority to facil itate the balance of the development 
works to be carried out in accordance with the prov isions of clause 8; ( c) may, to protect the 
interest of prospective buyers or in the public int erest, issue such directions as it may deem 
necessary. 
 
3.57  Clause 7(4)  reads as under: 
 
(4) Upon the revocation of the registration, the Authority,— 
 ( a) shall debar the promoter from accessing its website in relation to that project 
and specify his name in the list of defaulters on i ts website and also inform the 
other Real Estate Regulatory Authorities in other S tates and Union territories 
about such cancellation; 
 (b) may recommend to the competent authority to facil itate the balance of 
the development works to be carried out in accordan ce with the provisions of 
section 8; 
(c) may, to protect the interest of prospective buyer s or in the public 
interest, issue such directions as it may deem necessary 
 
3.58 It has been suggested that  clause  7(4)(a) needs further refinement on debarring the 
promoter and specifying the name in the list of def aulters to make it relevant in a situation 
where it is common practice among developers to  have a different entity for every project.  
3.59 Ministry of Urban Housing and Poverty Alleviat ion, on this aspect stated in their written 
reply as under: 
 "The said clause only bars the promoter from acces sing the website for that specific 
project only, in case of default. Also, the definit ion of promoter is inclusive and covers 
all such entities that developers form for real est ate projects, and thus cannot escape 
responsibility." 
 

 
 
43 
 
3.60  Clause 7(4)(a) debars  the promoter from accessing its website in relation to the 
specific project of which the registration has been  revoked. It also provides for the 
Authority to specify his name in the list of defaul ters on its website and also inform 
the other Real Estate Regulatory Authorities in oth er States and Union Territories 
about such cancellation.  The Committee fully agree  with the suggestion forwarded in 
this regard and strongly recommend that as recommen ded in connection with clause 
5(1)(a)  the promoter of the project after two such instances should be blacklisted from 
conducting any further business across the country. 
Clause 8  
3.61 C lause 8 relates to the obligation of Authority cons equent upon lapse of or revocation 
of registration.  
This clause provides that upon lapse of the registration or on revocation of the 
registration under the  proposed legislation, the Authority, may consult t he appropriate 
Government to take such action as it may deem fit i ncluding the carrying out of the 
remaining development works by competent authority or by the association of allottees 
or in any other manner, as may be determined by the  Authority. However, that no 
direction, decision or order of the Authority under  this clause  shall take effect until the 
expiry of the period of appeal provided under the p rovisions of the  proposed 
legislation.  
 
3.62 Clause 8 reads as under: 
 
" Upon lapse of the registration or on revocation of  the registration under this 
Act, the Authority, may consult the appropriate Gov ernment to take such action 
as it may deem fit including the carrying out of th e remaining development 
works by competent authority or by the association of allottees or in any other 
manner, as may be determined by the Authority:  
Provided that no direction, decision or order of th e Authority under this section 
shall take effect until the expiry of the period of  appeal provided under the 
provisions of this Act." 
 
3.63 Clause  8 provides that the Regulatory Authority has to con sult the State government 
for action that is to be taken on lapse of registra tion or it’s revocation. Also, the proviso to the 

 
 
44 
 
section allow for a very long 90 day period for App eal before an Order U/S 8 can take effect. 
During the Course of evidence before the Committee the stakeholders raised their query 
regarding the justification of such a long period. 
Further they suggested that the exemptions from reg istrations should be removed in 
public interest. Accordingly, Section 8 needs to be appropriately modified.  
3.64 When the Committee inquired from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation about its opinion on this aspect of the  Real Estate (Regulation and Development) 
Bill 2013, the Ministry stated as under:- 
"The clause provides that the Authority may consult  the appropriate 
Government on the possibilities of completion of th e project pursuant to 
cancellation, it does not provide for seeking permi ssion for cancellation. Also, 
as pursuant to cancellation of registration, it wou ld require execution towards 
project completion. The Authority is not competent to take up project execution 
work, hence, it is to be done by the appropriate Go vernment or such other 
agencies as decided. 
 
Also, the proviso providing for action pursuant to cancellation is to take 
effect only after appeal period is over, as it is a  natural law of justice to provide 
the grievance redressal mechanism before action can be taken." 
 
3.65 In connection with clause 8 of the bill it has  been suggested that, 
"Office of the authority should have competence to recommend to the authority 
for its approval for alternate promoters/modalities  following a transparent 
process. The task of the authority in this directio n would considerably be 
facilitated if it has got an investigating agency". 
 
3.66 On the above suggestion the Ministry of Housing and  Urban Poverty Alleviation, in 
their written reply opined as under:- 
"The clause provides for a wide range of all possib le options to the Authority to 
take appropriate remedial measures, wherein the int ent is to ensure project 
completion. Thus, the clause takes care of the conc erns raised. Also, the need 
for an investigating agency may not be necessary. C lause 31 provides for 
inquiry and investigation by the Authority, and the  Authority is expected to 
develop its own methods of investigation." 
 
3.67 The Committee find that the provision of 90 da ys for appeal settlement in case 
of revocation of registration of the project is a l ong  period.  This will prove to be 

 
 
45 
 
burden on the customers of the projects, as in pres ent scenario most of the 
customers purchase the flats through  bank loans.  Thus, the Committee recommend 
that the provision of 90 days for appeal settlement  should be reduced to 45 days.  In 
the alternative, the provision of suitably compensa ting the customers of projects that 
get affected due to revocation of registration of t he project and subsequent delays in 
the construction due to appeal period, should be explicitly provided in the Bill. 
Clause 9 & Clause 10  
3.68 C lause 9 relates to the registration of real estate agents, while claus e 10 deals with 
functions of real estate agents.   
 
Clause 9(1) 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that no real estate agent  shall facilitate the sale or 
purchase of or act on behalf of any person to facil itate the sale or purchase of any plot, 
apartment or building, as the case may be, in a rea l estate project or part of it, being the part 
of the real estate project registered under the pro posed legislation, being sold by the 
promoter in any planning area, without registering with the Authority . 
 
3.69  Clause 9(1) reads as under: 
 
9. (1) No real estate agent shall facilitate the sale or  purchase of or act 
on behalf of any person to facilitate the sale or p urchase of any plot, 
apartment or building, as the case may be, in a real estate project or part 
of it, being the part of the real estate project re gistered under section 3, 
being sold by the promoter in any planning area, wi thout obtaining 
registration under this section. 
 
3.70 Sub-clause 9( 1)  provides that no real estate agent shall facilit ate the sale or purchase 
of or act on behalf of any person to facilitate the  sale or purchase of any 
 plot, apartment or 
building, as the case may be, in a real estate proj ect or part of it, being the part of the real 
estate project registered under the proposed legislation , being sold by the promoter in any 
planning area, without registering with the Authority .  

 
 
46 
 
3.71  Apprehensions have been raised that under Clause 9 (1) of the Real Estate Bill 
2013, registration of real estate agent focuses onl y on new property sale; it does not 
provide clarity on the criteria for eligibility of an individual to go for this registration. This 
clause indicates that real estate agents need regis tration only for new project/flats sale and 
left out other areas of business like resale of property, out of the purview.  
3.72 On being inquired by the Committee, the Minist ry of Urban Housing and Poverty 
Alleviation; submitted as under: 
"The proposed Bill is prospective in application, f or registration of both 
real estate projects and real estate agents. Resale of properties, if it relates to a 
real estate project, registered under the Act, whet her it is a first sale or resale, 
the real estate agents will have to register with t he Authority and shall be 
quoted by the real estate agent in every sale facil itated by him. However, the 
Bill does not provide for registration of agents who are not selling properties not 
registered under the Bill. 
However, the Ministry is willing to examine the sug gestions of resale in 
secondary market for other unregistered projects by  the Real Estate Agents for 
which a reference is being sent to the Ministry of Law (Legislative department) 
to get their views, as consequent changes would bec ome necessary in clause 
10, which provides for functions of real estate age nts, and section 54 which 
provides for penalty, for contravention of clauses 9 & 10." 
 
3.73 In connection with registration of real estate  agents under Clause 9  suggestion has 
been received regarding training of the Real Estate Agents. The suggestion is as under :- 
 “All real estate agents must be trained and also be provided with a ‘model code’ 
to follow. Often, an agent over claims and doesn't clarify the salient features 
(negatives) of the project. There should be a ‘tick  box’ form (a provisional 
project information letter) which every customer mu st be made aware to ask 
for. The agent must receive signature of the custom er on this letter. The letter 
lays out all the information, which the customer must have been provided about 
the project by the agent. It may contain details su ch as (material used, the 
distance from the amenities, source of water, ‘the final certificate’ of the 
township, etc.). The agent must be trained to follow a model code in selling." 
3.74 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alle viation on being asked about their 
view on incorporating the above suggestion in the proposed Bill, replied as under: 
"These are matter of implementation details, which can be provided under 
delegated legislation." 
 

 
 
47 
 
3.75  In connection with clause 9 dealing with regi stration of real estate agents, it was 
pointed out by the experts that there are no well d efined Guidelines and minimum eligibility 
criteria. 
3.76 The Committee taking a note of the same inquir ed the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation that why the guidelines and min imum eligibility criteria, for the registration 
of the Real Estate Agents have not been defined.  T he Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under: 
"The Bill provides for implementation aspects to be  specified by delegated 
legislation (rules and regulations), wherein these aspects can be considered." 
Clause 9(3) 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the Authority shall,  within such period, in such 
manner and satisfying itself of the fulfillment of such conditions, as may be prescribed—     
(a) grant registration to the real estate agent; ( b) reject the application for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, if such application does not c onform to the provisions of the proposed 
legislation or the rules or regulations made thereu nder. However, no application shall be 
rejected unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
 
3.77  Clause 9(3) reads as under: 
 
(3) The Authority shall, within such period, in such manner and satisfying 
itself of the fulfilment of such conditions, as may be prescribed— 
 ( a) grant registration to the real estate agent; 
(b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded  in writing, if 
such application does not conform to the provisions  of this Act or 
the rules or regulations made thereunder: 
Provided that no application shall be rejected unle ss the applicant 
has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
 
  
3.78 It has been suggested by the stakeholders that  there is no clarity on the eligibility 
criteria for the registration of Real Estate agents . This needs to be incorporated to ensure 
transparency in property dealing. The objective sho uld be to create a pool of licensed Real 
Estate agents who are adequately trained and certif ied, like other self-employed professional 
e.g. insurance agents, lawyers etc. 

 
 
48 
 
3.79 The Ministry in its written replies, submitted the following views on the above 
suggestion: 
"This aspect has been covered under clause 9(3) ‘ The Authority shall, within 
such period, in such manner and satisfying itself o f the fulfillment of such 
conditions, as may be prescribed, grant registratio n ’.  So it has been left to the 
regulator to define the criteria for registration as it deems appropriate." 
3.80 In regard to clause 9 and 10, dealing with Reg istration of Real Estates Agents and 
functions of Real Estates Agents it has been sugges ted that since there is no professional 
body available in the country to certify a person s eeking to be real estate agent, initially the 
Bill should make provisions for provisional registr ation only as one time opportunity to the 
existing agents for a limited period of, say, three years. 
 
3.81 On being inquired about their views on the abo ve suggestion, the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation, opined as under:- 
   
"The main thrust of the Bill is regarding disclosur e and transparency in relation 
to real estate projects, registered under the Bill.  As real estate agents are an 
important link in the ‘transaction’ chain, it has b een decided to register them 
and make them accountable. The Bill in clause 9(6) provides for period of 
validity of registration in such a manner to be pro vided for by rules, and 
extendable as specified by the said rules. Thus the se aspects have been 
covered under the Bill." 
 
3.82 Clause 10 reads as under: 
 
Every real estate agent registered under section 9 shall— 
(a) not facilitate the sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or building, as the 
agents. case may be, in a real estate project or pa rt of it, being sold by the 
promoter in any planning area, which is not registered with the Authority; 
(b) maintain and preserve such books of account, reco rds and documents as 
may be prescribed; 
(c) not involve himself in any unfair trade practices, namely:— 
(i) the practice of making any statement, whether orally or in writing or by visible 
representation which— 
(A) falsely represents that the services are of a particular standard or grade; 
(B) represents that the promoter has approval or affiliation which such promoter 

 
 
49 
 
does not have; 
(C) makes a false or misleading representation concerning the services; 
(ii ) permitting the publication of any advertisement whether in any newspaper or 
otherwise of services that are not intended to be offered; 
(d) facilitate the possession of all documents, as the allottee is entitled to, at the 
time of booking of any plot, apartment or building, as the case may be; 
(e) discharge   such  other  functions as may be prescribed. 
  
3.83 Under clause 10(a), of the Bill, it has been m entioned that “Every real estate agent 
registered under section 9 shall not facilitate the  sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or 
building, as the case may be, in a real estate proj ect or part of it, being sold by the promoter 
in any planning area, which is not registered with the Authority”. 
3.84 The Committee asked the Ministry of Housing an d Urban Poverty Alleviation to clarify 
that whether the properties which are exempted unde r Clause 3(a) would be allowed to be 
sold or purchased through real estate agents or not . The Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under:- 
"The proposed Bill is prospective in application, f or registration of both real 
estate projects and real estate agents. Resale of properties, if it relates to a real 
estate project, registered under the Act, whether i t is a first sale or resale, the 
real estate agents will have to register with the Authority and shall be quoted by 
the real estate agent in every sale facilitated by him. However, the Bill does not 
provide for registration of agents who are not sell ing properties not registered 
under the Bill. 
 
However, the Ministry is willing to consider its re vision, towards which a 
reference is being sent to the Ministry of Law (Leg islative department) to get 
their views, as consequent changes would become nec essary in 10, which 
provides for functions of real estate agents, and s ection 54 which provides for 
penalty, for contravention of clauses 9 & 10. The v iews of the Ministry pursuant 
to the suggestions received from the Ministry of Law would be communicated to 
the Standing Committee." 
 

 
 
50 
 
3.85 The Committee find that in Clauses 9 and 10 relatin g to "registration of real 
estate agents" and "functions of real estate agents" certain things are conspicuous by 
their absence.  There are no provisions for registr ation of agents who are selling 
properties not registered under the Bill, lack of a ny training for real estate agents, no 
well defined guidelines and minimum eligibility cri teria for registration of real estate 
agents.  The Committee are dissatisfied over the re ply of the Ministry in this regard, 
that these are implementation aspects and are to be specified by delegated legislation.   
 The Committee are of the view that real estate age nts are the main players in 
this Bill.  Hence, the repository of real estate ag ents will prove to be the most 
important deciding factor towards the successful im plementation of all other 
provisions of this Bill.  Thus, the Committee being  in full agreement with the 
suggestions received in connection with Clauses 9  and 10 strongly recommend that 
all the real estate agents across the country shoul d be  registered irrespective  of the 
type of property they are selling.  This includes p roperties from agriculture, industry, 
residential and commercial sectors.  Also, the mini mum eligibility criteria and other 
guidelines alongwith the "model code for training o f real estate agents" should be 
clearly mentioned  in the Bill.  This model code ca n be followed by all the regulatory 
authorities across the country with suitable changes according to the local needs . 
  

 
 
51 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
Functions and Duties of Promoter 
 
Chapter III of the Bill deals with  Functions and Duties of Promoter  and contains clauses 11 to 
16.  The Committee will now give their comments and  observations on provisions contained 
in some of the clauses.   
 
Clause 11 
 
4.2 Clause 11 relates to the functions and duties o f promoter. 
 
Clause 11(4) 
 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that the promoter shall—( a) be responsible to obtain a 
completion certificate from the relevant competent authority as per local laws or other laws 
for the time being in force and to make it availabl e to the allottees individually or to the 
association of allottees, as the case may be; ( b) be responsible for providing and maintaining 
the essential services, as may be specified in the service level agreements, on reasonable 
charges, till the taking over of the maintenance of  the project by the association of the 
allottees; ( c) take steps for the formation of an association or  society or co-operative society, 
as the case may be, of the allottees, or a federation of the same, under the laws applicable. 
 
4.3 Clause 11(4) reads as under: 
 
(4) The promoter shall— 
 ( a) be responsible to obtain a completion certificate  from the relevant 
competent authority as per local laws or other laws  for the time being in force 
and to make it available to the allottees individua lly or to the association of 
allottees, as the case may be; 
 ( b) be responsible for providing and maintaining the essential services, 
as may be specified in the service level agreements, on reasonable charges, till 
the taking over of the maintenance of the project b y the association of the 
allottees; 
 ( c) take steps for the formation of an association or  society or co-
operative society, as the case may be, of the allot tees, or a federation of the 
same, under the laws applicable. 
 
4.4  Under Clause 11(4) (a) the responsibility of the pr omoter has been fixed but 
responsibilities of the State Govt. / municipal aut hority to issue completion certificate within 
stipulated time or force majeure factors which caus es delay in obtaining completion 

 
 
52 
 
certificate have not been mentioned.  The suggestio n has been received to include the same 
in the Bill. 
 
 
 
4.5 On being inquired about the incorporation of th e suggestion in the Bill, the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation submitted in their written reply stated as under: 
 
"The proposed Bill is limited in applicability, to transaction entered into between 
the buyer and the promoter, under the Concurrent Li st of the 7 
th  Schedule of 
the Constitution. Local Authorities are covered wit hin the State List of the 7 th  
Schedule, towards which the Central Government does  not have the powers to 
make laws. Force majeure, along with other factors because of which projects 
can get delayed can be covered under clause 6, whic h provides for making 
rules, for extension of registration, based on loca l situations by the State/UT 
government." 
 
4.6 
Under Clause 11(4)(a)  it has been made the respons ibility of the promoter to 
obtain a completion certificate from the relevant c ompetent authority as per local laws 
or other laws for the time being in force and to ma ke it available to the allottees 
individually or to the association of allottees, as  the case may be.  However, the 
responsibilities of the State Govt. / municipal aut hority to issue completion certificate 
within stipulated time or force majeure factors whi ch cause delay in obtaining 
completion certificate have not been mentioned. 
 The Committee are of the view that no doubt it sho uld be the responsibility of 
the promoter to obtain completion certificate from the relevant competent authority 
and make it available to the allottees or to the as sociations of allottees, but if no time 
frame is fixed for the competent authorities to iss ue such completion certificate, it can 
be used by the promoter as a plea for unnecessarily  delaying the furnishing of 
documents to the allottees.  Therefore, the Committ ee strongly recommend that a 
suitable  time limit should be specified  for compe tent authority to provide completion 

 
 
53 
 
certificate to the promoter under Clause 11(4)   of  the Bill,   instead of leaving it to 
State Governments to decide. 
4.7 In any of the real estate project development, debris accumulated across the 
roadsides, streets and grounds prove to be a menace  for the local people. The Committee 
inquired from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Pov erty Alleviation, whether they have any 
policy/guidelines under which the builder is forced to clear the debris simultaneously from the 
roadside and streets to prevent inconvenience to th e local people.  The Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation submitted as under :- 
 
"The thrust of the Bill is disclosure and transpare ncy with regard to the 
transactions entered into between the promoter and the allottee. Clearing of 
debris etc. are part of Municipal functions and beyond the ambit of the Bill." 
 
 
4.8 The Committee are of the view that the construction of  real estate projects in all 
the residential areas where the people are already dwelling, the debris across the 
roadside, streets and in parks and grounds prove to  be menace for the local people.  
Thus, though the clearing of debris etc. is part of  Municipal functions, it should be 
made the responsibility of the promoter to ensure t he timely  clearance of all the 
debris generated during construction of the projects.  
 Thus, the Committee recommend that a new sub-claus e should be incorporated 
in the Bill making it the responsibility of the pro moter to clear the debris generated 
during construction of the project, till the completion of projects.  
 
Clause 14 
 
 
4.9 
This clause relates to the adherence to approved plans and project specifi cations by 
the promoter.  

 
 
54 
 
 
Clause 14(2) 
 
 
 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that in case any structur al defect in such development 
is brought to the notice of the promoter within a p eriod of two years by the allottee from the 
date of handing over possession, it shall be the du ty of the promoter to rectify such defects 
without further charge, within reasonable time, and in the event of promoter’s failure to rectify 
such defects within such time, the aggrieved allott ees shall be entitled to receive appropriate 
compensation in the manner as provided under the proposed legislation. 
 
4.10 Sub- Clause 14(2) reads as under: 
 
" In case any structural defect in such development  is brought to the 
notice of the promoter within a period of two years  by the allottee from 
the date of handing over possession, 
it shall be the duty of the promoter 
to rectify such defects without further charge, wit hin reasonable time, 
and in the event of promoter's failure to rectify s uch defects within such 
time, the aggrieved allottees shall be entitled to receive appropriate 
compensation in the manner as provided under this Act." 
 
4.11 In connection with clause 14(2),  following su ggestion was received: 
 
"It is felt that a period of 2 years is too short a  time to ensure structural 
stability. It would be desirable to increase this p eriod to 5 years since 
new projects are likely to develop new sewage defects etc. 
Further it would be worthwhile considering retentio n of final payment in 
the form of performance guarantee so that the promo ter is under 
pressure to ensure structural stability for a longer period."  
 
4.12  With regard to clause 14(2), representative of the RBI during oral evidence submitted 
as under:- 
 "While these provisions take care of the situation  like delay in completion of the project 
or any structural defects, there are not specific p rovisions to compensate the allottees if the 
construction is of substandard quality.  It is desi rable to compensate the allottees for 
substandard quality of work also.  As detection of structural defects may not be possible 
within a short period.  We suggest that allottees s hould have a longer time to claim 
compensation for structural defects."  
                                                                                              
 
 
 
 

 
 
55 
 
4.13 On being asked about the views of the Ministry  of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation, on the above suggestion, they submitted in writing as follows: 
   
"The provision for rectification of structural defec ts has been provided for two 
years after extensive discussions with State Govern ment, structural engineers 
and town planning experts. It has been suggested th at two years is sufficiently 
long period to reflect any structural defects. Also, the Bill should not impose any 
‘exit barriers’ for the promoters, which would hind er competition and affect the 
interest of prospective players in the sector.  The  costs associated with the 
longer association of developer in the project are likely to built-in by the 
developer which would ultimately be borne by the consumers." 
 
As regards structural safety the promoter is bound under local laws, and any 
defect is liable to be punished under such laws. Th e remit of this Bill is just to 
make good the loss to the buyer in the specified pe riod, through compensation, 
if the promoter does not correct such defects. Also , as stated above clause 34 
of the Bill clearly provides for ‘Recovery of inter est or penalty or compensation’ 
imposed under the Bill."  
 
4.14 On the above suggestion the Department of Lega l Affairs of Ministry of Law and 
Justice opined as under: 
"The proposal to increase the period from two years  to five years is a welcome 
suggestion." 
 
4.15 Clause 14(2) of the Bill makes the promoter du ty bound to rectify the structural 
defects that are brought to his notice by the allot tee within a time period of two years 
of allotment.  However, the Committee feel that a p eriod of 2 years is too short a time 
to ensure structural stability. It would be desirab le to increase this period to 5 years 
since new projects are likely to develop unforeseen defects. 
   
 Furthermore, the Committee are also in agreement w ith the view expressed by 
RBI that the allottess may be compensated for delay in projects or for detection of any 
structural defects. They do not agree with the reply of the Ministry that   the Bill should 

 
 
56 
 
not impose any ‘exit barriers’ for the promoters, w hich would hinder competition and 
affect the interest of prospective players in the s ector.  The costs associated with the 
longer association of developer in the project are likely to be built-in by the developer 
which would ultimately be borne by the consumers. 
Hence, the Committee recommend that the time period  to rectify the 
structural defects should be increased from 2 to 5 years.  Also the provision for 
compensating the allottees in case the construction  is of substandard quality  should 
be invariably incorporated under Clause 14 of the present Bill.       
 
 
Clause 15 
 
 
 
4.16 Clause 15 relates to the transfer of title. 
 
4.17 Clause 15 reads as under: 
 
" (1) The promoter shall take all necessary steps to ex ecute a registered 
conveyance of deed in favour of the allottee along with the undivided 
proportionate title in the common areas including the handing over of the 
possession of the plot, apartment or building, as t he case may be, in a 
real estate project, and the other title documents pertaining thereto. 
(2)After obtaining the completion certificate and han ding over physical 
possession to the allottees in terms of sub-section  ( 1), it shall be the 
responsibility of the promoter to hand over the nec essary documents 
and plans, including common areas, to the associati on of the allottees or 
the competent authority, as the case may be, as per the local laws." 
 
 Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the promoter shall t ake all necessary steps 
to execute a registered conveyance deed in favour o f the allottee along with the undivided 
proportionate title in the common areas including t he handing over of the possession of the 
plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in  a real estate project, and the other title 
documents pertaining thereto. Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that after obtaining the 
completion certificate and handing over physical po ssession to the allottees in terms of sub-
section ( 1), it shall be the responsibility of the promoter t o hand over the necessary 
documents and plans, including common areas, to the  association of the allottees or the 
competent authority, as the case may be, as per the local laws. 
 

 
 
57 
 
4.18 A suggestion has been received that under clau se 15 (1), (Transfer of Title) "Once the 
FSI / FAR of a given plot has been consumed / exhau sted by the Builder, the plot would be 
automatically deemed to have been conveyed to the e xisting Flat Owners / Societies on the 
plot and all benefits from the date of deemed conve yance onwards would accrue to the Flat 
Owners / Societies."  
4.19 On this suggestion, the Ministry of Housing an d Urban Poverty Alleviation, opined as 
under: 
“These are matters of development, to be regulated b y the State laws like 
Development/Municipal Acts, Apartment Ownership Act  etc. This clause only 
makes a reference to the local laws, towards timely transfer of title.” 
 
4.20 A suggestion has been received that under Clau se-3 of the Real Estate (Regulation 
and Development) Bill 2013 there should be a specif ic time frame of 2 months for the 
Registration of conveyance deed from the date of handing over possession to the allottee. 
4.21   On being inquired about the feasibility of the abo ve suggestion the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation submitted as under: 
"Clause 15 of the Bill in its current form does not  define the time frame within 
which conveyance deed needs to be registered by the  promoter. However, the 
Ministry is not averse to the idea of defining the time frame for executing the 
conveyance deed. However, this point will need to be legally examined." 
 
4.22 In context of  clause 15 (1), another suggesti on has been received, which reads as 
under: 
" The Promoter should execute registered conveyance  in favour of the allotee 
(Purchaser) along with the undivided proportionate title in the common area, 
However under State law the conveyance of the property is to be granted to the 
Association of the Flat purchaser which is normally  a Society registered under 
Maharashtra Co-operative Society Act but it could b e Company incorporated 
under Companies Act 1956 also or any other incorpor ated identity. Therefore 
society owns the land along with the building and f lat purchasers have right to 
use, occupy transfer the said flat. However  if as proposed conveyance is 
granted to the Purchaser of his undivided share in that case he becomes the 
owner of undivided property and no decision can be taken unless there is 
unanimity and single person can stall everything, w hereas presently member is 

 
 
58 
 
bound by decision taken by the Society. This aspect  needs serious 
consideration." 
 
4.23  On the above suggestion the  Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
opined as under: 
 
“Clause 15 provides for handing over of the apartme nt etc. to the allottees, 
consequently a reference in the registered conveyan ce deed is also made to 
the undivided interest in the common areas, which i s together owned by the 
allottees. The same is managed by the society/association, which are regulated 
by State laws like Apartment Ownership Acts, thus t he provision is rightly 
provided.” 
 
4.24 With regard to clause 15(1), representative of  the RBI during oral evidence on 
06.12.2013, submitted as under: 
"As regards clause 15(1), to project the interest o f allottees, the Bill 
understandably has effective provisions of execution of conveyance in favour of 
the  allottees.  It may, however, be noted that whe n cooperative housing 
societies are formed by the allottes, the conveyanc e of land building is required 
to be made to such cooperative society.   As such, in addition to the existing 
provisions of requiring conveyance to be made in fa vour of allottees, an 
additional provision for conveying to the cooperati ve society or any other body 
corporate  constituted by the allottees may also be  made wherever the 
circumstances so warrant."     
 
4.25 In Clause 15 of the Real Estate Bill, there is  no time limit mentioned during which 
registration of conveyance deed should be executed.  A suggestion was received stating as 
under: 
"Ideally it should be within 2 months from the date  of handing over possession 
to the allottee." 
 
 

 
 
59 
 
 
4.26 On being inquired about the incorporation of t he suggestion in the proposed Bill the Ministry of 
HUPA, suggested as under: 
  "Transfer of title upon development is provided f or under local laws, thus  not 
 provided for." 
 
4.27 Further the Legislative Department of Ministry  of Law and Justice opined as under in 
their written reply: 
" We have no objection.  However, while specifying the two months period, a 
provision relating to extension of the period for t he benefit of allottee may be 
considered." 
 
4.28 
Under Clause 15(1), the promoter should execute a registered conveyance  deed 
in favour of the allottee alongwith the undivided p roportionate title in common areas 
including the handing over of the  possession of the plot, apartment or building, as the 
case may be, in a real estate project, and the othe r title documents pertaining thereto.  
In this regard,  it is apprehended that if conveyan ce is granted to the purchaser of his 
undivided share, in that case he becomes the owner of undivided property and no 
decision can be taken unless there is unanimity and  a single person can stall the 
project, whereas presently a member is bound by dec ision taken by the society.  
Further the representative of RBI during the course  of oral evidence, put forth the 
suggestion that in addition to the existing provisi ons of requiring conveyance to be 
made in favour of allottees, an additional provisio n for conveying to the cooperative 
society or any other body corporate  constituted by  the allottees may also be made 
wherever the circumstances so warrant. 

 
 
60 
 
 The Committee feel that in today's time where coop erative group housing 
societies have become the need of the hour  special ly in urban areas the conveyance 
for the cooperative society or any other corporate constituted by the allottees is 
indispensable.  Thus the Committee strongly recomme nd that in addition to present 
provision of conveyance deed in favour of allottee,   suitable provisions for providing 
the conveyance to cooperative society or any other corporate formed by the allottees 
may also be incorporated under Clause 15 of the Bil l.  The Committee also desire the 
Ministry to define the definite time frame of two m onths from the date of handing over 
possession to the allottee, within which conveyance  deed needs to be registered by 
the promoter.   
  

 
 
61 
 
CHAPTER V  
Rights and Duties of the Allottees  
 
 The Chapter IV of the Real estate (Regulation and Development) Bill 2013 deals with 
the rights and duties of the allottees. It has got only clause i.e. Clause -17  
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that the allottee shall b e entitled to claim the refund of 
amount paid, from the promoter, if the promoter fai ls to comply or is unable to give 
possession of the apartment, plot or building, as t he case may be, in accordance with the 
terms of agreement or due to discontinuance of his business as a developer on account of 
suspension or revocation of registration under the provisions of the proposed legislation or 
the rules or regulations made there under . 
 
5.2  Clause -17 (4) reads as under:  
“The allottee shall be entitled to claim the refund  of amount paid, from the 
promoter, if the promoter fails to comply or is una ble to give possession of the 
apartment, plot or building, as the case may be, in  accordance with the terms of 
agreement or due to discontinuance of his business as a developer on account 
of suspension or revocation of his registration und er the provisions of this Act or 
the rules or the regulations made there under.” 
 
5.3 Regarding this sub clause, a suggestion has bee n received which reads as  under : 
 “If the allottee has to pay interest for delay in payment, the promoter should also 
pay interest for any delay in rendering the details  of accounts to the allottee for 
his verification.” 
 
5.4  On being asked whether this aspect has been taken c are in the Real estate 
(Regulation and   Development) Bill 2013, Ministry of Urban Housing and Poverty 
alleviation submitted as  under:  
“Clause 16(2) provides that if the promoter fails t o discharge any obligation 
imposed under the Act or rules and regulations, he shall be liable to pay 
compensation to the allottees in the manner as provided under this Act.” 
                                                                                                 
5.5  The Committee agree with the submission of the Mini stry that it is explicitly  
mentioned in Clause 16(2) that in case promoter fai ls to discharge any obligation 
imposed under the Act or rules and regulations, he shall be liable to pay 
compensation to the allottees. In this connection, the Committee desire that such 

 
 
62 
 
compensation should be calculated in a judicious ma nner while taking into 
consideration the principal amount paid by the allo ttee alongwith the rate of interest 
payable thereon.    
 
Clause 17(5) 
 
Sub-clause ( 5) of this clause provides that the allottee shall be entitled to have the necessary 
documents and plans, including that of common areas , after handing over the physical 
possession of the apartment or plot or building as the case may be, to the allottee by the 
promoter. 
 
5.6  Clause 17(5) read as under: 
“The allottee shall be entitled to have the necessa ry documents and plans, 
including that of common areas, after handing over the physical possession of 
the apartment or plot or building, as the case may be, to the allottee by the 
promoter.” 
 
5.7  Regarding this sub-clause, suggestions were re ceived to redefine the sub- clause (5) 
of Clause 17 of the Real Estate Bill 2013 which may be read as under: 
 “The allottee shall be entitled to have in soft co pies, PDF format all good for 
construction drawings/reports of all disciplines i. e. Architectural, Structural, 
Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing, Façade, Geo-techn ical and any other 
discipline. Soft copies of structural stability cer tificate, design execution 
certificate, construction execution certificate, de sign basis reports, geotechnical 
investigation report and vetting certificates. Allo ttee may take these soft copies 
from the building society/association or the promoter.”                           
5.8 On being asked whether Sub-clause  (5) under Clause 17  of the Real Estate Bill 2013 
can be redefined, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty alleviation submitted as under:  
“Matters regarding possession of apartment and hand ing over of documents are 
covered under clause 15 of the Bill, wherein the pr omoter is mandated to hand 
over the ‘necessary documents and plans’ to the all ottee or the association as 
the case may be as per the local laws. Clause 17 is  a reiteration of the allottees 
right as a result of the provision under clause 15.”   
 

 
 
63 
 
5.9     The Committee are in agreement with the view of the  Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty alleviation  that matters regarding possession of apartment and handing 
over of documents are covered under clause 15 of th e Bill, wherein the promoter is 
mandated to hand over the ‘necessary documents and plans’ to the  allottee or the 
association as the case may be as per the local laws, but the  Committee find that 
‘necessary documents and plans’ are not specified i n the Clause. Therefore the 
Committee are of the firm view that the allottee shall be  entitled to have the soft 
copies, PDF format of construction drawings/reports of  all disciplines. Therefore the 
Committee strongly recommend to redefine the Clause accordingly.  
  
Clause 17(9) 
 
Sub-clause ( 9) of this clause provides that every allottee after  taking possession of the 
apartment, plot or building as the case may be, sha ll participate towards the formation of an 
association or society or co-operative society of the allottees, or a federation of the same. 
 
5.10  Clause 17(9) reads as under:  
“Every allottee after taking possession of the apar tment, plot or building, as the 
case may be, shall participate towards the formatio n of an association or 
society or co-operative society of the allottees, or a federation of the same.” 
 
5.11  It has been suggested for redefining the sub- clause (9) Clause 17 of the Real 
 Estate Bill 2013 which may read as under:  
“Every allottee after taking possession of the apar tment, plot or building, as the 
case may be, shall participate towards the formatio n of an association or 
society or co-operative society of the allottees, o r a federation of the same. The 
organization so formed shall get independent third party vetting of the designs 
submitted by the promoter to verify that their buil ding is compliant with the 
relevant Indian Standards issued by Bureau of India n standards. The 
organization shall also get Non-Destructive Tests a nd Concrete Core testing as 
mentioned in the relevant Indian Standards to ascer tain that the construction 
quality is as specified in the design documents”.  
 

 
 
64 
 
5.12  On being asked to clarify this aspect, Minist ry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
alleviation  submitted as under: 
“Matters regarding association of allottees are gov erned under State laws like 
Apartment Ownership laws and is beyond the scope of  this Bill. The Bill 
provides for a limited responsibility on the part o f allottee to participate in the 
formation of an association.” (3 rd  LOP 26)” 
 
5.13  The Committee observe that Clause 17(9) of the Bill  authorize every allottee to 
 participate  towards the formation of an associati on or co-operative society or 
 federation after taking possession of the apartmen t/plot/ building as the case 
 maybe.  When asked to the possibility of getting t he third party vetting of the 
 designs submitted by the promoter by the association to verify that their  building is 
 compliant with the relevant Indian standards issue d by Bureau of Indian standards, 
 the Ministry has apprised the Committee that maters  regarding association of 
 allottes are governed under state laws and is beyo nd the scope of the Bill. Clause 29 
 of the Bill has entrusted the Real Estate Authorit y for promotion of Real Estate 
 Sector which includes measures to encourage constr uction of environmentally 
 sustainable and  affordable housing, promote stand ardization, including grading and 
use of appropriate construction materials, fixtures , fittings and construction 
 techniques. The Committee deplore the reply of the  Ministry in which it does not 
 want to use the provision of the Bill to emphasize  upon the basic rights of the 
 association/organization of the allottees so that they can verify whether their 
 building is compliant with the relevant Indian sta ndards issued by Bureau of 
 Indian Standards.  Such intention of the Ministry goes against the very purpose of the 
Bill which tries to protect the interest of the con sumers.  Therefore, the Committee 
strongly desire the Ministry that suitable provisio ns may be made in this clause so 
that associations/organizations so formed shall get rights of getting independent third 

 
 
65 
 
party vetting of the designs submitted by the promo ter to verify that their  building is 
compliant with the relevant Indian Standards issued  by Bureau of Indian standards. 
 The Committee strongly feel that this provision wi ll go a long way to promote 
standardization and stop the use of low quality of materials by the promoters/builders.  
  
5.14 Clause 16(1) relates to returns of amount and compensation.  It reads as under :- 
If the promoter fails to complete or is unable to give possession of an apartment, 
 plot or building,— 
(a) in accordance with the terms of the agreement or, as the case may be, duly 
completed by the date specified therein or any further date agreed to by the parties; or 
(b) due to discontinuance of his business as a developer on account of suspension or 
revocation of his registration under this Act or for any other reason, 
 
he shall be liable on demand to the allottees, without prejudice to any other remedy 
available, to return the amount received by him in   respect of that   apartment, plot, 
building, as the case may be, with interest at such rate as may be prescribed in this 
behalf including compensation in the manner as provided under this Act. 
  
5.15 Clause  17(4) is about  the rights and duties of allottees. It reads as under :- 
The allottee shall be entitled to claim the refund of amount paid, from the promoter,if 
the promoter fails to comply or is unable to give p ossession of the apartment, plot or 
building, as the case may be, in accordance with th e terms of agreement or due to 
discontinuance of his business as a developer on account of suspension or revocation 
of his registration under the provisions of this Ac t or the rules or the regulations made 
thereunder. 
 
 It is observed that in both these clauses the prom oter is liable to return the amount 
and compensation to the allottees if he/she fails t o complete or is unable to give position of 
an apartment, plot or building.  In this regard it is observed that in many cases the 
builders/promoters face difficulties in getting clearances from the competent authorities about 
their projects. They have to run from one authority  to other for getting different clearances. 
Pertaining to this the Real Estate Bill does not me ntion about the time frame by which the 
authorities will give necessary clearances to the p rojects. A suggestion has been received to 
include a provision for reducing the number of appr ovals required by real estate developers 
and specify a time-line thereon.  This is the bigge st bottleckneck faced by the Promoters 

 
 
66 
 
which has a direct bearing on the supply of project s.  If approvals are granted within the 
stipulated time by the authorities it will bring do wn the costs of real estates projects 
significantly.  
 
5.16 The Committee observe that under clause 16(1) the promoter is liable to return 
the amount and  compensation to the allottees in ca se he fails to complete or is 
unable to give possession of an apartment, plot or building.  The Committee are given 
to understand that the real estate developers need to run after various departments of 
the appropriate Government for getting clearances f or their projects. Moreover, the 
Bill does not prescribe any time-line for the appro priate Government for giving 
clearances to the projects of the promoters/builder s. These factors are also 
responsible for making delays in the completion of the projects.  The Committee feel 
that this is the biggest bottleneck faced by the pr omoters for getting clearances from 
the Government.  Clause 29 prescribe the duties of the Real Estate Regulatory 
Authority to make recommendations to the appropriat e Government or the Competent 
Authority to ensure protection of interest of the a llottees and promoters. In this 
connection, the Committee desire the Ministry to in sert a new sub-clause under 
Clause 29 so that the Real Estate Regulatory Author ity will give necessary directions 
to the appropriate government  to put in place a si ngle window system for getting all 
necessary clearances of the projects by the builder s/promoters. The Committee 
further desire the Ministry to specify the time-lin es in the Bill itself for giving various 
types of clearances of the real estate projects.  T he Committee are of the strong view 
that in this way the projects will be cleared in a hassle-free manner.  This will  curtail 
delays in completion of the projects and also bring  down the cost of real estate 
projects significantly.  
  

 
 
67 
 
CHAPTER VI  
Real Estate Regulatory Authority  
 
 Chapter V of the bill deals with the Real Estate Re gulatory Authority.  It contains 
provisions under clause 18 to 34.  The Committee ha ve made their observations in respect 
of  some of the provisions under this Chapter .  
Clause -20  
This clause provides that the Chairperson and other  Members of the Authority shall be 
appointed by the appropriate Government on the recommendations of a Selection Committee 
consisting of such persons and in such manner as may be prescribed, from amongst persons 
having adequate knowledge of and professional experience of atleast twenty years in case of 
the Chairperson and fifteen years in the case of th e Members in urban development, 
housing, real estate development, infrastructure, e conomics, planning, law, commerce, 
accountancy, industry, management, social service, public affairs or administration. However, 
that a person who is, or has been, in the service o f the State Government shall not be 
appointed as a Chairperson unless such person has h eld the post of Additional Secretary to 
the Central Government or any equivalent post in th e Central Government or in the State 
Government. It further provides that a person who i s, or has been, in the service of the State 
Government shall not be appointed as a Member unles s such person has held the post of 
Secretary to the State Government or any equivalent  post in the State Government or in the 
Central Government. 
 
6.1  Clause -20 reads as under:  
“The Chairperson and other Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the 
appropriate Government on the recommendations of a Selection Committee 
consisting of such persons and in such manner as ma y be prescribed, from 
amongst persons having adequate knowledge of and pr ofessional experience 
of at least twenty years in case of the Chairperson  and fifteen years in the case 
of the Members in urban development, housing, real estate development, 
infrastructure, economics, planning, law, commerce,  accountancy, industry, 
management, social service, public affairs or admin istration: Provided that a 
person who is, or has been, in the service of the S tate Government shall not be 
appointed as a Chairperson unless such person has h eld the post of Additional 
Secretary to the Central Government or any equivale nt post in the Central 
Government or State Government: Provided further th at a person who is, or 
has been, in the service of the State Government sh all not be appointed as a 
Member unless such person has held the post of Secr etary to the State 
Government or any equivalent post in the State Gove rnment or Central 
Government.” 

 
 
68 
 
 
 6.2  Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative Dept) was asked to clarify whether professional 
experience of 20 years should be adequate enough fo r holding such position and the 
provisions of holding the post of Additional Secret ary or equivalent should be kept out of this 
Real Estate Bill 2013. Ministry of Law & Justice (L egislative Dept) gave their version which 
reads as under: 
“The requirement of 20 years and 15 years of experi ence is applicable to the 
persons other than the Government Servants.  The pr ovisos under the said 
clause are applicable to the Government servants”  
         
6.3 Ministry of Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) on Clause 20 stated as 
 under: 
Clause 20 of the Bill provides for qualifications o f Chairperson and Members of 
proposed Real Estate Authority. The qualifications of professional experience of 20 
or 15 years respectively are for those applicants/c andidates who are experts in 
various fields /areas such as enumerated in the Cla use. However, proviso I and II 
provide for qualifications in terms of rank, if app licants belong to the category of 
officials of Central Government /State Governments.  The professional experience 
of 20 or 15 years is for category of officials who are experts in various fields and 
not for officials who are holding the posts of Addi tional Secretary/ Secretary or 
equivalent rank in the Central Government/State Gov ernments and apply for 
appointment to the post of Chairperson and Member of the Authority. 
        
  
6.4  The Committee find that as per the proposed Re al Estate (Regulation & 
Development ) Bill 2013, Chairperson and Members of  the Real Estate Regulatory 
Authority will be selected from amongst persons hav ing adequate knowledge and 
professional experience of at least twenty years in  case of the Chairperson and fifteen 
years in the case of Members. The Committee are of the view that by emphasizing 
upon such post in the Central Government or State G overnment, the Ministry intends 
to restrict the post of Chairperson and Members of the Real Estate Authority for the 

 
 
69 
 
serving and retired bureaucrats only. In this way t he very purpose of the Bill that is to 
ensure professionalism in the Real Estate sector wi ll be defeated.  Therefore, the 
Committee strongly emphasize upon the fact that cha irperson or members of the Real 
Estate Regulatory Authority should be selected from the persons who are  experts in 
their professions like urban development, housing, real estate development, 
infrastructure, economics, planning, law, legislati ve, judiciary, commerce, 
accountancy, industry, management, social service, public affairs and who have 
worked in their field for 20 years in case of chair person and 15 years in case of 
members. The Committee also recommend that the Sele ction Committee shall finalise  
the selection  of the Chairperson and Members  of t he Authority within two months 
from the date on which the reference is made to it.  
Clause 24 (1) 
 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the appropriate Gove rnment may, by order, 
remove from office the Chairperson or other Members , if the Chairperson or such other 
Member, as the case may be,—( a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or ( b) has been 
convicted of an offence, involving moral turpitude;  or ( c) has become physically or mentally 
incapable of acting as a Member; or ( d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is 
likely to affect prejudicially his functions; or ( e) has so abused his position as to render his 
continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest. 
 
6.5  Clause 24  (1) reads as under:  
 
 “The appropriate Government may, by order, r 
emove from office, the Chairperson or  
 other Members, if the Chairperson or such other Member, as the case may be,— 
a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or 
b) has been convicted of an offence, involving mora l turpitude; or 
c) has become physically or mentally incapable of a cting as a Member; or 
d) has acquired such financial or other interest as  is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions; or 
e) has so abused his position as to render his cont inuance in office 
prejudicial 
to the public interest.” 
 
  

 
 
70 
 
 
Clause 24( 2) 
 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that no such Chairperson or Member shall be removed 
from his office under clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) unless he has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.   
 
Clause 24( 2) reads as under: 
“No such Chairperson or Member shall be removed fro m his office under clause 
(d) or clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) unless he has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in the matter.” 
 
6.6  Ministry of Law& justice (Legislative Dept) wa s asked to clarify whether the power to 
remove Chairperson or Member from his office under clause (d) or clause (e) of  sub-section 
(1) of clause 24 be bestowed to a judicial magistrate  apart from giving an opportunity of 
being heard and clause may be reworded to include t he word ‘Judicial Magistrate’ after 
‘heard’. So Ministry of Law& justice (legislative Dept)  stated as under:  
      
“Decision to be taken by the administrative Ministr y, in consultation with the 
Department of Legal Affairs” 
 
         
 
6.7  Accordingly, Ministry of Law& justice (Legal D ept.) was asked to clarify whether the 
power to remove Chairperson or Member from his offi ce under clause (d) or clause (e) of 
sub-section (1) of clause 24 be bestowed to a judic ial magistrate apart from giving an 
opportunity of being heard and clause may be reword ed to include the word ‘Judicial 
Magistrate’ after ‘heard’. Thereafter, Ministry of Law& justice (Legal  Dept.) stated as under: 
   
“Clause 24 of the Bill provides for removal of the Chairperson and Member 
from office in certain circumstances as enumerated in (a) to (e) of clause 
24 (1)  by the Appropriate Government. Clause (2)  provides for giving of 
reasonable opportunity in respect of (d) and (e) by  the appropriate 
Government only.”    

 
 
71 
 
        
6.8  It has been suggested that clause may be rewor ded as follows: 
 
“Neither the Chairperson nor any Member shall be re moved from his office on 
the grounds specified in clause (d) or clause (e) o f clause 24 (1)  unless the High 
Court on a reference being made to it in this behal f by the appropriate 
government, has, on an enquiry held by it in accord ance with such procedure as 
may be prescribed in this regard by the High Court,  reported that the 
Chairperson/Member, ought on such ground or grounds be removed.”   
 
The above wording corresponds to the wording as pro vided in the section 11(3) 
of the Competition Commission Act 2002. For the pur pose of this Bill it may be 
provided that the Chairperson or Member may be susp ended on the 
recommendation of High Court before or during the inquiry by the High Court. 
 
6.9  On being asked to give opinion in this regard,  Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
 alleviation submitted as under: 
“Sufficient safeguards have been provided in the re levant clause to protect the 
regulator. Furthermore, Real Estate Regulator is pr oposed to be a State level 
regulatory Authority while Competition Commission o f India is a central 
regulator, which has stringent clause for protection of regulator.” 
         
 
6.10       The Committee find that the Chairman and  the Members of the Authority have 
received a raw deal in respect of their removal in comparison to their peers in other 
enactments such a Competition Commission of India.  Though, the Department of 
Legal Affairs has seconded the existing provision of providing reasonable opportunity 
being given to them by the appropriate Government, the Committee fail to understand 
as to why the Ministry are not agreeing to the prop osal of making the removal subject 
to judicial scrutiny.  They see no reason as to why  the procedure followed in case of 
Competition Commission of India can not be made app licable in this case.  Hence, the 
Committee recommend that matters relating to remova l of Chairmen/Members on 
account of  sub-clauses (a) to (e) of clause 24(1) shall be subject to judicial scrutiny.  
 
 

 
 
72 
 
 
Clause 29  
 
This clause relates to the functions of Authority for promotion of real estate sector. 
 
6.11  Clause 29 reads as under: 
“The Authority shall in order to facilitate the gro wth and promotion of a healthy, 
transparent, efficient and competitive real estate sector make recommendations to 
the appropriate Government or the competent authority, as the case may be, on,— 
a) Protection of interest of the allottees and prom oter; 
b) Measures to improve the processes and procedures  for clearance and 
sanction of plans and development of    projects; 
c) Measures to encourage construction of environmen tally sustainable and 
affordable housing, promote standardization, including grading and use of 
appropriate construction materials, fixtures, fitti ngs and construction 
techniques; 
d) Measures to facilitate amicable conciliation of disputes between the 
promoters and the allottees through dispute settlem ent forums set up by 
the consumer or promoter associations 
e) Any other issue that the authority may think nec essary for the promotion 
of the real estate sector.” 
 
6.12  During deposition before the Committee, the S ecretary, Ministry of Consumer Affairs 
stated that the words “disputes settlements forum ” will get confused with the forums of 
Consumer Protection Act.  If one of them goes to the  consumer forum then other party 
would take the plea that we are still in the conciliation  phase that’s why our conciliation 
should be completed first.  This will create delays . We have created these consumer forums 
in more than 600 districts.  The relief and the mot ivations the individual gets in his/her 
districts will get denied.  We just want to say tha t “through disputes settlement forum” will 
create confusion. Some other terms should be used.  We are in the “conciliation” 
terminology. We have created mediations centre in consumer forums. Whenever  any  party 
comes to the consumer forum, the presiding officer sends him to the mediation centre. We 
also believe in disputes resolution but the termino logy of the “through disputes settlement 
forum” should be changed to some other phrase.  These  will not create any confusion.  
  

 
 
73 
 
6.13  The Secretary Ministry of Law & Justice (lega l affairs) suggested that if we use the 
word  “machinery” instead of “forum” than all the c onfusion created may be resolved 
regarding disputes settlement.  
 
6.14 The Committee are in agreement  with the version of  Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs that the words “disputes settlements forum”  will get confused with the 
“forums” of Consumer Protection Act.  The Committee  are, therefore, in agreement 
with the suggestion by the Secretary, Ministry of L aw & Justice (Legal Affairs) that 
the word “machinery” should  replace the word “foru m” in the Dispute settlements. 
This will erase out all the confusion between disputes settlement  forum set up by 
the consumer or promoter associations and forums of  Consumer Protection Act. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to make necessary modifications in the Bill.   
6.15  On being asked by the Committee to explain, how the  Ministry aims to provide 
affordable housing through this Real Estate Bill 20 13, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
alleviation submitted as under: 
 
“The Bill is a regulatory Bill to regulate and promo te transparency in transactions 
of buying and selling residential real estate. The Bill is not aimed at providing 
affordable housing, which is addressed by other schemes such as JNNURM, RAY, 
and RRY etc. of the Ministry.” 
 
6.16  The Committee note that under Clause 29(c) of  the Real Estate Bill 2013, the 
Authority shall in order to facilitate the growth a nd promotion of a healthy, 
transparent, efficient and competitive real estate sector, make recommendations to 
the appropriate Government or the competent authori ty on measures to encourage 
construction of environmentally sustainable and aff ordable housing, promote 
standardization, including grading and use of appro priate construction materials, 

 
 
74 
 
fixtures, fittings and construction techniques. Whe n the Committee asked the Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation to explain  as to  how the Ministry aims to 
provide affordable housing through the Real Estate Bill 2013, it was explained that t he 
Bill is a regulatory Bill to regulate and promote t ransparency in transactions of buying 
and selling residential real estate and is not aime d at providing affordable housing, 
which is addressed by other schemes such as JNNURM,  RAY, and RRY etc. of the 
Ministry . The  Committee lament  the Ministry in giving such a casual reply, when it  is 
explicitly mentioned in the Bill that the Real Esta te Authority shall make 
recommendations to the appropriate Government or th e competent authority on 
measures to encourage construction of environmental ly sustainable and affordable 
housing. The Committee, therefore, strongly desire the Ministry to elaborate on the 
said provision, by giving due emphasis on affordabl e housing for economically 
weaker sections who can render services to the residents of such buildings.  
 
6.17  The Committee observe that under Clause 29, t he authority shall in order to 
facilitate  the growth and promotion of a healthy, transparent, efficient and 
competitive real  estate sector make certain recomm endations to the appropriate 
Government or the competent authority, as the case may be. In this regard, the 
Committee wish to draw the attention of the Ministr y that there are so many litigations 
in this sector all over India. In most of the cases , there is no clarity on the title of the 
land owners. In many a case, the same land /house/f lat is being sold to many 
individuals. As a result, the individual or the all ottee is subject to manifold problems. 
To mitigate these problems and to ensure smooth fun ctioning of Real Estate 
Regulatory Authority, the Committee are of the stro ng view that the entire land should 
be digitized. Therefore, the Committee desire the M inistry to add a suitable sub-clause 
in Clause 29 wherein Real Estate Regulatory Authori ty can give directions to the 
appropriate Govt. or the competent authority as the case may be, to digitize all  the 
land records within a time bound manner. 

 
 
75 
 
 
Clause 30- This clause relates to the functions of the Authority. 
 
 
6.18  Clause 30 reads as under:  
 
The functions of the Authority shall, inter alia, include— 
(a) to render advice to the appropriate Government in m atters relating to the 
development of real estate sector; 
(b) to publish and maintain a website of records of all  real estate projects for which 
registration has been given, with such details as m ay be prescribed, including 
information provided in the application for which registration has been granted; 
(c) to maintain a database, on its website, and enter t he names of promoters as 
defaulters including the project details, registrat ion for which has been revoked 
or have been penalized under the Act, with reasons therefor, for access to the 
general public; 
(d) to maintain a database, on its website, and enter t he names of real estate 
agents who have applied and registered under this A ct, with such details as 
may be prescribed, including those whose registrati on has been rejected or 
revoked; 
(e) to fix through regulations for each areas under its  jurisdiction the standard fees, 
to be levied on the allottees by the promoter or th e association of allottees, as 
the case may be; 
(f) to ensure compliance of the obligations cast upon t he promoters, the allottees 
and the real estate agents under this Act and the r ules and regulations made 
thereunder; 
(g) to ensure compliance of its regulations or orders o r directions made in exercise 
of its powers under this Act; 
(h) To perform such other functions as may be entrusted  to the Authority by the 
appropriate Government as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this 
Act. 
 
6.19  The Committee find that, as per Clause 30(g),  a function of the Real Estate 
Regulatory Authority is to ensure compliance of its  regulations or orders or 
directions made in exercise of its powers under this Act and feel that mere mention of 
such provision will not help unless the Authority i tself monitors its regulations and 
orders with regard to their execution.  Hence, they  would like to emphasize upon 
periodic monitoring of its regulations or orders or  directions by the Authority itself. 

 
 
76 
 
Therefore, the Committee would like the Ministry to  redefine sub-clause 30(g) 
accordingly. 
  

 
 
77 
 
CHAPTER VII 
THE REAL ESTATE APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 
 
 Chapter VII of the Real Estate (Regulation and Dev elopment Bill), 2013 deals with the 
Real Estate Appellate Tribunal and contains Clauses  37 to 50.The Committee will now give 
their comments and observations on provisions conta ined in some of the clauses of this 
Chapter. 
 
Clause 40 
 
This clause relates to the qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members. 
 
7.2 Clause 40.—This clause relates to the qualifications for a ppointment of Chairperson 
and Members. 
 Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that a person shall not b e qualified for 
appointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the A ppellate Tribunal unless he,—
(a) in the case of Chairperson, is or has been a Judge of the High Court; and ( b) in the 
case of a Judicial Member he has held a judicial of fice in the territory of India for at 
least seven years or has been a Member of the India n Legal Service and has held the 
post in Grade I of that service or any equivalent p ost for at least three years, or has 
been an advocate for at least fifteen years with ex perience in dealing with real estate 
matters; and ( c) in the case of a Technical or Administrative Memb er he is a person 
who is well versed in the field of urban developmen t, housing, real estate 
development, infrastructure, economics, planning, l aw, commerce, accountancy, 
industry, management, public affairs or administration and possesses experience of at 
least fifteen years in the field or who has held th e post in the Central Government or a 
State Government equivalent to the post of Joint Secretary to the Government of India 

 
 
78 
 
or an equivalent post in the Central Government or an equivalent post in the State 
Government.  
  Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the Chairperson of t he Appellate Tribunal  
shall be appointed by the appropriate Government in  consultation with the Chief 
Justice of High Court or his nominee. 
 Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the Judicial Members  and Technical or 
Administrative Members of the Appellate Tribunal sh all be appointed by the 
appropriate Government on the recommendations of a Selection Committee 
consisting of such persons and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
7.3  In this regard a suggestion has been received that in order that the appellate tribunal 
is of sufficient status and inspires confidence amo ng stake holders, the minimum 
requirements for being a judicial member and a tech nical administrative member need to be 
restated in these clauses to include that both the judicial member as well as the technical 
member should have held the post or be capable of h olding the post equivalent to Secretary 
to Government of India/Chief Secretary to a State G overnment.  Accordingly rewording the 
two sub-clauses namely Clause 40(1)(b) and Clause 4 0(1)(c) to accommodate the need for 
higher qualifications as suggested, the Ministry stated as under :- 
   
 “Requirements of offices (judicial and administrat ive) have been provided keeping in 
mind that every State is required to set up a Regul atory Authority. It would become 
difficult to find such senior officers, and also it  would take away the opportunity of 
having serving officers to serve the Authorities. T he qualification defined are 
appropriate and sufficient for regulatory body officers.” 
 
7.4 When asked why there is a long list for selecti on of only one member as judicial 
Member and the  list should be pruned , the Ministry in their written replies stated as under :- 

 
 
79 
 
“Clause 40 defines qualification for two categories  of Members, one for judicial 
member and the other for administrative member.  Ju dicial Members are to be 
selected either from the Indian Legal Service or fr om the legal fraternity.  However, 
clause 40 provides for an exhaustive list of profes sionals who may be selected as an 
administrative members based on experience to ensur e no professional associated 
with the sector is denied on opportunity to be a part of the Tribunal.” 
 
 
7.5 The Committee feel satisfied with the existing provision in respect of 
appointment of judicial member but are not inclined  to agree with the provision with 
regard to administrative members. The Committee str ongly dissuade any move which 
hinders professional expertise, rather pave way for  creation of additional posts for 
absorption of bureaucrats in the Real Estate Regula tory Authority.  Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommend that such posts should be held  only by professionals 
of the level of  Additional Secretary/Secretary to Government of India or equivalent 
posts in the State Governments.   
 
  

 
 
80 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION 
 
 
 Chapter VIII of the Real Estate (Regulation and Development Bill), 2013 deals with the 
Offences, Penalties and Adjudication and contains C lauses 51 to 62.The Committee will now 
give their comments and observations on provisions contained in some of the clauses of this 
Chapter. 
 
 8.2  Clause 51(1) to 55: These clauses deal with  punishment for non-registration  
and contraventions under Section  9 to 10  and  wil lful failure to comply with order of  
Authority by promoters:  
 “If any promoter contravenes the provisions of sec tion 3, he shall be liable to a 
penalty which may extend up to ten per cent of the estimated cost of the real 
estate project as determined by the Authority. ( 2) If any promoter does not 
comply with the orders, decisions or directions iss ued under sub-section ( 1) or 
continues to violate the provisions of section 3, h e shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend up to thre e years or with fine which 
may extend to a further ten per cent of the estimat ed cost of the real estate 
project, or with both. 
 
  Clause 52 reads as under :- 
 
 “ If any promoter knowingly provides false informatio n or contravenes the 
provisions of section 4, he shall be liable to a pe nalty which may extend up to 
five per cent. of the estimated cost of the real es tate project, as determined by 
the Authority.” 
 
  Clause 53 reads as under :- 
 
 “ If any promoter contravenes any other provisions of this Act, other than that 
provided under section 3 or section 4, or the rules or the regulations made 
thereunder, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend up to five per cent. 
of the estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the Authority. “ 
 
 
 
  

 
 
81 
 
   
 
  Clause 54 reads as under :- 
 
“If any real estate agent wilfully fails to comply w ith or contravenes the 
provisions of section 9 or section 10, he shall be liable to a penalty of ten 
thousand rupees for every day during which such def ault continues, which may 
cumulatively extend up to five per cent. Of the cos t of plot, apartment or 
building, as the case may be, of the real estate pr oject, for which the sale or 
purchase has been facilitated as determined by the Authority.” 
 
  Clause 55 reads as under :- 
 
“If any promoter, who wilfully fails to comply with , or contravenes any of the 
orders or directions of the Authority, he shall be liable to a penalty for every day 
during which such default continues, which may cumu latively extend up to five 
per cent, of the estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the 
Authority.” 
 
 
8.3 In this regard it was  suggested that penalty for every day to the Promote r should be 
deleted and should be mentioned therein that the pr omoter shall be liable for a penalty for a 
period during which the default continues and also the percentage rate should be reduced 
from 10% to 5% as in the case of allottee OR any pr omoter who, without reasonable excuse, 
fails to comply with or contravenes the provision o f this act, shall be punished with fine up to 
Rs. One Crore. When asked to give comments, the Min istry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation  in their written replies stated as under :- 
 “ The clause for ‘everyday’ penalty has been inserted  to ensure compliance, as every 
day of delay can cause hardship and difficulties to  the allottees.  Also, the 
determination of penalty as a specified sum, can le ad to asymmetry in quantum of 
penalty, as smaller projects may be highly penalize d and larger projects with bigger 
defaults may go scot-free with small penalties.”  
 
 
8.4 It has been suggested by various stake holders including Shri M.M.K. Sardana, former 
Chairman of MRTP Commission and former Secretary to  Government of India that regulator 
should be facilitator as well and should have balan ced approach. The Persons / Agencies / 
Authorities / customers should also be accountable if the work gets delayed / stopped due to 

 
 
82 
 
their fault.   If the authorities do not provide th e clearance in an appropriate time, they would 
be penalized. When asked about the opinion in his regard, the Ministry stated as under :- 
 “The Bill provides under clause 6, the powers to t he State/UT government to provide 
for situations wherein the project can be extended,  these aspects are adequately 
covered under delegated legislation.”  
 
8.5 Clauses 51(1) to 55 deal with  punishment for n on-registration  and 
contraventions under Section  9 and 10  and  wilful failure to comply with the orders of  
the Authority by promoters.  In this regard, it was suggested that penalty for every day 
occurring therein on the Promoter should be replace d by a penalty for a period during 
which the default continues.  It was further sugges ted that  the regulator should be a  
facilitator and should have balanced approach. All the Persons / Agencies / 
Authorities / customers  involved in the project sh ould also be made accountable and 
penalised if the work gets delayed / stopped due to their fault.   
 The Committee are in agreement with the views of t he Ministry that wilful delay 
of even single day can cause hardship and difficult ies to the allottees. Hence,  in order 
to safeguard the interest of the consumers it is necessary to retain this clause. 
 
 The Committee are also in  agreement with the view s of the stakeholders  that 
there should be provision for penalizing the concer ned authorities responsible for 
causing delays in giving clearances  to the project s. It is therefore necessary that 
some time-frame should be set for giving necessary  approvals and it should be 
strictly adhered to by the authorities which may be  prescribed under the rules. An 
enabling  provision to this effect should be clearly spelt out in the Bill itself. 
 
Clause 55 and 56:  
 
 
8.6 Clause 55 and 56 deal with Penalty for wilful f ailure to comply with orders of Authority 
by promoter. Penalty for wilful failure to comply w ith orders of Appellate Tribunal by promoter 
respectively.   These clauses state as under: 
“If any promoter, who wilfully fails to comply with , or contravenes any of the 
orders or directions of the Authority, he shall be liable to a penalty for every day 
during which such default continues, which may cumu latively extend up to five 
per cent, of the estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the 
Authority.  

 
 
83 
 
 
If any promoter, who wilfully fails to comply with,  or contravenes any of the , 
decisions or directions of the Appellate Tribunal, he shall be liable to a penalty 
for every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively 
extend up to ten per cent of the estimated cost of the real estate project as 
determined by the Appellate Tribunal.” 
 
 
8.7 In this regard it was suggested by Deputy Gover nor of RBI during the evidence before 
the Committee as under: 
 
“As regards Chapter VIII, certain wilful conduct on  the part of promoters and others is 
made punishable under the Bill.  This Chapter deals  with various offences failing to do 
certain things wilfully only is made as an offence.   While it may be appropriate that 
wilful contravention is made an offence resulting i n imprisonment, we suggest that 
specific provisions may also be made for compensati ng the allottees from out of the 
fine money and to pay the financing bank from out o f the same even if the 
contraventions are not wilful but have prejudiced t he interest of the allottees and 
moneylenders. 
8.8 When asked about the opinion of the Ministry  i n this regard, the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation stated as under:- 
 
“The Bill provides for compensation to the allottee s for contraventions under clause 
12, 14 and 16 of the Bill, which is to be paid by t he promoter to the allottee after 
adjudication by the adjudicating officer. Penalties  recovered by the promoter for 
contravention of the provisions of the Act are to b e deposited in the Consolidated 
Fund of India, and cannot be used for paying the co mpensation to the allottees. The 
Bill is not mandated to protect the interest of mon eylenders and is limited to promoting 
transparency in transactions between the promoter and the allottee.” 
 
8.9 On the provisions of penalty for wilful violati on of the act, one of the stakeholders 
stated as under:- 
 “ …………. this being a new act and regulations  woul d made for the first time, a  time 
period of 60 to 90 days which may be treated as cur e period along with an opportunity 
for correcting the violation of the provision be pr ovided in the act instead of penalizing 
the promoter.” 
 
8.10 It was further stated that power to cancel lic ence has been given to Regulatory 
Authority for willful defaulter. This provision cou ld be misused. Therefore, the term ‘wilful 
defaulter’ may be defined in the bill. 

 
 
84 
 
 
8.11 The Committee observe that in Chapter VIII cer tain wilful conduct on the part of 
promoters and others is made punishable under the B ill.  The wilful contravention of 
the provision may result in imprisonment. It has be en suggested that specific 
provisions may also be made for compensating the al lottees out of the  money  
collected as penalty and to pay the financing bank from the same even if the 
contraventions are not wilful but have prejudiced t he interests of the allottees and 
moneylenders. The Committee are also in agreement w ith RBI that compensation from 
the Promoter to the allottee should be given to the  allottee and the banks/agencies 
financing them.  The Committee are given to underst and that at present, the penalties 
recovered by the promoter for contravention of the provisions  of the  Act are to be 
deposited in the Consolidated Fund of India.  The C ommittee, however recommend 
that specific provisions should be made in the Act for compensating the allottees from 
the  money collected as penalty. 
 
8.12 Clause 61.—This clause relates to the power to adjudicate. 
 
 Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that for the purpose of a djudging compensation 
under clauses 12, 14 and 16 the Authority shall appoint any officer not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the State Government to be an adjudica ting officer for holding an inquiry in the 
prescribed manner, after giving any person concerne d a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard. However, if any person whose complaint, in respect of matters covered under clauses 
12, 14 and 16 is pending before the Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum or the Consumer 

 
 
85 
 
Disputes Redressal Commission or the National Consu mer Redressal Commission, 
established under section 9 of the Consumer Protect ion Act, 1986, on or before the 
commencement of the proposed legislation, he may, w ith the permission of such Forum or 
Commission, as the case may be, withdraw the compla int pending before it and file an 
application before the adjudicating officer under the proposed legislation. 
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the application for adjudging compensation 
under sub-section ( 1), shall be dealt with by the adjudicating officer as expeditiously as 
possible and dispose of the same within a period of  ninety days from the date of receipt of 
such application. However, where any such applicati on could not be disposed of within the 
said period of ninety days, the adjudicating office r shall record his reasons in writing for not 
disposing of the application within that period.  
8.13 It has been suggested that under Clause 61 of the Real Estate (Regulation and 
Development) Bill - any adjudication by Jt. Secreta ry to the State Govt. is likely to cause 
delay in disposal of the cases because the officer may be preoccupied in his work. Therefore, 
the Consumer Protection Act 1986 provides the best three tier mechanism for such 
complaints.   When asked to give their opinion on t his aspect of the Real Estate (Regulation 
and Development) Bill 2013, the Ministry has stated as under :- 
“The Bill does not bar the jurisdiction of consumer forums. However, the 
thought behind providing for an adjudicating office r was to provide for an 
executive establishment, without the need for huge administrative structure at 
Central, State and at districts, for settlement of disputes. The Consume 
Protection Act provides for a judicial process for dispute settlement. The 
Consumer forums are clogged with numerous cases, and their disposition takes 
a very long time, as it handles all kinds of consumer disputes. 
   The Bill envisages an adjudicating officer exclusively for adjudication 
  purposes, and the officer concerned would not be engaged with other work.  In 
  fact, the appointment of an adjudicating officer would expedite consumer  
  complaints redressal .” 
 

 
 
86 
 
8.14  In this regard the Legislative Department  in  their written reply had stated that: 
 “At the time of drafting of this clause, this Depa rtment has suggested a retired District 
 Judge as an adjudicating officer. Since, the admin istrative Ministry expressed the 
 doubt about the non-availability of the retired di strict judges, a person not below the 
 rank of Joint Secretary has been specified. Howeve r, the said provision has been 
 drafted on the lines similar to the Securities and  Exchange Board of India Act, 1992. 
  
8.15 The Committee are of the opinion that Joint Se cretary may not have sufficient 
expertise to deal with such  cases.  Therefore, the  Committee recommend that a 
retired  district judge  with adequate experience in the Rea l Estate field should be 
appointed as adjudicating officer in place of Joint  Secretary and in case they would 
not find a retired District Judge, the Joint Secretary having relevant experience may be 
considered next option as an adjudicating officer. 
 
8.16 Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that while holding an inq uiry the adjudicating 
officer shall have power to summon and enforce the attendance of any person acquainted 
with the facts and circumstances of the case to giv e evidence or to produce any document 
which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer, m ay be useful for or relevant to the subject 
matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he i s satisfied that the person has failed to 
comply with the provisions of any of the sections specified in sub-section ( 1), he may direct to 
pay such compensation or interest, as the case may be, as he thinks fit in accordance with 
the provisions of any of those sections. 
8.17 As regards clause 61 the adjudicating officer needs  to have more power to pass 
interim order in the nature of directing the promoter to deposit at least a portion of the amount 
of compensation, when asked to elaborate, the Ministry replied as under :- 
“The aspect of adjudication in regard to compensati on to be paid by the promoter to 
the allottee can only be determined after the offic e has been established.  There is no 
requirement of interim orders, as the time within w hich such grievances to be resolved 
by adjudicating officer, has been made time bound.” 

 
 
87 
 
  
8.18 In this regard the Deputy Governor, RBI during  evidence before the Committee has 
opined as under:- 
 “As regards clause 61, the Adjudicating Officer ne eds to have more powers in our 
 view.  The Adjudicating Officer should have the po wer to pass interim orders in the 
 nature of directing the promoter to deposit at lea st a portion of the amount of 
 compensation even before the final disposal if the  AO is satisfied that there is a prima 
 facie  in favour of the allottee or to direct the promote r to provide alternative 
 accommodation to the allottee when there is delay.  “  
 
8.19 The Committee observe that under sub clause (2 ) of Clause 61,  the application 
for adjudging compensation under sub-section ( 1), shall be dealt with by the 
adjudicating officer as expeditiously as possible a nd dispose of the same within a 
period of ninety days from the date of receipt of s uch application.  The Committee are 
in agreement with the opinion of RBI that the Adjud icating Officer needs to have more 
powers to pass interim orders in the nature of dire cting the promoter to deposit at 
least a portion of the amount of compensation even before the final disposal if the 
Adjudicating Officer  is satisfied that there is a prima facie  case in favour of the 
allottee or to direct the promoter to provide alter native accommodation to the allottee 
when there is delay. The Committee desire the Minis try to incorporate suitable 
provision in the Bill.  
8.20 Chapter VIII of the Real Estate (Regulation an d Development Bill), 2013 deals 
with the Offences, Penalties and Adjudication.  The re are provisions of penalties and 
adjudication for  violation by promoters under sect ions 3,4,9 and 10 of the Bill.  
However, provisions for penalty for violation by pr omoters/developers under section 
11 which deals with functions and duties of promote r with regard to creating his 
webpage on the website of the authority and enter a ll details of the proposed projects 

 
 
88 
 
provided under sub-section (2) of section 4 has bee n left out in the Bill.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that provisions to this effect be included 
appropriately under Chapter VIII. 
   
        
  
  

 
 
89 
 
 
CHAPTER-IX 
Miscellaneous 
 
 Chapter X of the Bill deals with  various miscellaneous provisions and contains 
clauses from 69 to 80.  The Committee will now give  their comments and observations on 
provisions contained in some of provisions contained in Chapter-X of the Bill. 
 
9.2 Clause 73 of this Bill relates to the power of appropriate Government to make rules. 
 
Clause 73 reads as under :-  
 73.  (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the information and documents for application to Authority for registration       under  
clause ( j) of sub-section ( 2) of section 4; 
(b) the conditions under which registration of a prom oter may be renewed under 
section 6; 
(c) the form and manner of making an application and fee and documents to be 
accompanied with such application as under sub-section ( 2) of section 9; 
(d) the period, manner and conditions under which the registration is to be granted 
under sub-section ( 3) of section 9; 
(e) the validity of the period of registration and the manner and fee for renewal 
under sub-section ( 6) of section 9; 
(f) the maintenance and preservation of books of account, records and documents 
under clause ( b) of section 10; 
(g) the discharge of other functions by the real estate agent under clause ( e) of 
section 10; 
(h) the rate of interest payable under section 12; 
(i) the form and particulars of agreement under sub-section ( 2) of section 13; 
(j) the rate of interest payable under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 16; 
(k) the rate of interest payable under sub-section ( 7) of section 17; 
(l) the constitution of a Selection Committee for the appointment of Chairperson 
and Members of Authority, and the manner of selection under section 20; 
(m) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of service of, the Chairperson and other Members of  the Authority under 
                
sub-section( 1)of section 22; 
(n) the administrative powers of the Chairperson under section 23; 

 
 
90 
 
(o) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the officers and other employees of the Authority under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 26; 
(p) the details to be published and maintain on the website as under clauses ( b) 
and under clause ( d) of section 30; 
(q) the additional functions which may be performed by the Authority under 
clause ( iv ) of sub-section ( 2) of section 31; 
(r) the manner of recovery of interest, penalty and compensation under 
section 34; 
(s) the recommendations received from the Central Advisory Council under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 36; 
(t) the form and manner and fee for filing of appeal under sub-section ( 2) of section 
38; 
(u) the constitution of a Selection Committee for the  appointment of Members of the 
Tribunal, and the manner of selection under sub-section ( 3) of section 40; 
(v) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the Chairperson and other Members of th e Appellate Tribunal under 
subsection( 1) of section 42; 
(w) the procedure for inquiry of the charges against the Chairperson or Judicial 
Member of the Tribunal under sub-section ( 4) of section 43; 
(x) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 3) 
of section 44; 
(y) any other powers of the Tribunal under clause ( h) of sub-section ( 4) of section 
46; 
(z) the powers of the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal under section 47; 
(za ) the terms and conditions and the payment of such sum for compounding of 
the offences under section 60; 
(zb ) the manner of inquiry under sub-section ( 1) of section 61; 
(zc ) the form to be specified in which the Authority shall prepare a budget, 
maintain proper accounts and other relevant records  and prepare an annual 
statement of accounts under sub-section ( 1) of section 67; 
(zd ) the form in which and time at which the Authority shall prepare an annual 
report under sub-section ( 1) of section 68; 
(ze ) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of 
which provision is to be made, by rules. 
 
9.3 From the above provision of this clause, it is observed that there seems to be 
excessive delegated legislation in the Bill.    Whe n asked whether it is not appropriate for 
having explicit provisions in the Bill instead of d elegating the power to the appropriate 

 
 
91 
 
Government, the Ministry of Housing and Poverty All eviation in its written replies submitted 
as under :- 
 “The proposed Bill provides for minimum standards to infuse transparency in the 
transactions between the promoter and allottee, wit h implementation aspects to be 
determined by Rules and Regulations. The clauses, w hich provide for delegated 
legislation based on Rules and Regulations, have been provided to be deal with at the 
State level, based on local conditions, which may b e different for different parts of the 
country, to be determined by the State/UT Government of the Regulatory Authority.” 
 
9.4 During deposition before the Committee, the rep resentatives of National Housing 
Board(NHB) submitted as under :-  
 “After the constitution of  the Regulatory Authori ty, the rules and regulations which will 
be framed by the authority should be flexible and i t will be better if there is some 
provision of guidelines related to  rules and regul ations in the bill.  By doing this some 
flexibility will be maintained  and initially there  will be something to learn because this 
is the first time that a Regulatory Authority is be ing constituted to regulate real estate.  
We held meetings and discussions with the Ministries and found that flexibility will help 
the stockholders and policy makers.  One should not  be tied enough in any manner 
and there should be some flexibility for policies t o be accumulated in the Bill.  We 
welcome the  Bill.” 
  
9.5 The Committee note that provision under Clause 73 provides for delegated 
legislation based on Rules and Regulations to be dealt with at the State level based on 
local conditions which may  be different for differ ent parts of the country to be 
determined by the Regulatory Authorities of State/U T Government Sub-clause 2 of 
Clause 73 states that such rules may provide ‘for a ll’ or any of the following matters 
mentioned at Clauses 4(2)J, 6, 9(2), (3) (6), 10(b) (e) 12, 13(2) 16, (1) (b), 17(1) 
20,22,23,26(2), 30(d), 31(2), 34,36(2), 38, 40(3), 42(1), 43(4), 46(4)(h), 47,60, 60(1), 67(1) 
and 68(1) etc. The Committee are informed that this  provision has been prescribed to 
ensure flexibility in the initial stage of the impl ementation of the Acts. This will further 
facilitate the stakeholders and policy makers to ma ke rules and regulations freely.  
The Committee do not approve such kind of excessive  delegation in the name of 
flexibility.  The Committee strongly feel that the word ‘for all’ used in sub clause(2) of 

 
 
92 
 
clause 73, will empower the appropriate Government to make rules on all the 
provisions of this Act by a simple notification. Th e Committee appreciate the fact that 
the appropriate Government will make rules dependin g upon the local conditions. 
However, they strongly disprove the intention of th e Ministry that in the name of the 
flexibility in operation and implementation, the Mi nistry leaves a lot with delegated 
legislation which defeat the very purpose of Centra l Law. The Committee are of the 
strong view that if specific provision are not inco rporated in the Bill, the appropriate  
Government  may or may not consult the stakeholders .  Furthermore, it deprives 
parliament to scrutinize various rules framed by th e appropriate Government. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly oppose such word "for all" and desire that Ministry 
to remove it from the clause. The Committee further  desire that only minimum 
provisions should be left for delegation and the ma tters of substantial nature should 
be clearly spelt out in the Bill itself. 
9.6 The Committee are of the view that this legisla tion is going to have a great 
impact as it ensure accountability and transparency  in the real estate sector as it will 
significantly reduce frauds and delays.  It attempt s to balance the interests of 
consumers and promoters by imposing certain responsibilities on both. The proposed 
Bill will induct professionalism and standardizatio n in the sector, thus paving the way 
for accelerated growth and investments in the long run.  The Committee find that as 
per proviso to clause 1(3) of the Bill,  different provisions of the Bill may be made 
effective from different dates.  As such, inordinate delay may happen for all provisions 
of the Bill coming into effect. The Committee do no t accept the provisions prescribed 
in this clause. The committee fail to understand wh y the Ministry has not laid down 
any time-frame  for State Governments to make rules  and implementation of 
provisions of this Bill after its enactment.  The C ommittee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry should clearly mention a cut off date not later than six months for making 
the rules and implementation of its provisions by the State Governments.   
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
12 th  February, 2014  
23 Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
SHARAD YADAV  
Chairman  
Standing Committee on Urban Development  

 
 
93 
 
 
  
Annexure I  
Organisations/ Individuals who submitted written me morandum/ suggestions to the 
Committee on " The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill 2013"  
S. No.  Organizations   Received from  
1. Chaitanya Foundation  Shri R.R. Patil  
2. Voluntary Organisation in 
Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE)* 
Shri Ashim Sanyal  
3. Chandrakant N. Dalal* Senior 
Counsel & Social Activist  
Shri Chandrakant N. Dalal  
4. Confederation of Real Estate 
Developers' Association of 
India (CREDAI)* 
Shri Lalit Kumar Jain  
(Chairman) and Shri C. Shekar Reddy 
(President) 
5. Shri Indra P Chourasia*  
 
Shri Indra P Chourasia  
Shri Pravin Parekh, Chairman 
6. Shri Gautam Basu*  Shri Gautam Basu  
7.  Shri A.K. Sarkar  
8. Institute of Real Estate and 
Finance (IREF)* 
Shri Abhay Kumar  
9. Shri RajKumar  Shri RajKumar  
10. Taylor*  
 Design & Engineering 
Consultants Pvt. Ltd. 
Major Sandeep Shah (Retd).  
11. Andhra Pradesh Builders 
Federation* 
Shri C. Prabhakara Rao,  
12. Prakash -India*  Shri S.P. Manchanda,  
13. Confederation of Real Estate 
Developers' Associations of 
India A.P. (CREDAI) 
Shri Y.V. Ramana Rao  
14. Siddhachal Enterprise*  Shri Pradeep Jain  
15. National Real Estate 
Development Council 
(NAREDCO)* 
Brig. (Retd.) R.R. Singh  
16. Institute for Studies in 
Industrial Development 
(ISID)* 
Professor M.R.  Murthy  
17. Shri Alok Avasthi  Shri Alok Avasthi  
18. Shri Prahladrai L Avasatthi*  Shri Prahladrai L Avasatthi*  
19. Shri Amit Kumar Maihan  Shri Amit Kumar Maihan  
20. Kalpa Taru  Shri Shantilal Bohra  
21. The Uniworld Garden* 
Apartment Owners  
Association /Federation of 
Apartment Owners 
Association,  
Lt. Col.(retd.) S.S. Oberoi/ Amit Jain  
  

 
 
94 
 
22. Sarthak  
Advocates & solicitors 
Shri Abhishek Tripathi/  
Shri Shivendra Singh 
23. Indian Institute of Public 
Administration (Delhi 
Regional Branch) 
Shri S.N. Swaroop  
24. Department of Economics,  
University of Mumbai  
Shri Shirish B Patel, Ms Vaidehi 
Tandel, Shri Sahil Gandhi 
25. Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII) 
Shri Rajesh Menon, Deputy Director 
General 
26. Federation of Indian 
Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry (FICCI) 
 
 
*  The representatives from the organisations/ the individuals appeared before 
the Committee for the oral  evidence. 
 
  

 
 
95 
 
Annexure II  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014)  
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  TUESDAY, 08 OCTOBER, 2013  
       
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1345 hrs. in C ommittee Room  ‘C’ Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
3. Shri P.C. Mohan 
4. Dr. Ramshankar 
5.  Shri Ratan Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
6. Shri Anil Desai 
7. Dr. M.S. Gill 
8. Md. Nadimul Haque  
9. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
10. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
11. Shri Avinash Pande 
12. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
13. Shri Amar Singh 
14. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha  - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha  - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
96 
 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.-  Under Secretary  
 
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES  
1.       Shri Arun Kumar Misra - Secretary, HUPA 
2.       Shri K.B.S. Sidhu  - Joint Secretary, Hous ing, HUPA 
3.       Shri Premjit Lal  - Director,Housing, HUPA  
 
 The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation (HUPA) and drew their attention  towards Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker.  
2. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of HUPA brie fed the Committee about the important 
clauses of "The Real Estate (Regulation and Develop ment) Bill, 2013".  Due to paucity of time, the 
Committee decided to have detailed discussion during the next sitting. 
 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitt ing has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned.  
  

 
 
97 
 
Annexure III  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014)  
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 6 NOVEMBER, 2013 
       
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Room No.- ‘53’ Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Kailash Joshi 
3. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
5.  Shri Ramesh Kumar 
6. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
7. Dr. Ramshankar 
8. Shri Ratan Singh 
9. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Parvez Hashmi  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha  - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 LIST OF WITNESSESS  
1. Shri Navin M. Raheja, Chairman, NAREDCO 
2. Shri Rajeev Talwar, Vice President(North) NAREDC O 
3. Shri Chalapathi Rao, Vice President(North) NARED CO 
4. Shri Muppa Venkaiah Chowdary, Member, NAREDCO 

 
 
98 
 
5. Brig. (Retd.) R.R Singh, Director General, NARED CO 
6. Shri Ashim Sanyal, Voluntary Organisation in Int erest of Consumer Education (VOICE) 
7. Shri Chandrakant N. Dalal , Senior Counsel & Soc ial Activist 
8. Shri Lalit Kumar Jain,Chairman and Shri C.  Shek ar Reddy (President) ,Confederation 
of Real Estate Developers' Association of India (CREDAI) 
9. Shri Indra P Chourasia, C-202, Sai Shradha-I, Sh iv Vallabh Road, Ashokvan, Borivali 
East Mumbai, 400 066  
10. Shri Gautam Basu, Saktipur, Goswamipara,P.O. Ag arpara, Kolkata-700 109 
11. Shri Abhay Kumar,  Institute of Real Estate and  Finance (IREF) 
12. Major Sandeep Shah (Retd)., Taylor  Design & En gineering Consultants Pvt. Ltd. 
13. Shri  C. Prabhakara Rao, Andhra Pradesh Builder s Federation 
14. Shri S.P. Manchanda, Prakash-India 
15. Shri Pradeep Jain ,Siddhachal Enterprise1 
16. Professor M.R. Murthy, Institute for Studies in  Industrial Development (ISID) 
17. Shri Prahladrai L Avasatthi, B/10 Himatlal Park , Ahmedabad-380 015 
18. Lt. Col.(retd.) S.S. Oberoi, The Uniworld Garde n Apartment Owners  Association 
19. Shri Amit Jain, Director General Federation of Apartment Owners Association, Regus 
Business Centre, 4th Floor, Augusta Point, Sector -53, Gurgoan.Haryana. 
  After the tea break, the witnesses were called in  and  the Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
various non-Governmental Organisations/stakeholders  engaged in Realty Sector and drew their attention 
towards direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality. 
2. Thereafter, the Committee invited them to presen t their views on the provisions of the Real Estate 
(Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013 ".  The representatives expressed their concern and po inted out 
deficiencies in certain provisions of the Bill and suggested corrective measures thereof.  Members rai sed 
queries to the stakeholders and the representatives  responded to them. Then the Committee directed the  
representatives to furnish written Memoranda to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sittin g has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 
 
99 
 
Annexure IV 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 
 6th  DECEMBER, 2013 
       
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Co mmittee Room  ‘D’ Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
3. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee  
4. Shri Ramesh Kumar  
5.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
6. Shri Ratan Singh 
7. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri Anil Desai 
9. Md. Nadimul Haque 
10. Shri Amar Singh  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. K. Rangamani N  - Under Secretary 
 
 

 
 
100 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES FROM MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)  
1. Shri Sumit Bose -  Revenue Secretary    
2. Shri M.L. Meena -  Joint Secretary, Revenue 
3. Pragya S. Saksena   -  Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Sunil Gupta     -   Joint Secretary 
5. Shri P.K. Tiwari  -  Director, FIU 
LIST OF WITNESSES FROM MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL 
SERVICES)  
       
1. Shri Rajiv Takru  -   Secretary 
2. Smt. Snehlata Shrivastava - Addl. Secretary 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar  -  Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Ateesh Singh  -  Director 
 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
 
1. Shri Anand Sinha -  Dy. Governor 
2. Shri G.S. Hege -  Principal Legal Advisor 
3. M.P. Baliga  -  G.M.  
STATE BANK OF INDIA  
 
1. Smt. Arundhati Bhattacharya 
-CMD 
2. Shri Arijit Basu       -CGM  
3. Shri Sunil Puri       - Chief Manager  
 
NATIONAL HOUSING BANK 
 
 
1.   Shri R.V. Verma -  CMD 
2. Shri Lalit Kumar  –  GM 
 
BANK OF INDIA  
1. Shri Arun Srivastava  –  Executive Director 
2. Shri Tarlochan Singh  - GM 
3. Shri J.C. Chugh  -  AGM 
Punjab National Bank 
 
1. Shri K.R. Kamath- CMD 
2. Ms. Susi George-AGM 
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed all th e Members and representatives of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Servic es, Economic Affairs and Revenue), Reserve 
Bank of India, State Bank of India, Punjab National Bank, Bank of India and National Housing Bank to 

 
 
101 
 
the sitting of the Committee and drew their attenti on towards maintaining confidentiality in terms of 
direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
 
2. Thereafter, the Committee invited them to presen t their views on the provisions of the Real 
Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013".  The representatives expressed their concern and 
pointed out deficiencies in certain provisions of the Bill and suggested corrective measures thereof.  
 
3. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries which  were responded to by the representatives. 
Then the Committee directed the representatives to furnish written replies to all the queries that hav e 
remained unanswered. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 
 
102 
 
Annexure V  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 11 DECEMBER, 2013  
       
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Ma in Committee Room  Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
3. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee  
4. Shri Ramesh Kumar  
5.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
6. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
7. Shri Ratan Singh 
8. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Anil Desai 
10. Md. Nadimul Haque 
11. Shri Amar Singh  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N. - Under Secretary 
  

 
 
103 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES FROM MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION  
  
4.       Shri Arun Kumar Misra - Secretary, HUPA 
5.       Shri K.B.S. Sidhu  - Joint Secretary, Hous ing, HUPA 
6.       Shri Premjit Lal  - Director,Housing, HUPA  
 
LIST OF WITNESSES FROM MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
 
1.  Shri P.K. Malhotra  - Secretary, 
2. Dr. G. Narayana Raju - Joint Secretary and Legis lative Counsel 
3. Smt. Veena Kothavale - Deputy Legislative Counse l 
4. Shri R. Sreenivas  - Deputy Legislative Counsel 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES FROM MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGAL AFFAIRS) 
 
1. Dr. B.A. AGRAWAL - Law Secretary 
2. Dr. S.S. Chahar  -  Additional Secretary 
3.  Shri T.K. Malik  -  Assistant Legal Adviser 
 
 LIST OF WITNESSES FROM MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS
 
 
1. Shri Pankaj Agrawal  -  Secretary 
2. Shri G. Gurucharan  -  Additional Secretary 
3. Shri G.N. Singh   -  Director 
4. Shri A.K. Jain   -  Director 
5. Md. Zakir Hussain   -  Director 
    
 
      At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed all the Members and representatives of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, the Ministry of Law and Justice and the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs to the sitting of the Committee, a nd drew their attention towards maintaining 
confidentiality in terms of direction 55 (1) of direction by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
2.  Thereafter, the Committee invited them to prese nt their views on the provisions of the Real 
Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013 ".  The representatives expressed their concern and 
pointed out deficiencies in certain provisions of the Bill and suggested corrective measures thereof.   

 
 
104 
 
3. Members raised certain queries which were clarif ied by the representatives. Then the 
Committee directed the representatives to furnish w ritten replies to the points that have remained 
unanswered. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
  

 
 
105 
 
Annexure VI  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY,12 FEBRUARY, 2014  
       
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Co mmittee Room  ‘C’ Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
3. Shri Kailash Joshi 
4. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
5. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
6. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
7.  Shri Ratan Singh 
8. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Anil Desai 
10. Md. Nadimul Haque  
11. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
12. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
13. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha  - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.-  Under Secretary  

 
 
106 
 
 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members t o the sitting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up for consideration the ****** *********draft  report on  "The Real Estate 
(Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013."  After de liberations, the Committee adopted the report 
unanimously without any change. The Members then au thorised the Chairman to present the report 
in the  Parliament. 
**********   *********  ********  ******** ********* 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******* These portions are not related to the Report. 
 
  

 
 
107 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
BILL N O. XLVI OF 2013  
 
THE REAL ESTATE (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 2013 
———————— 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
———————— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
R
EGISTRATION OF REAL ESTATE PROJECT AND REGISTRATION  OF 
REAL ESTATE AGENTS 
 
3. Prior registration of real estate project with Real Estate Regulatory Authority. 
4. Application to Authority. 
5. Grant of registration. 
6. Extension of registration. 
7. Revocation of registration. 
8. Obligation of Authority consequent upon lapse of or on revocation of registration. 
9. Registration of real estate agents. 
10. Functions of real estate agents. 
CHAPTER III 
F
UNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF PROMOTER 
 
11. Functions and duties of promoter. 
12. Obligations of promoter regarding veracity of advertisement or prospectus. 
13. No deposit or advance to be taken by promoter without first entering into agreement 
of sale. 
14. Adherence to approved plans and project specifications by promoter. 
15. Transfer of title. 
16. Return of amount and compensation. 
CHAPTER IV 
R
IGHTS AND DUTIES OF ALLOTTEES 
 
17. Rights and duties of allottees. 
CHAPTER V 
T
HE REAL ESTATE REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
 
18. Establishment and incorporation of Real Estate Regulatory Authority. 
19. Composition of Authority. 
20. Qualifications of Chairperson and Members of Authority. 
21. Term of office of Chairperson and Members. 
22. Salary and allowances payable to Chairperson and Members. 
23. Administrative powers of Chairperson. 
24. Removal of Chairperson and Members from office in certain circumstances. 
C
LAUSES 
25. Restrictions on Chairperson or Members on emplo yment after cessation of office. 
26. Officers and other employees of Authority. 
27. Meetings of Authority. 
28. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceeding of Authority. 
29. Functions of Authority for promotion of real estate sector. 
30. Functions of Authority. 
31. Powers of Authority to call for information, conduct investigations. 

 
 
108 
 
32. Powers of Authority to issue directions. 
33. Powers of Authority. 
34. Recovery of interest or penalty or compensation. 
CHAPTER VI 
C
ENTRAL ADVISORY COUNCIL 
35. Establishment of Central Advisory Council. 
36. Functions of Central Advisory Council. 
CHAPTER VII 
T
HE REAL ESTATE APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 
37. Establishment of Real Estate Appellate Tribunal. 
38. Application for settlement of disputes and appeals to Appellate Tribunal. 
39. Composition of Appellate Tribunal. 
40. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members. 
41. Term of office of Chairperson and Members. 
42. Salary and allowances payable to Chairperson and Members. 
43. Removal of Chairperson and Member from office in certain circumstances. 
44. Officers and other employees of Appellate Tribunal. 
45. Vacancies. 
46. Powers of Tribunal. 
47. Administrative powers of Chairperson of Appellate Tribunal. 
48. Right to legal representation. 
49. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be executable as a decree. 
50. Appeal to High Court. 
CHAPTER VIII 
O
FFENCES , PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION 
51. Punishment for non-registration under section 3. 
52. Penalty for contravention of section 4. 
53. Penalty for contravention of other provisions of this Act. 
54. Penalty for non-registration and contravention under sections 9 and 10. 
55. Penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders of Authority by promoter. 
56. Penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by promoter. 
57. Penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders of Authority by allottee. 
58. Penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by allottee. 
59. Offences by companies. 
C
LAUSES 
60. Compounding of offences. 
61. Power to adjudicate. 
62. Factors to be taken into account by adjudicating officer. 
CHAPTER IX 
F
INANCE , ACCOUNTS , AUDITS AND REPORTS 
63. Grants and loans by Central Government. 
64. Grants and loans by State Government. 
65. Constitution of Fund. 
66. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund 
of India or State account. 
67. Budget, accounts and audit. 
68. Annual report. 
CHAPTER X 
M
ISCELLANEOUS 
69. Bar of jurisdiction. 
70. Delegation. 
71. Power of appropriate Government to supersede Authority. 
72. Powers of appropriate Government to issue directions to Authority and obtain reports 
and returns. 
73. Power of appropriate Government to make rules. 
74. Power to make regulations. 
75. Laying of rules. 

 
 
109 
 
76. Members, etc., to be public servants. 
77. Application of other laws not barred. 
78. Act to have overriding effect. 
79. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
80. Power to remove difficulties. 
  

 
 
110 
 
 
THE REAL ESTATE (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 2013 
A 
BILL 
 
to establish the Real Estate Regulatory Authority for regulation and promotion of the real 
estate sector and to ensure sale of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in 
an efficient and transparent manner and to protect the interest of consumers in the 
real estate sector and establish the Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the 
decisions, directions or orders of the Authority and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2013. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint: 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as 
a reference to the coming into force of that provision. 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
BILL NO. XLVI OF 2013 
Definitions. 
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) ‘‘adjudicating officer’’ means the adjudicating officer appointed under subsection 
(1) of section 61; 
(b) ‘‘advertisement’’ means any document described or issued as advertisement 
through any form of media and includes any notice, circular or other documents offering 
for sale of a plot, building or apartment or inviting persons to purchase in any manner 
such plot, building or apartment or to make advances or deposits for such purposes; 
(c) ‘‘allottee’’ in relation to a real estate project, means the person to whom a 
plot, apartment or buildings, as the case may be, has been allotted, sold or otherwise 
transferred by the promoter, and includes the person who subsequently acquires the 
said allotment through sale, transfer or otherwise, but does not include a person to 
whom such plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, is given on rent; 
(d) ‘‘apartment’’ whether called dwelling unit, flat, premises, suite, tenement, 
unit or by any other name, means a separate and self-contained part of any immovable 
property located on one or more floors or any part thereof, in a building or on a plot of 
land, used or intended to be used for residential purposes, or for any other type of 
independent use ancillary to the purpose specified and includes any covered garage, 
whether or not adjacent to the building in which such apartment is located which has 
been provided by the promoter for the use of the allottee for parking any vehicle, or as 

 
 
111 
 
the case may be, for the residence of any domestic help employed in such apartment; 
(e) ‘‘Appellate Tribunal’’ means the Real Estate Appellate Tribunal established 
under section 37; 
(f) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in respect of matters relating to,— 
(i) the Union territory without Legislature, the Central Government; 
(ii ) the Union territory of Puducherry, the Union territory Government; 
(iii ) the Union territory of Delhi, the Central Ministry of UrbanDevelopment; 
(iv ) the State, the State Government; 
(g) ‘‘architect’’ means a person registered as an architect under the provisions of 
the Architects Act, 1972; 
(h) ‘‘Authority" means the Real Estate Regulatory Authority established under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 18; 
(i) ‘‘building’’ includes any structure or erection or part of a structure or erection 
which is intended to be used for residential or other related purposes; 
(j) ‘‘carpet area’’ means the net usable floor area of an apartment, excluding the 
area covered by the walls; 
(k) ‘‘Chairperson’’ means the Chairperson of the Real Estate Regulatory Authority 
appointed under section 19; 
(l) ‘‘commencement certificate’’ means any certificate issued by the competent 
authority to allow or permit the promoter to begin development works on an immovable 
property; 
(m) ‘‘common areas’’ mean — 
(i) the part of the site or plot not occupied by buildings; 
(ii ) the stair cases, lifts, staircase and lift lobbies, fire escapes and common 
entrances and exits of buildings; 
(iii ) the common basements, parks, play areas, parking areas and common 
storage spaces; 
 (iv ) the premises for the lodging of persons employed for the management 
of the property including accommodation for watch and ward staffs; 
(v) installations of central services such as electricity, gas, water and 
sanitation, air-conditioning and incinerating; 
(vi ) the water tanks, sumps, motors, fans, compressors, ducts and all 
apparatus connected with installations for common use; 
(vii ) community and commercial facilities as may be provided; 
(viii ) all other portion of the property necessary or convenient for its 
maintenance, safety, etc., and in common use; 
(n) ‘‘company’’ means a company incorporated and registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956 and includes,— 
(i) a corporation established by or under any Central Act or State Act; 
(ii ) a development authority or any public authority established by the 
Government in this behalf under any law for the time being in force; 
(o) ‘‘competent authority’’ means the local authority or any authority created 
under any law made by the appropriate Government which exercises authority over 
land under its jurisdiction, and has powers to give permission for development of such 
immovable property; 
(p) ‘‘completion certificate’’ means the completion certificate, or such other 
certificate, as the case may be, issued by the competent authority permitting occupation 

 
 
112 
 
of any building under any law for the time being in force; 
(q) ‘‘development’’ with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, 
means carrying out the development of immovable property, engineering or other 
operations in, on, over or under the land or the making of any material change in any 
immovable property or land and includes re-development; 
(r) ‘‘development works’’ means the external development works and internal 
development works on immovable property; 
(s) ‘‘engineer’’ means a person who possesses a bachelor's degree or equivalent 
from an institution recognised by the All India Council of Technical Education or is 
registered as an engineer under any law for the time being in force; 
(t) ‘‘estimated cost of real estate project’’ means the total cost involved in 
developing the real estate project and includes the land cost; 
(u) ‘‘external development works’’ includes roads and road systems, landscaping, 
water supply, sewerage and drainage systems, electricity supply transformer, sub-station 
of any other work which may have to be executed in the periphery of, or outside, a 
colony for its benefit, as may be specified under the rules or bye-laws of the competent 
authority; 
(v) ‘‘immovable property’’ includes land, buildings, rights of ways, lights or any 
other benefit arising out of land and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened 
to anything which is attached to the earth, but not standing timber, standing crops or 
grass; 
(w) ‘‘interest’’ means the rates of interest payable by the promoter or the allottee, 
as the case may be; 
(x) ‘‘internal development works’’ means roads, footpaths, water supply, sewers, 
drains, parks, tree planting, street lighting, provision for community buildings and for 
treatment and disposal of sewage and silage water, social infrastructure such as 
educational, health and other public amenities or any other work in a colony necessary 
for its proper development; 
(y) ‘‘local authority’’ means the Municipal Corporation or Municipality or 
Panchayats or any other Local Body constituted under any law for the time being in 
force for providing municipal services or basic services, as the case may be, in respect 
of areas under its jurisdiction; 
(z) ‘‘Member’’ means the member of the Real Estate Regulatory Authority 
appointed under section 19 and includes the Chairperson; 
(za ) ‘‘notification’’ means a notification published in the Official Gazette and 
the expression ‘‘notify’’ shall be construed accordingly; 
(zb ) ‘‘person’’ includes,— 
(i) an individual; 
(ii ) a Hindu undivided family; 
(iii ) a company; 
(iv ) a firm; 
(v) a competent authority; 
(vi ) an association of persons or a body of individuals whether incorporated 
or not; 
(vii ) a co-operative society registered under any law relating to co-operative 
societies; 
(viii ) any such other entity as the appropriate Government may, by 

 
 
113 
 
notification specify in this behalf; 
(zc ) ‘‘planning area’’ means a planning area or a development area or a local 
planning area or a regional development plan area, by whatever name called, or any 
other area specified as such by the appropriate Government or any competent authority 
and includes any area designated by the appropriate Government or the competent 
authority to be a planning area for future planned development, under the law relating 
to Town and Country Planning for the time being in force; 
(zd ) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(ze ) ‘‘project’’ means the real estate project under this Act; 
(zf ) ‘‘promoter’’ means,— 
(i) a person who constructs or causes to be constructed an independent 
building or a building consisting of apartments, or converts an existing building 
or a part thereof into apartments, for the purpose of selling all or some of the 
apartments to other persons and includes his assignees and also includes a buyer 
who purchases in bulk for resale; or 
(ii ) a person who develops a colony for the purpose of selling to other 
persons all or some of the plots, whether with or without structures thereon; or 
(iii ) any development authority or any other public body in respect of 
allottees of— 
(a) buildings or apartments, as the case may be, constructed by such 
authority or body on lands owned by them or placed at their disposal by 
the Government; or 
(b) plots owned by such authority or body or placed at their disposal 
by the Government, 
for the purpose of selling all or some of the apartments or plots; or 
 (iv ) an apex State level co-operative housing finance society and a primary 
co-operative housing society which constructs apartments or buildings for its 
Members or in respect of the allottees of such apartments or buildings; or 
(v) any other person who acts himself as a builder, colonizer, contractor, 
developer, estate developer or by any other name or claims to be acting as the 
holder of a power of attorney from the owner of the land on which the building 
or apartment is constructed or colony is developed for sale; or 
(vi ) such other person who constructs any building or apartment for sale 
to the general public. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, where the person who constructs 
or converts a building into apartments or develops a colony for sale and the persons 
who sells apartments or plots are different persons, both of them shall be deemed to be 
the promoters; 
(zg ) ‘‘prospectus’’ means any document described or issued as a prospectus or 
any notice, circular, or other document offering for sale of any real estate project or 
inviting any person to make advances or deposits for such purposes; 
(zh ) ‘‘real estate agent’’ means any person, who negotiates or acts on behalf of 
one person in a transaction of transfer of his plot, apartment or building, as the case 
may be, in a real estate project, by way of sale, with another person or transfer of plot, 
apartment or building, as the case may be, of any other person to him and receives 
remuneration or fees or any other charges for his services whether as a commission or 
otherwise and includes a person who introduces prospective buyers and sellers to 

 
 
114 
 
each other for negotiation for sale or purchase of plot, apartment or building, as the 
case may be, and includes property dealers, brokers, middlemen by whatever name 
called; 
(zi ) ‘‘real estate project’’ means the development of a building or a building 
consisting of apartments, or converting an existing building or a part thereof into 
apartments, or the development of a colony into plots or apartments, as the case may 
be, for the purpose of selling all or some of the said apartments or plots or buildings 
and includes the development works thereof; 
(zj ) ‘‘regulations’’ means the regulations made by the Authority under this Act. 
 
CHAPTER II 
REGISTRATION OF REAL ESTATE PROJECT AND REGISTRATION OF REAL ESTATE 
AGENTS 
 
3. No promoter shall book, sell or offer for sale, or invite persons to purchase in any 
manner any plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in any real estate project, or part 
of it, in any planning area, without registering the real estate project with the Real Estate 
Regulatory Authority established under this Act: 
Provided that no such registration shall be required,— 
(a) where the area of land proposed to be developed does not exceed one thousand 
square meters or the number of apartments proposed to be developed does not exceed 
twelve, inclusive of all phases, or an area or number of apartments as notified by the 
Central Government on recommendations from the appropriate Government, which 
may be different for different States or Union territories but not more than one thousand 
square meters or twelve apartments, as the case may be; 
(b) where the promoter has received all requisite approvals and the 
commencement certificate for the development of the real estate project prior to 
commencement of this Act; 
(c) for the purpose of renovation or repair or re-development which does not 
involve re-allotment and marketing of the real estate project. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, where the real estate project is to 
be developed in phases, every such phase shall be considered as a stand alone real 
estate project, and the promoter shall obtain registration under the Act for each phase 
separately. 
4. (1) Every promoter shall make an application to the Authority for registration of 
the real estate project in such form, manner, within such time and accompanied by such fee 
as may be specified by the regulations made by the Authority. 
(2) The promoter shall enclose the following documents along with the application 
referred to in sub-section ( 1), namely:— 
(a) a brief details of his enterprise including its name, registered address, type 
of enterprise (proprietorship, societies, partnership, companies, competent authority) 
and the particulars of registration; 
(b) an authenticated copy of the commencement certificate from the competent 
authority obtained in accordance with the laws as may be applicable for the real estate 
project mentioned in the application, and where the project is proposed to be developed 
in phases, an authenticated copy of the approval and sanction from the competent 
authority for each of such phases; 

 
 
115 
 
(c) the layout plan of the proposed project or the phase thereof, and also the 
layout plan of the whole project as sanctioned by the competent authority; 
(d) the plan of development works to be executed in the proposed project and 
the proposed facilities to be provided thereof; 
(e) proforma of the agreements proposed to be signed with the allottees; 
(f) the number and the carpet area of apartments for sale in the project; 
(g) the names and addresses of his real estate agents, if any, for the proposed 
project; 
(h) the names and addresses of the contractors, architect, structural engineer, if 
any, and other persons concerned with the development of the proposed project; 
(i) a declaration, supported by an affidavit, which shall be signed by the promoter 
or any person authorised by the promoter, stating,— 
(A) that he has a legal title to the land on which the development is proposed 
along with a legally valid authentication of such title if such land is owned by 
another person; 
(B) that the land is free from all encumbrances, or as the case may be, of 
the encumbrances on such land including any rights, title, interest or name of 
any party in or over such land along with details; 
(C) the likely period of time within which he undertakes to complete the 
project or phase thereof; 
(D) that seventy per cent., or such lesser per cent. as notified by the 
appropriate Government, of the amounts realised for the real estate project from 
the allottees, from time to time, shall be deposited in a separate account to be 
maintained in a scheduled bank within a period of fifteen days of its realisation 
to cover the cost of construction and shall be used only for that purpose. 
Explanation .— For the purpose of this clause, the term ‘‘scheduled bank’’ 
means a bank included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934; 
(E) that he has furnished such other documents as may be prescribed by 
the rules or regulations made under this Act; and 
(j) such other information and documents as may be prescribed. 
5. (1) On receipt of the application under sub-section (1) of section 4, the Authority 
shall within a period of fifteen days— 
(a) grant registration subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder, and provide a registration number, including a Login Id 
and password to the applicant for accessing the website of the Authority and to create 
his web page and to fill therein the details of the proposed project; or 
(b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing, if such application 
does not conform to the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder: 
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been 
given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
(2) If the Authority fails to grant the registration or reject the application, as the case 
may be, as provided under sub-section ( 1), the project shall be deemed to have been 
registered, 
and the Authority shall within two days of the expiry of the said fifteen days, provide a 
registration number and a Login Id and password to the promoter for accessing the website 

 
 
116 
 
of the Authority and to create his web page and to fill therein the details of the proposed 
project. 
(3) The registration granted under this section shall be valid for a period declared by 
the promoter under sub-clause ( C) of clause ( i) of sub-section ( 2) of section 4 for completion 
of the project or phase thereof, as the case may be. 
6. The registration granted under section 5 may be extended by the Authority on an 
application made by the promoter under such conditions as may be prescribed and in such 
form and on payment of such fee as may be specified  by the regulations made by the 
Authority: 
Provided that no application for extension of registration shall be rejected unless the 
applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
7. (1) The Authority may, on receipt of a complaint in this behalf or on the 
recommendation of the competent authority, revoke the registration granted under section 5, 
after being satisfied that— 
(a) the promoter makes wilful default in doing anything required of him by or 
under the Act or the rules or the regulations made thereunder; 
(b) the promoter violates any of the terms or conditions of the approval given by 
the competent authority; 
(c) the promoter is involved in any kind of unfair practice or irregularities. 
Explanation .— For the purposes of this clause, the term ‘‘unfair practice’’ means 
a practice which, for the purpose of promoting the sale or development of any real 
estate project adopts any unfair method or unfair or deceptive practice including any 
of the following practices, namely:— 
(A) the practice of making any statement, whether orally or writing or by 
visible representation which,— 
(i) falsely represents that the services are of a particular standard or 
grade; 
(ii ) represents that the promoter has approval or affiliation which 
such promoter does not have; 
(iii ) makes a false or misleading representation concerning the 
services; 
 (B) the promoter permits the publication of any advertisement or prospectus 
whether in any newspaper or otherwise of services that are not intended to be 
offered. 
(2) The registration granted to the promoter under section 5 shall not be revoked 
unless the Authority has given to the promoter not less than thirty days notice, in writing, 
stating the grounds on which it is proposed to revoke the registration, and has considered 
any cause shown by the promoter within the period of that notice against the proposed 
revocation. 
(3) The Authority may, instead of revoking the registration under sub-section ( 1), 
permit it to remain in force subject to such further terms and conditions as it thinks fit to 
impose in the interest of the allottees, and any su ch terms and conditions so imposed shall 
be 
binding upon the promoter. 
(4) Upon the revocation of the registration, the Authority,— 
(a) shall debar the promoter from accessing its website in relation to that project 
and specify his name in the list of defaulters on its website and also inform the other 

 
 
117 
 
Real Estate Regulatory Authorities in other States and Union territories about such 
cancellation; 
(b) may recommend to the competent authority to facilitate the balance of the 
development works to be carried out in accordance with the provisions of section 8; 
(c) may, to protect the interest of prospective buyers or in the public interest, 
issue such directions as it may deem necessary. 
8. Upon lapse of the registration or on revocation of the registration under this Act, 
the Authority, may consult the appropriate Government to take such action as it may deem fit 
including the carrying out of the remaining development works by competent authority or 
by the association of allottees or in any other man ner, as may be determined by the 
Authority: 
Provided that no direction, decision or order of the Authority under this section shall 
take effect until the expiry of the period of appeal provided under the provisions of this Act. 
9. (1) No real estate agent shall facilitate the sale or purchase of or act on behalf of 
any person to facilitate the sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or building, as the case 
may be, in a real estate project or part of it, being the part of the real estate project registered 
under section 3, being sold by the promoter in any planning area, without obtaining 
registration 
under this section. 
(2) Every real estate agent shall make an application to the Authority for registration 
in such form, manner, within such time and accompanied by such fee and documents as may 
be prescribed. 
(3) The Authority shall, within such period, in such manner and satisfying itself of the 
fulfilment of such conditions, as may be prescribed— 
(a) grant registration to the real estate agent; 
(b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing, if such application 
does not conform to the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder: 
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been 
given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
(4) Whereon the completion of the period specified under sub-section ( 3), if the 
applicant does not receive any communication about the deficiencies in his application or 
the rejection of his application, he shall be deemed to have been registered. 
(5) Every real estate agent who is registered as per the provisions of this Act or the 
rules and regulations made thereunder, shall be gra nted a registration number by the 
Authority, 
which shall be quoted by the real estate agent in every sale facilitated by him under the Act. 
 (6) Every registration shall be valid for such period as may be prescribed, and shall be 
renewable for a period in such manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed. 
(7) Where any real estate agent who has been granted registration under this Act commits 
breach of any of the conditions thereof or any other terms and conditions specified under 
this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder, or where the Authority is satisfied that 
such registration has been secured by the real estate agent through misrepresentation or 
fraud, the Authority may, without prejudice to any other provisions under this Act, revoke 
the registration or suspend the same for such period as it thinks fit: 
Provided that no such revocation or suspension shall be made by the Authority unless 
an opportunity of being heard has been given to the real estate agent. 

 
 
118 
 
10. Every real estate agent registered under section 9 shall— 
(a) not facilitate the sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or building, as the 
case may be, in a real estate project or part of it, being sold by the promoter in any 
planning area, which is not registered with the Authority; 
(b) maintain and preserve such books of account, records and documents as 
may be prescribed; 
(c) not involve himself in any unfair trade practices, namely:— 
(i) the practice of making any statement, whether orally or in writing or by 
visible representation which— 
(A) falsely represents that the services are of a particular standard 
or grade; 
(B) represents that the promoter has approval or affiliation which 
such promoter does not have; 
(C) makes a false or misleading representation concerning the 
services; 
(ii ) permitting the publication of any advertisement whether in any 
newspaper or otherwise of services that are not intended to be offered; 
(d) facilitate the possession of all documents, as the allottee is entitled to, at the 
time of booking of any plot, apartment or building, as the case may be; 
(e) discharge such other functions as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER III 
FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF PROMOTER 
11. (1) The promoter shall, upon receiving his Login Id and password under clause 
(a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 5 or under sub-section ( 2) of section 5, as the case may be, 
create his web page on the website of the Authority and enter all details of the proposed 
project as provided under sub-section ( 2) of section 4, in all the fields as provided, 
including — 
(a) details of the registration granted by the Authority; 
(b) quarterly up-to-date list of number and types of apartments or plots, as the 
case may be, booked; 
(c) quarterly up-to-date status of the project; and 
(d) such other information and documents as may be specified by the regulations 
made by the Authority. 
(2) The advertisement or prospectus issued or published by the promoter shall mention 
prominently the website address of the Authority, wherein all details of the registered project 
have been entered and include the registration number obtained from the Authority and such 
other matters incidental thereto. 
(3) The promoter, upon entering into an agreement of sale with the allottee shall be 
responsible to make available to the allottee, the following information, namely:— 
(a) site and layout plans along with specifications, approved by the competent 
authority, by display at the site or such other place as may be specified by the regulations 
made by the Authority; 
(b) the stage-wise time schedule of completion of the project, including the 
provisions for water, sanitation and electricity. 
(4) The promoter shall— 
(a) be responsible to obtain a completion certificate from the relevant competent 
authority as per local laws or other laws for the time being in force and to make it 

 
 
119 
 
available to the allottees individually or to the association of allottees, as the case may 
be; 
(b) be responsible for providing and maintaining the essential services, as may 
be specified in the service level agreements, on reasonable charges, till the taking over 
of the maintenance of the project by the association of the allottees; 
(c) take steps for the formation of an association or society or co-operative 
society, as the case may be, of the allottees, or a federation of the same, under the laws 
applicable. 
(5) The promoter may cancel the allotment only in terms of the agreement of sale: 
Provided that the allottee may approach the Authority for relief, if he is aggrieved by 
such cancellation and such cancellation is not in accordance with the terms of the agreement 
of sale, unilateral and without any sufficient cause. 
(6) The promoter shall prepare and maintain all such other details as may be specified, 
from time to time, by regulations made by the Authority. 
 
12. Where any person makes an advance or a deposit on the basis of the information 
contained in the advertisement or prospectus and sustains any loss or damage by reason of 
any incorrect, false statement included therein, he shall be compensated by the promoter in 
the manner as provided under this Act: 
Provided that if the person affected by such incorrect, false statement contained in the 
advertisement or prospectus, intends to withdraw from the proposed project, he shall be 
returned his entire investment along with interest at such rate as may be prescribed. 
13. (1) A promoter shall not accept a sum more than ten per cent. of the cost of the 
apartment, plot, or building, as the case may be, as an advance payment or an application 
fee, from a person without first entering into a written agreement for sale with such person. 
(2) The agreement referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be in such form as may be 
prescribed and specify the particulars of developme nt of the project including the 
construction 
of building and apartments, along with specifications and external development works, the 
dates and the manner by which payments towards the cost of the apartment, plot, or building, 
as the case may be, are to be made by the allottees  and the likely date on which the 
possession 
of the apartment, plot, or building is to be handed over and such other particulars, as may be 
prescribed. 
14. (1) The proposed project shall be developed and completed by the promoter in 
accordance with the plans and structural designs and specifications as approved by the 
competent authorities. 
(2) In case any structural defect in such development is brought to the notice of the 
promoter within a period of two years by the allott ee from the date of handing over 
possession,it shall be the duty of the promoter to rectify such defects without further charge, 
within reasonable time, and in the event of promote r's failure to rectify such defects within 
such time, the aggrieved allottees shall be entitle d to receive appropriate compensation in 
the manner as provided under this Act. 
15. (1) The promoter shall take all necessary steps to execute a registered conveyance 
deed in favour of the allottee along with the undivided proportionate title in the common 
areas including the handing over of the possession of the plot, apartment or building, as the 
case may be, in a real estate project, and the other title documents pertaining thereto. 

 
 
120 
 
(2) After obtaining the completion certificate and handing over physical possession to 
the allottees in terms of sub-section ( 1), it shall be the responsibility of the promoter to hand 
over the necessary documents and plans, including common areas, to the association of the 
allottees or the competent authority, as the case may be, as per the local laws. 
 
16. (1) If the promoter fails to complete or is unable to give possession of an apartment, 
plot or building,— 
(a) in accordance with the terms of the agreement or, as the case may be, duly 
completed by the date specified therein or any further date agreed to by the parties; or 
(b) due to discontinuance of his business as a developer on account of suspension 
or revocation of his registration under this Act or for any other reason, 
he shall be liable on demand to the allottees, without prejudice to any other remedy available, 
to return the amount received by him in respect of that apartment, plot, building, as the case 
may be, with interest at such rate as may be prescribed in this behalf including compensation 
in the manner as provided under this Act. 
(2) If the promoter fails to discharge any other obligations imposed on him under this 
Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, he shall be liable to pay such compensation 
to the allottees, in the manner as provided under this Act. 
CHAPTER IV 
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF ALLOTTEES 
17. (1) The allottee shall be entitled to obtain the information relating to site and 
layout plans along with the specifications, approved by the competent authority and such 
other information as provided in this Act or the rules and the regulations made thereunder or 
the agreement signed with the promoter. 
(2) The allottee shall be entitled to know stage-wise time schedule of completion of 
the project, including the provisions for water, sanitation and electricity. 
(3) The allottee shall be entitled to claim the possession of apartment, plot or building, 
as the case may be, as per the declaration given by the promoter under sub-clause ( C) of 
clause ( i) of sub-section ( 2) of section 4. 
(4) The allottee shall be entitled to claim the refund of amount paid, from the promoter, 
if the promoter fails to comply or is unable to give possession of the apartment, plot or 
building, as the case may be, in accordance with the terms of agreement or due to 
discontinuance of his business as a developer on account of suspension or revocation of his 
registration under the provisions of this Act or the rules or the regulations made thereunder. 
(5) The allottee shall be entitled to have the necessary documents and plans, including 
that of common areas, after handing over the physical possession of the apartment or plot or 
building, as the case may be, to the allottee by the promoter. 
(6) Every allottee, who has entered into an agreement of sale to take an apartment, plot 
or building, as the case may be, under section 13, shall be responsible to make necessary 
payments in the manner and within the time as specified in the said agreement and shall pay 
at the proper time and place, the proportionate share of the registration charges, municipal 
taxes, water and electricity charges, maintenance charges, ground rent, and other charges, if 
any, in accordance with such agreement. 
(7) The allottee shall be liable to pay interest, at such rate as may be prescribed, for 
any delay in payment towards any amount or charges to be paid under sub-section ( 6). 
(8) The obligations of the allottee under sub-section ( 6) and the liability towards interest 
under sub-section ( 7) may be reduced when mutually agreed to between the promoter and 

 
 
121 
 
such allottee. 
(9) Every allottee after taking possession of the apartment, plot or building, as the case 
may be, shall participate towards the formation of an association or society or co-operative 
society of the allottees, or a federation of the same. 
CHAPTER V 
THE REAL ESTATE REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
18. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within a period of one year from the 
date of coming into force of this Act, by notificat ion, establish an Authority to be 
known 
as the Real Estate Regulatory Authority to exercise the powers conferred on it and to 
perform the functions assigned to it under this Act: 
Provided that the appropriate Government of two or more States or Union 
territories may, if it deems fit, establish one single Authority: 
Provided further that the appropriate Government may, if it deems fit, establish 
more than one Authority in a State or Union territory, as the case may be. 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with the power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and 
shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 
19. The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than two whole-time 
Members to be appointed by the appropriate Government. 
20. The Chairperson and other Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the 
appropriate Government on the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of 
such persons and in such manner as may be prescribe d, from amongst persons having 
adequate 
knowledge of and professional experience of at least twenty years in case of the Chairperson 
and fifteen years in the case of the Members in urban development, housing, real estate 
development, infrastructure, economics, planning, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, 
management, social service, public affairs or administration: 
Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of the State Government 
shall not be appointed as a Chairperson unless such person has held the post of Additional 
Secretary to the Central Government or any equivalent post in the Central Government or 
State Government: 
Provided further that a person who is, or has been, in the service of the State Government 
shall not be appointed as a Member unless such person has held the post of Secretary to the 
State Government or any equivalent post in the State Government or Central Government. 
21. (1) The Chairperson and Members shall hold office for a term not exceeding five 
years from the date on which they enter upon their office, or until they attain the age of 
sixty-five years, whichever is earlier. 
(2) Before appointing any person as a Chairperson or Member, the appropriate 
Government shall satisfy itself that the person does not have any such financial or other 
interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such Member. 
 
22. (1) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of service of, the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed 
and shall not be varied to their disadvantage during their tenure. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 21, the 

 
 
122 
 
Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be, may,— 
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing, to the appropriate Government, 
notice of not less than three months; or 
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 24 
of this Act. 
(3) Any vacancy caused to the office of the Chairperson or any other Member shall be 
filled-up within a period of six months from the date on which such vacancy occurs. 
23. The Chairperson shall have powers of general superintendence and directions in 
the conduct of the affairs of the Authority and he shall, in addition to presiding over the 
meetings of the Authority, exercise and discharge such administrative powers and functions 
of the Authority as may be prescribed. 
24. (1) The appropriate Government may, by order, remove from office, the Chairperson 
or other Members, if the Chairperson or such other Member, as the case may be,— 
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence, involving moral turpitude; or 
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or 
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially 
his functions; or 
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial 
to the public interest. 
(2) No such Chairperson or Member shall be removed from his office under clause ( d) 
or clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in the matter. 
25. (1) The Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to hold office as such, shall not— 
(a) accept any employment in, or connected with, the management or 
administration of, any person or organisation which has been associated with any 
work under the Act, from the date on which he ceases to hold office: 
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to any employment 
under the appropriate Government or a local authority or in any statutory authority or 
any corporation established by or under any Central, State or provincial Act or a 
Government Company, as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956; 
(b) act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation in connection with any 
specific proceeding or transaction or negotiation or a case to which the Authority is a 
party and with respect to which the Chairperson or such Member had, before cessation 
of office, acted for, or provided advice to, the Authority; 
(c) give advice to any person using information which was obtained in his capacity 
as the Chairperson or a Member and being unavailable to or not being able to be made 
available to the public; 
(d) enter into a contract of service with, or accept an appointment to a board of 
directors of, or accept an offer of employment with, an entity with which he had direct 
and significant official dealings during his term of office as such. 
(2) The Chairperson and Members shall not communicate or reveal to any person any 
matter which has been brought under his consideration or known to him while acting as 
such. 
 
26. (1) The appropriate Government may, in consultation with the Authority, appoint 
such officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of their 

 
 
123 
 
functions under this Act who would discharge their functions under the general 
superintendence of the Chairperson. 
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the officers and of the employees of th e Authority appointed under 
subsection 
(1) shall be such as may be prescribed. 
27. (1) The Authority shall meet at such places and times, and shall follow such rules 
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at 
such meetings), as may be specified by the regulations made by the Authority. 
(2) The Chairperson if for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, 
any other Member chosen by the Members present amon gst themselves at the meeting, 
shall 
preside at the meeting. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided 
by a majority of votes by the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of 
votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the perso n presiding, shall have a second or 
casting 
vote. 
28. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the 
Authority; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of 
the case. 
29. The Authority shall in order to facilitate the growth and promotion of a healthy, 
transparent, efficient and competitive real estate sector make recommendations to the 
appropriate Government or the competent authority, as the case may be, on,— 
(a) protection of interest of the allottees and promoter; 
(b) measures to improve the processes and procedures for clearance and sanction 
of plans and development of projects; 
(c) measures to encourage construction of environmentally sustainable and 
affordable housing, promote standardisation, including grading and use of appropriate 
construction materials, fixtures, fittings and construction techniques; 
(d) measures to facilitate amicable conciliation of disputes between the promoters 
and the allottees through dispute settlement forums set up by the consumer or promoter 
associations; 
(e) any other issue that the Authority may think necessary for the promotion of 
the real estate sector. 
30. The functions of the Authority shall, inter alia, include— 
(a) to render advice to the appropriate Government in matters relating to the 
development of real estate sector; 
(b) to publish and maintain a website of records of all real estate projects for 
which registration has been given, with such details as may be prescribed, including 
information provided in the application for which registration has been granted; 
(c) to maintain a database, on its website, and enter the names of promoters as 
defaulters including the project details, registration for which has been revoked or 
have been penalised under the Act, with reasons therefor, for access to the general 

 
 
124 
 
public; 
 (d) to maintain a database, on its website, and enter the names of real estate 
agents who have applied and registered under this Act, with such details as may be 
prescribed, including those whose registration has been rejected or revoked; 
(e) to fix through regulations for each areas under its jurisdiction the standard 
fees, to be levied on the allottees by the promoter or the association of allottees, as the 
case may be; 
(f) to ensure compliance of the obligations cast upon the promoters, the 
allottees and the real estate agents under this Act and the rules and regulations made 
thereunder; 
(g) to ensure compliance of its regulations or orders or directions made in exercise 
of its powers under this Act; 
(h) to perform such other functions as may be entrusted to the Authority by the 
appropriate Government as may be necessary  to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
31. (1) Where the Authority considers it expedient to do so, on a complaint relating to 
the Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, it may, by order in writing and recording 
reasons therefor call upon any promoter or allottee or real estate agent, as the case may be, 
at any time to furnish in writing such information or explanation relating to its affairs as the 
Authority may require and appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the 
affairs of any promoter or allottee or the real estate agents, as the case may be. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
while exercising the powers under sub-section ( 1), the Authority shall have the same powers 
as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in 
respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(i) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at 
such place and at such time as may be specified by the Authority; 
(ii ) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on 
oath; 
(iii ) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; 
(iv ) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
 
32. The Authority may, for the purpose of discharging its functions under the provisions 
of this Act or the rules or the regulations made thereunder, issue such directions from time to 
time, to the promoters and allottees or real estate agents, as the case may be, as it may 
consider necessary and such directions shall be binding on all concerned. 
 
33. (1) The Authority shall have powers to impose penalty or interest, in regard to any 
contravention of obligations cast upon the promoter s, the allottees and the real estate 
agents, 
under this Act or the rules and the regulations made thereunder. 
(2) The Authority shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to 
the other provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Authority shall have 
powers to regulate its own procedure. 
(3) Where an issue is raised relating to agreement, action, omission, practice or 
procedure that— 
(a) has an appreciable prevention, restriction or distortion of competition in 
connection with the development of a real estate project; or 

 
 
125 
 
(b) has effect of market power of monopoly situation being abused for affecting 
interest of allottees adversely, 
then the Authority, may, suo motu, make reference in respect of such issue to the 
Competition 
Commission of India. 
34. If a promoter or an allottee or a real estate agent, as the case may be, fails to pay 
any interest or penalty or compensation imposed on him under this Act, it shall be 
recoverable 
from such promoter or allottee or real estate agent, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
CENTRAL ADVISORY COUNCIL 
35. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, establish with effect from 
such date as it may specify in such notification, a Council to be known as the Central 
Advisory Council. 
(2) The Minister to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry of the Central 
Government dealing with Housing shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the Central Advisory 
Council. 
(3) The Central Advisory Council shall consist of representatives of the Ministry of 
Finance, Ministry of Industry and Commerce, Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice, Planning 
Commission, National Housing Bank, Housing and Urban Development Corporation, five 
representatives of State Governments to be selected by rotation, five representatives of the 
Real Estate Regulatory Authorities to be selected by rotation, and any other Central 
Government department as notified. 
(4) The Central Advisory Council shall also consist of not more than ten members to 
represent the interests of real estate industry, co nsumers, construction labourers, 
nongovernmental 
organisations and academic and research bodies in the real estate sector. 
36. (1) The functions of the Central Advisory Council shall be to advise and recommend 
the Central Government— 
(a) on all matters concerning the implementation of the Act; 
(b) on major questions of policy; 
(c) towards protection of consumer interest; 
(d) to foster the growth and development of the real estate sector; 
(e) on any other matter as may be assigned to it by the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government may specify the rules to give effect to the recommendations 
of the Central Advisory Council on matters as provided under sub-section ( 1). 
CHAPTER VII 
THE REAL ESTATE APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 
37. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within a period of one year from the 
date of coming into force of this Act, by notification, establish an Appellate Tribunal to 
be known as the ---- (State/Union territory) Real Estate Appellate Tribunal: 
Provided that the appropriate Government of two or more States or Union 
territories may, if it deems fit, establish one single Appellate Tribunal. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by any direction or decision or order made by the Authority 
or by an adjudicating officer under this Act may pr efer an appeal before the Appellate 
Tribunal 

 
 
126 
 
which shall have jurisdiction over the matter. 
38. (1) The appropriate Government or the competent authority or any person aggrieved 
by any direction or order or decision of the Authority or the adjudicating officer may prefer 
an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. 
(2) Every appeal made under sub-section ( 1) shall be preferred within a period of 
sixty days from the date on which a copy of the direction or order or decision made by the 
Authority is received by the appropriate Government or the competent authority or the 
aggrieved person and it shall be in such form, and accompanied by such fee, as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of sixty 
days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. 
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may after 
giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders as it thinks fit. 
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties 
and to the Authority or the adjudicating officer, as the case may be. 
(5) The appeal preferred under sub-section ( 1), shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously 
as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal within a period of 
ninety days from the date of receipt of appeal: 
Provided that where any such appeal could not be disposed of within the said period 
of ninety days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of 
the appeal within that period. 
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality or propriety 
or correctness of any order or decision of the Authority or the adjudicating officer, on its 
own motion or otherwise, call for the records relevant to disposing of such appeal and make 
such orders as it thinks fit. 
39. The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and two other Members of 
which one shall be a Judicial Member and other shall be a Technical or Administrative 
Member, to be appointed by the appropriate Government. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Chapter,— 
(i) ‘‘Judicial Member’’ means a Member of the Appellate Tribunal appointed as 
such under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 40; 
(ii ) ‘‘Technical or Administrative Member’’ means a Member of the Appellate 
Tribunal appointed as such under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 40. 
40. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a Member 
of the Appellate Tribunal unless he,— 
(a) in the case of Chairperson, is or has been, a Judge of the High Court; and 
(b) in the case of a Judicial Member he has held a judicial office in the territory 
of India for at least seven years or has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and 
has held the post in Grade I of that service or any equivalent post for at least three 
years, or has been an advocate for at least fifteen years with experience in dealing with 
real estate matters; and 
(c) in the case of a Technical or Administrative Member, he is a person who is 
well-versed in the field of urban development, housing, real estate development, 
infrastructure, economics, planning, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, 
management, public affairs or administration and possesses experience of at least 
fifteen years in the field or who has held the post in the Central Government or a State 
Government equivalent to the post of Joint Secretary to the Government of India or an 

 
 
127 
 
equivalent post in the Central Government or an equivalent post in the State 
Government. 
(2) The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the appropriate 
Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of High Court or his nominee. 
(3) The Judicial Members and Technical or Administrative Members of the Appellate 
Tribunal shall be appointed by the appropriate Government on the recommendations of a 
Selection Committee consisting of such persons and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
41. (1) The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal 
shall hold office, as such for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which he 
enters upon his office, but shall not be eligible for re-appointment: 
Provided that in case a person, who is or has been a Judge of a High Court, has been 
appointed as Chairperson of the Tribunal, he shall not hold office after he has attained the 
age of sixty-seven years: 
Provided further that no Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member 
shall hold office after he has attained the age of sixty-five years. 
(2) Before appointing any person as Chairperson or Member, the appropriate 
Government shall satisfy itself that the person does not have any such financial or other 
interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such Member. 
42. (1) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of service of, the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed 
and shall not be varied to their disadvantage during their tenure. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 41, the 
Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be, may:— 
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the appropriate Government a 
notice of not less than three months; 
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 43. 
(3) A vacancy caused to the office of the Chairperson or any other Member, as the case 
may be, shall be filled-up within a period of six months from the date on which such vacancy 
occurs. 
43. (1) The appropriate Government may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the 
High Court, remove from office of the Chairperson or any Judicial Member of the Appellate 
Tribunal, who — 
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the appropriate 
Government involves moral turpitude; or 
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable; or 
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially 
his functions; or 
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial 
to the public interest. 
(2) The Chairperson or Judicial Member shall not be removed from his office except 
by an order made by the appropriate Government after an inquiry made by the Judge of the 
High Court in which such Chairperson or Judicial Member has been informed of the charges 
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges. 
(3) The appropriate Government may suspend from the office of the Chairperson or 
Judicial Member in respect of whom a reference of conducting an inquiry has been made to 
the Judge of the High Court under sub-section ( 2), until the appropriate Government passes 

 
 
128 
 
an order on receipt of the report of inquiry made by the Judge of the High Court on such 
reference. 
(4) The appropriate Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for inquiry 
referred to in sub-section ( 2). 
(5) The Technical or Administrative Member may be removed from his office by an 
order of the appropriate Government on the grounds specified in sub-section ( 1) and in 
accordance with the procedure notified by the appropriate Government: 
Provided that the Technical or Administrative Member shall not be removed unless he 
has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
44. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide the Appellate Tribunal with such 
officers and employees as it may deem fit. 
(2) The officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall discharge their functions 
under the general superintendence of its Chairperson. 
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the officers and employees of the Appel late Tribunal shall be such as may 
be 
prescribed. 
45. If, for reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office of 
the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal, the appropriate Government shall 
appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and 
the proceedings may be continued before the Appellate Tribunal from the stage at which the 
vacancy is filled. 
46. (1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall have power to 
regulate its own procedure. 
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall also not be bound by the rules of evidence contained 
in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purpose of discharging its functions 
under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 
1908 in respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him 
on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; 
(e) reviewing its decisions; 
(f) dismissing an application for default or directing it ex parte; and 
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(5) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial 
proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 for the purposes of section 196 
of the Indian Penal Code, and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be civil court for the 
purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
47. The Chairperson shall have powers of general superintendence and direction in 
the conduct of the affairs of Appellate Tribunal and he shall, in addition to presiding over the 
meetings of the Appellate Tribunal, exercise and discharge such administrative powers and 

 
 
129 
 
functions of the Appellate Tribunal as may be prescribed. 
48. The applicant or appellant may either appear in person or authorise one or more 
chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or 
any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate Tribunal. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) "chartered accountant" means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) 
of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and who has 
obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act; 
 (b) ‘‘company secretary’’ means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 and who has obtained 
a certificate of practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act; 
(c) ‘‘cost accountant’’ means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and who has 
obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act; 
(d) ‘‘legal practitioner’’ means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any 
High Court, and includes a pleader in practice. 
49. (1) Every order made by the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable 
by the Appellate Tribunal as a decree of civil court, and for this purpose, the Appellate 
Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may 
transmit any order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court 
shall execute the order as if it were a decree made by that court. 
50. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal, may, 
file an appeal to the High Court, within a period o f ninety days from the date of 
communication 
of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal, to him, on anyone or more of the grounds 
specified in section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908: 
Provided that the High Court may, entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said 
period of ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the appeal in time. 
Explanation .—The expression ‘‘High Court" means the High Court of a State or Union 
territory where the real estate project is situated. 
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate Tribunal 
with the consent of the parties. 
CHAPTER VIII 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION 
51. (1) If any promoter contravenes the provisions of section 3, he shall be liable to a 
penalty which may extend up to ten per cent. of the estimated cost of the real estate project 
as determined by the Authority. 
(2) If any promoter does not comply with the orders, decisions or directions 
issued under sub-section ( 1) or continues to violate the provisions of section 3, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to three years or with fine 
which may extend to a further ten per cent. of the estimated cost of the real estate project, or 
with both. 
52. If any promoter knowingly provides false information or contravenes the provisions 
of section 4, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend up to five per cent. of the 
estimated cost of the real estate project, as determined by the Authority. 

 
 
130 
 
53. If any promoter contravenes any other provisions of this Act, other than that provided 
under section 3 or section 4, or the rules or the regulations made thereunder, he shall be 
liable to a penalty which may extend up to five per cent. of the estimated cost of the real 
estate project as determined by the Authority. 
54. If any real estate agent wilfully fails to comply with or contravenes the provisions 
of section 9 or section 10, he shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees for every day 
during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up to five per cent. of 
the cost of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, of the real estate project, for 
which the sale or purchase has been facilitated as determined by the Authority. 
56 of 1980. 
55. If any promoter, who wilfully fails to comply with, or contravenes any of the 
orders or directions of the Authority, he shall be liable to a penalty for every day during 
which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up to five per cent, of the 
estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the Authority. 
56. If any promoter, who wilfully fails to comply with, or contravenes any of the 
orders, decisions or directions of the Appellate Tribunal, he shall be liable to a penalty for 
every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up to ten 
per cent. of the estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the Appellate 
Tribunal. 
57. If any allottee, who wilfully fails to comply with, or contravenes any of the orders, 
decisions or directions of the Authority he shall be liable to a penalty for the period during 
which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up to five per cent. of the 
plot, apartment or building cost, as the case may be, as determined by the Authority. 
58. If any allottee, who wilfully fails to comply with, or contravenes any of the orders 
or directions of the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, he shall be liable to a penalty for 
the period during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up to ten 
per cent. of the plot, apartment or building cost, as the case may be, as determined by the 
Appellate Tribunal. 
59. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every 
person who, at the time, the offence was committed was in charge of, or was responsible to 
the company for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished 
accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section, shall render any such person liable 
to any punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under 
this Act has been committed by a company, and it is  proved that the offence has been 
committed 
with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section,— 
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association 

 
 
131 
 
of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
60. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the 
offence punishable under section 51 of this Act may, either before or after the institution of 
the prosecution, be compounded by the court on such terms and conditions and on payment 
of such sums as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the sum prescribed shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount 
of the fine which may be imposed for the offence so compounded. 
61. (1) For the purpose of adjudging compensation under sections 12, 14 and 
section 16, the Authority shall appoint any officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to 
the State Government to be an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry in the prescribed 
manner, after giving any person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard: 
Provided that any person whose complaint in respect of matters covered under 
sections 12, 14 and section 16 is pending before th e Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum 
or 
the Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission or the National Consumer Redressal 
Commission, established under section 9 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, on or before 
the commencement of this Act, he may, with the permission of such Forum or Commission, 
as the case may be, withdraw the complaint pending before it and file an application before 
the adjudicating officer under this Act. 
(2) The application for adjudging compensation under sub-section ( 1), shall be dealt 
with by the adjudicating officer as expeditiously as possible and dispose of the same within 
a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of such application: 
Provided that where any such application could not be disposed of within the said 
period of ninety days, the adjudicating officer shall record his reasons in writing for not 
disposing of the application within that period. 
(3) While holding an inquiry, the adjudicating officer shall have power to summon and 
enforce the attendance of any person acquainted wit h the facts and circumstances of the 
case 
to give evidence or to produce any document which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer, 
may be useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he 
is satisfied that the person has failed to comply with the provisions of any of the sections 
specified in sub-section ( 1), he may direct to pay such compensation or interest, as the case 
may be, as he thinks fit in accordance with the provisions of any of those sections. 
62. While adjudging the quantum of compensation or interest, as the case may be, 
under section 61, the adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the following factors, 
namely:— 
(a) the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever 
quantifiable, made as a result of the default; 
(b) the amount of loss caused as a result of the default; 
(c) the repetitive nature of the default. 
CHAPTER IX 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDITS AND REPORTS 
63. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
in this behalf, make to the Authority grants and loans of such sums of money as that 
Government may consider necessary. 
64. The State Government may, after due appropriation made by State Legislature 

 
 
132 
 
by law in this behalf, make to the Authority, grant s and loans of such sums of money 
as 
the State Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
65. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Fund to be called the “Real 
Estate Fund” and there shall be credited thereto— 
(a) all Government grants received by the Authority; 
(b) the fees received under this Act; 
(c) the interest accrued on the amounts referred to in clauses ( a) to ( b). 
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other Members 
and the administrative expenses including the salaries and allowances payable to the 
officers and other employees of the Authority and the Appellate Tribunal; 
(b) the other expenses of the Authority in connection with the discharge of its 
functions and for the purposes of this Act. 
 (3) The Fund shall be administered by a committee of such Members of the Authority 
as may be determined by the Chairperson. 
(4) The committee appointed under sub-section ( 3) shall spend monies out of the 
Fund for carrying out the objects for which the Fund has been constituted. 
66. (1) All sums realised, by way of penalties, imposed by the Appellate Tribunal or 
the Authority, in the Union territories, shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
(2) All sums realised, by way of penalties, imposed by the Appellate Tribunal or the 
Authority, in a State, shall be credited to such account as the State Government may specify. 
67. (1) The Authority shall prepare a budget, maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by 
the appropriate Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India. 
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred 
in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have the same 
rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts 
and, in particular shall have the right to demand a nd production of books, accounts, 
connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority. 
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report 
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the appropriate Government by the Authority and the 
appropriate Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament or, as th e case may be, before the State 
Legislature 
or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature 
consists of one House, before that House. 
68. (1) The Authority shall prepare once in every year, in such form and at such time 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government,— 

 
 
133 
 
(a) a description of all the activities of the Authority for the previous year; 
(b) the annual accounts for the previous year; and 
(c) the programmes of work for the coming year. 
(2) A copy of the report received under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is received, before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, before the State 
Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where 
such legislature consists of one House, before that House. 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 
69. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect 
of any matter which the Authority or the adjudicating officer or the Appellate Tribunal is 
empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court 
or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power 
conferred by or under this Act. 
70. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any member, 
officer of the Authority or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as may be 
specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the power to 
make regulations under section 74) as it may deem necessary. 
71. (1) If, at any time, the appropriate Government is of the opinion,— 
(a) that, on account of the circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it 
is unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the 
provisions of this Act; or 
(b) that the Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction 
given by the appropriate Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions 
or performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and 
as a result of such default the financial position of the Authority or the administration 
of the Authority has suffered; or 
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so 
to do, 
the appropriate Government may, by notification, supersede the Authority for such period, 
not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification and appoint a person or 
persons as the President or the Governor, as the case may be, may direct to exercise 
powers 
and discharge functions under this Act: 
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the appropriate Government shall 
give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to make representations against the proposed 
supersession and shall consider the representations, if any, of the Authority. 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding the 
Authority,— 
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from the date of supersession, 
vacate their offices as such; 
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of 
this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, until the 
Authority is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by the 
person or persons referred to in sub-section ( 1); and 
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority 
is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), vest in the appropriate Government. 

 
 
134 
 
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification 
issued under sub-section ( 1), the appropriate Government shall reconstitute the Authority by 
a fresh appointment of its Chairperson and other Members and in such case any person who 
had vacated his office under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be 
disqualified 
for re-appointment. 
(4) The appropriate Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under 
sub-section ( 1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances 
leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, 
before the State Legislature, or the Union territory Legislature, as the case may be, where 
it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that 
House. 
72. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, 
in exercise of its powers and in performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by 
such directions on questions of policy, as the appropriate Government may give in writing to 
it from time to time: 
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to 
express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section. 
 (2) If any dispute arises between the appropriate Government and the Authority as to 
whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the appropriate 
Government 
thereon shall be final. 
(3) The Authority shall furnish to the appropriate Government such returns or other 
information with respect to its activities as the appropriate Government may, from time to 
time, require. 
73. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the information and documents for application to Authority for registration 
under clause ( j) of sub-section ( 2) of section 4; 
(b) the conditions under which registration of a promoter may be renewed under 
section 6; 
(c) the form and manner of making an application and fee and documents to be 
accompanied with such application as under sub-section ( 2) of section 9; 
(d) the period, manner and conditions under which the registration is to be granted 
under sub-section ( 3) of section 9; 
(e) the validity of the period of registration and the manner and fee for renewal 
under sub-section ( 6) of section 9; 
(f) the maintenance and preservation of books of account, records and documents 
under clause ( b) of section 10; 
(g) the discharge of other functions by the real estate agent under clause ( e) of 
section 10; 
(h) the rate of interest payable under section 12; 
(i) the form and particulars of agreement under sub-section ( 2) of section 13; 
(j) the rate of interest payable under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 16; 
(k) the rate of interest payable under sub-section ( 7) of section 17; 

 
 
135 
 
(l) the constitution of a Selection Committee for the appointment of Chairperson 
and Members of Authority, and the manner of selection under section 20; 
(m) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of service of, the Chairperson and other Members of the Authority under sub-section ( 1) 
of section 22; 
(n) the administrative powers of the Chairperson under section 23; 
(o) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the officers and other employees of the Authority under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 26; 
(p) the details to be published and mantain on the website as under clauses ( b) 
and under clause ( d) of section 30; 
(q) the additional functions which may be performed by the Authority under 
clause ( iv ) of sub-section ( 2) of section 31; 
(r) the manner of recovery of interest, penalty and compensation under 
section 34; 
(s) the recommendations received from the Central Advisory Council under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 36; 
 (t) the form and manner and fee for filing of appeal under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 38; 
(u) the constitution of a Selection Committee for the appointment of Members 
of the Tribunal, and the manner of selection under sub-section ( 3) of section 40; 
(v) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal under subsection 
(1) of section 42; 
(w) the procedure for inquiry of the charges against the Chairperson or Judicial 
Member of the Tribunal under sub-section ( 4) of section 43; 
(x) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 3) 
of section 44; 
(y) any other powers of the Tribunal under clause ( h) of sub-section ( 4) of section 
46; 
(z) the powers of the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal under section 47; 
(za ) the terms and conditions and the payment of such sum for compounding of 
the offences under section 60; 
(zb ) the manner of inquiry under sub-section ( 1) of section 61; 
(zc ) the form to be specified in which the Authority shall prepare a budget, 
maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement 
of accounts under sub-section ( 1) of section 67; 
(zd ) the form in which and time at which the Authority shall prepare an annual 
report under sub-section ( 1) of section 68; 
(ze ) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of 
which provision is to be made, by rules. 
74. (1) The Authority may, by notification, make regulations, after it is approved by 
the appropriate Government, in consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to 
carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 

 
 
136 
 
(a) the form and manner of making application and fee payable herewith under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 4; 
(b) the fee for extension of registration under section 6; 
(c) such other information and documents required under clause ( d) of subsection 
(1) of section 11; 
(d) display of site and layout plans along with specifications, approved by the 
competent authority, for display under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 3) of section 11; 
(e) preparation and maintenance of other details under sub-section ( 6) of section 
11; 
(f) time, places and the procedure in regard to transaction of business at the 
meetings of the Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 27; 
(g) standard fees to be levied by the promoter on the allottees or the association 
of allottees under clause ( e) of section 30; 
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulation 
or in respect of which provision is to be made by the regulations. 
75. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government, every regulation made by the 
Authority and every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or in the 
notification, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation or the 
notification should not be made, the rule or regulation or notification, as the case may be, 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation or notification, as the 
case may be. 
(2) Every rule made by a State Government or the Union territory Government, as the 
case may be, under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be, after it is made, before the 
State 
Legislature, or the Union territory Legislature, as the case may be, where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House. 
76. The Chairperson, Members and other officers and employees of the Authority and 
the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 
21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
77. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 
78. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force: 
Provided that where a State has enacted a law for regulation of the real estate sector, 
and such State law is not inconsistent with this Act, then, the State Government, to that 
extent, may not apply the provisions of this Act in the State. 
79. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the appropriate 
Government or the Authority or any officer of the appropriate Government or any member, 
officer or other employees of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder. 
80. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 

 
 
137 
 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the date of the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The real estate sector plays a catalytic role in fulfilling the need and demand for 
housing and infrastructure in the country. While this sector has grown significantly in 
recent years, it has been largely unregulated, with absence of professionalism and 
standardisation and lack of adequate consumer protection. Though the Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986 is available as a forum to the buyers in the real estate market, the recourse is only 
curative and is not adequate to address all the concerns of buyers and promoters in that 
sector. The lack of standardisation has been a constraint to the healthy and orderly growth 
of industry. Therefore, the need for regulating the sector has been emphasised in various 
forums. 
2. In view of the above, it becomes necessary to have a Central legislation, namely, the 
Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013 in the interests of effective consumer 
protection, uniformity and standardisation of business practices and transactions in the 
real estate sector. The proposed Bill provides for the establishment of the Real Estate 
Regulatory Authority (the Authority) for regulation and promotion of real estate sector and 
to ensure sale of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in an efficient and 
transparent 
manner and to protect the interest of consumers in real estate sector and establish the Real 
Estate Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the decisions, directions or orders of the 
Authority. 
3. The proposed Bill will ensure greater accountability towards consumers, and 
significantly reduce frauds and delays as also the current high transaction costs. It attempts 
to balance the interests of consumers and promoters by imposing certain responsibilities on 
both. It seeks to establish symmetry of information between the promoter and purchaser, 
transparency of contractual conditions, set minimum standards of accountability and a 
fasttrack 
dispute resolution mechanism. The proposed Bill will induct professionalism and 
standardisation in the sector, thus paving the way for accelerated growth and investments 
in the long run. 
4. The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013, inter alia , provides for 
the following, namely:— 
(a) to impose an obligation upon the promoter not to book, sell or offer for sale, 
or invite persons to purchase any plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in 
any real estate project without registering the real estate project with the Authority; 
(b) to make the registration of real estate project compulsory in case where the 
area of land proposed to be developed exceed one thousand square meters or number 
of apartments proposed to be developed exceed twelve; 
(c) to impose an obligation upon the real estate agent not to facilitate sale or 

 
 
138 
 
purchase of any plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, without registering 
himself with the Authority; 
(d) to impose liability upon the promoter to pay such compensation to the 
allottees, in the manner as provided under the proposed legislation, in case if he fails 
to discharge any obligations imposed on him under the proposed legislation; 
(e) to establish an Authority to be known as the Real Estate Regulatory Authority 
by the appropriate Government, to exercise the powers conferred on it and to perform 
the functions assigned to it under the proposed legislation; 
(f) the functions of the Authority shall, inter alia , include— (i) to render advice 
to the appropriate Government in matters relating to the development of real estate 
sector; ( ii ) to publish and maintain a website of records of all real estate projects for 
28 
29 
which registration has been given, with such details as may be prescribed; ( iii ) to 
ensure compliance of the obligations cast upon the promoters, the allottees and the 
real estate agents under the proposed legislation; 
(g) to establish an Advisory Council by the Central Government to advice and 
recommend the Central Government on— (i) matters concerning the implementation of 
the proposed legislation; ( ii ) major questions of policy; ( iii ) protection of consumer 
interest; ( iv ) growth and development of the real estate sector; 
(h) to establish the Real Estate Appellate Tribunal by the appropriate Government 
to hear appeals from the direction, decision or order of the Authority or the adjudicating 
officer; 
(i) to appoint an adjudicating officer by the Authority for adjudging compensation 
under sections 12, 14 and 16 of the proposed legislation; 
(j) to make provision for punishment and penalties for contravention of the 
provisions of the proposed legislation and for non-compliance of orders of Authority 
or Appellate Tribunal; 
(k) to empower the appropriate Government to supersede the Authority on 
certain circumstances specified in the proposed legislation; 
(l) to empower the appropriate Government to issue directions to the Authority 
and obtain reports and returns from it. 
5. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Real 
Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013. 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
NEW DELHI;          DR. GIRIJA VYAS 
The 22 nd July, 2013. 
———— 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
 
(Copy of letter No. O-17034/18/2009-H dated 24th July, 2013 from Dr. Girija Vyas, 
Minister of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation to the Secretary-General, Rajya 
Sabha) 
 
 “The Hon'ble President having been informed of the  subject matter of the proposed 

 
 
139 
 
‘the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013’, recommends *** *** *** to the 
House the consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the Constitution.” 
Notes on clauses 
Clause 1.—This clause relates to the short title, extent and commencement of the 
proposed legislation. 
Clause 2.—This clause contains the definitions of various expressions used in the 
proposed legislation. 
Clause 3.—This clause relates to the prior registration of real estate project with the 
Real Estate Regulatory Authority. 
This clause provides that no promoter shall book, sell or offer for sale, or invite persons 
to purchase in any manner any plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in any real 
estate project, or part of it, in any planning area, without registering the real estate project 
with the Real Estate Regulatory Authority established under the proposed legislation. 
However, no such registration shall be required where the area of land proposed to be 
developed does not exceed one thousand square meters or the number of apartments 
proposed to be developed does not exceed twelve or where the promoter has received all 
requisite approvals and the commencement certificate for the development of immovable 
property prior to commencement of the proposed legislation or for the purpose of renovation 
or repair or redevelopment which does not involve re-allotment and marketing of immovable 
property. 
Clause 4.—This clause relates to the application to Authority. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that every promoter shall make an application to 
the Authority for registration of the project in such form, manner, within such time and 
accompanied by such fee as may be specified by the regulations made by the Authority. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause of the Bill provides the list of documents that the promoter 
is required to enclose along with the application for registration. 
Clause 5.—This clause relates to the grant of registration. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Authority shall within a period of fifteen 
days—(a) grant registration subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation and the 
rules and regulations made thereunder, and provide a registration number, including a Login 
Id and password to the applicant for accessing the website of the Authority and to create his 
web page and to fill therein the details of the proposed project; or ( b) reject the application 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, if such application does not conform to the provisions 
of the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made thereunder. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause of the Bill provides that if the Authority fails to grant the 
registration or reject the application, as the case may be, as provided within the said fifteen 
days, the project shall be deemed to have been registered, and the Authority shall within two 
days of the expiry of the said fifteen days, provide a registration number and a Login Id and 
password to the promoter for accessing the website of the Authority and to create his web 
page and to fill therein the details of the proposed project. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause of the Bill provides that the registration granted under 
this clause shall be valid for a period declared by the promoter. 
Clause 6.—This clause relates to the extension of registration. 
This clause provides that the registration granted may be extended by the Authority 
on an application made by the promoter under such conditions as may be prescribed and in 
such form and on payment of such fee as may be specified by the regulations made by the 
Authority. 

 
 
140 
 
Clause 7.—This clause relates to the revocation of registration. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Authority may on receipt of a complaint 
in this behalf or on the recommendation of the competent authority, revoke the registration 
granted after being satisfied that the promoter has made wilful default in doing anything 
required of him by or under the proposed legislation or the rules or the regulations made 
thereunder; the promoter has violated any of the terms or conditions of the approval given 
by the competent authority; the promoter is involved in any kind of unfair practice or 
irregularities. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the registration granted to the promoter 
under clause 5 shall not be revoked unless the Authority has given to the promoter not less 
than thirty days notice, in writing, stating the grounds on which it is proposed to revoke the 
registration, and has considered any cause shown by the promoter within the period of that 
notice against the proposed revocation. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the Authority may, instead of revoking the 
registration under sub-section ( 1), permit it to remain in force subject to such further terms 
and conditions as it thinks fit to impose in the interest of the allottees, and any such terms 
and conditions so imposed shall be binding upon the promoter. 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that upon the revocation of the registration, the 
Authority,—(a) shall debar the promoter from accessing its website in relation to that project 
and specify his name in the list of defaulters on its website and also inform the other Real 
Estate Regulatory Authorities in other States and Union territories about such cancellation; 
(b) may recommend to the competent authority to facilitate the balance of the development 
works to be carried out in accordance with the provisions of clause 8; ( c) may, to protect the 
interest of prospective buyers or in the public interest, issue such directions as it may deem 
necessary. 
Clause 8.—This clause relates to the obligation of Authority consequent upon lapse 
of or revocation of registration. 
This clause provides that upon lapse of the registration or on revocation of the 
registration under the proposed legislation, the Authority, may consult the appropriate 
Government to take such action as it may deem fit including the carrying out of the remaining 
development works by competent authority or by the association of allottees or in any other 
manner, as may be determined by the Authority. However, that no direction, decision or order 
of the Authority under this clause shall take effect until the expiry of the period of appeal 
provided under the provisions of the proposed legislation. 
Clause 9.—This clause relates to the registration of real estate agents. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that no real estate agent shall facilitate the sale 
or purchase of or act on behalf of any person to facilitate the sale or purchase of any plot, 
apartment or building, as the case may be, in a real estate project or part of it, being the part 
of the real estate project registered under the proposed legislation, being sold by the 
promoter 
in any planning area, without registering with the Authority. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the registration shall be in such form, 
manner, within such time and accompanied by such fee and documents as may be 
prescribed. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the Authority shall, within such period, in 
such manner and satisfying itself of the fulfillment of such conditions, as may be prescribed— 
(a) grant registration to the real estate agent; ( b) reject the application for reasons to be 

 
 
141 
 
recorded in writing, if such application does not conform to the provisions of the proposed 
legislation or the rules or regulations made thereunder. However, no application shall be 
rejected unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that if on the completion of the period specified 
under sub-section ( 3), if the applicant does not receive any communication about the 
deficiencies in his application or the rejection of his application, he shall be deemed to have 
been registered. 
Sub-clause ( 5) of this clause provides that every real estate agent who is registered as 
per the provisions of the proposed legislation or the rules and regulations made thereunder, 
shall be granted a registration number by the Authority, which shall be quoted by the real 
estate agent in every sale facilitated by him under the proposed legislation. 
Sub-clause ( 6) of this clause provides that every registration shall be valid for such 
period as may be prescribed, and shall be renewable for a period in such manner and on 
payment of such fee as may be prescribed. 
Sub-clause ( 7) of this clause provides that where any real estate agent who has been 
granted registration under the proposed legislation commits breach of any of the conditions 
thereof or any other terms and conditions specified under the proposed legislation or any 
rules or regulations made thereunder, or where the Authority is satisfied that such registration 
has been secured by the real estate agent through misrepresentation or fraud, the Authority 
may, without prejudice to any other provisions under the proposed legislation, revoke the 
registration or suspend the same for such period as it thinks fit. However, no such revocation 
or suspension shall be made by the Authority unless an opportunity of being heard has been 
given to the real estate agent. 
Clause 10.—This clause relates to the functions of real estate agents. 
This clause provides that every real estate agent registered under clause 9 shall— 
(a) not facilitate the sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, 
in a real estate project or part of it, being sold by the promoter in any planning area, which is 
not registered with the Authority; ( b) maintain and preserve such books of account, records 
and documents as may be prescribed; ( c) not involve himself in any unfair trade practices, 
namely:—(i) the practice of making any statement, whether orally or writing or by visible 
representation which—(A) falsely represents that the services are of a particular standard or 
grade; ( B) represents that the promoter has approval or affiliation which such promoter does 
not have; ( C) makes a false or misleading representation concerning the services; 
(ii ) permitting the publication of any advertisement whether in any newspaper or otherwise 
of services that are not intended to be offered; ( d) facilitate the possession of all documents, 
as the allottee is entitled to, at the time of booking of any plot, apartment or building, as the 
case may be; ( e) discharge such other functions as may be prescribed. 
Clause 11.— This clause relates to the functions and duties of promoter. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the promoter shall, upon receiving his 
Login-Id and password under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of clause 5 or under sub-section 
(2) of clause 5, as the case may be, create his web page on the website of the Authority and 
enter all details of the proposed project as provided under sub-section ( 2) of clause 4, in all 
the fields as provided, including those specified. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the advertisement or prospectus issued or 
published by the promoter shall mention prominently the website address of the Authority, 
wherein all details of the registered project have been entered and include the registration 
number obtained from the Authority and such other matters incidental thereto. 

 
 
142 
 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that that the promoter, upon entering into an 
agreement of sale with the allottee shall be responsible to make available to the allottee 
information as specified. 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that the promoter shall—(a) be responsible to 
obtain a completion certificate from the relevant competent authority as per local laws or 
other laws for the time being in force and to make it available to the allottees individually or 
to the association of allottees, as the case may be; (b) be responsible for providing and 
maintaining the essential services, as may be specified in the service level agreements, on 
reasonable charges, till the taking over of the maintenance of the project by the association 
of the allottees; ( c) take steps for the formation of an association or society or co-operative 
society, as the case may be, of the allottees, or a federation of the same, under the laws 
applicable. 
Sub-clause ( 5) of this clause provides that the promoter may cancel the allotment only 
in terms of the agreement of sale. However, the allottee may approach the Authority for relief 
if he is aggrieved by such cancellation and such cancellation is not in accordance with the 
terms of the agreement of sale, unilateral and without any sufficient cause. 
Clause 12.—This clause relates to the obligations of promoter regarding veracity of 
the advertisement or prospectus. 
This clause provides that where any person makes an advance or a deposit on the 
basis of the information contained in the advertisement or prospectus and sustains any loss 
or damage by reason of any incorrect, false statement included therein, he shall be 
compensated by the promoter in the manner as provided under the proposed legislation. 
However, if the person affected by such incorrect, false statement contained in the 
advertisement or prospectus, intends to withdraw from the proposed project, he shall be 
returned his entire investment along with interest at such rate as may be prescribed. 
Clause 13.—This clause relates to no deposit or advance to be taken by promoter 
without first entering into an agreement of sale. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that a promoter shall not accept a sum more than 
ten per cent. of the cost of the apartment, plot, or building as the case may be, as an 
advance payment or an application fee, from a person without first entering into a written 
agreement for sale with such person. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the agreement referred to in sub-section ( 1) 
shall be in such form as may be prescribed and specify the particulars of development of the 
project including the construction of building and apartments, along with specifications and 
external development works, the dates and the manner by which payments towards the cost 
of the apartment, plot, or building as the case may be, are to be made by the allottees and 
the likely date on which the possession of the apartment, plot, or building is to be handed 
over and such other particulars, as may be prescribed. 
Clause 14.—This clause relates to the adherence to approved plans and project 
specifications by the promoter. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the proposed project shall be developed 
and completed by the promoter in accordance with the plans and structural designs and 
specifications as approved by the competent authorities. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that in case any structural defect in such 
development is brought to the notice of the promoter within a period of two years by the 
allottee from the date of handing over possession, it shall be the duty of the promoter to 
rectify such defects without further charge, within reasonable time, and in the event of 

 
 
143 
 
promoter’s failure to rectify such defects within such time, the aggrieved allottees shall be 
entitled to receive appropriate compensation in the manner as provided under the proposed 
legislation. 
Clause 15.—This clause relates to the transfer of title. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the promoter shall take all necessary steps 
to execute a registered conveyance deed in favour of the allottee along with the undivided 
proportionate title in the common areas including the handing over of the possession of the 
plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in a real estate project, and the other title 
documents pertaining thereto. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that after obtaining the completion certificate 
and handing over physical possession to the allottees in terms of sub-section ( 1), it shall be 
the responsibility of the promoter to hand over the necessary documents and plans, including 
common areas, to the association of the allottees or the competent authority, as the case 
may be, as per the local laws. 
Clause 16.—This clause relates to the return of amount and compensation. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that if the promoter fails to complete or is unable 
to give possession of an apartment, plot or building,—(a) in accordance with the terms of the 
agreement or, as the case may be, duly completed by the date specified therein or any 
further date agreed to by the parties; or ( b) due to discontinuance of his business as a 
developer on account of suspension or revocation of registration under the proposed 
legislation or for any other reason, he shall be liable on demand to the allottees, without 
prejudice to any other remedy available, to return the amount received by him in respect of 
that apartment, plot, or  building as the case may be, with interest at such rate as may be 
prescribed in this behalf including compensation in the manner as provided under the 
proposed legislation. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that if the promoter fails to discharge any other 
obligations imposed on him under the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder, he shall be liable to pay such compensation to the allottees, in the manner as 
provided under the proposed legislation. 
Clause 17.—This clause relates to the rights and duties of allottees. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the allottee shall be entitled to obtain the 
information relating to site and layout plans along with the specifications, approved by the 
competent authority and such other information as provided in the proposed legislation or 
the rules and regulations made thereunder or the agreement signed with the promoter. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the allottee shall be entitled to know stagewise 
time schedule of completion of the project, including the provisions for water, sanitation 
and electricity. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the allottee shall be entitled to claim the 
possession of apartment, plot or building, as the case may be, as per the declaration given 
by the promoter under sub- clause ( c) of clause ( i) of sub-section ( 2) of clause 4. 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that the allottee shall be entitled to claim the 
refund of amount paid, from the promoter, if the promoter fails to comply or is unable to give 
possession of the apartment, plot or building, as the case may be, in accordance with the 
terms of agreement or due to discontinuance of his business as a developer on account of 
suspension or revocation of registration under the provisions of the proposed legislation or 
the rules or regulations made there under. 
Sub-clause ( 5) of this clause provides that the allottee shall be entitled to have the 

 
 
144 
 
necessary documents and plans, including that of common areas, after handing over the 
physical possession of the apartment or plot or building as the case may be, to the allottee by 
the promoter. 
Sub-clause ( 6) of this clause provides that every allottee, who has entered into an 
agreement of sale to take an apartment, plot or building as the case may be, under       
clause 13, shall be responsible to make necessary payments in the manner and within the 
time as specified in the said agreement and shall pay at the proper time and place, the 
proportionate share of the registration charges, municipal taxes, water and electricity 
charges, maintenance charges, ground rent, and other charges, if any, in accordance with 
such agreement. 
Sub-clause ( 7) of this clause provides that the allottee shall be liable to pay interest, at 
such rate as may be prescribed, for any delay in payment towards any amount or charges to 
be paid under sub-section ( 6). 
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that the obligations of the allottee under subsection 
(6) and the liability towards interest under sub-section ( 7) may be reduced when 
mutually agreed to between the promoter and such allottee. 
 
Sub-clause ( 9) of this clause provides that every allottee after taking possession of the 
apartment, plot or building as the case may be, shall participate towards the formation of an 
association or society or co-operative society of the allottees, or a federation of the same. 
Clause 18.—This clause relates to the establishment and incorporation of the Real 
Estate Regulatory Authority. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides the appropriate Government shall, within a 
period of one year from the date of coming into force of the proposed legislation, by 
notification, establish an Authority to be known as the Real Estate Regulatory Authority to 
exercise the powers conferred on it and to perform the functions assigned to it under the 
proposed legislation. However, the appropriate Government of two or more States or Union 
territories may, if it deems fit, establish one single Authority, also if the appropriate 
Government 
deems fit, it may establish more than one Authority in a State or Union territory, as the case 
may be. 
Clause 19.—This clause relates to the composition of the Authority. 
This clause provides that the Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not less 
than two whole-time Members to be appointed by the appropriate Government. 
Clause 20.—This clause relates to the qualification of Chairperson and Members of 
Authority. 
This clause provides that the Chairperson and other Members of the Authority shall 
be appointed by the appropriate Government on the recommendations of a Selection 
Committee consisting of such persons and in such manner as may be prescribed, from 
amongst persons having adequate knowledge of and professional experience of atleast 
twenty years in case of the Chairperson and fifteen years in the case of the Members in 
urban development, housing, real estate development, infrastructure, economics, planning, 
law, commerce, accountancy, industry, management, social service, public affairs or 
administration. However, that a person who is, or has been, in the service of the State 
Government shall not be appointed as a Chairperson unless such person has held the post 
of Additional Secretary to the Central Government or any equivalent post in the Central 
Government or in the State Government. It further provides that a person who is, or has 

 
 
145 
 
been, in the service of the State Government shall not be appointed as a Member unless 
such person has held the post of Secretary to the State Government or any equivalent post 
in the State Government or in the Central Government. 
Clause 21.—This clause relates to the term of office of Chairperson and Members. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Chairperson and Members shall hold 
office for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which they enter upon their office, 
or until they attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that before appointing any person as a 
Chairperson or Member, the appropriate Government shall satisfy itself that the person does 
not have any such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions 
as such Chairperson or Member. 
Clause 22.—This clause relates to the salary and allowances payable to Chairperson 
and Members. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the salary and allowances payable to, and 
the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other Members shall be 
such as may be prescribed and shall not be varied to their disadvantage during their tenure. 
Clause 23.—This clause relates to the administrative powers of Chairperson. 
This clause provides that the Chairperson shall have powers of general superintendence 
and directions in the conduct of the affairs of the Authority and he shall, in addition to 
presiding over the meetings of the Authority, exercise and discharge such administrative 
powers and functions of the Authority as may be prescribed. 
 
Clause 24.—This clause relates to the removal of Chairperson and Members from 
office in certain circumstances. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the appropriate Government may, by order, 
remove from office the Chairperson or other Members, if the Chairperson or such other 
Member, as the case may be,—(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or ( b) has been 
convicted of an offence, involving moral turpitude; or ( c) has become physically or mentally 
incapable of acting as a Member; or ( d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is 
likely to affect prejudicially his functions; or ( e) has so abused his position as to render his 
continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that no such Chairperson or Member shall be 
removed from his office under clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) unless he has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
Clause 25.—This clause relates to the restrictions on Chairperson or Members on 
employment after cessation of office. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to 
hold office as such, shall not—(a) accept any employment in, or connected with, the 
management or administration of, any person or organisation which has been associated 
with any work under the proposed legislation from the date on which he ceases to hold 
office, except under the appropriate Government or a local authority or in any statutory 
authority or any corporation established by or under any Central, State or provincial Act or 
a Government Company, as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956; ( b) act, for 
or on behalf of any person or organisation in connection with any specific proceeding or 
transaction or negotiation or a case to which the Authority is a party and with respect to 
which the Chairperson or such Member had, before cessation of office, acted for or provided 
advice to, the Authority; ( c) give advice to any person using information which was obtained 

 
 
146 
 
in his capacity as the Chairperson or a Member and being unavailable to or not being able to 
be made available to the public; ( d) enter into a contract of service with, or accept an 
appointment to a board of directors of, or accept an offer of employment with, an entity with 
which he had direct and significant official dealings during his term of office as such. 
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Chairperson and Members shall not 
communicate or reveal to any person any matter which has been brought under his 
consideration or known to him while acting as such. 
Clause 26.—This clause relates to the officers and other employees of the Authority. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the appropriate Government may, in 
consultation with the Authority appoint such officers and employees as it considers 
necessary 
for the efficient discharge of their functions under the proposed legislation who would 
discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the Chairperson. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the salary and allowances payable to, and 
the other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and of the employees of the 
Authority 
appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall be such as may be prescribed. 
Clause 27.—This clause relates to the meetings of the Authority. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Authority shall meet at such places and 
times, and shall follow such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its 
meetings, (including quorum at such meetings), as may be specified by the regulations made 
by the Authority. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that if the Chairperson, if for any reason, is 
unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, any other Member chosen by the Members 
present amongst themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting. 
 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that all questions which come up before any 
meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority of votes by the Members present and 
voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the person 
presiding shall have a second or casting vote. 
Clause 28.—This clause relates to the vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceeding of 
the Authority. 
This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely 
by reason of—(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Authority; or ( b) 
any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Authority; or ( c) any 
irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case. 
Clause 29.—This clause relates to the functions of Authority for promotion of real 
estate sector. 
This clause provides that the Authority shall in order to facilitate the growth and 
promotion of a healthy, transparent, efficient and competitive real estate sector make 
recommendations to the appropriate Government or the competent authority as the case 
may 
be, on,—(a) protection of interest of the allottees and promoter; ( b) measures to improve the 
processes and procedures for clearance and sanction of plans and development of projects; 
(c) measures to encourage construction of environmentally sustainable and affordable 
housing, promote standardisation including grading and use of appropriate construction 
materials, fixtures, fittings and construction techniques; ( d) measures to facilitate amicable 

 
 
147 
 
conciliation of disputes between the promoters and the allottees through dispute settlement 
forums set up by the consumer or promoter associations; ( e) any other issue that the 
Authority 
may think necessary for the promotion of the real estate sector. 
Clause 30.—This clause relates to the functions of the Authority. 
This clause provides that the functions of the Authority shall, inter alia , include—(a) 
to render advice to the appropriate Government in matters relating to the development of real 
estate sector; ( b) to publish and maintain a website of records of all real estate projects for 
which registration has been given, with such details as may be prescribed, including 
information provided in the application for which registration has been granted; ( c) to 
maintain a database, on its website, and enter the names of promoters as defaulters 
including the project details, registration for which has been revoked or have been penalised 
under the proposed legislation, with reasons therefor, for access to the general public; ( d) to 
maintain a database, on its website, and enter the names of real estate agents who have 
applied and registered under the proposed legislation, with such details as may be 
prescribed, including those whose registration has been rejected or revoked; ( e) to fix 
through regulations for each areas under its jurisdiction the standard fees, to be levied on the 
allottees by the promoter or the association of allottees, as the case may be; ( f) to ensure 
compliance of the obligations cast upon the promoters, the allottees and the real estate 
agents under the proposed legislation and the rules and regulations made thereunder; ( g) to 
ensure compliance of its regulations or orders or directions made in exercise of its powers 
under the proposed legislation; ( h) to perform such other functions as may be entrusted to 
the Authority by the appropriate Government as may be necessary to carry out the provisions 
of the proposed legislation. 
Clause 31.—This clause relates to the powers of the Authority to call for information, 
conduct investigations. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that where the Authority considers it expedient 
to do so, on a complaint relating to the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder, it may, by order in writing and recording reasons therefor call upon any promoter 
or allottee or real estate agent, as the case may be, at any time to furnish in writing such 
information or explanation relating to its affairs as the Authority may require and appoint one 
or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any promoter or allottee or the 
real estate agents, as the case may be. 
 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, while exercising the powers under sub-section ( 1), the 
Authority shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:– (i) the 
discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at such place and at 
such time as may be specified by the Authority; ( ii ) summoning and enforcing the attendance 
of persons and examining them on oath; ( iii ) issuing commissions for the examination of 
witnesses or documents; ( iv ) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
Clause 32.—This clause relates to the powers of the Authority to issue directions. 
This clause provides that the Authority may, for the purpose of discharging its functions 
under the provisions of the proposed legislation or the rules or the regulations made 
thereunder, issue such directions from time to time, to the promoters and allottees or real 

 
 
148 
 
estate agents, as the case may be, as it may consider necessary and such directions shall 
be binding on all concerned. 
Clause 33.—This clause relates to the powers of the Authority. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Authority shall have powers to impose 
penalty or interest, in regard to any contravention of obligations cast upon the promoters, 
the allottees and the real estate agents, under the proposed legislation or the rules and the 
regulations made thereunder. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the Authority shall be guided by the principles 
of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of the proposed legislation and the 
rules made thereunder, the Authority shall have powers to regulate its own procedure. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that where an issue is raised relating to agreement, 
action, omission, practice or procedure that—(a) has an appreciable prevention, restriction 
or distortion of competition in connection with the development of a real estate project; or 
(b) has effect of market power of monopoly situation being abused for affecting interest of 
allottees adversely, then the Authority, may, suo motu , make reference in respect of such 
issue to the Competition Commission of India. 
Clause 34.—This clause relates to the recovery of interest or penalty or compensation. 
This clause provides that if a promoter or an allottee or a real estate agent, as the case 
may be, fails to pay any interest or penalty or compensation imposed on him under the 
proposed legislation, it shall be recoverable from such promoter or allottee or real estate 
agent, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
Clause 35.—This clause relates to the establishment of Central Advisory Council. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Central Government may, by notification, 
establish with effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a Council to be 
known as the Central Advisory Council. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the Minister to the Government of India in 
charge of the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with housing shall be the ex officio 
Chairperson of the Central Advisory Council. 
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Central Advisory Council shall consist 
of representatives of the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Industry and Commerce, Ministry 
of Urban Development, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Ministry 
of Law and Justice, Planning Commission, National Housing Bank, Housing and Urban 
Development Corporation, five representatives of State Governments to be selected by 
rotation, five representatives of the Real Estate Regulatory Authorities to be selected by 
rotation, and any other Central Government department as notified. 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that the Central Advisory Council shall also 
consist of not more than ten members to represent the interests of real estate industry, 
consumers, construction labourers, non-governmental organisations and academic and 
research bodies in the real estate sector. 
Clause 36.–– This clause relates to the functions of the Central Advisory Council. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the functions of the Central Advisory 
Council shall be to advise and recommend the Central Government:—(a) on all matters 
concerning the implementation of the proposed legislation; ( b) on major questions of policy; 
(c) towards protection of consumer interest; ( d) to foster the growth and development of the 
real estate sector; ( e) on any other matter as may be assigned to it by the Central 
Government. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the Central Government may specify the 

 
 
149 
 
rules to give effect to the recommendations of the Central Advisory Council on matters as 
provided under sub-section ( 1). 
Clause 37.—This clause relates to the establishment of Real Estate Appellate Tribunal. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the appropriate Government shall, within a 
period of one year from the date of coming into force of the proposed legislation, by 
notification, establish an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the –– (State/Union territory) 
Real Estate Appellate Tribunal. However, the appropriate Government of two or more States 
or Union territories may, if it deems fit, establish one single Appellate Tribunal. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that any person aggrieved by any direction or 
decision or order made by the Authority or by an adjudicating officer under the proposed 
legislation may prefer an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal which shall have jurisdiction 
over the matter. 
Clause 38.—This clause relates to the application for settlement of disputes and 
appeals to Appellate Tribunal. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the appropriate Government or the competent 
authority or any person aggrieved by any direction or order or decision of the Authority or 
the adjudicating officer may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that every appeal made under sub-section ( 1) 
shall be preferred within a period of sixty days from the date on which a copy of any direction 
or decision or order made by the Authority is received by the appropriate Government or the 
competent authority or the aggrieved person and it shall be in such form, and accompanied 
by such fee as may be prescribed. However, the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal 
after the expiry of sixty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it 
within that period. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that on receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), 
the Appellate Tribunal may after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, pass such 
orders as it thinks fit. 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that the Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of 
every order made by it to the parties and to the Authority or the adjudicating officer, as the 
case may be. 
Sub-clause ( 5) of this clause provides that the appeal preferred under sub-section ( 1), 
shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to 
dispose of the appeal within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of appeal. 
However, where any such appeal could not be disposed of within the said period of ninety 
days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the 
appeal within that period. 
Sub-clause ( 6) of this clause provides that the Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose 
of examining the legality or propriety or correctness of any order or decision of the Authority 
or the adjudicating officer, on its own motion or otherwise, call for the records relevant to 
disposing of such appeal and make such orders as it thinks fit. 
40 
Clause 39.—This clause relates to the composition of the Appellate Tribunal. 
This clause provides that the Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and 
two other Members of which one shall be a Judicial Member and other shall be a Technical 
or 
Administrative Member, to be appointed by the appropriate Government. 
Clause 40.—This clause relates to the qualifications for appointment of Chairperson 

 
 
150 
 
and Members. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that a person shall not be qualified for appointment 
as the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal unless he,—(a) in the case of 
Chairperson, is or has been a Judge of the High Court; and ( b) in the case of a Judicial 
Member he has held a judicial office in the territory of India for at least seven years or has 
been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held the post in Grade I of that service 
or 
any equivalent post for at least three years, or has been an advocate for at least fifteen years 
with experience in dealing with real estate matters; and (c) in the case of a Technical or 
Administrative Member he is a person who is well versed in the field of urban development, 
housing, real estate development, infrastructure, economics, planning, law, commerce, 
accountancy, industry, management, public affairs or administration and possesses 
experience 
of at least fifteen years in the field or who has held the post in the Central Government or a 
State Government equivalent to the post of Joint Secretary to the Government of India or an 
equivalent post in the Central Government or an equivalent post in the State Government. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be appointed by the appropriate Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of 
High Court or his nominee. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the Judicial Members and Technical or 
Administrative Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the appropriate 
Government on the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of such persons 
and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
Clause 41.—This clause relates to the term of office of Chairperson and Members. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal 
or a member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold office as such for a term not exceeding five 
years from the date on which he enters upon his office, but shall not be eligible for 
re-appointment. However, in case a person, who is or has been a Judge of a High Court, has 
been appointed as Chairperson of the Tribunal, he shall not hold office after he has attained 
the age of sixty-seven years. Also, no Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative 
Member shall hold office after he has attained the age of sixty-five years. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that before appointing any person as Chairperson 
or Member, the appropriate Government shall satisfy itself that the person does not have any 
such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such 
member. 
Clause 42.—This clause relates to the salary and allowances payable to Chairperson 
and Members. 
This clause provides that the salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms 
and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be 
prescribed and shall not be varied to their disadvantage during their tenure. 
Clause 43.—This clause relates to the removal of Chairperson and Member from office 
in certain circumstances. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the appropriate Government may, in consultation 
with the Chief Justice of the High Court, remove from office of the Chairperson or any 
Judicial 
Member of the Appellate Tribunal, who – (a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; 
or ( b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the appropriate Government 

 
 
151 
 
involves moral turpitude; or ( c) has become physically or mentally incapable; or (d) has 
acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions; or ( e) 
has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the Chairperson or Judicial Member shall 
not be removed from his office except by an order made by the appropriate Government after 
an inquiry made by Judge of the High Court in which such Chairperson or Judicial Member 
has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in respect of those charges. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the appropriate Government may suspend 
from the office of the Chairperson or Judicial Member in respect of whom a reference of 
conducting an inquiry has been made to the Judge of the High Court under sub-section ( 2), 
until the appropriate Government passes an order on receipt of the report of inquiry made by 
the Judge of the High Court on such reference. 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that the appropriate Government may, by rules, 
regulate the procedure for inquiry referred to in sub-section ( 2). 
Sub-clause ( 5) of this clause provides that the Technical or Administrative Member 
may be removed from his office by an order of the appropriate Government on the grounds 
specified in sub-section ( 1) and in accordance with the procedure notified by the appropriate 
Government. 
Clause 44.—This clause relates to the officers and other employees of the Appellate 
Tribunal. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the appropriate Government shall provide 
the Appellate Tribunal with such officers and employees as, it may deem fit. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the officers and employees of the Appellate 
Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the general superintendence of its Chairperson. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that salary and allowances payable to, and the 
terms and other conditions of service of the officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 
Clause 45.—This clause relates to the vacancies. 
This clause provides that if, for reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy 
occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal, the appropriate 
Government shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of the proposed 
legislation to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Appellate 
Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled. 
Clause 46.—This clause relates to the powers of Tribunal. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound 
by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the 
principles of natural justice. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions of the proposed 
legislation, the Appellate Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the Appellate Tribunal shall also not be 
bound by the rules of evidence contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that the Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the 
purpose of discharging its functions under the proposed legislation, the same powers as are 
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following 

 
 
152 
 
matters, namely:—(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; ( b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; ( c) 
receiving evidence on affidavits; ( d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents; ( e)reviewing its decisions; ( f) dismissing an application for default or directing it 
ex-parte ; and (h) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
Sub-clause ( 5) of this clause provides that all proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 
for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code, and the Appellate Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
Clause 47.—This clause relates to the administrative powers of Chairperson of the 
Appellate Tribunal. 
This clause provides that the Chairperson shall have powers of general superintendence 
and direction in the conduct of the affairs of the Appellate Tribunal and he shall, in addition 
to presiding over the meetings of the Appellate Tribunal, exercise and discharge such 
administrative powers and functions of the Appellate Tribunal as may be prescribed. 
Clause 48.—This clause relates to the right to legal representation. 
This clause provides that the applicant or appellant may either appear in person or 
authorise one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or 
legal practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate 
Tribunal. 
Clause 49.—This clause relates to the orders passed by the Appellate Tribunal to be 
executable as a decree. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that every order made by the Appellate Tribunal 
under the proposed legislation shall be executable by the Appellate Tribunal as a decree of 
civil court, and for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil 
court. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may transmit any order made by it to a civil court 
having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if it were a decree 
made by that court. 
Clause 50.—This clause relates to the appeal to High Court. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that any person aggrieved by any decision or 
order of the Appellate Tribunal, may, file an appeal to the High Court, within a period of 
ninety days from the date of communication of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal, 
to him, on anyone or more of the grounds specified in section 100 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908. However, the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the 
said period of ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from preferring the appeal in time. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that no appeal shall lie against any decision or 
order made by the Appellate Tribunal with the consent of the parties. 
Clause 51.—This clause relates to the punishment for non-registration under clause 3. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that if any promoter contravenes the provisions 
of clause 3, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend upto ten per cent. of the 
estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the Authority. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that if any promoter does not comply with the 
orders, decisions or directions issued under sub-section ( 1) or continues to violate the 

 
 
153 
 
provisions of clause 3, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend upto three years or with fine which may extend to a further ten per cent. of the 
estimated cost of the real estate project, or with both. 
Clause 52.—This clause relates to the penalty for contravention of clause 4. 
This clause provides that if any promoter knowingly provides false information or 
contravenes the provisions of clause 4, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend upto 
five per cent. of the estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the Authority. 
Clause 53.—This clause relates to the penalty for contravention of other provisions of 
the Act. 
This clause provides that if any promoter contravenes any other provisions of the 
proposed legislation, other than that provided under clause 3 or clause 4, or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend up to five per 
cent. of the estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the Authority. 
Clause 54.—This clause relates to the penalty for non-registration and contravention 
under clauses 9 and 10. 
This clause provides that if any real estate agent wilfully fails to comply with or 
contravenes the provisions of clause 9 or clause 10, he shall be liable to a penalty of ten 
thousand rupees for every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively 
extend up to five per cent. of the cost of immovable property, for which the sale or purchase 
has been facilitated as determined by the Authority. 
Clause 55.—This clause relates to the penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders 
of the Authority by Promoter. 
This clause provides that if any promoter, who wilfully fails to comply with, or 
contravenes any of the orders or directions of the Authority, he shall be liable to a penalty for 
every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up to five 
per cent. of the estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the Authority. 
Clause 56.—This clause relates to the penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders 
of Appellate Tribunal by Promoter. 
This clause provides that if any promoter, who wilfully fails to comply with, or 
contravenes any of the orders, decisions or directions of the Appellate Tribunal, he shall be 
liable to a penalty for every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively 
extend up to ten per cent. of the estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by 
the 
Appellate Tribunal. 
Clause 57.—This clause relates to the penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders 
of the Authority by allottee. 
This clause provides that if any allottee, who wilfully fails to comply with, or contravenes 
any of the orders, decisions or directions of the Authority he shall be liable to a penalty for 
the period during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up to five 
per cent. of the apartment cost as determined by the Authority. 
Clause 58.—This clause relates to the penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders 
of Appellate Tribunal by allottee. 
This clause provides that if any allottee, who wilfully fails to comply with, or contravenes 
any of the orders or directions of the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, he shall be 
liable 
to a penalty for the period during which such default continues, which may cumulatively 
extend up to ten per cent. of the apartment cost as determined by the Appellate Tribunal. 

 
 
154 
 
Clause 59.—This clause relates to the offences by Companies. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that where an offence under the proposed 
legislation has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was 
committed was in charge of, or was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the 
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. However, 
nothing contained in this sub-section, shall render any such person liable to any punishment 
under the proposed legislation if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section ( 1), where an offence under the proposed legislation has been committed by a 
company, and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance 
of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be 
deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
Clause 60.—This clause relates to the compounding of offences. 
This clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, the offence punishable under clause 51 of the proposed legislation may, 
either before or after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by the court on such 
terms and conditions and on payment of such sums as may be prescribed. However, the 
sum 
prescribed shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the fine which may be 
imposed for the offence so compounded. 
Clause 61.—This clause relates to the power to adjudicate. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that for the purpose of adjudging compensation 
under clauses 12, 14 and 16 the Authority shall appoint any officer not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the State Government to be an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry in the 
prescribed manner, after giving any person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard. However, if any person whose complaint, in respect of matters covered under clauses 
12, 14 and 16 is pending before the Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum or the Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Commission or the National Consumer Redressal Commission, 
established under section 9 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, on or before the 
commencement of the proposed legislation, he may, with the permission of such Forum or 
Commission, as the case may be, withdraw the complaint pending before it and file an 
application before the adjudicating officer under the proposed legislation. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the application for adjudging compensation 
under sub-section ( 1), shall be dealt with by the adjudicating officer as expeditiously as 
possible and dispose of the same within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of 
such application. However, where any such application could not be disposed of within the 
said period of ninety days, the adjudicating officer shall record his reasons in writing for not 
disposing of the application within that period. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that while holding an inquiry the adjudicating 
officer shall have power to summon and enforce the attendance of any person acquainted 

 
 
155 
 
with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to produce any document 
which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to the subject 
matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person has failed to 
comply with the provisions of any of the sections specified in sub-section ( 1), he may direct 
to pay such compensation or interest, as the case may be, as he thinks fit in accordance with 
the provisions of any of those sections. 
Clause 62.—This clause relates to the factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating 
officer. 
This clause provides that while adjudging the quantum of compensation or interest, as 
the case may be, under section 61, the adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the 
following factors, namely:– (a) the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, 
wherever quantifiable, made as a result of the default; ( b) the amount of loss caused as a 
result of the default; ( c) the repetitive nature of the default. 
Clause 63.—This clause relates to the grants and loans by the Central Government. 
This clause provides that the Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament in this behalf, make to the Authority grants and loans of such sums of money 
as that Government may consider necessary. 
Clause 64.—This clause relates to the grants and loans by the State Government. 
This clause provides that the State Government may, after due appropriation made by 
State Legislature by law in this behalf, make to the Authority, grants and loans of such sums 
of money as the State Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of the 
proposed legislation. 
Clause 65.—This clause relates to the Constitution of Fund. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the appropriate Government shall constitute 
a fund to be called the “Real Estate Fund” and there shall be credited thereto—(a) all 
Government grants received by the Authority; ( b) the fees received under the proposed 
legislation; ( c) the interest accrued on the amounts referred to in clauses ( a) to ( b). 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the Fund shall be applied for meeting – (a) 
the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other Members and the 
administrative expenses including the salaries and allowances payable to the officers and 
other employees of the Authority and the Appellate Tribunal; ( b) the other expenses of the 
Authority in connection with the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of the 
proposed legislation. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the Fund shall be administered by a committee 
of such Members of the Authority as may be determined by the Chairperson. 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that the committee appointed under sub-section ( 3) 
shall spend monies out of the Fund for carrying out the objects for which the Fund has been 
constituted. 
Clause 66.––This clause relates to the crediting sums realised by way of penalties to 
Consolidated Fund of India or State account. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that all sums realised, by way of penalties, 
imposed by the Appellate Tribunal or the Authority, in the Union territories, shall be credited 
to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that all sums realised, by way of penalties, 
imposed by the Appellate Tribunal or the Authority, in a State, shall be credited to such 
account as the State Government may specify. 
Clause 67.—This clause relates to the budget, accounts and audit. 

 
 
156 
 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Authority shall prepare a budget, 
maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of 
accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government in consultation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the accounts of the Authority shall be 
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified 
by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India and any person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the 
Authority under the proposed legislation shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular shall 
have the right to demand and production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other 
documents and papers, and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority. 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that the accounts of the Authority, as certified 
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this 
behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the appropriate 
Government by the Authority and the appropriate Government shall cause the audit report to 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament or, as the 
case 
may be, before the State Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of 
two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House. 
Clause 68.—This clause relates to the annual report. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Authority shall prepare once in every 
year, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government— 
(a) a description of all the activities of the Authority for the previous year; ( b) the annual 
accounts for the previous year; and ( c) the programmes of work for the coming year. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that a copy of the report received under subsection 
(1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament 
or, as the case may be, before the State Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, where 
it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that 
House. 
Clause 69.—This clause relates to the bar of jurisdiction. 
This clause provides that no civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter which the Authority or the adjudicating officer or the 
Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under the proposed legislation to determine and no 
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or 
to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under the proposed legislation. 
Clause 70.—This clause relates to the delegation. 
This clause provides that the Authority may, by general or special order in writing, 
delegate to any member, officer of the Authority or any other person subject to such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under 
the proposed legislation (except the power to make regulations under clause 74) as it may 
deem necessary. 
Clause 71.—This clause relates to the power of appropriate Government to supersede 
the Authority. 

 
 
157 
 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that if, at any time, the appropriate Government 
is of the opinion,—(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, 
it is unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the 
provisions of the proposed legislation; or ( b) that the Authority has persistently defaulted 
in complying with any direction given by the appropriate Government under the proposed 
legislation or in the discharge of the functions or performance of the duties imposed on it by 
or under the provisions of the proposed legislation and as a result of such default the 
financial position of the Authority or the administration of the Authority has suffered; or (c) 
that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do; the 
appropriate 
Government may, by notification, supersede the Authority for such period, not exceeding 
six months, as may be specified in the notification and appoint a person or persons as the 
President or the Governor, as the case may be, may direct to exercise powers and discharge 
functions under the proposed legislation. However, before issuing any such notification, the 
appropriate Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to make 
representations against the proposed supersession and shall consider the representations, 
if any, of the Authority. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that upon the publication of a notification under 
sub-section ( 1) superseding the Authority,— (a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, 
as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such; ( b) all the powers, functions 
and duties which may, by or under the provisions of the proposed legislation, be exercised 
or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub-section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by the person or persons referred to in 
sub-section ( 1); and ( c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the 
Authority is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), vest in the appropriate Government. 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that on or before the expiration of the period of 
supersession specified in the notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the appropriate 
Government shall reconstitute the Authority by a fresh appointment of its Chairperson and 
other Members and in such case any person who had vacated his office under clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for re-appointment. 
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that the appropriate Government shall cause a 
copy of the notification issued under sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken 
under this clause and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each House 
of Parliament or, as the case may be, before the State Legislature, or the Union territory 
Legislature, as the case may be, where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature 
consists of one House, before that House. 
Clause 72.—This clause relates to the powers of appropriate Government to issue 
directions to the Authority and obtain reports and returns. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that without prejudice to the foregoing provisions 
of the proposed legislation, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers and in performance 
of its functions under the proposed legislation, be bound by such directions on questions of 
policy, as the appropriate Government may give in writing to it from time to time. However, 
the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views before 
any direction is given under this sub-section. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that if any dispute arises between the appropriate 
Government and the Authority as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the 
decision of the appropriate Government thereon shall be final. 

 
 
158 
 
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the Authority shall furnish to the appropriate 
Government such returns or other information with respect to its activities as the appropriate 
Government may, from time to time, require. 
Clause 73.—This clause relates to the power of appropriate Government to make rules. 
This clause empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying out the 
provisions of the proposed legislation. 
Clause 74.—This clause relates to the power to make regulations. 
This clause empowers the Authority to make regulations for carrying out the provisions 
of the proposed legislation. 
Clause 75.—This clause relates to the laying of rules. 
This clause provides that every rule, regulation and notification made under the 
proposed legislation shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the House of 
Parliament or State Legislature, as the case may be. 
Clause 76.—This clause relates to the Members, etc., to be public servants. 
This clause provides that the Chairperson, Members and other officers and employees 
of the Authority and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Clause 77.—This clause relates to the application of other laws not barred. 
This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation shall be in addition 
to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 
Clause 78.—This clause relates to the act to have overriding effect. 
This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therein contained in any other law for the time being 
in force. However, where a State has enacted a law for regulation of the real estate sector, 
and 
such State law is not inconsistent with the proposed legislation, then, the State Government, 
to that extent, may not apply the provisions of the proposed legislation in the State. 
Clause 79.—This clause relates to the protection of action taken in good faith. 
This clause provides that no prosecution or other legal proceedings can be instituted 
against the appropriate Government or the Authority or any of their officers, etc., for anything 
done in good faith under the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder. 
Clause 80.—This clause relates to power to remove difficulties. 
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the 
provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central Government may make provisions, by 
order, published in the Official Gazette, for removing the difficulty. These orders must be 
consistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation. However, no order shall be made 
under this clause after the expiry of two years from the commencement of the proposed 
legislation. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that every order made under this clause shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 18 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Real Estate 
Regulatory Authority to exercise the powers conferred on it and to perform the functions 
assigned to it under the proposed legislation. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 22 of the Bill provides 
for the salary and allowances payable to the Chairperson and the Members of the Authority. 
Sub-clause ( 2) of clause 26 of the Bill provides for salary and allowances payable to the 

 
 
159 
 
officers and employees of the Authority. 
2. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 35 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Central 
Advisory Council to perform the functions assigned to it under the proposed legislation. 
3. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 37 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Appellate 
Tribunal to hear appeals from the decisions, directions or orders of the Authority or the 
adjudicating officer. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 42 of the Bill provides for the salary and 
allowances payable to the Chairperson and the Members of the Appellate Tribunal. 
Subclause 
(3) of clause 44 of the Bill provides for salary and allowances payable to the officers 
and employees of the Appellate Tribunal. 
4. Clause 63 of the Bill provides for grants and loans by the Central Government to the 
Authority of such sums of money as considered necessary. 
5. Clause 64 of the Bill provides for grants and loans by the State Government to the 
Authority, of such sums of money as considered necessary for the purposes of the proposed 
legislation. 
6. The establishment of the Real Estate Regulatory Authorities and Real Estate Appellate 
Tribunal for the Union territories without legislatures, namely—Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands; Lakshadweep; Dadra and Nagar Haveli; Daman and Diu; and Chandigarh, may not 
be necessary at this stage and thus no expenses are likely to be incurred. However, if the 
need for an Authority or an Appellate Tribunal is felt for any of the said Union territories in 
future, the responsibility and functions may be entrusted to the Authority or the Appellate 
Tribunal of the adjoining State or Union territory. 
7. The establishment of the Real Estate Regulatory Authorities and the Real Estate 
Appellate Tribunal for the Union territory of Delhi is to be carried out by the Ministry of 
Urban Development, which is the appropriate Government in relation to the Union territory 
of Delhi, for which some expenses are likely to be borne. 
8. The total financial implication in terms of recurring and non-recurring expenditure 
involved in carrying out the various functions under the Bill would be borne respectively by 
the State Government and the Central Government. However, it is not possible to estimate 
the exact recurring and non-recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India at 
this stage. 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
Clause 73 of the Bill seeks to empower the appropriate Government to make rules to 
provide for—(a) information and documents for application to the Authority for registration 
under clause ( j) of sub-section ( 2) of section 4; ( b) conditions under which registration of a 
promoter may be renewed under section 6; ( c) the form and manner of making application 
and 
fee and documents to be accompanied with such application as under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 9; ( d) the period, manner and conditions under which the registration is to be granted 
under sub-section ( 3) of section 9; ( e) the validity of the period of registration and the 
manner and fee for renewal under sub-section ( 7) of section 9; ( f) the maintenance and 
preservation of books of account, records and documents under clause ( b) of section 10; ( g) 
the discharge of other functions by the real estate agent under clause ( e) of section 10; ( h) 
the rate of interest payable under section 12; ( i) the form and particulars of agreement under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 13; ( j) the rate of interest payable under clause ( b) of sub-section 

 
 
160 
 
(1) of section 16; ( k) the rate of interest payable under sub-section ( 7) of section 17; ( l) 
constitution of a Selection Committee for the appointment of Chairperson and Members of 
the Authority, and the manner of selection under section 20; ( m) the salaries and allowances 
payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other 
Members of the Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 22; ( n) the administrative powers 
of the Chairperson under section 23; ( o) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the 
other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and other employees of the Authority 
under sub-section ( 2) of section 26; ( p) details to be published on the website as under 
clause ( b) and under clause ( d) of section 30; ( q) the additional functions which may be 
performed by the Authority under clause ( iv ) of sub-section ( 2) of section 31; ( r) the manner 
of recovery of interest, penalty and compensation under section 34; ( s) recommendations 
received from the Central Advisory Council under sub-section ( 2) of section 36; ( t) the form 
and manner and fee for filling of appeal under sub-section ( 2) of section 38; ( u) constitution 
of a Selection Committee for the appointment of Members of the Tribunal, and the manner of 
selection under sub-section ( 3) of section 40; ( v) the salaries and allowances payable to, and 
the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other Members of the 
Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 1) of section 42; ( w) the procedure for inquiry of the 
charges against the Chairperson or Judicial Member of the Tribunal under sub-section ( 4) of 
section 43; ( x) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 3) of 
section 44; ( y) any other powers of the Tribunal under clause ( h) of sub-section ( 4) of section 
46; ( z) the powers of the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal under section 47; ( za ) the 
terms and conditions and the payment of such sum for compounding of the offences under 
section 60; ( zb ) the manner of inquiry under sub-section ( 1) of section 61; ( zc ) the form to be 
specified in which the Authority shall prepare a budget, maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 67; ( zd ) the form in which and time at which the Authority shall prepare an annual 
report under sub-section ( 1) of section 68; and ( ze ) any other matter which is to be, or may 
be, 
prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be made, by rules. 
2. Clause 74 of the Bill empowers the Authority to make regulations to provide for— 
(a) the form and manner of making application and fee payable herewith under sub-
section( 1) 
of section 4; ( b) the fee for extension of registration under section 6; ( c) such other 
information 
and documents required under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11; ( d) display of site 
and layout plans along-with specifications, approved by the competent authority, for display 
under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 3) of section 11; ( e) preparation and maintenance of other 
details under sub-section ( 6) of section 11; ( f) time, places and the procedure in regard to 
transaction of business at the meetings of the Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 27; 
(g) standard fees to be levied by the promoter on the allottees or the association of allottees 
under clause ( e) of section 30; and ( h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
specified by regulation or in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations. 
3. The matters in respect of which the said rules and regulations may be made are 
matters of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practicable to provide 
for them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a 
normal character. 

 
 
161 
 
  

 
 
162 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
A 
BILL 
 
 
 
to establish the Real Estate Regulatory Authority for regulation and promotion of the real 
estate sector and to ensure sale of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in 
an efficient and transparent manner and to protect the interest of consumers in the real 
estate sector and establish the Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the decisions, 
directions or orders of the Authority and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Dr. Girija Vyas, Minister of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation) 
 
 
 
GMGIPMRND—1661RS—05-08-2013. 
 