1 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2013-2014) 
                                
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
                 MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
FUNCTIONING OF DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY PARTICUL ARLY 
WITH REFERENCE TO AFFORDABLE HOUSES IN DELHI AND ITS ROLE IN 
REGULARIZATION OF UNAUTHORIZED COLONIES IN DELHI AN D 
MATTER CONNECTED THERETO  
 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April 2014/Vaisakha, 1936(Saka) 
 
 
31 


2 
 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2013-2014) 
 
                                
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
  
FUNCTIONING OF DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY PARTICUL ARLY 
WITH REFERENCE TO AFFORDABLE HOUSES IN DELHI AND ITS ROLE IN 
REGULARIZATION OF UNAUTHORIZED COLONIES IN DELHI AN D 
MATTER CONNECTED THERETO  
 
   
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on  22.04. 2014 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 April 2014/Vaisakha, 1936(Saka) 
 
 


3 
 
 
   C.U.D No. _____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
(C) 2014 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Thirteenth Edition) and printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 
 
 

4 
 
CONTENTS  
 
         
           PAGE 
Part I  
CHAPTER I Introductory 3-7 
CHAPTER II Construction of Affordable Houses  8-45  
CHAPTER III Regularization of Unauthorized Colonies  and Role of 
DDA 
46 -65  
CHAPTER IV Miscellaneous Issues 66 -86  
Part II  
Observations /Recommendations 87 -129  
 
Annexures 
 
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 21st  January, 2013, 7 th  February, 
2013, 8 th  and 31 st  October, 2013, 6 th  November, 2013, 12 th  February, 2014 and 12 th  
March, 2014. 
  

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
3. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
4. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
7. Smt. Kaisar Jahan 
8. Shri Kailash Joshi 
9. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
10 Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
11. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
12. Shri P.C. Mohan 
13. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
14. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
15. Dr. Ramshankar  
16. Shri Ratan Singh 
17. Shri Anjan Kumar M. Yadav 
18. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Anil Desai 
23. Dr. M.S. Gil 
24. Md. Nadimul Haque 
25. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
27. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
28. Shri Avinash Pande 
29. Shri Ajay Sancheti  
30. Shri Amar Singh 
31. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 
  

6 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S Malha   -  Director 
3. Smt. J.M.  Sinha   -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sumit Kumar Grover  -  Executive Assistant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

7 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2013-14) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit t he Report on their behalf, present 
the Thirty-First Report on the subject “Functioning  of Delhi Development Authority 
particularly with reference to Affordable Houses in  Delhi and its Role in Regularization 
of Unauthorized Colonies in Delhi and matter connec ted thereto” relating to the Ministry 
of 
 Urban Development.  
 
2. The Committee took the oral-evidence of the repr esentatives  of the Ministry of  
Urban Development, DDA, NDMC, MCD and Registrar Co- operative Societies of 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi ( GNCTD) on 21 st  January, 2013, 8 th  & 
31 st  October,2013, 6 th  November, 2013 and 12 th  February, 2014. The Committee also 
took oral evidence of Shri Sandeep Dixit, MP, LS on 7 th  February, 2013. The Committee 
also heard the view-points of Shri Mahabal Mishra, MP, LS, and representatives of 
Resident Welfare Associations of various colonies in Delhi on 6 th  November, 2013. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the report at their sitting held on        
12 th  March, 2014. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to th e Officers of Ministry of Urban 
Development and DDA, NDMC, MCD and Registrar Co-ope rative Societies of 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi ( GNCTD) for furnishing the material 
and information which the Committee desired from ti me to time  in connection with the 
examination of the subject and also for  appearing before the  Committee. 
5. The Committee convey their gratitude to S/Shri S andeep Dixit and  Shri Mahabal 
Mishra, MPs, LS and the representatives of Resident  Welfare Associations (RWAs) of 
various colonies for  sharing their views and sugge stions and also for  appearing before 
the Committee. 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the r ecommendations/observations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in part II of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;           SHARAD YADAV 
12 March, 2014 
                             CHAIRMAN 
21 Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Urban Development  
 
 
 

8 
 
PART - I 
CHAPTER-1 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
INCEPTION AND ROLE OF DDA 
 
 
 In 1947 Delhi witnessed a vast migration increasin g its population from 7 lakhs to 
17 lakhs leading to a critical shortage of urban in frastructure and a virtual collapse of 
civic services. A large population of migrants was forced to occupy open spaces. This 
paved a new direction and need for a planned develo pment of the city. Delhi 
Improvement Trust and Municipal Body, the two local  bodies of the time, were not 
adequately equipped to cope up with the changing sc enario. In 1950, the central 
government appointed a Committee under the chairman ship of Shri G. D. Birla to check 
and plan Delhi’s rapid and haphazard growth. This C ommittee recommended a Single 
Planning & Controlling Authority for all the urban areas of Delhi. Consequently, the Delhi 
Development (Provisional) Authority - DDPA - was co nstituted by promulgating the 
Delhi (Control of Building Operations) Ordinance, 1 955 (replaced by the Delhi 
Development Act, 1957) with the primary objective of ensuring the development of Delhi 
in accordance with a plan. Thereafter on 27th Decem ber 1957, Delhi Development 
Authority acquired its present name and took on its historic role as  the 9th builder of the 
city of Delhi. 
 
1.2 The Charter of DDA, as ratified by Section 6 of  the Delhi Development Act, 1957, 
lists the objectives of the Authority as:- 
 A) To formulate a Master Plan for covering the pre sent and future  growth of 
Delhi and to promote and secure the development of Delhi according to the plan 
covering all the possible activities. 
 B) To acquire, hold, manage and dispose of land an d other property. 
 C) To carry out building, engineering, mining and other operations, and 
 D) To provide services and amenities incidental to  the above. 

9 
 
1.3 The Delhi Development Authority (DDA) a body co rporate has been constituted 
under the Section 3 of the Delhi Development Act, 1 957.  It has a legal status with 
common seal and succession.  The status of DDA is t hat it happens to be an 
instrumentality of the State, which can sue and be sued in its own name. As per Section 
3 (3) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the 'Authority' consists of :- 
• A Chairman who shall be the Administrator of the U nion Territory of Delhi, ex-
officio ; 
• A Vice-Chairman to the appointed by the Central Go vernment; 
• A Finance and Accounts member to be appointed by t he Central Government; 
• An Engineer member to be appointed by the Central Government;  
• As and when the Municipal Corporation of Delhi is established, two 
representatives of that  Corporation to be elected by the Councilors and 
alderman of the Corporation from amongst themselves; 
• As and when the Metropolitan Council for the Union  Territory of Delhi is 
constituted, three representatives of that Council to be elected by the members 
of the Council from amongst themselves and until th at Council is constituted, 
three representatives of the Interim Metropolitan C ouncil to be elected by the 
members of the Interim Metropolitan Council from amongst themselves; 
• Three other persons to be nominated by the Central  Government of whom one 
shall be a person with experience of town planning or architecture; and  
• The Commissioner of the Municipal Corporation of D elhi, ex-officio ; 
 
1.4  The total members nominated by the Central Gov ernment in the Delhi 
Development Authority (DDA) comprise of Joint Secre tary, Ministry of Urban 
Development; Member Secretary, NCR Planning Board; Chief Planner of Town & 
Country Planning Organization (TCPO) and Commission er, Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi (MCD).  
 
 
1.5  With the enactment of the Constitution (Sixty- ninth Amendment) Act, 1991, the 
Union Territory of Delhi stood to be called the Nat ional Capital Territory of Delhi. Under 

10 
 
article 239 of the Constitution of India, the Admin istrator of the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi became the Lieutenant Governor. A Legislat ive Assembly of Delhi with a 
Council of Ministers under Articles 239 AA & 239 AB  of the Constitution of India was 
created. Presently, 3 members of Delhi Legislative Assembly and 2 members of 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi are appointed as Boa rd members of DDA. The 
Legislative Assembly of Delhi has powers to make la ws in respect of all the 68 matters 
in the State list excepting public sector, police and land.  
1.6  In accordance with the provisions made in Sect ion 12 of the Delhi Development 
Act, 1957 no development of land shall be undertake n or carried out in any area by any 
person or body (including a Department of Governmen t) unless that area is a 
development area and permission for such developmen t has been obtained in writing 
from the Delhi Development Authority (DDA).  Further, after the coming into operation of 
any of the Plans in any area, no development shall be undertaken or carried out in that 
area unless such development is also in accordance with such Plans i.e. the Plans of 
DDA. As per Sections 7and 8 of the Delhi Developmen t Act, 1957, Master Plans and 
Zonal Plans shall be prepared for development of De lhi. The Act requires the DDA to 
carry out a civic survey and prepare a Master Plan for Delhi. 
 
1.7 The vice-chairman of DDA  is under the dual con trol of Lieutenant Governor of 
Delhi as well as the Union  Ministry of Urban Devel opment.  This at times creates 
complex situations for him while taking vital decisions. 
 
1.8 According to Result Framework Document 2013-14 for Delhi Development 
Authority(DDA), following are the Vision, Mission, Objectives and Functions of DDA: 
  
 Vision 
 
  To promote and secure planned development of Delh i, facilitate 
improvement in the quality of life by creation of quality. 
  

11 
 
Mission  
  To provide regulatory framework for achieving int egrated sustainable 
development of Delhi, provide accommodation to all its citizens, carry out 
developmental activities for continuous improvement  of living and environmental 
infrastructure in the city. 
 Objectives 
 
1. Construction of houses for Urban Poor 
2. Construction of houses for other categories 
3. In-situ rehabilitation of JJ Clusters 
4. Construction of Community Halls 
5. Construction of Urban Extension Road-II which co nnects NH-1, NH-10 & NH-8 
6. Lighting of DDA Parks 
7. Fencing of vacant DDA Land 
8. Facilitation of Review of Master Plan Delhi- 202 1 
9. Bio-diversity Parks i) Neela Hauz-3.9 Hac, ii) N orthern Ridge- 87 Hac, iii)  Tilpat 
 Valley- 70 Hac 
 
Functions 
 
 
1.9 To assist Authority and MoUD in implementation of master plan, change of land 
use and mid term review of master plan by involving  experts.  Preparation of manuals 
comprising regulations, policies and guidelines.  C o-ordinate with different local bodies 
and agencies to effectively implement the same.  En sure efficient public interface by 
introducing a simple procedure with an effective re dressal system and an alternate 
Dispute Settlement Mechanism.  Planned development of residential, commercial and 
other facilities in an effective manner.  Scientifi c and modern record management with 
integrated MIS.  Providing prompt disposal of griev ances and VIP references, by having 
a well trained proactive staff.  Achieve a slum fre e Delhi through in-situ development.  
Decongest the city roads by making urban extension roads.  Create green lungs by 
having more biodiversity parks, green areas and sports complexes. 
 

12 
 
1.10 Also, the objects of the Authority are to prom ote and secure the development of 
Delhi according to plan and for that purpose, the A uthority have the power to acquire, 
hold, manage and other operations, to execute works in connection with supply of water 
and electricity, disposal of sewage and other services and amenities and generally to do 
anything necessary or expedient for purpose of such  development and for purposes 
incidental thereto. 
 
1.11 In the succeeding chapters the details of func tioning of DDA in general and 
construction of affordable housing, regularization of unauthorized colonies and 
encroachment of DDA lands are dealt with. 
  

13 
 
Chapter-II 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSES 
 
Population  Growth and Affordable Housing 
 
 As per Census data, the main components of the popu lation growth are natural 
growth and in-migration. The share of natural growt h during the last three decades 
during 1981-2001 has been between 55-60 percent.  
 
2.2 As per Regional Plan-2021 for NCR (review under  process), over the years 
component of natural growth has increased and share of net migration has declined. On 
an average, 1.2 to 1.5 lakhs migrants were added pe r annum in the net growth of 
Delhi’s population from 1971-2001. The share of out -migration from Delhi has also 
increased from 2.42 lakhs in 1961-1971 to 4.58 lakhs during 1991-2001. Delhi has been 
witnessing a high rate of in-migration, although th ere was a decline in the percentage 
share of net migrants in the decadal growth of popu lation in NCT Delhi from 45.1% in 
1961-1971 to 39.8% in 1991-2001. However, in absolu te terms the number of migrants 
increased, continuously. 
 
2.3 As per Census-2011 (Provisional), the total pop ulation of Delhi is 167.5 lakhs 
with a decadal growth of 21% and density of population of 11,297 persons per sq.km. In 
absolute terms, the population has increased by 29. 0 lakhs during 2001-2011 as 
against 44.3 lakhs in the previous decade. 
 
2.4 However, the decadal growth of population in th e Delhi during the period 1951-
1991 has been consistently above 50%, but in the la st two decades the growth has 
steadily declined from 47.0% in 1991-2001 to 21.0% in 2001-2011.  
 
 
 

14 
 
Definition of affordable Housing 
 
2.5 Affordable house is that which is within the re ach of lower and middle income 
group families in that particular region.  Affordab le, in this context means that monthly 
cost incurred as repayment of 25 years loan period which does not exceed the average 
monthly rent of the region.  The plinth area for af fordable house is 26sqm.  for EWS 
houses and 42sqm  for LIG houses.   
Housing Availability and Existing Housing 
 
2.6  The first urban focused housing policy, National Ur ban Housing and Habitat 
Policy 2007 aims at promoting sustainable developme nt of habitat in the country with a 
view to ensuring equitable supply of land shelter a nd services at affordable prices to all 
sections of the society.  However, given the magnit ude of the housing shortage and the 
staggering requirement of funds amounting to Rs. 3. 61 lakh crores to meet the cost of 
construction only for overcoming the shortage, it i s obvious that public sector efforts 
alone will not suffice in fulfilling the requiremen t due to budgetary constraints of both 
Central and State Governments.  Involvement of mult iple stakeholders namely; private 
sector, co-operative sector, industrial sector for labour housing and the services, 
institutional sector for employees housing has been emphasized in the NUHHP. 
 
2.7 The NUHHP aims as forging strong partnerships b etween the public private and 
co-operative sector for accelerated growth in the h ousing sector and sustainable 
development of habitat.  10-15% of land in every ne w public / private housing project or 
20-25% of FAR which is greater will be reserved for  EWS/ LIG housing through 
appropriate legal stipulations and spatial incentiv es.  The policy seeks to augment 
housing stock at an accelerated rate both on owners hip and rental basis with a view to 
overcoming shortage of EWS/ LIG unit. 
 
2.8 The Committee inquired DDA about the main featu res of National Urban Housing 
and Habitat Policy 2007 relating to construction of  affordable houses.  The DDA replied 
as under:- 

15 
 
 
 "The magnitude of housing shortage was estimated b y a Technical Group in the 
context of formulation of the 11th Five Year Plan.  The Technical Group 
estimated the housing shortage at the end of the 10 th Plan to be around 24.7 
million for 67.4 million households.  The Group fur ther estimated that 99% of this 
shortage pertains to EWS & LIG sectors.  During the  11th Plan the Group 
estimated that the total housing requirements (incl uding backlog) will be to the 
tune of 26.53 million units for 75.01 million  households." 
  
2.9 On being inquired by the Committee about the co mpliance of NUHHP, by DDA in 
connection with constructions of affordable houses, DDA replied as under: 
  " No role has been assigned to DDA under this pol icy." 
  
2.10  When asked about the reasons for the same, DDA in its written reply stated as 
under: 
 “Under the National Urban Housing and Habitat Poli cy 2007, Chapter 3.3 the role 
of Urban Local Bodies/Development Authorities/Housi ng Boards has been 
provided as under: 
 
Create a Supportive Environment 
 
i)   Develop capacity building at the local level to d esign and take up inner-city 
development schemes, in-situ slum upgradation proje cts and slum relocation 
projects through suitable training programmes. 
ii)   Implement Central and State sector schemes pertai ning to housing and 
infrastructure sector at the city level with approp riate provision for EWS and LIG 
beneficiaries in the Master Plan as well as Zonal Plans. 
iii)   Enforce regulatory measures for planned developme nt in an effective manner. 
iv)   Check the growth of unauthorized colonies, new sl ums, unauthorized 
construction, extensions of existing properties and  commercialization of 
residential areas. 
 
Urban Planning 
 
v)  Ensure that Development Plans/Master Plans as well  as Zonal Plans and Local 
Area Plans are made and updated regularly so that a dequate provision is made 
for the homeless as well as slum dwellers. 
 
vi)   Prepare Master Plan and Metropolitan Plans in con sonance with the concerned 
District Plan and the State Regional Plan. 
 

16 
 
vii)   Identify city specific housing shortages and prep are city level Urban Housing and 
Habitat Action Plans for time bound implementation.   Wherever necessary and 
feasible, ULBs as well as other parastatal would pr ovide viability gap funding 
especially for EWS/LIG housing and supporting infra structure so as to ensure 
better affordability by the poor and financial viab ility of slum role of Government, 
Urban Local Bodies and Other Agencies National Urba n Housing and Habitat 
Policy 2007 upgradation projects. 
 
viii) Promote planning and development of industrial esta tes along with appropriate 
labour housing colonies serviced by necessary basic services. 
ix)   Incorporate provisions of model building bye-laws  prepared by Town & Country 
Planning Organization (TCPO) and National Building Code in their respective 
building bye-laws.  Make suitable provisions in the  Building bye-laws for 
innovative energy conservation practices and mandat ory rain water harvesting 
for specified owners of buildings. 
x)   Devise capacity building programmes at the local level. 
 
Public-Private Partnerships 
 
xi)   Promote participatory planning and funding based on potential of local level 
stakeholders. 
 
xii)   Develop suitable models for  private sector’s ass embly of land and its 
development for housing in accordance with the Master Plan. 
 
xiii)  Promote Residents’ Welfare Associations (RWAs) for  specified operation and 
maintenance of services within the boundaries of gi ven colonies as well as utilize 
their assistance in developing an early warning sys tem relating to 
encroachments. 
 
xiv)  Involve RWAs/CBOs in collaboration with conservancy organizations at the local 
level for effective cleaning of streets/lanes and s olid waste disposal at the colony 
level. 
 
Special Programme for Disadvantaged Sections 
 
xv)   Devise innovative housing programmes for meeting the housing shortage with 
special focus on vulnerable groups. 
 
 
 
Environment and Ecology 
 
xvi)  Devising adequate safeguards for promoting a healt hy environment with special 
emphasis on ‘green lungs’ of the city in terms of p arks, botanical gardens and 
social forestry as well as green belts around cities/towns.  

17 
 
 
Security & Safety 
 
xvii)   Ensure Safety & Security in residential and insti tutional areas which may include 
construction of boundary walls around housing colon ies as well as installation of 
security systems. 
 
 
2.11 Master Plan for Delhi-2021 depicts that as per  the Census 2001, Delhi has 24.5 
lakh Census houses under the category of residence and residence-cum-other uses, in 
which 25.5 lakh householders are residing. This reflects a net housing shortage of about 
1.0 lakh houses/ dwelling units. The   households a re accommodated in a variety of 
housing types including different categories of pla nned built housing, squatter 
settlements, unauthorized colonies, traditional are as and villages.  The Sub-group on 
Shelter noted that up to the year 1991, the contrib ution to housing stock through 
institutional agencies was only 53% (excluding squa tter housing). Therefore, the 
component of housing through non-institutional sour ces, viz, unauthorized colonies, 
squatter/JJ clusters, etc, is quite significant.  T his trend has continued in the current 
decade as well and has to be kept in view while det ermining the plan and strategy for 
housing.   
 
2.12 Based on the projected population of 230 lakh by 2021, the estimated additional 
housing stock required will be around 24 lakh dwelling units.  This includes an estimated 
housing requirement of 20 lakh dwelling units for a dditional population and backlog of 
about  4 lakh units comprising of 1 lakh net shorta ge and the rest by dilapidated and 
Kutcha structures requiring replacement.  
 
2.13 It has also been assessed that around 40% of h ousing need can potentially be 
satisfied through redevelopment/ up-gradation of ex isting areas of Delhi.  This may be 
met in the present urban limits of A to H zones and  in the sub cities of Dwarka, Rohini 
and Narela. This implies that the remaining 60% of the requirement would have to be 
met through 14.4 lakh new housing units to be provided in new areas.  
 

18 
 
2.14 Keeping in view of the socio-economic composit ion of the population, it is 
estimated that around 50-55% of the housing require ment would be for the urban poor 
and the economically weaker sections in the form of  houses of two rooms or less.  
Based on past experience. It is necessary to distin guish between the urban poor 
comprising the inhabitants of squatter settlements/ payments dwellers,etc. and other 
economically weaker sections of the society convent ionally classified in the form of 
EWS, LIG, etc. The role of the government would hav e to be both as a provider and 
facilitator.  The category of the urban poor is to be broadly catered in old and new urban 
areas through up-gradation of old / traditional are as, employers and industrial housing, 
group housing and also in unauthorized regularized colony Infills.  
 
2.15 The proposed housing strategy incorporates spe cific approaches for 
development of new housing areas, up-gradation and re-densification through 
redevelopment of existing housing areas, including unauthorized colonies, housing in 
villages and Special Area.  Looking at the possible  distribution of housing types, the 
future requirement of shelter provision will be dom inated by small dwelling units.  In 
view of the limited availability of land and increa sed requirement of housing, plotted 
residential developments shall be discouraged.  
 
2.16 A multi-pronged housing Strategy is needed for  provision of housing stock and 
for delivery of serviced land, involving the privat e sector to a significant extent,public 
agencies and co-operative societies etc.  The overa ll responsibility for provision of land 
and facilitation of adequate housing to meet the pr ojected demand lies with the DDA in 
collaboration with GNCTD and other agencies.   
 
2.17 Planning norms, and use zoning , density, FAR and building controls have been 
reviewed for housing, both in new areas to be opene d up and for redevelopment of 
existing areas. 
2.18 In the Context of housing strategy, it is esse ntial to optimize utilization of land 
and space with a view to increasing net residential  density.  It has been observed that 
the practice of prescribing FAR/ density norms with out distinguishing between housing 

19 
 
categories in terms of plinth area, can result in o ver population or under population on 
the one hand, and non-optimal design and under- uti lization of the utility network, on the 
other. 
  
2.19  Policies and Programmes Needed For Affordable  Housing: 
 
 
/xrhombus There is a need to develop a comprehensive afforda ble housing policy for Delhi 
that takes care of blockages and enables the provision of all affordable houses for all. 
/xrhombus MPD-2021 earmarks 15% of proposed FAR for EWS hous es in addition to the 
FAR available at site for other housing. 
/xrhombus New Housing Urban poor should be in the form of on e or two room units, which 
would be developed through public and private agenc ies or through cooperative 
societies. 
/xrhombus Development and infrastructure cost and financing.  
/xrhombus Local Zoning and regulation, Effective land use. 
/xrhombus Local zoning and regulation. 
/xrhombus Regulatory framework. 
/xrhombus Economic viability and finances. 
/xrhombus Establishment of zoning regulations that create co mpulsory affordable housing 
development. 
/xrhombus Establishment of housing Trust Fund by legislation  to receive dedicated public 
revenue. 
/xrhombus Creation of Escrow Fund. 
/xrhombus The possibility of creating affordable rental mark et through enabling   provisions 
in MPD 2021 could be explored, wherein, 
/xrhombus Builder/developer may quote and collect the minimu m rent by arranging bank 
loans for the beneficiaries. 
 
/xrhombus Provision for maintenance of common services could  be done by the builder till 
the rental housing gets converted into ownership. 

20 
 
/xrhombus Shelter can be provided to larger number of famili es, who can have access to 
neighborhood community facilities. 
 
Role of DDA in Housing activities 
 
 
2.20 Housing activity has been taken up by Delhi De velopment Authority since 1967-
68 and from time to time, it has been announcing sc hemes for various categories of 
flats. i.e., HIG/ MIG LIG/ EWS & Janta category.  T he first registration scheme was 
opened in the year 1969.  Thereafter, 43 more schem es have been launched till date.  
Out of the total 44 Schemes launched so far, DDA ha s allotted 3,94,738 flats under 
various schemes.  The affordable houses comprising LIG/ EWS/ Janta category of flats 
contribute majority of the total housing stock allotted. 
 
2.21 A separate scheme of JHRS- 1996 was also launc hed to cater the needs of 
persons of Janta category.  Further, under rehabili tation of Punjab and Kashmiri 
migrants about 3284 & 236 expandable flats respecti vely were allotted on concessional 
rates. 
2.22 Essentially, the DDA constructs houses of vari ous categories viz. SFS/ HIG/ 
MIG/ LIG/ Janta/ EWS etc. for a large number of reg istrants/ non-registrants.  DDA has 
constructed as well as facilitated construction (by  allotting land to individuals or 
cooperative societies) of a total of more than 1 mi llion dwelling units as per following 
details:- 
i) Dwelling Units constructed by DDA               3.9 4 lacs 
ii) Dwelling Units on DDA plots by private individuals  2.50 lacs 
iii) Dwelling Units in JJ Resettlement Colonies   2.40 l acs 
iv) Dwelling Units constructed on plots allotted   2.00  lacs 
to Co-operative Group Housing Societies 
v) Dwelling Units through Rohini plotted scheme   0.85  lacs  
 
Total                         11.69 lacs 
 
 

21 
 
2.23 DDA has till date been able to raise only 11.6 9 lakh dwelling units.  When asked 
is this sufficient to meet the demand of housing in  Delhi, the DDA in its written replies 
stated as under:- 
 
 MPD-2021 based on the projected population of 230 lakhs by 2021 has 
estimated an additional housing stock requirement o f about 24 lakh Dwelling 
Units. It is also assessed that about 40% of housin g needs may potentially be 
satisfied through redevelopment/up-gradation of exi sting areas of Delhi and this 
may be met in the present urban limits of A to H zo nes and in the Sub-cities of 
Dwarka, Rohini and Narela. The remaining 60% of the  requirement is to be met 
through 14.4 lakh Dwelling Units in new areas/urban  extensions as per the Zonal 
Development Plans-2021. 
 
 The above-cited housing demand is to be developed by the year 2021. DDA has 
generated the housing facilities of about 11.69 lak h DUs for more than one 
million families. In addition to this, sizeable pop ulation of Delhi is accommodated 
in villages, unauthorised regularized colonies, tra ditional areas and government 
housing.  
 
 As per the MPD-2021, housing is to be developed by  various agencies such as 
Public, Private, Central/State Govt., Co-op Society , Residents’ & Associations. 
As such DDA has been able to fulfill the role of fa cilitator/provider for meeting the 
housing needs.  
 
 Further, as per MPD-2021 for new urban extensions it is envisaged that 
development of land measuring about 22,000-24,000 H a. will be taken up by 
private developers. In order to involve Private dev elopers in development of 
housing, Central Government recently notified Land Pooling Policy vide 
Notification S.O.2687 (E) dated 05.09.2013. 
 
2.24 MPD-2021 based on the projected population of 230 lakhs by 2021 has 
estimated an additional housing stock requirement o f about 24 lakhs Dwelling Units. 
This includes an estimated housing requirement of 20 lakhs Dwelling Units for additional 
population and backlog of about 4 lakh units (compr ising of 1 lakh net shortage and the 
rest by dilapidated and kutcha structures requiring replacement).    
 
2.25 In addition, it is estimated that around 50-55 % of the housing requirement would 
be for the urban poor and the economically weaker s ections in the form of houses of 
two rooms or less keeping in view the socio-economic characteristics of the population.  
 

22 
 
2.26 On being inquired by the Committee as to how t he needs can be satisfied, the 
DDA submitted as under in their written reply: 
 " It is assessed that about 40% of housing needs c an be potentially satisfied 
through redevelopment/up-gradation of existing area s of Delhi and this may be 
met in the present urban limits of A to H zones and  in the Sub-cities of Dwarka, 
Rohini and Narela.  
The remaining 60% of the requirement is to be met t hrough 14.4 lakh Dwelling 
Units in new areas/urban extensions as per the Zonal Development Plans-2021."    
 
 
2.27 Accordingly, in the Plan  DDA has worked out a  possible indicative scenario in 
terms of mode of housing supply in different types of development , which is as under:- 
    
2.28  As per the above-cited scenario, the requirem ent of housing has to be met 
through in-situ development, re-development and gro up housing development by 
Public, Private, Centre/ State Govt., Co-op Society and Residents' Associations.    
            
2.29 The Committee had inquired the DDA about  the targets of DDA in Low Cost 
Housing and Low Income Group Housing during the las t 20 years including  detailed 
year-wise list, covering the targets, achievements and reasons for under achievement, if 


23 
 
any, and the percentage of the achievement against the target.  DDA however, in their 
written reply submitted a half- baked reply, that i ncluded only the details of houses 
constructed under LIG/ EWS/ JANATA category during the last 20 years.  The 
information furnished by DDA is as under:- 
   
  DETAILS OF HOUSES CONSTRUCTED DURING LAST 20 YEARS 
 
Sl. 
No 
 
Year LIG EWS/ JANATA 
1. 1993-94 3505 831 
2. 1994-95 1945 374 
3. 1995-96 460 0 
4. 1996-97 705 0 
5. 1997-98 890 848 
6. 1998-99 2032 612 
7. 199-2000 232 3584 
8. 2000-2001 526 5600 
9. 2001-2002 590 5164 
10.  2002-2003 1072 2032 
11.  2003-2004 704 64 
12.  2004-2005 7906 480 
13.  2005-2006 828 0 
14.  2006-2007 2445 0 
15.  2007-2008 100 0 
16.  208-2009 970 0 
17.  2009-2010 3920 0 
18.  2010-2011 480 2870 
19.  2011-2012 3502 3050 
20.  2012-2013 0 2400 
 G.Total 32812 27909 
 
2.30 The Committee find that out of the total Dwell ing Units constructed by DDA, since 
its inception till date (i.e; 3.94 lacs) during las t 20 years only 15%  of the construction 
has been done under LIG/EWS/ JANATA category. 
 
2.31 The Committee had inquired DDA about the targe ts that were set for Low Income 
Group Housing in Zonal Plans of 1971; alongwith the achievements made against those 
targets.  The DDA, in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 

24 
 
 "In MPD-1962, for planning purposes Delhi has been  divided into eight planning 
divisions based on the physical features, historica l growth, character of 
development intensity of land use and the circulati on pattern. However, the 
divisions being too large an area for which divisio nal plans are to be prepared, 
the workable units were identified for these planni ng divisions that were sub-
divided into 136 (two were added later on, making t otal of 138 Development 
Zones). Out of 138 Zonal Development Plans, 64 were  notified, 31 were at draft 
stage and remaining 43 were to be prepared based on the need. 
In these Zonal Development Plans, land for resident ial component and housing 
was indicated. In the Work Studies of MPD-1962, abo ut 30,000 families (1.5 lakh 
population) of slum dwellers were identified for re -settlement and schemes for 
their rehabilitation were formulated in the form of re-settlement colonies."  
 
2.32  When the Committee inquired about the actions  that have been contemplated by 
DDA in constructing houses for urban homeless durin g the 11th Plan as well as during 
12th Plan.  In this regard DDA furnished the following reply, in writing:- 
 
"DDA provides land to MCD & Slum Deptt. for constru cting night shelters for 
homeless people. 
Also as per record there are 291 JJ clusters in Del hi where jhuggies have been 
laid by homeless people in DDA land.  Action for re habilitation of these jhuggies 
dwellers is being taken by DDA by way of In-situ de velopment.  The first such 
project for Kathputali Colony near Shadipur Depot h as already been awarded to 
the developer and the work for construction of 3000  EWS houses for jhuggies 
dwellers at A-14 Kalkaji Extn.  is also already awa rded.  For balance works, 
action is being taken on priority." 
 
 
Problems in Constructions of Affordable Housing 
 
 
2.33 When asked to clarify the definition of blockage wi th examples with regard to 
need for comprehensive affordable housing policy, t he DDA in its written reply has 
stated as under :- 
 
 “The main blockages in implementing a comprehensiv e housing policy include the 
following: 
 
- The cost of land in urban cities which require to be intermediated by the State 
Governments.  

25 
 
- The cost factor of development and infrastructure provision including 
infrastructure charges from local bodies i.e. DJB &  DISTCOM etc. has increased 
manifolds, which are subsequently recovered from th e beneficiaries/allottees.  
This needs to be balanced by the remunerative part being created in a project as 
per Master Plan provision.  There is need to relax the same.  Secondly the land 
acquisition cost has also increased manifold which also results in higher disposal 
cost. 
- Cost of construction which has to be driven down b y adopting either by providing 
constructions at no profit no loss basis, or by mix ing EWS/LIG/MIG with HIG 
houses and commercial layouts so that the premium e arned on HIG and 
commercial space could be used for cross subsidization. 
- State Governments should attempt to bring down sta mp duty for affordable 
houses.  
- Local zoning and regulations means the constraints  of FAR applicable to the 
individual plots with respect to its use.  There ar e constraints of the FAR 
restrictions for various categories of the houses, this needs to be reviewed for 
higher FAR provision for all categories of houses. 
 
Presently there are constraints on the density norm s on different categories of houses 
which needs to be relaxed and rationalized to make the project viable and 
implementable.”   
 
2.34 DDA in the background material had pointed out  the following bottlenecks in 
construction of affordable houses:- 
i) Availability of land; 
 ii) High cost of land, development charges and inf rastructure cost; 
 iii) Finance is not available to the needy who doe s not have regular   
  employment and fixed monthly income; 
 iv) Low density of housing as per Master Plan norm s. 
 
2.35 When the Committee inquired DDA about the meas ures being taken by them to 
address these issues.  DDA submitted the following reply in writing:- 
(i) Availability of land: There is shortage of land in Delhi.  Till date, 90,326.61 acres 
of land has been acquired for DDA.  Out of which, p ossession of approx. 76,900 acres 
of land has been handed over by Land Acquisition Collectors of the Government of NCT 
of Delhi to DDA and the possession of balance 13,42 7.61 acres of land is yet to be 
handed over to DDA by LACs.  
 Apart from the above, acquisition of 4600 acres of  land is under progress at 
various stages with the Government of NCT of Delhi. 
(ii) High cost of land, development charges and inf rastructure cost: Cost of land 
in Delhi is very high.  Moreover, there is acute shortage of land as such it is very difficult 
to take up new housing projects in future. 

26 
 
(iii) Finance is not available to the needy who doe s not have regular 
employment and fixed monthly income: The matter has been taken up with Ministry 
of HUPA seeking financial help from the Ministry. 
(iv) Low density of housing as per Master Plan norm s 
(a)Para 4.2 of Chapter 4.0- shelter discuss about t he housing strategy to be adopted in 
Delhi.  In the MPD- 2021 following is mentioned: 
• The planning norms, land use zoning, density, FAR and building controls were 
reviewed for housing i.e., (a) new areas and (b) re development of existing areas.  
Hence, for optimal utilization of land and space it  is necessary to increasing net 
residential density.  However, to meet the requirem ents of the citizens these norms and 
controls (preferably every five years) could be rev iewed periodically with suitably 
updating in the plan. 
• It has been observed that the practice of prescrib ing FAR/ density norms without 
distinguishing between housing categories in terms of plinth area, can result in over 
population or under population on the one hand, and  non-optimal design and under-
utilisation of the utility of network, on the other .  A fixed density could lead to under 
utilisation of FAR or imposition of artificial limits to optimal use of land, which is a scarce 
commodity. 
b) Accordingly, the MPD- 2021 provides following de nsity norms, with 
corresponding category of dwelling unit (DU) sizes as under: 
• Slum/ EWS housing (upto 30sq.m)- 600 DUs/Ha 
• Category I (above 30- upto40sq.m)-500 DUs/Ha 
• Category II (above40-upto 80sq. m)-250 DUs/Ha 
• Category III (above 80 sq.m)- 175 DUs/Ha 
c)Further, the MPD- 2021 proposes to accommodate the projected additional population 
@ 250-300 pph average city level density keeping in  view of the projected population of 
230 lakhs by 2021. 
 
Prevention of effective land use 
• Clause 1(2) of chapter 17.0 Development Code stipu lates that it covers the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi to regulate the development of in the NCT  
• The land use Plan 2021 for Delhi was also notified  along with the text document 
of MPD- 2021. 
• Subsequently, Zonal Development Plans- 2021 of 17 planning zones consisting 
Land Use Plan for Delhi -2021 are approved by Centr al Government and 
published. 
• Development in Delhi is regulated by notified Land  Use Plan and is to be 
implemented by the concerned local bodies/ authority as per area of jurisdiction. 
• Further misuse of land other than designated land use is to be provided by Land 
Management Department of DDA. 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
 
Role of CGHS in catering to the needs of EWS Housing 
 
 
2.36 The Committee inquired about the role envisage d for the developer of Group 
Housing, in catering to the needs of Affordable Hou sing.  The DDA in their written reply 
stated as under: 
 " As per MPD 2021, In Group Housing, the developer  shall ensure that minimum 
15% of the proposed FAR to be constructed for Commu nity-Service 
Personnel/EWS and lower income category. Such flats  should have a carpet 
area between 25-40 sqm. This 15% of the proposed FA R for Community Service 
Personnel/EWS and lower category housing would be o ver and above 200 
permissible FAR and density of 200 DUs/ha." 
 
2.37 Prior to the enforcement of MS-2021, it was ma de applicable to the Cooperative 
Group Housing Societies to contribute Rs. 25,000/- per DU where the DUs are 
constructed of 92.90 sqm. And above. This was appli cable under Notification dated 
09.06.99 for all Co-operative Group Housing Societi es applying for sanction of building 
plans to make contribution to housing for economically weaker section.   
 
2.38 It was not mandatory on part of the Cooperativ e Group Housing Societies 
(CGHS) to construct houses for the Lower Income Gro up. The Societies generally 
construct dwelling units for its bonafide members.  The members of a CGHS are 
enrolled by the Society as per the eligibility crit eria provided in the Delhi Co-operative 
Societies Act and Rules framed thereunder under whi ch the income of an individual is 
not linked to the eligibility criteria. The CGHS co nstructs dwelling units for its bonafide 
members which were enrolled keeping in view the eli gibility criteria provided by the 
statute.   
 
2.39 The DDA further added:- 
 
 Further in view of the notified Land Pooling Polic y, following provisions are 
incorporated in MPD-2021 for group housing developm ent vide Notification 
S.O.2889 (E) dated 23.09.2013: 

28 
 
‘50% of the EWS Housing Stock shall be retained by Developer Entity (DE) and 
disposed only to the Apartment owners, at market ra tes, to house Community 
Service Personnel (CSP) working for the Residents/O wners of the Group 
Housing. These will be developed by DE at the respe ctive Group Housing 
site/premises or contiguous site. Remaining 50% of DUs developed by DE to be 
sold to DDA for EWS housing purpose will be sold to  DDA/ Local Bodies at base 
cost of Rs. 2000/- per sq. ft. as per CPWD index of  2013 (plus cost of EWS 
parking) which shall be enhanced as per CPWD escala tion index at the time of 
actual handing over and can be developed by DE at a n alternate nearby site. 
Necessary commercial and PSP facilities shall also be provided by the DE for 
this separate housing pocket. The EWS housing compo nent created by the DE 
shall be subject to quality assurance checks, as pr escribed in this regard by 
Govt./DDA. The final handing/taking over of this co mponent shall be subject to 
fulfilling the quality assurance requirements. The DE shall be allowed to 
undertake actual transfer/transaction of saleable c omponent under its 
share/ownership to the prospective buyers only afte r the prescribed land and 
EWS housing component is handed over to the DDA.’                  
 
2.40 The DDA further informed the Committee, that: 
 "In order to involve Private developers in develop ment of housing, Central 
Government recently notified Land Pooling Policy (i .e., to involve the private 
sector in the assembly and development of land and provision of infrastructure 
services) vide Notification S.O.2687 (E) dated 05.09.2013.  
In the Land Pooling Policy it is envisaged that dev elopment of land measuring 
about 22,000-24,000 Ha. will be taken up by private  developers. As per the said 
policy, maximum 53% of land is for Gross Residentia l use which will provide 
50,000 DUs approximately for Economically Weaker Se ctions (EWS) housing for 
every 1000 Ha. of Land pooled. Further, FAR of 400 is allowed to meet the 
residential requirement and 15% of FAR over & above  of the permissible FAR is 
reserved for EWS housing." 
                                                                                       
 
2.41 Fast Tracking EWS Construction: 
 
1. The mandate is for one Lakh EWS houses. 
  
2. With existing FAR for walk-up EWS multistoried f lats; 500 acres is needed for 
one lakhs EWS Houses. 
 
3. Five teams are formed (one for each engineering zone) with members from 
engineers, planning, architecture and lands departments. 
 

29 
 
4. All the five teams have taken stock of available  land inventory in their respective 
zones and carried out a joint field survey of all p ockets of vacant land with a view to 
identify areas/pockets where EWS houses are to be built. 
 
5. A total of 33 pockets with a total area of about  154.49 Acres was initially 
identified. On further study 26 sites (with an area  of 270 acres) were found suitable for 
EWS construction. Total station Survey (TSS)  on mo st of the sites is complete and 
architects are preparing final drawings. 
 
6. TSS of all the identified sites is being underta ken urgently to know the exact area 
available for EWS construction. So far TSS for 23 s ites (263 Acres) has already been 
completed and sent to Chief Architect. TSS for rema ining  3 sites (7 Acres) is under 
process. 
 
7. As soon as the prototype designs are finalized f or the sites where TSS is 
complete, tendering process shall initiated for such pockets. 
 
 
Basic Services to the affordable Houses constructed by DDA 
 
 
2.42 DDA has constructed LIG & EWS since 1967-68 in  all zones of Delhi i.e North 
Zone, Rohini Zone, Dwarka zone, East zone and South  zone etc.  When asked how 
DDA has ensured basic services viz-potable water we ll laid drainage system, sewerage 
network, sanitation facilities, electricity, recreational space etc, the DDA stated that :- 
 
 “The basic services like potable water well laid d rainage system, sewerage 
network, sanitation facilities, electricity, recrea tional space etc  have also been 
provided for these houses.” 
 
2.43 After the construction of DDA flats, by DDA, t hese are transferred to MCD for 
providing water supply, drainage and other faciliti es.  But the complaints are not being 
attended to and the residents are facing serious pr oblems.  When asked about the 
mechanism with DDA for ensuring proper co-ordination with MCD and other agencies to 
redress the genuine grievances of the residents, DD A in its written reply has submitted 
as under :- 
 “DDA basically provides all the infrastructure fac ilities like water supply, drainage 
and other facilities which subsequently get transfe rred to the civic agencies i.e. 
MCD & DJB etc. for maintenance of such services.  O nce the services are 

30 
 
transferred to the civic agencies then the services  are independently maintained 
by the respective civic agencies.  DDA has no role to play.” 
 
2.44 With regard to a question it is stated that af ter the transfer of flats to MCD by 
DDA, DDA has no role for the maintenance of the hou ses. But the Committee feel that 
DDA should coordinate with the civic agencies for t heir proper maintenance, DDA has 
further stated  that :- 
 “Even in respect of properties where services have  been handed over to civic 
agencies DDA continues to interact with the other s ervice providers.  For 
instance, in Dwarka, even in respect of those areas  where services have been 
handed over to MCD, DDA continues to take up with D JB, the issues related to 
adequate supply of water in respect of these pockets.” 
 
2.45 When asked to enlighten the Committee about th e procedure followed by DDA 
regarding maintenance of roads those fall under the  purview of DDA,  the DDA 
submitted as under  :- 
 “Delhi Development Authority develops the colonies  and constructs roads within 
it. All such roads are handed over to Municipal Cor poration of Delhi for further 
maintenance.  Till such time these are not handed over, the roads are maintained 
as per the maintenance norms.” 
 
2.46 On being enquired about the deficiency charges  decided by DDA while handing 
over the colony to MCD, DDA stated as under :-  
 
 “The process of handing over of services is a mutu ally agreed arrangement 
between the Delhi Development Authority and the Mun icipal Corporation of Delhi 
or Delhi Jal Board. The services which are found deficient as per norms are listed 
out and as per estimates put forward by the respect ive civic bodies, i.e., MCD or 
DJB, the amount is provided as deficiency charges to the respective body.” 
 
2.47 However during the local visit of the Committe e to DDA and affordable houses 
constructed by DDA in Sector 14, Dwarka the Committ ee observed that the houses 
were in dilapidated conditions, there were seepage in the buildings, the cement were 
falling form the roof people were not getting timel y water supply the parks were turned 
into dumping grounds which lead to many serious health hazardous etc.     
 

31 
 
Designing of DDA Houses  
 
2.48 It is stated that the scope for improving and meeting the challenges is a dynamic 
process and the same is met through various innovat ions and improved delivery.  
Elaborating  on this issue, DDA has submitted that:- 
 
 " In order to meet the increasing need of facilities and conveniences, DDA has 
been adopting innovations like pre-fab technology w hich is speedy, sustainable 
and environment friendly for the construction of lo w cost houses, third party 
assurance for civil works to ensure quality, comput erization for delivery of 
services like conversion of lease hold to free hold , booking of spaces for 
marriages and social functions, computerization of legal cases, etc." 
 
2.49 It is reported in a Press news that the design ing of DDA houses constructed so 
far are outdated and there is a need for adopting m odern designs.  When asked 
whether DDA has taken any steps in this regard, DDA  Vice-Chairman during oral 
evidence before the Committee has stated that :- 
 
 “The  quality of designing of  DDA houses is not a s per the expectations of 
people and there is a need to adopt modern concepts  like Green buildings etc. 
For this we are using pre-fabricated technology by which the quality will definitely 
will improve. In future, when we construct  MIG and  LIG houses definitely we will 
take care of the modern designing in the line of Pr ivate Group Housing Society.  
We are learning  as per the changes in the concept of designing.  We have to 
change our designing and adopt modern technologies in this regard.” 
 
 
Awareness drive about affordable housing 
 
 
2.50 As per the background material, the Ministry h as enumerated certain 
requirements for affordable housing.  When asked about the measures initiated to make 
people aware in this direction? DDA in its written reply has stated that :- 
 “As part of its awareness programe, DDA has partic ipated in a conference 
organized by NAREDCO with the assistance of Ministr y of Urban Development 
and Ministry of Housing and Poverty Alleviation at Vigyan Bhawan.  The same 
was inaugurated by the President of India and a wid e publicity through media 
was made.  A press release was also given by the NAREDCO on the subsequent 

32 
 
day.  The conference was attended by about 3 to 4 t housand delegates from all 
over India to impress upon the people about the Gov t. initiative towards 
affordable houses.” 
 
2.51 The measures taken by DDA as mentioned in the reply are not sufficient.  On 
being asked about the action being taken up by the DDA to make the people aware 
about the affordable housing, DDA has further submitted as under :- 
 “The awareness regarding any housing scheme amongs t the target audience is 
done at the time of floating the scheme. Wide publi city is given through the print 
media and also through press conferences, press rel eases, etc., which are 
covered by both audio visual and other media.  It m ay be mentioned that due to 
adequate publicity having been given for the last s cheme, i.e.,  “DDA Housing 
Scheme 2010”, more than 11 lakh applications were r eceived against availability 
of only 16,000 flats.  Awareness regarding affordab le housing will be created as 
and when the scheme is floated.” 
 
Cooperative Group Housing and DDA 
 
2.52 The Co-operative movement in the National Capi tal Territory of Delhi was born 
on 25 th  March 1904 with the enactment of First Co-operativ e Society Act.  Over the 
years and especially with the enactment of Co-operative Society Act II in 1912, it gave a 
boost to co-operative areas like urban credit, hous ing, industrial and consumer 
products.  Delhi co-operative Society Act 1972 has also helped to achieve new heights 
especially in Co-operative Group Housing Society (C GHS).  The act further modified in 
2003 and Delhi Cooperative Societies Rules 2007 wer e framed to consolidate and 
amend the laws relating to Co-operative Societies, to facilitates the voluntarily formation 
and democratic functioning of co-operatives as peop le’s institutions based on self help 
and mutual aid to enable them to promote their econ omic and social betterment and to 
provide for regulat ion and management, functional autonomy of such soc ieties.                                                                   
           
2.53 The stakeholders in their written memorandum h ad informed the Committee 
about the existing issues in connection with Cooper ative Group Housing in Delhi.  The 
issues are as follows:- 
A) Prior to July 16, 1983, for some period of time the Registrar, Cooperative 
Societies, Delhi Administration was not registering  any Group Housing Society under 
the provisions of Delhi Co-operative Societies Act,  1972 presumably because there was 
very little chance of such societies being able to get land for construction.  As a result of 

33 
 
large scale acquisition of land in Delhi either at the instance of the Central Government 
or the DDa, most of the land in Delhi had been froz en.  It appears that under the 
instructions of the Union of India, the DDA itself has been constructing for residential 
units on 60% land made available to it and 40% of s uch land was being allotted by it to 
different Cooperative Group Housing Societies. 
B) On July 16, 1983, a public notice was issued by the Delhi Administration to the 
effect that the administration has decided to re-op en the registration of Group Housing 
Societies.  The application for such registration w as to be accepted in the office of the 
Registrar between July 18,1983 and August 17,1983 o n a prescribed form to be 
available from the office.  Later on by a Press Note dated August 17, 1983, the period of 
registration was extended to August 30,1983. 
C) A large number of persons thereafter formed Grou p Housing Cooperative 
Societies and applied for registration with the Reg istrar.  Out of 2600 Societies which 
applied for registration 1406 Societies were regist ered.  The Societies had to apply and 
obtain registration by satisfying all the provision s of the Delhi Cooperative Societies Act  
and the rules framed there under.  On 13 
th  March 1984, the Registrar issued a public 
notice in the leading newspapers of Delhi to  the following effect: 
“DDA has now intimated that they would now consider  allotment of land to Group 
Housing Societies registered in 1983-84.” 
D) DDA had allotted land to these registered Co-ope rative Group Housing Societies 
till 2003 on the recommendation of Registrar Co-ope rative Societies, Govt. of NCT of 
Delhi.  DDA had further sought confirmation of the recommendations made by RCS for 
allotment of land ot approximately 80 Group Housing  Societies in near future according 
to the seniority of the registration number vide th eir letter No.  F.2(27)91/GH/DDA/ Part-
II /5542 dated 04 
th  September 2003. 
E) On 16 th  June 2004, Yogi Raj Krishna Co-operative Group Hou sing Society filed a 
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 10066/2004 in the High Co urt of Delhi for Quashing and not to 
consider the list of 35 societies recommended by Re gistrar Co-operative Society vide 
their letter No. F 47/19/NGH/ Coop/298 dated 25 th  March 2004.  
F) On 02 nd  August 2005, the Delhi High Court Bench of Hon’ble  Justice, Vijender 
Jain and Hon’ble Justice Manju Goel while considering WP (C) No. 10066/2004 directed 
The Director of CBI to conduct a thorough investiga tion in all the matter of 135 Co-
operative Societies.   
G) The Central Bureau of Investigation has revealed  the following information under 
RTI Act, 2005 sought by Advocate Md. Shahid Anwar v ide their letter No. 
056/8/33/2005/RTI/ EOU-I/2009/0020 dated 06 
th  May 2009.  
H) Delhi Development Authority has provide informat ion under RTI Act, 2005 sought 
by Sh. Manoj Kumar Goyal vide their letter No. F 5( 86)09/GH/DDA/998 dated 06 th  
February 2009 stating that “DDA have no loss of worth Rs. 4000.00 crores”  
 
I) Delhi Development Authority has submitted its re ply vide their letter No. F 4(136) 
2010/ P&C/ LS/837 dated 10 
th  October 2011  to Ministry of Urban Development in 
response to Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No. 4546 f ixed for 20 th  August 2010 raised 
by Hon’ble Shri Virender Kashyap, MP regarding “Land to CGHS by DDA” as under: 

34 
 
 i) No, Sir.  The land / Plots earmarked for Group Housing purpose in the lay 
out plan of DDA in project ares, such as Dwarka, Narela & Rohini have not been allotted 
to any other institutions or builders by DDA. 
 ii) Dwarka Sub-city phase –II is an integral part of the Dwarka sub-city 
scheme approved by DDA and Central Govt. Zonal deve lopment plan for Dwarka was 
notified earlier in 2006 in accordance with MPD 200 1.  Subsequently, the same was 
revised in accordance with MPD- 2021 and notified in June, 2010.  
          
2.54 Regarding the status of land allotment by DDA to the Co-operative Group 
Housing Societies, in their written submission the stakeholders had informed the 
Committee as under:- 
   
 “Delhi Development Authority has neither offered l and to the Co-operative Group 
Housing Societies nor sought recommendations from R egistrar Co-operative 
Societies, NCT of Delhi after the staying order dat ed 18 
th  June 2004 CWP( C) 
No. 10066/2004 for the operation and effect of comm unication dated 25 th  March 
2004 whereby additional list of 35 societies was se nt by Registrar Co-operative 
Society for land allotment.  And like wise Registra r Co-operative Society did not 
send recommendation after the above said order.” 
  They have also added: 
 “However, it is also pertinent to mention that the  Hon’ble High Court of Delhi very 
categorically emphasized in its order dated 03 
rd  October 2005 in WP (C) No. 
10066/2004 and CM. 10514/2005 that: 
‘We make it clear that we could not like a single g enuine society or a genuine member 
to be either harassed or denied their right of allotment’.” 
 
2.55  On the basis of the above submission of the s takeholders the Committee 
inquired from the DDA as to whether permission to s tart the construction work for 
housing projects have been granted by DDA to the Ho using Societies or not.  The DDA 
in their written reply furnished as under:- 
 " As per terms and conditions of the allotment/Lea se-deed, the Cooperative 
Group Housing Society (CGHS) is required to complet e the construction within 
three years from the date of taking over physical p ossession of land. After issue 
of physical possession of land, the DDA issues ‘No Objection Certificate’ (NOC) 
to the CGHS for commencement of construction. On th e basis of NOC, the 
CGHS applies for sanction of the building plan.  Up on formal sanction of the 
building plan,  the society may commence constructi on.  As of date no building 
plan of any society is pending with DDA for sanction." 

35 
 
 
2.56 The forum of Co-operative Group Housing Societ ies Waiting for Land Allotment 
(FCSWLA) had raised the issue of non allotment of l and to such societies by DDA.  On 
Being inquired about the same, the DDA in their reply furnished as under:- 
 "DDA has allotted land to all such eligible societ ies, whose names were 
forwarded by RCS to DDA from time to time and no ca se is pending for allotment 
of land in DDA.  The scope of carving out further l and for allotment to CGHS can 
be considered on receipt of further Recommendation from RCS. 
 As regards, developing and further allotting of la nd to Cooperative Group 
Housing Societies, in view of the introduction of t he new Land Pooling Policy, the 
Co-operative Group Housing Societies can directly p urchase land from the 
villagers according to their requirement." 
  
 
2.57 On being inquired, DDA informed the Committee that the last offer for allotment 
of land to the societies was made by DDA in 2003.    
 
2.58 When the Committee asked about the reasons of not allotting approximately 80 
developed plots available since 2003 to any of the societies, DDA submitted as under:- 
 "As on date, no plot exclusively meant for allotme nt of land to the societies is 
available.  Plots for allotment of land to Group Ho using Societies are earmarked 
as and when any recommendation is received from the RCS. 
 Furthermore, no recommendation of RCS for allotmen t of land to societies is 
pending in DDA." 
 
2.59 On being inquired about the reasons for not se eking recommendation from the 
office of RCS by DDA for allotment of land to the s ocieties.  DDA in their written 
submission furnished as under:- 
 "The office of the Registrar of Co-operative Socie ties under the Govt. of NCT of 
Delhi has its own independent criteria for recommen ding the names of CGHS for 
allotment of land to DDA and there is no procedure for seeking recommendation 
from the office of RCS by DDA" 
2.60 The Committee inquired about the compelling re asons for DDA to approach the 
Supreme Court of India for cancellation of Land to old Group Housing Societies who 
were recently allotted by them.  The DDA in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 "The compelling reason that DDA had to approach th e Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
India for cancellation of  land to old group Housin g Societies is on account of the 

36 
 
fact that all these societies have been illegally r evived in violation of the laid 
down procedure and statutory provisions contained i n the Delhi Co-operative 
Societies Act.  The affairs of these societies were  investigated by the Central 
Bureau of Investigation (CBI) pursuant to the direc tion of Hon’ble Delhi High 
Court in WPC No. 10066/2004 titled Yogiraj Krishna CGHS Ltd. Vs. DDA & Ors.  
After completion of investigation, the CBI has file d regular charge sheet and 
criminal cases are pending against the office beare rs of these societies. The fact 
that the CBI filed regular charge sheet against the se societies shows that the 
societies were fraudulently revived, resignation of  the bonafide members were 
forged, new members were inducted in violation of t he statutory provisions 
contained in Delhi Co-operative Societies Act and t hese societies were taken 
over by the builder mafia which has also been recor ded by the Hon’ble Delhi 
High Court in its order dated 25.08.2008 in WPC No.  10066/2004 titled Yogiraj 
Krishna CGHS Ltd. Vs. DDA & Ors." 
 
2.61 During the course of oral evidence before the Committee, the stakeholders 
submitted as under:- 
 "Hon'ble Sir, in the early years of 1980 DDA had e xecuted a lot of land, with main 
purpose of promoting affordable housing.  Under thi s, 60 per cent of the 
residential part was to be developed by DDA and 40 per cent was to be handed 
over to Cooperative Group Housing Society for Affor dable Housing.  In the year 
1983, Registrar Cooperative Society re-opened the r egistration of Co-operative 
Societies, then in the year 1983-84 about 900 socie ties were registered.  The 
land allotment to these societies continued till ye ar 2003 on seniority basis.  In 
the year 2003, 80 societies were offer land, out of  which the land allotment to 35 
societies was challenged by another society that wa s also waiting for the 
allotment of land.  Hon'ble High Court stayed the o peration of these societies in 
the year 2004.  In the year 2005 CBI inquiry was directed against these societies.  
CBI submitted its inquiry report to Hon'ble High Co urt in the year 2008.  Hon'ble 
High Court from time-to-time kept on directing DDA and Registrar Co-operative 
Societies that no genuine society, or even a single  member, they should not be 
harassed for any kind of inadequacy of the past.  F rom the year 2003 till date 
neither the registrar co-operative societies has no t recommended any society to 
DDA nor DDA has offered land to any of the co-opera tive societies.  In the year 
2012, 10 societies approached Hon'ble High Court wi th a writ petition for land 
allotment.  Hon'ble High Court directed the Registr ar Co-operative Societies to 
examine the membership validity of these societies and forward their cases to 
DDA for further land allotment. 
  DDA has kept its stand clearly and continuously i n Hon'ble Court as well 
as Parliament that we got sufficient land for allot ment to the group housing 
cooperative societies, provided the registrar co-op erative societies recommend 
their name.  The matter is hanging between Registra r Co-operative Society and 
DDA, that who should start first?  It has been about 30 years as of now." 
 

37 
 
2.62 In response to the above submission, the Regis trar Cooperative Society, during 
the course of oral evidence submitted as under:- 
 "Here, in 2006, we have investigated a large numbe r of cases relating to the 
CGHS. In the course of investigation, we very speci fically noted 22 societies 
which were not found to be involved in any criminal ity. That order of the court 
was in the year 2006. In pursuance of the observati ons of the High Court 
regarding these 22 societies and subsequent directi ons of the PGC, since some 
of them went to the PGC with a grievance that RCS w as sitting over the cases of 
withdrawal of notices issued under section 96 to th ese societies, there was a 
direction from PGC to the RCS to hear the cases. Accordingly, I heard the cases. 
Out of 22 societies, of course, three societies had owned up in the meantime and 
19 societies appeared before me. These 19 societies  were heard and I took a 
decision to drop notices issued under section 96. P ursuant to that, we have to 
carry out a verification of genuineness of the memb ers and the office bearers of 
those societies. A format was circulated to the soc ieties for providing required 
documents for verification. Since a lot of allegati ons were there earlier and a 
large number of societies were charge-sheeted by th e CBI, we wanted to be on 
the safer side and wanted the societies to file an indemnity bond, specifically 
relating to ‘not-owning’ residential property in th e NCR of Delhi. But these 
societies have got certain reservations about this.  As a result, the verification 
process is now being held up. As and when they file  the required documents 
before us, we will complete the verification proces s and take a view on allowing 
them." 
 He further added:- 
"Actually verification can be carried out provided the societies give us the 
required documents which have been clearly listed o ut in our communication.  
When they furnish the documents in time we will def initely try to complete the 
verification process about the genuineness of the m embers and the office 
bearers.  As I have stated, they have got a specifi c reservation about the affidavit 
of indemnity bond." 
 
2.63 In their written submission of the Registrar C ooperative Societies, Govt. of Delhi, 
also informed  as under:- 
 
 "As regards verification of membership of 19 coope rative housing societies, it is 
to be stated that the verification process has been  held up because of persistent 
refusal of the societies to submit registered Indem nity Bond.  So far only Padmini 
CGHS Ltd.  has submitted the required Indemnity Bon d in respect of 49 
members of the society.  The verification process o f membership to ascertain 
eligibility shall be started and when all relevant documents including registered 
Indemnity Bond submitted by societies. 
 Compiled list of 19 societies showing exact status  of submission records in 
respect of members for verification including detai ls of correspondence made by 

38 
 
the office of RCS to the individual societies suppo rted by copies of the same are 
enclosed." 
 
2.64 In the written information submitted by Office  of the Registrar Cooperative 
Societies, they had furnished the following list of  documents that was called for from the 
Cooperative Group Housing for verification of eligibility of members on 15.03.2013:- 
 
a. Application for membership. 
b. Proceeding Register. 
c. M.C. Resolution for enrolment and resignation. 
d. Share certificate. 
e. Share money and admission fee deposited by the m ember. 
f. Residence proof of 3 years prior to date of enro lment. 
g. Bank Statement as a proof of payment of the memb er. 
h. Affidavit of President/ Secretary of the society  regarding genuineness 
of the member in case the society is supervised by the Administrator, 
the affidavit is to be filed by the administrator o n behalf of the 
members. 
i. Affidavit of member with recent passport sized p hotograph duly 
notarized. 
j. Verification from Gazetted Officer who will atte st photograph & 
signature of a member of a cooperative society. 
k. Audit Reports. 
l. Date of Last AGM held. 
m. Annual Return Filed. 
n. Membership Register. 
 Along with this list it was also mentioned that th e President/ Secretary 
of the society is directed to adhere to the submiss ion of documents 
and verification of the original documents of the s ociety strictly.  'NON 
COMPLIANCE BY THE PRESIDENT/ SECRETARY OF THE 
SOCIETY MAY LEAD TO REJECTION/ CANCELLATION OF THE 
REGISTRATION OF THE SOCIETY'. 
 
 
2.65 In the similar written submission of the Offic e of RCS, copy of another 
communication No. F. 47/1443/GH/AR (North)/910 date d 06/08/2013 was found 
attached.  In that the RCS office has requested to furnish the following documents:- 
 
a. Details of individual members in the revised for mat in soft copy (in PDF 
as well as Excel) and hard copy duly signed by the President/ Secretary 
of the society. 

39 
 
b. Application for membership alongwith affidavit f iled as the time of 
enrollment. 
c. Managing Committee Resolution/ extract for enrol ment and resignation. 
d. Share certificate. 
e. Share money and admission fee deposited by the m ember. 
f. Copy of Pan card of the member. 
g. Affidavit of President/ Secretary of the society  regarding genuineness of 
the members.  In case the society is supervised by the Administrator, the 
affidavit is to be filed by Administrator on behalf  of Managing Committee 
of the society. 
h. Photo I.D. bearing current address of the member . 
i. Registered indemnity Bond of individual member ( format enclosed). 
j. Three years residence proof of individual member  at the time of applying 
for membership. 
k. Last Audit Report. 
l. Detail of AGM held. 
m. Last Annual Return Filed. 
n. Membership Register. 
o. Detail of present and past members of Managing C ommittee of the 
society from inception of the society to till date. 
p. Proof of election of the present Managing Commit tee. 
q. Proof of compliance of Rule 24 of DCS Rules, 197 3 and Rule 19 of DCS 
Rules, 2007 while enrolling new member in the society." 
 
  
2.66 In this regard, the Vice Chairman DDA, during the course of oral evidence 
submitted as under:- 
"Whatever information we have got with regard to al lotment of land to the CGHS 
which are registered in the office of the RCS, whic h are stopped practically for 
the last many years, especially since 1993 because of the CBI inquiry, the CBI 
inquiry was conducted into the process of verificat ion conducted by the RCS, it is 
understood that they have completed their inquiry. We would like to be sure and 
we would like to know what the findings are. In cas e, any society is fully cleared 
by the RCS with reference to the number of members and to the land 
requirement, if they come forward to the DDA, we ha ve already made a 
commitment by way of replies to questions in Parlia ment – I would like to read 
out one such reply that was made in 2010, which say s that 368 cooperative 
societies were registered in 1983 and 454 societies  were registered in 1984; out 
of these societies, recommended by the RCS are 255 and 106 which are held up 
because of the inquiry. We have also said at the sa me time that land and plots 
earmarked for the group housing purpose in the lay out plan of the DDA such as 
Dwarka, Narela, Rohini, etc. are available. 
The constitution of the societies has to be verifie d by the RCS. The requirement 
will depend on the area of flat which the members w ould like to have – whether 
they want to have 1000 ft. or 2000 ft.; etc." 

40 
 
 
2.67 During the examination of Demands for Grants ( 2013-14) of the Ministry of Urban 
Development, the Committee inquired the Ministry ab out the measures being taken by 
the Ministry of Urban Development or DDA for develo ping and allotting any land for the 
CGHS.  The Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 
 "As regards developing and further allotting of la nd to Cooperative Group 
Housing Societies, this requires large scale acquis ition and the same can be 
taken up by DDA only on land being made available b y the State Government.  
DDA is always prepared to develop and allot land to CGHS." 
  
2.68 A representation was received from the Secreta ry, Aviation Cooperative Group 
Housing Society Ltd. (Regd.), 10/140, Geeta Colony,  Gandhi Nagar, Delhi.  In the 
representation the appellant had informed the Committee that the Registrar Cooperative 
Societies have wrongfully issued notice; against th eir society; under section 96(1) of the 
RCS Act.  The notice was issued against the society  in the year 2006, without even 
conducting a proper inquiry.  He had requested to r emove this section altogether from 
the Act. 
 
2.69 In this regard, the Registrar Co-operative Soc ieties, during the course of oral 
evidence, submitted as under:- 
 "Yes, a number of notices have been issued under s ection 96.  The cases are 
still pending and his case is one of them.  We can have a re-look at the notices 
issued to the societies." 
 
 
 
2.70 On being inquired by the Committee about the t ime frame by which the issue 
would be sorted out.  The Registrar Cooperative Societies deposed as under:- 
 " We can have a re-look at the notices issued to t he societies in three 
 months' time."  
 
2.71 In his letter no. F/47/Policy/68/RCS/2013/1289  dated 18.12.2013 to the Secretary 
Ministry of Urban Development, the Registrar Co-operative Society informed as under:- 

41 
 
 
 "The Standing Committee was assured that the quest ion of withdrawal of notice 
to Aviation CGHS Ltd.  will be re-examined in three  months' time for an 
appropriate decision.  The matter has been consider ed and the said notice has 
already been withdrawn." 
 
2.72 A representation was received from the Secreta ry Loknayak Co-operative Group 
Housing Society Ltd. (Regd.), Rohini, New Delhi.  In the representation, the Secretary of 
the CGHS has informed that DDA is not according the  credit of ground rent for the 
amounts deposited by the society from 12/01/1990 to 17/07/2000. 
 
2.73 During the course of oral evidence, the Secret ary Loknayak Co-operative Group 
Housing Society Ltd. submitted as under:- 
 "Sir, our issue is pertaining to DDA's ground rent  that we have been depositing 
regularly from 1990 to 2000.  We have the entries o f pass book.  Balance sheets 
duly attested by chartered accountants.  But we are not having copies of challans 
as in the year 2003 the basement of our society was  flooded resulting in 
destruction of a lot of record, including the copie s of those challans.  When we 
approached the banks for the certified copies of th e draft issued from the bank 
account of society, it was informed that in banks records beyond 10 years are not 
kept. Hence, even the bank could not issue us the c ertificates.  This amount is 
about rupees 10 lakh.  When members of our society approach DDA for the 
getting their flats freehold, they are being charged rs. 6,000 to rs. 7,000 per flat to 
recover that amount of ground rent.  Out of this total amount rs. 4 lakh is principal 
and the remaining rs. 6 lakh is interest. 
 We request DDA to check their records and credit t he amount of ground rent to 
 our society." 
 
2.74 On the above issue, the Vice Chairman DDA depo sed as under:- 
 "Sir, their problem is very simple and can be solv ed.  They are right in stating that 
they have deposited the money during the years 1990  to 2000. All the copies of 
challans available with them, they have provided us.  Unfortunately, banks do not 
keep a record beyond 10 years.  But in DDA we do ke ep records.  Those 
challans are being verified.  Two-three challans ha ve even been verified. 
Challans that are remaining will also be verified i n a span of one month and we 
will solve their problem.  It should not have any p roblem.  We have secondary 
records.  There are cash book entries, with the help of those entries we will verify 
the challans and solve the problem." 
 

42 
 
2.75 When the Committee inquired the status of veri fication of 14 challans that have 
been claimed to be deposited by the Lok Nayak Coope rative Group Housing Society 
Ltd. (Regd,), in the month of February, 2014, DDA i n their written reply submitted as 
under: 
 "DDA has been able to locate the credit of all the  payment details which 
were submitted by the Lok Nayak Cooperative Group Housing Society Ltd. 
vide their letter dated 3rd November 2013 addressed to Chairman, PAC. 
 Accordingly, DDA has incorporated all these 14 pay ments in the records 
of CS accounts and has certified/ confirmed that nothing is due against the 
concerned society up to 14.07.2014 on account of gr ound rent and 
interest thereof."         
 
Role of DDA, MCD and NDMC in arresting the growth of slum in Delhi 
 
  
2.76 In MPD – 1962 about, 30,000 families of slum d wellers were identified for re-
settlement.  When asked how much achievement was ma de in this regard, the DDA in 
its written reply stated as under :- 
 
 “As per housing sectoral review of MPD-1962 as giv en in the MPD-2001, prior to 
Master Plan for Delhi 1962 there was no institution al arrangement for public 
housing-built or plotted.  Major Govt. housing acti vity was by the Central Public 
Works Department for Central Govt. employees or by local bodies for their own 
employees. Ministry of Rehabilitation was responsib le for providing housing to 
displaced persons who came to Delhi after partition .  In 1961, there was housing 
shortage to the tune of 1,40,000 DUs. The Master Pl an for Delhi envisaged 
construction of about 7.47 lakh dwelling units duri ng the two decades period of 
1961-81 with the break up as under: 
 
1. Govt. housing (for employees)  150,000 
2. squatter and low cost housing   110,000 
3. Private housing     487,500 
 
 2.77 In respect of 7.47 lakh target, 5.43 lakh hou sing became available during the two 
decades 1961-81 indicating an achievement of 72.8%.  The details are given as under:- 
 
 
1. Govt. housing (for employees) 

43 
 
  Target     1,50,000 DUs 
  Achievement    30,600 DUs (approx.) 20.4% 
2. Squatter and low cost housing 
  Target     1,10,000 
  Achievement    1,98,000 180% 
  (plots in resettlement colonies) 
3. Private Housing 
  Target     4,87,000 
  
 
 
 2.78 The Master Plan did not conceive built housin g by public agency which in fact 
became the major housing programme of the Delhi Dev elopment Authority. Thus 
inclusive of this and housing in regularised coloni es the performance is 315,000 DUs 
(approx.) which is 64.7% of the target.  The breaku p of 315,000 DUs is approximately 
as under:- 
 
1. Housing on private plots   121,000 DUs 
2. Multi-family housing by DDA    78,000 DUs 
3. Regularised colonies   116,000 DUs 
  
 DDA has developed 42 Resettlement colonies which h ouses large number of 
population in these J.J.R. colonies.  They have been developed and handed over 
to MCD for further maintenance.” 
 
2.79 The number of people in urban cities and towns  has gone up substantially 
primarily as a by-product of demographic explosion,  poverty and migration from rural to 
urban areas.  This situation has resulted in tremendous pressure on urban infrastructure 
and consequent increase in the number of urban home less people.  When asked about 
the contemplated by DDA in constructing houses for urban homeless during the 11 
th  
plan as well as during 12 th  plan, the DDA in its written reply has stated as under:-  
 
 “DDA provides land to MCD & Slum Deptt. for constr ucting night shelters for 
homeless people. 
 Also as per record there are 291  JJ clusters  in Delhi where jhuggies are existing 
on DDA land.  Action for rehabilitation of these jh uggies dwellers is being taken 
by DDA by way of In-situ development. The first suc h project for  Kathputali 
Colony near Shadipur Depot has already been awarded  to the developer and the 
work for construction of 3000 EWS houses for jhuggi es dwellers at A-14 Kalkaji 

44 
 
Extn. is also already awarded.  For balance  works,  action is being taken on 
priority.” 
 
 
Constitution of Project Team to Study and Prepare T arget Report For in-situ 
development of JJ Clusters  
 
 2.80 On being asked whether any project team has be en constituted to study and 
prepare target report for in-situ development of JJ  cluster based on Mumbai pattern,  
the DDA in its written reply has stated as under:- 
 
 “According to Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Boar d it has come in existence 
under Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board Act, 2010 which has been passed 
by the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital  Territory of Delhi on the 1 
st  
April, 2010 and has come in force by the orders of Hon’ble Lt. Governor of Delhi 
on 1 st  July, 2010.  The mandate of DUSIB is as under :- 
 
 Creation of Housing stock for the poor sections of  the society and for the 
implementation of provisions of Slum Areas (Improve ment and Clearance) Act, 
1956.” 
 
 Envision for improvement of the living conditions of the slum dwellers, including 
the JJ Clusters (jhuggie jhopri basties), in order to make Delhi a ‘Slum Free City’. 
 
 No such Project Team has been constituted under DU SIB. However, one or two 
pilot projects are being proposed to be taken up on  Mumbai pattern(PPP) for in-
situ development of JJ clusters on DUSIB lands.  
 
 Pr. Commissioner (LM) has been designated nodal of ficer for monitoring of in-
situ development schemes.  A project report for in- situ development of JJ 
clusters is being prepared by Engineering Wing in c onsultant with Land 
Management, Finance, Legal Departments.”  
 
 
Co-ordination of DDA With Slum and JJ Department of MCD and NDMC 
 
 
2.81 On the issue of coordination of DDA with slums  and JJ department of MCD and 
NDMC for rehabilitation of slum dwellers, DDA has submitted that :- 
 

45 
 
 “Delhi Government has made Delhi  Urban Shelter Im provement Board (DUSIB)  
as nodal agency for Slum Free Plan of Action for wh ole of Delhi under Rajiv 
Awas Yojna of Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty  Alleviation, Government of 
India.   There are 685 JJ Clusters in Delhi which a re owned by various land 
owning agencies.  About 51% clusters are on DDA lan ds, 8% each on Railway 
and MCD, 6% each on Delhi Government and CPWD/L&DO,  15% on DUSIB 
lands, 2% Delhi Cantt., 1% each on NDMC and others.  
 
 DUSIB has organized various meetings with Land own ing agencies such as 
DDA, NDMC, MCD, Delhi Cantt., Railway, CPWD and L&D O, DJB, I&F deptt., 
etc. It has been requested to all the agencies to a ppoint nodal officers for 
coordination purpose and also to provide their pan of action for utilization of lands 
on which clusters are situated. DDA has stated that  they will be taking care of JJ 
clusters falling under jurisdiction and will be mak ing their own plan of action for 
either rehabilitating them in-situ or relocation.  No. of meetings have been held 
with these agencies to know their plan of action bu t information in still awaited.  
Only on the feedback from these agencies, DUSIB wil l be able to integrate the 
same in the overall plan of action for Slum Free Delhi.  
 
 Under Rajiv Awas Yojna, DUSIB has undertaken a com prehensive socio-
economic survey of all the JJ clusters in Delhi.  F or this purpose, four agencies 
have been contracted for taking up survey work in a ll the JJ Clusters irrespective 
of land owning agency.  At present 80% survey has b een completed covering 
around 2,50,000 households.  The data so collected will from baseline data for 
preparing Action Plan for all slums.  
 
 As one of the registrars of UIDAI for AADHAAR enro lment, DUSIB has 
completed the AADHAAR enrolment of 10,65,000 indivi duals in the various JJ 
clusters in the city.  DUSIB has now prepared a pil ot project for preparing an 
application software for authentication of eligible  beneficiaries of the housing 
scheme through the biometric authentication facilit y of UIDAI.  This would 
prevent duplication of beneficiaries and also prope r authentication of 
beneficiaries.  
 
 The JJ clusters have been marked in the ‘Delhi Sta te Spatial Data Infrastructure 
Project’.  This was done by DUSIB.  However, this G IS data is controlled by 
GSDL under the control of IT Department of Delhi Go vernment.  A request has 
already been made to them to allow the access to DU SIB through leased-line 
and the matter is being pursued.  Once the access i s enabled, the DUSIB would 
also like to make changes in the GIS to update the status of JJ clusters which is 
not static  Further, DUSIB would also be super-impo sing MIS layer on the 
marked JJ clusters on the basis of socio-economic s urvey, as required under the 
RAY guidelines.  
 

46 
 
 DUSIB will be setting up Technical Cell under Raji v Awas Yojna.  This  cell will 
be manned by various specialists in the filed of MI S, GIS, Social Development, 
Urban/Town Planning, Project Development and Capacity Building/Training. 
  
DUSIB had earlier requested Department of Economic Affairs for assistance in 
carrying out studies for making Slum Free City Plan .  DEA had further asked 
Asian Development Bank to provide Technical Assista nce to DUSIB.  ADB, 
under TA-7696, selected CRISIL to assist DUSIB in c reating Slum Free City 
Plan.  CRISIL commenced working in early February, 2012.  CRISIL has 
submitted a draft report on strategic framework for  Slum Free Delhi. Based on 
the Socio-Economic Survey  and framework being deve loped through CRISIL, 
DUSIB intends to Prepare Action Plan for all the JJ  Clusters.  However, 
cooperation from all Land Owning Agencies will be necessary to prepare such an 
Action Plan.  
 
 DDA is following policy guidelines of Govt. of Nat ional Capital Territory of Delhi 
(GNCTD) for implementation of the scheme for reloca tion/rehabilitation of the 
slums.  DDA has also nominated SE/CC-18 & a Sr. Arc h. as Nodal officer for 
coordination with DUSIB.  DUSIB is responsible for relocation/removal of existing 
slum clusters after conducting survey of the concerned JJ Cluster with the help of 
officers of the concerned land owning agency.”  
 
2.82 It has been observed that slums begin to thriv e and initially none of the 
Governmental agencies bothers for the reasons best known to them.  After a lapse of 
time these take the form of cluster. When asked abo ut the steps being taken for slum 
development or their rehabilitation,  the DDA in its written replies has stated as under :- 
  “As far as DUSIB is concerned, we will be followi ng three pronged strategy in 
lines with RAY guidelines :- 
 
1. Up-gradation of existing slums by providing all the basic civic amenities such 
as streets, individual water supply, sewerage syste m, drainage, street light 
plies, etc.   
2. The slums which are untenable will be relocated by way of providing EWS 
housing.  
3. The slum which are tenable can be taken up for i n-situ housing subject to 
NOC by concerned land owning agencies.  
4. Delhi Government has prioritized 76 JJ Clusters for relocation.  Survey has 
already been conducted in 39 JJ Clusters)20000 JJ Household surveyed) and 
eligibility determination has been undertaken for r elocation in 14 clusters and 
found 1340 families eligible.  Allotment letters ha ve been issued to 500 
eligible families of 8 JJ Clusters. 180 families of  6 JJ Clusters have been 
shifted to EWs housing in Bawana.  
5. Under JNNURM, 15000 EWS flats in Bawana, Dwarka,  etc are ready for 
allotment to eligible slum dwellers as per Delhi Go vernment Policy of 2010. 

47 
 
Around 17000 flats are under construction in DUSIB and 18000 flats are 
under construction in DSIIDC. In all about 62000 ho uses will be constructed 
under JNNURM by end of 2014. 
6. DUSIB is responsible for relocation/removal of e xisting slum clusters after 
conducting a survey of the concerned J.J. Cluster w ith the help of officers of 
the concerned land owning agency. 
7. DDA has taken an initiative to develop a slum ar ea with their rehabilitation on 
a Public Private Partnership Mode and has awarded o ne such project named 
as Katputli Colony near Shadipur Deptt. to a Pvt. d eveloper.  Thereafter DDA 
had poor response to in-situ development on PPP Mod e and has taken its 
own initiative to develop in-situ project on Design  and Built basis and has 
successfully awarded a project at A-14, Kalkaji Ext n.  The similar steps are 
being taken in other zones to take up the in-situ d evelopment project on 
Design and Built basis.  Initially DDA has a plan t o develop 21 nos., of such 
projects which are feasible and viable.” 
 
2.83 When asked whether DDA, MCD or NDMC have any m echanism for containing 
the growth of slums and whether any task force has been constituted to control the 
mushrooming of slums in Delhi, the DDA in its written replies stated as under :-  
 “The main reason for creation of slums in Delhi is  lack of Housing infrastructure 
for low income group people such as daily wagers, rag pickers, hawkers, etc.  
 
 The another reason is non-utilization of land earm arked for the purpose such 
as school, hospital, green areas, etc. by the Agencies concerned. 
 
 As far as DUSIB is concerned, as part of preventiv e strategy, we have created 
enforcement system under Director(Enforcement) supp orted by 3 Enforcement 
division for immediate action on receipt of any complaint.  We have tried that no 
new slums come up on our land so that the same can be utilized for designated 
purpose.”  
 
2.84 There are multiple agencies in the rehabilitat ion of jhuggi dwellers as a result 
they are not being rehabilitated, the number of cou rt cases pending in regard to 
rehabilitation of jhuggi dwellers. When asked to en lighten the Committee about this and 
the Solicitor General appointed on behalf of DDA fo r settling down the cases, the DDA 
in its written replies has stated as under :-  
“In addition to earlier report of in-situ developme nt two more in-situ projects for 
rehabilitation of J.J. Clusters, one at Jailerwala  Bagh (North Delhi )and another 
at Sanjay Lake (East Delhi) have been approved by t he Screening Committee 
and tenders  are being  prepared on design and build concept. 
 

48 
 
In one group and a individual groups for which the Total Station Survey (TSS) is 
being done.  DDA is broadly following the policy fo rmulated by DUSIB for 
relocation of jhuggi dwellers from DDA land. 
 
22 cases have been reported in this regard.  DDA has its won panel of lawyers to 
represent it in various courts of Law.  No Solicito r General is appointed on behalf 
of DDA for the purpose. 
 
Besides, DDA is the implementing agency of 1 Basic Services for Urban Poor 
(BSUP) project on Relocation of slums under Basic S ervices to the Urban Poor 
(BSUP) scheme at Narela phase – III near Siraspur V illage, Delhi with a project 
cost of Rs. 196.06 crores and Central Share of Rs. 77.31 crores for construction 
of 4740 DUs.  As on date, 1 
st  instalment of ACA of Rs. 19.33 crores has been 
released and the construction work for 3060 DUs is in progress.  
 
.It is stated that EWS faces difficulties to get lo an from banks without having a 
regular employment and fixed monthly income. Regard ing financial help to the 
needy who does not have regular employment and fixe d monthly income, it is 
stated that matter has been taken up with Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation. Regarding the out put, the DDA in its written replies stated as under :-  
 
 “ Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation i s the nodal ministry for 
providing housing for the needy.  For this purpose they have started the 
preliminary consultations with DDA to frame an appropriate scheme."  
 
 Redevelopment and upgradation of existing Areas 
 
 
2.85 When asked to clarify and give details of the attempts made by DDA with regard 
to redevelopment and upgradation of existing areas as they have been accounted for 
meeting 40% of future Housing needs, the DDA in its written replies stated as under :-  
 
 
“DDA in respect of Development Areas is considering  specific 
guidelines/regulations for redevelopment and upgrad ation.  However, no specific 
areas have so far been taken up for this purpose.” 
 
 MPD-2021 recommends re-development of existing urb an areas with enhanced 
FAR as there is a limitation in the development of new areas due to shortage of 
land.  It has been assessed that around 40% of hous ing needs can be potentially 
satisfied through re-development/up gradation of existing areas of Delhi.   
 
  

49 
 
 MCD/Local bodies shall prepare re-development plan s within their respective 
areas.  DDA has so far notified following regulatio ns in this regard as a follow up 
action:- 
 
1. The building regulations for special area unauth orised colonies and village 
abadis 2010 notified vide SO 97(E) dt. 17.1.2011. 
2. Regulations and guidelines for re-development of  existing planned 
industrial area notified vide SO 683(E) dt. 1.4.2011. 
3. Regulations for re-development of cluster of ind ustrial concentration in 
non-conforming areas/un-planned industrial area not ified vide SO 954 (E)  dt. 
1.5.2012. 
 
 MPD-2021 further recommends influence zone upto 50 0 mtrs on both sides 
along MRTs and major transport corridor which is en visaged as intensive 
development zone.  As such re-development schemes i n  the influence zone 
upto 500 mtr. on both sides of the MRTs/major trans port corridor are to be 
prepared. DDA has prepared draft regulations/guidel ines for development as 
influence zone and sent to MOUD on 5.5.2010 for the ir approval.  DDA is also 
working on the modalities of influence zone as Tran sit Oriented Development 
(TOD) which is envisaged as higher intensive mix us e /mixed income 
development along transport corridors.  DDA has pub lished a public notice on 
21.12.12 identifying following four TOD corridors a nd a pilot project at 
Karkardooma for inviting suggestions from public. 
 
Corridor 1: Chattarpur Metro Station to Arjangarh Metro Station. 
Corridor 2: Peeragarhi Metro Station to TikriKalan Metro Station. 
Corridor 3: Dwarka Mor Metro Station to Dwarka Sector 21 Metro Station. 
Corridor 4: Nehru Place Metro Station to Badarpur Metro Station. 
 
• Karkardooma TOD Pilot Project 
 
Further, development shall be taken up as per the approved policy of TOD by the 
concerned agencies. 
DDA has also taken an initiative for retrofitting a nd redevelopment of unsafe 
buildings in Delhi.  One such project in East Delhi  has already been taken u p as 
a case study. 
 
  
 
 
Setting up of the Escrew Fund for Maintenance of EWS Housing 
 
 

50 
 
2.86 When asked to give the details of the proposed  establishment of a Housing Trust 
Fund (HTF), the DDA in its written replies stated as under :-  
 
“There is no proposal of creating any Housing Trust Fund.” 
 
2.87 When asked to give details of the parties invo lved in the proposed Escrow fund 
and the regulatory authorities involved, the DDA in its written replies stated as under :-  
 
 “DDA is in the process of framing procedures/guide lines for setting up the 
ESCROW fund for long term maintenance of EWS housing in respect of in 
situ rehabilitation of JJ Clusters which are curren tly under 
construction/planning. 
 
 However, an escrow fund was established in pursuan ce of condition no. VI 
of Annexure of Gazette notification of Government o f India dated 
09.06.1999.  The receipt in this account was to be from the contribution 
@25,000/- per  dwelling unit of size 1000 sq. ft or  more plinth area.  Fund 
available in the account was to be utilized for con struction of houses for 
the EWS.  The fund was to be operated by DDA under specific direction of 
the Ministry of Urban Development.” 
  

51 
 
Chapter-III 
 
Regularisation of Unauthorised Colonies and Role of DDA  
 
 The process of regularization of unauthorized colo nies commenced with the 
notification of “Regulations for Regularization of Unauthorized Colonies in Delhi” notified 
vide Gazette Notification No.  S.O.683(E)  dt. 24.0 3.2008 and amendment therein 
notified vide Gazette Notification No.  S.O. 1452(E ) dt. 16.06.2008 and further 
amendment was notified vide Gazette Notification No. S.O. 1297 (E) dt. 06.06.12. 
 
3.2 Subsequently, Govt. of Delhi provided files of 1639 unauthorized colonies to DDA 
for examination as per the above mentioned regulati ons. Out of 1639 unauthorized 
colonies about  300 unauthorized colonies found to be falling in the Development Area 
of DDA. Based on the aerial photograph of the year 2002, an in –house exercise was 
carried out to assess the built up percentage of in dividual unauthorized colonies falling 
under Development Area of DDA. Accordingly, a repor t on built up percentage of 
unauthorized colonies falling in the Development Area of DDA was submitted to Govt. of 
Delhi. 
 
3.3 To facilitate Development work and processing o f layout plan by single agency, 
the Authority vide its Resolution No. 9/2008 dated 11.03.2008 resolved to de-notify 
unauthorized colonies falling within the Development Area of DDA. 
 
3.4 As stipulated in the regulations, DDA carried o ut the exercise of identification of 
unauthorized colonies which are causing hindrances to Master Plan / Zonal Plan Roads 
along with unauthorized colonies falling within Rid ge or Regional Park.  A list of 572 
colonies causing hindrance including around 50 colo nies falling within Regional Park 
have been duly indicated on the respective layout p lans have been submitted to Govt. 
of Delhi. 
 
 

52 
 
3.5 As per para 5.6 & 5.7 of the notification dt. 2 4.03.2008 simultaneously the local 
body / MCD to refer the case to GNCTD for regulariz ation and to DDA for land use 
change. As per clause 5.3 & 5.4 of the notification  dt. 06.06.2012 GNCTD will finalize 
the boundaries of each identified colonies having m ore than 50% built up area by 
superimposing the satellite /aerial survey images as obtained in 2007 on the layout plan 
submitted by the resident society. After fixing the  boundaries, GNCTD forward the 
layout plans to local body. Simultaneously, GNCTD w ill issue orders regularizing the 
colonies. Thereafter, DDA will affect change in lan d use and local body concern shall 
approve the layout plan.  
 
3.6 Recently, DDA has received layout plans of 895 unauthorized colonies which are 
cleared by Govt. of NCT of Delhi for regularization  for providing the status / land use of 
these colonies. Till date the examination of the sa me is under process by respective 
planning units from land use point of view.  Recent ly DDA has started receiving layout 
plans of unauthorised colonies prepared by GSDL fro m GNCTD for validation.  These 
plans are being examined. The status of these indiv idual layout plans are being sent to 
GNCTD. 
 
3.7 The DDA in their written note to the Committee informed as under:- 
 " The process of regularization of unauthorized co lonies commenced with the 
notification of “Regulations for Regularization of Unauthorized Colonies in Delhi” 
notified vide Gazette Notification No.  S.O.683(E)  dt. 24.03.2008 and 
amendment therein notified vide Gazette Notificatio n No.  S.O. 1452(E) dt. 
16.06.2008 and further amendment was notified vide Gazette Notification No. 
S.O. 1297 (E) dt. 06.06.12. 
 Subsequently, Govt. of Delhi provided files of 163 9 unauthorized colonies to DDA 
for examination as per the above mentioned regulati ons. Out of 1639 
unauthorized colonies about  300 unauthorized colon ies found to be falling in the 
Development Area of DDA. Based on the aerial photog raph of the year 2002, an 
in –house exercise was carried out to assess the built up percentage of individual 
unauthorized colonies falling under Development Are a of DDA. Accordingly, a 
report on built up percentage of unauthorized colon ies falling in the Development 
Area of DDA was submitted to Govt. of Delhi." 
 

53 
 
3.8 The salient features of the regulations for Reg ularization of unauthorized colonies 
in Delhi which has been notified vide Gazette Notif ication No. SO 683(E) dated 
24.03.2008 are as follows:- 
 Introduction:   States that on the directions of Hon'ble Court th e revised 
guidelines for unauthorized colonies framed. 
2. Definitions:  Definition of different terms used in the Regulati ons, 
Contiguity, Habitations, Lack of approval. 
3. Criteria for Regularization of Unauthorized Colonies : The cut off 
date for regularization is 31.03.2002.  Habitations  eligible for regularization.  
However following types of colonies are not to be considered for regularization: 
 a) Unauthorized colonies falling in notified or re served forest area. 
 b) Unauthorized colonies which pose hindrances to infrastructural 
facilities. 
 c) Unauthorized colonies where more than 50% plot are unbuilt. 
 d) Unauthorized colonies which violate the provisi ons of Ancient 
Monuments and    Archaeological Sites and Remains A ct, 1958.  
Further the criteria states that Residential buildi ngs used for non-residential 
purposes except those covered under the mixed land use regulations contained 
in Master Plan for Delhi- 2021.  Action against una uthorized construction which 
do not fulfill the conditions of regularization.  T hese Regulations does not relate 
to affluent colonies. 
4. Procedure for Regularization :   The residents of Unauthorized colonies 
shall establish a registered Society that will subm it Layout Plan alongwith all 
relevant documents and information to Local bodies concerned and a copy to 
Delhi Government.  The Delhi Govt. shall issue prov isional regularization 
certificate to them.  And then Local bodies would c omplete formalities for formal 
regularization. 
5. Steps/ procedure to be followed by local body,  DDA/ GNCTD :   For 
regularization a separate cell shall be created whi ch will scrutinize Layout Plans.  
Simultaneously Delhi govt. shall finalize the bound ary and thereafter it will 
formally forward the layout plan to local body for approval. 
6. Parameters/ basis for regularization:    This includes title of land, 
planning norms, mixed use, recovery of cost/ development charges. 
7. Miscellaneous:   The local bodies after scrutiny of plans may sanc tion the 
same and if found violating guidelines it may refus e the same.  Further 
Regulations to be read together with Guidelines.  L astly the entire process is to 
be coordinated by Delhi Govt. 
 The salient features of the regulation for regular ization of unauthorized 
colonies in Delhi notified on 24.03.2008 is as under: 
• habitation that have come up as extension to villa ge abadi and are outside the 
Lal Dora of village, would be eligible for regulari zation on the basis as those of 
unauthorized colonies the cut off date for regulari zation was 31.03.2002.  
However, vide notification S.O.No. 1297 dated 6th June 2012 an amendment has 
been made which is as given below: 

54 
 
"GNCTD will finalize the boundaries of each identif ied colony having more than 
50% built up area, by superimposing the satellite/ aerial survey images as 
obtained in 2007 on the layout plan submitted by the resident society." 
• Following types of colonies or parts thereof would  not be considered for 
regularization, colonies falling in notified or res erved forest, unauthorized 
colonies which pose hindrances in the provision of infrastructure facilities or fall in 
the Right of way of existing / proposed railway lin es.  Master Plan road and 
major/ trunk water supply and sewerage lines. 
• Unauthorized colonies/ parts of unauthorized colon ies/ habitations which violates 
the provisions of Ancient Monuments Archeological s ites and Remains Act, 1958 
shall not be regularized. 
• No regularization will be done in respect of resid ential building used for non-
residential purposes except covered under Mixed Land Use. 
 
3.9 When the Committee inquired DDA about the Amend ments carried so far, DDA 
replied as under:- 
"The regulations have been amended twice: 
a) 16.06.2008: Provided for issue of PRCs 
b) 06.06.2012: Amended the procedure, without alter ing the eligibility criteria. It 
enabled GNCTD to (i) fix boundary and issue order o f regularization without prior 
approval of lay out plans, and to (ii) take into ac count any natural boundary if 
available on any one or more sides of UC. 
 
The process of regularization of unauthorized colon ies commenced with the 
notification of "Regularization of Unauthorized col onies in Delhi" notified vide 
Gazette Notification No. S.O. 683(E) dated 24.03.20 08 and amendment therin 
notified vide Gazette Notification No. S.O. 1452(E)  dated 16.06.2008 and further 
amendment was notified vide Gazette Notification No . S.O. 1297(E) dated 
06.06.2010" 
 
3.10 DDA in their written note had informed as unde r:- 
 "To facilitate Development work and processing of layout plan by single agency, 
the Authority vide its Resolution No. 9/2008 dated 11.03.2008 resolved to de-
notify unauthorized colonies falling within the Development Area of DDA." 
 
 
3.11 In view of the above information by DDA, the C ommittee inquired DDA about the 
officer responsible for keeping record of notified and denotified land under DDA.  DDA 
informed as under:- 

55 
 
  "Land Management Department under DDA keeps the r ecord of 
notified / de-notified land.  Total land measuring 90326.61 acres has so far been 
notified/ acquired.   
  The organogram of the Department is as under: 
"                                                                                                                         (Page-302) 
 
3.12 On the basis of the reply of the DDA, it can b e inferred that no land has been 
denotified till date by DDA.  When the Committee inquired about the same, DDA 
furnished the following reply:- 
  "Yes, DDA does not denotify any land.  De-notific ation is carried out by  
  GNCTD." 
3.13 Since, DDA notifies the land, therefore, the C ommittee inquired about the 
ordinance issued by DDA with respect to the notifie d land, alongwith the procedure 
followed for the same. DDA in their written reply, submitted as under:- 
 "DDA has been undertaking Large Scale Acquisition,  Development and Disposal 
of Land vigorously up to 2007, through GNCTD.  Howe ver, due to a number of 
court cases with respect to compensation and delay in resolving the litigation 
issues there has been little acquisition of land since then. 
 The MPD-2021 progress for (i) Review of the scheme  of large scale development 
and acquisition and its relevance in the present context; (ii) Alternative options for 
development of areas identified for urbanization in  MPD—2021; (iii) Evolving a 
system under which planning for and provision of ba sic infrastructure could take 
place simultaneously with reference to (i) and (ii)  above; and (vi) Involving the 
private sector in the assembly and development of l and and provision of 
infrastructure service. 
 As part of MPD-1962, the acquisition of land and d evelopment for various land 
uses was envisaged in two stages i.e., Stage-I: 28, 070  acres & Stage-II: 34,130 
acres, with a total of 62,200 acres. 
 In the MPD-2001, about 18,000-24000 ha. area was e nvisaged to be developed 
through land pooling policy. 
 No ordinance in respect of notified land is issued  by DDA.  Proposals for 
declaration of Development Area is sent by DDA to t he Land & Building 
Department of GNCTD. 
 
Principal 
Commissio 
ner 
  (Land 
Manageme 
nt) ►  
Commissio 
ner 
  (Land 
Manageme 
nt) ►  
Director(L 
and 
Managem 
ent)/ HQ                                               
                           
►  
 
Dy. 
Dir 
(New 
Leas 
es)-
II ►  
 
Tehsil 
dar 
(Land 
Recor 
d) ►  

56 
 
3.14 As per provisions of Master Plan, 3% to 4% of land acquired under the Scheme 
of Large Scale Acquisition, Development & Disposal of land in Delhi is utilized for 
commercial use.  When the Committee inquired DDA ab out the concept of "Scheme of 
Large Scale Acquisition, Development & Disposal of Land in Delhi", DDA submitted as 
under:- 
"In MPD-1962, it is mentioned that planned growth i n the past has been 
hampered by lack of developed land and speculation in land. The stock of land 
built up by government when New Delhi was planned p roved to be a great 
standby, particularly in settling the large number of displaced people. Very little of 
that is left now. As a result the prices of develop ed land have soared in recent 
years and the low and middle income groups have res orted to unauthorised 
house construction in the absence of developed land within their means. 
 
Further, it is mentioned that recognizing the above  fact and also as a major 
policy, Government of India has notified for acquisition about 35,000 acres of land 
all around the present built up areas which will be sufficient for the growth of Delhi 
according to plan for the next 10 years or so. Step s are also being taken to 
develop land for industry, commerce, residential uses and community facilities. 
 
These were planning policies which on which the pla n is based. These decisions 
have been arrived at by the planning authority as a  result of the physical and 
socio-economic studies in preparing the plan. To tr anslate these broad policies 
into physical form, certain desirable planning prin ciples have been adopted, 
which would be workable in the Delhi situation. App lying certain standards for 
allocation to the various land uses, a land use pat tern was evolved, which is 
synthesis of the planning principles, to arrive at a comprehensive plan best suited 
for present needs and the future growth of the capital. 
 
All this land will remain under public ownership an d developed plots or 
undeveloped land will be leased out to individuals and cooperative societies on 
an equitable basis, so that the benefit of planned growth accrues to the common 
man and the government can also have a share of the  future rise in the price of 
land.  
 
The ownership of land by government makes planning and the implementation of 
plans easier and is imperative if slum clearance, r edevelopment and subsidized 
housing and provision of community facilities accor ding to accepted standards 
have to be undertaken, as indeed, they must be in Delhi, in a determined way. 
 
Section 12 to 15 of Delhi Development Act, 1957 pro vides for declaration of 
development areas and the development of land in th ese and other areas as well 
as acquisition and disposal of land. 
 

57 
 
Section 7 of DD Act, 1957 directs that the Authorit y shall not only prepare the 
Master Plan, but also indicate the stages by which any such development shall 
be carried out. Accordingly, in MPD-1962 staging of  development of the Delhi 
Master Plan is provided wherein acquisition of land  and development is also 
indicated for different use zones and Public Utilities.   
 
Hence, from the above it can be established that co ncept of “Scheme of Large 
Scale Acquisition, Development & Disposal of Land in Delhi” is basically acquiring 
of land as projected in the plan based on the proje ction of growth pattern, 
population, studies and standards/norms for the pla nned development of the city 
in a harmonious and balanced way. 
 
DDA has been undertaking this large scale acquisiti on, development and 
disposal of land vigorously up to 2007 by acquiring  lands through GNCTD. 
However, due to a number of court cases with respec t to compensation and 
delay in resolving litigation issues there has been  reduction in the acquisition of 
land. 
 
MPD-2021 also proposes for (i) Review of the scheme  of large scale 
development and acquisition and its relevance in th e present context; (ii) 
Alternative options for development of areas identi fied for urbanization in MPD-
2021; (iii) Evolving a system under which planning for and provision of basic 
infrastructure could take place simultaneously with  reference to (i) and (ii) above; 
and (iv) Involving the private sector in the assembly and development of land and 
provision of infrastructure services. In this regar d, the draft Policy on Public-
Private Partnership in Land Assembly and Development in Delhi is in the process 
of formulation. 
 
Accordingly, to involve private developers in devel opment of housing, Central 
Government notified Land Pooling Policy (i.e., to i nvolve the private sector in the 
assembly and development of land and provision of i nfrastructure services) vide 
notification S.O.2687 (E) dated 05.09.2013.  
 
In the Land Pooling Policy it is envisaged that dev elopment of land measuring 
about 22,000-24,000 ha. will be taken up by private  developers. As per the said 
policy, maximum 53% of land is for gross residentia l use which will provide 
50,000 DUs approximately for Economically Weaker Se ctions (EWS) housing for 
every 1000 ha. of land pooled. Further, FAR of 400 is allowed to meet the 
residential requirement and 15% of FAR over and abo ve of permissible FAR is 
reserved for EWS housing."                                   
       
 
3.15 Land of DDA that is under encroachment in vari ous parts of Delhi, at present in 
1402.16 Acres as per following details:- 
   

58 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Land encroached (in Acres) 
(i) South West Zone 103.67 
(ii) South East Zone 168.51 
(iii) West Zone 128.00 
(iv) North Zone 242.90 
(v) East Zone 679.08 
(vi) Rohini Zone 80.00 
Total  1402.16  
 
3.16 On the issue of role of DDA in respect of regu larization of unauthorized colonies, 
DDA has furnished the following information:- 
"In exercise of power conferred under section 57 of  Delhi Development Act 1957 
(61 of 1957) the Delhi Development Authority with t he approval of Central 
Government notified "Regulation for Regularization of unauthorized colonies in 
Delhi" vide Gazette Notification No. S.O -683(E) da ted 23.3.2008 and 
subsequently few amendments therein notified vide G azettee Notification No. 
S.O. 1452(E) dated 16.06.2008 and further amendment  was notified vide 
Gazette notification No. S.O. 1297(E) dated 06.06.2 012 .The role of DDA 
includes following: 
a) A separate cell to be created in DDA. 
b) Scrutiny of layout plan as per land use specific ally with respect to colonies 
posing hindrances in  the provision of infrastructu re facilities or fall in the 
area of right of way (ROW) of existing / proposed r ailway lines; Master Plan 
roads and major/ trunk water supply and sewerage li nes.  (This exercise is 
completed and the report submitted to GNCTD) 
c) Assessment of built-up percentage of the colony as per aerial photographs 
with respect to colonies falling within the Develop ment Area of DDA (This 
exercise is completed and the report submitted to G NCTD.)  Now the 
Authority has denotified all the unauthorized colon ies falling within the 
Development Area of DDA, hence the entire work is t o be done by local 
body. 
d) Cost of the land shall be collected by Local Bod y/ DDA on behalf of land 
owning agency in respect of colonies on public land. 
e) Change of land use of those colonies which are f alling in the non-
compatible land use once it is regularized by GNCTD. 
Wherever required DDA also processes requests for c hange of land use 
after layout plans are approved by Local bodies. 
The Regulations have been notified by DDA on 24.03. 2008 amended on 
16.06.2008 and 06.06.2012. 
Under the Regulations, the role of DDA includes interalia the following: 
a) Creation of separate Unauthorized Colonies (UCs)  cell.  (Clause 5.1) 
b) Action against UCs which do not fulfill eligibil ity criteria (Clause 3.5) 
c) Approval of layout plans for UCs falling within Development Areas (Clause 
4.2) and collection of cost of land for social infrastructure 

59 
 
d) Taking over available land for social infrastruc ture 
e) Change of land use (Clause 5.6) 
f) Participation in committee for conferment of tit le." 
 
3.17 DDA further informed the Committee that work r elated to regularization of 
unauthorized colonies is being undertaken, coordina ted, monitored and supervised by 
GNCTD, including the unauthorized colonies over DDA land.  As per the record of lands 
Deptt. of DDA out of 1639 colonies stated for regul arization 248 unauthorized colonies 
falls in DDA land.  Lands Deptt. of DDA has made th e request to Govt. of Delhi not to 
include vacant DDA land as a part of layout plan of unauthorized colony. 
 As per GNCTD, DDA has to furnish the same.  All su ch colonies, otherwise 
fulfilling the eligibility criteria are proposed to be regularized.                            
 
3.18 The work related to regularization of unauthor ized colonies is being undertaken, 
coordinated, monitored and supervised by GNCTD. The  regularization of unauthorized 
colonies done in September 2012 by GNCTD must be ba sed on the laid down criteria. 
On being inquired about the criteria that have been laid down the Ministry in their written 
reply submitted as under:- 
"After amendment in the Regulations issued vide not ification dated 6.6.2012 by 
DDA, the Survey of India/Geo Spatial Delhi Ltd.  (G SDL) was asked to prepare 
the boundary maps of the colonies in terms of claus e 5.3 of the Regulations and 
accordingly in case of 895 colonies the boundaries were fixed by Delhi Govt. and 
regularization order dated 4.9.2012 was issued by G NCTD. The following criteria 
were followed: 
1. The colony should have 10% built up as per 202 a erial photographs. 
2. The colony should have more than 50% built up ar ea as per aerial photographs 
of 2007. 
3. Boundary of such colonies were delineated by Sur vey of India/ GSDL and were 
finalized vide order dated 4.9.2012 issued by GNCTD. 
 
3.19 GNCTD has further informed the Committee that regularization of 895 
unauthorized has been considered vide order dated 4 .9.2012 of the department.  Action 
is being taken for further processing of getting bo undaries demarcated through 
Revenue Department for ensuring land status to take  further action under Regulations 
dated 24.3.2008.  
        

60 
 
3.20 It is mentioned that 1639 colonies stated for regularization, out of them 248 
unauthorized colonies falls in DDA Land.  It was st ated that DDA has to furnish the 
same. The Committee inquired about the position of the 248 unauthorized colonies.  
DDA in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 " Out of 1639 colonies stated for regularization, on ly 248 colonies fall in DDA 
land.  The unauthorized colonies on DDA land are al so under consideration for 
regularization by the Government of National Capita l Territory of Delhi as per the 
approved guidelines issued in this regard vide Noti fication No. F 
3(11)2004/MP/Part I vide S.O. 683(E) dated 24.03.2008." 
 
 
3.21 As per the record of lands Department of DDA o ut of 1639 colonies stated for 
regularization 248 unauthorized colonies falls in D DA land.  Lands Department of DDa 
has made the request to Government of Delhi not to include vacant DDA land as a part 
of lay out plan of unauthorized colony.  The Commit tee inquired about the response of 
Government of Delhi alongwith the status of regular ization of the 248 unauthorized 
colonies.  DDA in their written reply submitted as under:- 
"DDA had informed regarding status around 40 coloni es in which unauthorized 
colony has come up on DDA land and it was requested  by DDA to delete certain 
khasra numbers from the layout plans of the unautho rized colonies.  In response 
Delhi Govt. has asked DDA to identify the built up land and vacant land as per 
the cut-off date prescribed under the NCT of Delhi (Special Laws) Second Act, 
2011 and as per the Regulations for unauthorized Co lonies in Delhi, notified by 
DDA vide Notification dated 24.3.2008 and to incorp orate the same in maps 
being prepared by Survey of India/ GSDL.  DDA was a lso advised to take 
necessary action for removal / demolition of the en croachment/ unauthorized 
constructions on the DDA land as per the law.  Even  if any DDA's vacant land 
falls in the boundaries of unauthorized colonies, the ownership of the vacant land 
remains with DDA and it the duty of DDA to protect such land because in the 
overall frame work and scheme of regularization, DD A land cannot be treated 
differently from other Govt. / public land.                                              
 
3.22 On being asked about the action being taken by  GNCTD in connection with the 
unauthorized colonies over DDA land also, DDA furni shed the following reply in their 
written submission:- 
"  The regulations allow regularization of Unauthor ized Colonies on government/ 
public land as well as on private land.  The regula tions do not make any 
distinction between DDA land and other government/ public land. 

61 
 
There are unauthorized colonies which have come up on DDA land, the Lands 
Department of DDA has made request to GNCTD to leav e the vacant DDA land 
falling within the layout plans of unauthorized colonies." 
 
3.23 The Committee inquired about the separate cell  that was to be created in DDA 
for regularizing unauthorized colonies.  DDA in the ir written reply informed the 
Committee as under:- 
 "There already exists a unit in DDA, which is acti vely participating with Govt. of 
Delhi and MCD as per the notified guidelines/ polic y in respect of regularizing 
unauthorized colonies." 
 
3.24 It is stated that scrutiny of lay out plan as per land use specifically with respect  to  
colonies posing hindrances in the provision of infr astructure facility fall in the area of 
right of way of existing/proposed railway lines, ma ster plan roads and major public trunk 
water supply and sewerage lines.(This exercise is c ompleted and the report submitted 
to GNCTD).  The Committee inquired about the action  taken by GNCTD.  The Ministry 
in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 
 " The area posing hindrance in the provisions of i nfrastructural facility were 
marked by the DDA in the maps prepared by Survey of  India/ Geo Spatial Delhi 
Ltd. (GSDL) and the said part of the land earmarked  by DDA are not eligible for 
regularization  as per clause 3.3 (b) of notificati on dated 24.03.2008 of 
Regulations for regularization of unauthorized colo nies in Delhi, issued by DDA.  
Such areas would be deleted from the regularization process by GNCTD.   
 
3.25 Assessment of built-up percentage of the colon y as per aerial photographs with 
respect to colonies falling within the Development Area of DDA(This exercise is 
completed and the report submitted to GNCTD.) Now the Authority has denotified all the 
unauthorized colonies falling within the Developmen t Area of DDA, hence the entire 
work is to be done by the local body.  The Committee inquired about the  action that has 
been taken by MCD till date.  The Ministry in their  written reply furnished the following 
reply:- 
 " The UD department, GNCTD vide order dated 04-09- 2012 has identified 895 
colonies for regularization out of which 312 coloni es falling on private land have 
been notified regularized from the date of order i. e. 04-09-2012 and the 
remaining 583 colonies falling on Govt. land shall be notified regularized from 
time to time after payment of the cost of land.  Th e boundary of 895 colonies 

62 
 
have been fixed / finalized by GNCTD.  Out of the 3 12 colonies 50 colonies are 
falling under the jurisdiction of East Delhi Munici pal Corporation (EDMC), 42 in 
North Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC) and 220 in  South Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (SDMC).  Resident Welfare Association ( RWA)/ Resident Society 
are required to get the lay out plan revised and submit the same for approval.  As 
per order of GNCTD, the lay out plans to be submitted by RWA/ Resident Society 
are to have proper planning inputs. 
 So far, no layout plan by any Resident Welfare Ass ociation (RWA)/ Resident 
Society has been submitted with any local body.  Lo cal Bodies took initiative by 
way of requesting three institutes vis School of Pl anning & Architecture (SPA), 
I.P. University and Jamia University to take up pre paration of lay out plan for 
RWA's with proper Town Planning inputs.  The paymen ts to these institutes is to 
be made by RWA's.  RWA's also are free to engage an y consultant for the work 
on their own.  The institutes took up work for 15 c olonies, 5 in each Corporation 
however, the same is not making progress for want o f extension of financial 
assistance to the institutes.  RWA's are not coming forward to take initiative. 
 The issue has been discussed in the Task Force mee ting on 4.1.2013 and U.D. 
Deptt. asked Corporation to make them available the  list of 15 colonies who 
could be directed by the U.D. Deptt. to immediately  deposit the amount in the 
form of bank draft to be paid to these institutions with U.D. Deptt. 
 The further course of action on non-submission of the requisite fees with U.D. 
Deptt. or layout plans with Local Body for approval, shall be decided by GNCTD."  
 
3.26 DDA had mentioned that so far, no lay out plan  by any Resident Welfare 
Association (RWA) Society has been submitted with a ny local body for regularization of 
colonies.  The Committee inquired about the action that has been taken by the MCD in 
this regard.  DDA in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 "The GNCTD, has identified 895 colonies for regula rization vide order dated 
4.9.2012.  Out of these 312 colonies falling on Pvt. Land were regularized from the 
date of order.  The GNCTD, vide letter No. F. No. 
617/UD/UC/2012?POLICY/14657 dated 09.11.2012 has fu rther conveyed that the 
payment for preparation of layout plan shall be pai d by the RWA's themselves.  
Accordingly, letters were sent to the RWA's to get the layout plan prepared within 
the boundaries fixed by the GNCTD with proper town planning inputs and as per 
notified regulations and to submit the same to the respective Corporation for 
approval of competent authority.  Further, the SDMC  took the initiative for 
preparation of lay out plans and four layout plans were prepared through the 
School of Planning and Architecture and approved by  the Standing Committee.  
The payment for the preparation of these layout pla ns is being made by 
Corporation, which shall be recovered from the RWA' s before release of layout/ 
regularization plan.  The North DMC and East DMC ha ve approved 3 and 2 
regularization plans respectively.  However, the following is submitted: 
   

63 
 
 As per policy of regularization of unauthorized co lonies notified by Govt. of India, 
the role of DDA is limited to the following:- 
 
To mark the proposed / existing Zonal plan/ Master Plan roads on the layout 
plan of unauthorized colonies (unauthorized colonie s creating hindrances to 
Zonal Plan/ Master Plan Roads). 
Once the unauthorized colonies  are regularized by the Govt. of Delhi, the 
change of land use, if any, is to be carried by DDA  under Section 11A of 
D.D.Act, 1957.                                                             
 
 
3.27 In Rajya Sabha, question was asked about the h urdles being faced in some 
unauthorized colonies have been overcome or not; the Ministry replied:- 
 " Urban Development, Government of NCT of Delhi ha s informed that suitable 
actions are being taken by the local body and the g overnment of NCT of Delhi to 
implement all steps required in the process of regularization" 
 
3.28 When the Committee inquired about the steps be ing taken by the Government of 
NCT of Delhi in this regard, DDA in their written reply submitted as under:- 
  "Yes Sir, 
a) Orders for fixation of boundaries has been issue d in respect of 895 colonies 
as per order dated 04.09.2012  
b) Local bodies are in the process of approval of l ay out plans in respect of 
these 895 colonies. 
c) Rest of colonies are being examined for regulari sation." 
                                                           
 
3.29 The Committee were informed that Government of  Delhi provided files of 1639 
unauthorized colonies to DDA for examination as per  the regularizations of 2008.  Out 
of 1639 unauthorized colonies found to be falling i n the Development Area of DDA, a 
report on built up percentage of unauthorized colon ies falling in the Development Area 
of DDA was submitted to Government of Delhi. 895 co lonies were recommended for 
regularization. 
 
3.30 The Committee asked DDA as to whether scrutiny  was carried out why these 
colonies were found fit for regularization.  DDA informed in their written reply as under: 
 "After issue of notification dated 06/06/2012 for amendment of the Regulations, 
GNCTD with the assistance of Survey of India (SOI) could, in the first instance, 

64 
 
fix the boundaries in around 900 colonies and as pe r the amended clause 5.3 
issued orders for fixation of boundaries and regula rization in respect of 895 
colonies.  Remaining unauthorized colonies are under consideration. 
 DDA received files of 1639 unauthorized colonies f rom Govt. of Delhi.  As per the 
Gazette Notification dated 24.03.2008, certain acti ons were to be carried out by 
DDA, namely identification of built-up percentage o f unauthorized colonies falling 
within the Development Area of DDA and identificati on of unauthorized colonies 
posing hindrances in the provision of infrastructur e facilities or fall in the area of 
Right of Way (ROW) of existing/ proposed railway li nes; Master Plan roads and 
major/ trunk water supply and sewerage lines.  The DDA supplied all the 
information as per above along with list of colonie s falling in the Regional park 
land use as per master Plan Delhi 2021.  Based on t his scrutiny, it is the 
responsibility of Govt. of Delhi to declare regularization of any colony." 
 
3.31 The Committee inquired about the agency that h as been given work relating to 
layout plan and the present status of  300 unauthor ized colonies.  DDA in their written 
reply furnished the following reply:- 
"The preparation of lay out plan is the responsibil ity of RWA whereas the local 
bodies have to consider the same for approval.  RWA  has the choice of having 
the lay out plan prepared from any qualified archit ect/ professional of their 
choice.  In case of difficulty, the RWA can approac h three qualified agencies 
identified by Municipal corporations namely IP University, School of Planning and 
Architecture and Jamia Milia University who have ag reed to do the work on pre-
determined agreed rates. 
Earlier Govt. of Delhi has entrusted this work for delineation of boundary of 
unauthorized colonies to Survey of India under Delh i State Spatial Data 
Infrastructure (DSSDI) project.  Now this work has been taken over by Geospatial 
Delhi Ltd.  Details may be obtained from Govt. of Delhi. 
300 colonies were not denotified as unauthorized co lonies, moreover, to facilitate 
development work and processing of lay out plan by single agency, the Authority 
vide its resolution no. 9/2008 dated 11.03.2008 res olved to de-notify 
unauthorized colonies falling within the Development Area of DDA." 
 
3.32 It has been informed to the Committee that as stipulated in regulations, DDA 
carried out the exercise of identification of unaut horized colonies which are causing 
hindrances to Master Plan/ Zonal Plan roads along w ith unauthorized colonies falling 
within Regional Park have been duly indicated on th e respective Layout Plans have 
been submitted to Government of Delhi.  The Committ ee inquired about its present 
status from DDA.  DDA in their written reply submitted as under:- 

65 
 
 " GNCTD while coordinating, asked DDA to get the h indrances, mentioned in 
clause 3.3 (b), marked in all 1639 colonies through  SOI, DSSDI project.  By 
necessary implication such hindrances are excluded from regularization. 
 Based on the above exercise/ status the Govt. of D elhi to decide which colonies 
are fit for regularization.  Details may be obtained from Govt. of Delhi." 
 
3.33 The Committee were informed by DDA that Biomet ric Survey was to be 
conducted in the Bhagya Vihar Colony, situated on t he land of three villages Ranikhera, 
Madanpur and Mubarakpur, on the basis of which resi dents are to be shifted to EWS 
houses in Dwarka.  On being inquired about the pres ent status of this Biometric Survey, 
Ministry of Urban Development in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 "Physical survey of these villages has not been ca rried out yet due to resistance 
from the local villages.  As the possession of land  in these villages has not been 
handed over to DDA by LAC/ L&B Deptt., GNCTD, surve y for rehabilitation is to 
be done by L&B Deptt. of GNCTD."   
                                                                  
 
3.34 During the course of oral evidence of public r epresentative on the subject, 
Committee came to know about the concept of built-u p area in regularization of 
unauthorized colonies.  In this regard the Committe e inquired from DDA about the 
concept of built-up area and how it is decided by D DA in any colony.  DDA in their 
written reply submitted as under:- 
"As per the Regulations of Unauthorized Colonies in  Delhi notified 
vide Gazette Notification S.O. 683(E) dated 24th Ma rch, 2008, under para 3.3  
"The following types of colonies or parts thereof w ould not be considered for 
Regularization": 
Sub para (c) of para 3.3 "Unauthorized colonies/ ha bitations where 
more than 50% plots are un-built on the date of for mal announcement of 
regularization scheme.  However, plots which have b een built up in the above 
mentioned colonies, even after 31-3-2002 and till the date of formal announcement 
of regularization scheme will be taken into conside ration for eligibility of the colony 
for regularization." 
In view of the above, GNCTD had asked DDA and MCD t o provide 
information of built up area of individual colonies falling within their jurisdiction. 
As far as DDA is concerned an exercise of built-up area falling in individual 
unauthorized colonies were carried out with respect  to those unauthorized 
colonies falling within the jurisdiction of DDA, i. e Unauthorized colonies falling in 
Development Area of DDA.  Hence, the report of buil t-up percentage of 228 
unauthorized colonies (as per Aerial Photo-interpre tation) and report of 306 
unauthorized colonies falling in Development area o f DDA along with 241 
unauthorized colonies falling in DDA acquired land (based on physical survey by 

66 
 
land Department of DDA) were sent to Urban Developm ent Department of 
GNCTD. 
It was decided to denotify all the unauthorized col onies falling in the 
Development Area of DDA so that the concerned local  Bodies and GNCTD could 
immediately take up the work in these areas/ colonies. 
Since then the entire work of unauthorized colonies  has been 
transferred to MCD/ GNCTD.  As per the policy for r egularization of unauthorized 
colonies notified by Govt. of India, the role of DDA is limited to the following:- 
 
1. To mark the proposed/ existing Zonal Plan/ Maste r Plan roads on the lay out 
plan of unauthorized colonies (Unauthorized colonie s creating hindrances to 
Zonal Plan/ Master Plan roads) 
2. Once the unauthorized colonies are regularized b y Govt. of Delhi, the change of 
land use, if any, to be carried out by DDA under section 11A of D.D. Act, 1957. 
 
Procedure followed by DDA to identify built up area of unauthorized colonies:- 
 
 For identification of built-up area of unauthorize d colonies, DDA relied on 
aerial photographs of the year 2002.  First delinea tion of boundary of 
unauthorized colonies was made on the aerial photog raphs and the visual 
interpretation was made while counting the individu al structure.  As such 
due to higher resolution of aerial photographs indi vidual structures could be 
identified easily. 
 Simultaneously, DDA also carried out physical surv eys of colonies falling 
in Development Areas of DDA as well as unauthorized  colonies falling in 
DDA acquired land." 
 
Encroachment of DDA Land 
 
 
3.35 As per Annual Report of 2010-11 of DDA the mos t important function of Land 
Management Department of DDA is to protect DDA land  from encroachments.  The 
Committee inquired DDA about the steps taken by the m in this regard, during last five 
years.  The DDA in their written reply furnished the following answer:- 
 "The steps taken by the Delhi Development Authorit y (DDA) to curb further 
encroachment in public places by removing illegal s tructures in National Capital 
Territory (NCT) of Delhi include the following: 
 
(i) In Development Areas under the control of the D DA, as and when any 
unauthorized / illegal structure came to the notice , action was initiated under 
section 30(i) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 an d after following due 
process of law, order of demolition of unauthorized / illegal structure was 
passed.  Thereafter, the unauthorized / illegal str uctures were removed in the 
demolition programme, fixed with the approval of th e competent authority.  

67 
 
Now, most of the Development Areas have been de-notified from the purview of 
the DDA. 
(ii) As and when the case of encroachment on DDA la nd comes to the notice of 
Delhi Development authority (DDA), action to remove / stop it was taken as per 
law. 
During the last five years valuable Govt. / DDA lan d measuring 402.428 
Acres reclaimed detail given below: 
Year  Demolition 
programme 
fixed (in 
nos.) 
Demolition 
programme 
carried out 
(in nos.) 
Land 
reclaimed 
(in Acres) 
2007-08 646 455 121.70 
2008-09 370 199 38.09 
2009-10 414 278 138.84 
2010-11 385 249 48.57 
2011-12 364 258 50.23 
2012-
13(Sept, 
13) 
88 576 4.998 
Total 2267 2015 402.428 
 
Action to remove the encroachment on the DDA/ Govt.  land within the 
parameters of 248 unauthorized colonies existing on  DDA land could not be 
taken up due to applicability of the National Capit al Territory of Delhi Laws 
(Special Provisions) Act, 2006 promulgated from time to time. 
(iii) For the protection of DDA land, boundary wall s have been constructed around 
vacant land, warning boards showing ownership of DDA are fixed/ displayed. 
(iv) Security Guards, revenue officials have been d eployed for keeping strict 
vigilance/ watch and ward of the Govt. / DDA land. 
(v) In addition, the policy initiatives, taken by M inistry of Urban Development in this 
regard include in-situ rehabilitation of Jhuggi Dwe llers and regularization on un-
authorized colonies in Delhi. 
(vi) In addition to the above, the Hon'ble Lieutena nt Governor, Delhi in the meeting 
held on 04.01.2011, discussed the strategy and plan  of action against all illegal 
and dangerous constructions in Delhi. 
Lt. Governor, Delhi has vide letter No. F-27/SDMK/ KJ/ 2010/96 dated 
30.3.2011 constituted a Special Task Force under th e convenership of Sub 
Divisional Magistrate of each Sub Division.  Zonal Dy. Directors and Executive 
Engineers of DDA are also members of this task forc e.  As far as DDA is 
concerned, it has its own Land Management Departmen t which is responsible 
for removal of encroachment on DDA Land. 
 
3.36 The Committee inquired from DDA about the unau thorized colonies that are 
coming up in areas which have been acquired by DDA for their development.  DDA in 
their written reply submitted as under:- 

68 
 
 "No new unauthorized colonies are allowed to come up on DDA land.  246 
unauthorized colonies are existing on DDA land.  So me of the unauthorized 
colonies came up earlier prior to taking over the p hysical possession of acquired 
land from Land Acquisition Collector/ Land & Buildi ng Deptt, GNCTD.  Land 
Management Department has six zonal Dy. Directors t o conduct regular watch 
and ward on fresh encroachment and get them removed immediately." 
 
3.37 The Committee inquired about how many kabadi m arkets, illegal shopping 
complexes, repairing shops and illegal parking are there in the DDA land.  DDA in their 
written reply submitted as under:- 
 "No encroachment on DDA's land is allowed in the f orm of kabadi markets, illegal 
shopping complexes, repairing shops, illegal parkin g, etc.  As and when 
encroachment comes to notice on DDA land the same i s removed.  In the last 
one year land measuring 26.03acres was reclaimed fr om the above mentioned 
type of encroachments." 
 
3.38 The Committee inquired about the new colonies that have come up after Madan 
Pur Khadar for slum development.  DDA informed as under:- 
  "Matter pertains to UD Department of GNCTD and De lhi Urban Shelter  
  Improvement Board (DUSIB). 
  After Madanpur Khadar, some parts of Bawana and N arela projects have  
  been  used for slum development / rehabilitation of slum evictees." 
           
 
3.39 On being inquired by the Committee about not t aking any action when 
unauthorized colonies were coming up on DDA land.  DDA replied as under: 
 "DDA takes action on all the fresh encroachment in  DDA land.  However, 
the encroachment that came up earlier are protected  which cannot be 
removed due the enactment of GNCTD Delhi Special (P rovision) Act 2011 
extended up to 31.12.2014.  Built up construction at the time of taking over 
possession of land from LAC/ L&B Dept. GNCTD also a dds to the 
problem."    
                                                                                         
 
3.40 DDA had stated that the process of encroachmen t removal is a continuous 
process and timely action is taken as when any encr oachment is reported.  1402.16 
acres of DDA land has been encroached in various pa rts of Delhi, mostly in the form of 
JJ Clusters (280.91 acres approx.)  and unauthorize d colonies could not be taken due 

69 
 
to enactment of Delhi laws (Special provisions) Act , 2006.  The Committee inquired 
about the rationale behind protecting the encroached land under such Act.  DDA in their 
written reply submitted as under:- 
 "Due to the provisions of GNCTD Delhi Special (Pro vision) Act 2011, old 
encroachment / built up construction existing befor e 2007 are not removed.  The 
increasing populations and lack of shelter must be reason for enactment of such 
Act." 
3.41  DDA had informed the Committee that out of 14 02.16 acres on encroached land, 
DDA has reclaimed 479.884 acres land.  The Committe e inquired about the status of 
remaining encroached land.  DDA in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 "DDA has reclaimed 479.884 acres land.  Land measu ring 1402.16 acres are 
encroached and is protected by the Delhi Laws (Spec ial provisions) Act, 2011, 
due to old encroachments prior to 2007, court orders, etc." 
 
3.42 The Committee were informed by DDA that DDA la nd under encroachment are 
protected under National Capital Territory of Delhi  Law (Special Provisions) Act, 2006 
which is extended up to 31.12.14. Further, the DDA also informed that the areas poising 
hindrance in the provisions of infrastructural faci lities were marked by the DDA in the 
maps prepared by Survey of India and the said part of the land earmarked by DDA are 
not eligible for regularization.  The Committee inq uired DDA about the plans for 
handling encroachment and regularization of unautho rized colonies.  DDA informed as 
under:- 
 "Vacant land details are being examined for markin g of the areas posing 
hindrance in the provision of infrastructural facil ities.  After marking the same, it 
will be forwarded to GNCTD so as to exclude these a reas while regularization of 
unauthorized colonies pertains to MCD and Govt. of NCT of Delhi." 
 
3.43  The Committee are of the view that presence o f a strong monitoring mechanism 
could have easily stopped the mushrooming of unauth orized  colonies in Delhi.  When 
asked about their view on this, DDA informed as under:- 
 
 " It is a fact that unauthorized colonies have com e up in Delhi irrespective of the 
fact that land is Govt. or private like DDA, Gram S abha etc.  Timely action would 
have definitely arrested this phenomena of coming up of unauthorized colonies in 
Delhi.  However, DDA is taking timely action not to allow any fresh encroachment 
leading to unauthorized colonies." 

70 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES 
 
CRITERIA FOLLOWED IN ALLOTMENT OF LAND FOR CONSTRUC TION FOR 
HOTELS, MALLS, SCHOOLS, BUS DEPOTS, POLICE STATIONS  AND OTHER 
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS 
 
 DDA allots land for construction of hotels, malls,  schools, bus depots, police 
stations and other public utility buildings out of land acquired under the 'scheme of 
Large Scale Acquisitions'.  
4.2 About the criteria followed in allotment of lan d for construction for Hotels, Malls, 
Schools, Bus Depots, Police Stations and other publ ic utility buildings, about their 
prioritization  and data on construction of schools , hospitals, community centres, bus 
depots, hotels, malls on DDA land during the last five years, DDA has stated as under: 
"As per provisions of Master Plan, 3% of land acqui red under the Scheme of Large 
Scale Acquisition, Development & Disposal of land i n Delhi is utilized for commercial 
use.  As per provisions of DDA (Disposal of Develop ed Nazul) Rules, 12981, the 
commercial plots developed by DDA (including Hotels , Malls and other commercial 
activities) are disposed of through auction/Tender. 
4.3 Prior to 2006, the disposal of Commercial/Hotel  plots was used to be made on 
lease hold basis.  However, as per directions of Go vernment of India (GOI), DDA 
adopted the scheme of conversion of leasehold right s into free hold in respect of 
commercial properties since 2003.  Further, as per GOI's orders of June, 2006, all 
commercial properties are being disposed of on 'fre ehold' basis through the process of 
Auction/Tender.  The procedure, followed for dispos al of commercial properties, 
includes the following steps: 
4.4 Details of vacant plots (with control norms and  drawings) carved out in different 
designated commercial areas, are provided by the Architectural/ Planning Wing of DDA. 
On receipt of such details, the list of plots are p laced before the Price Fixation 
Committee headed by Commissioner (LD) consisting of  members from Planning.  
Architecture, Engineer and Finance/Land Costing Win gs for fixation of reserved prices 
of available plots. 

71 
 
4.5 Once the reserved price is finalized and approv ed by the competent authority, a 
tender programme is scheduled for disposal of available plots. 
4.6 The successful bidder/tender is required to get  the plans of the building 
sanctioned/approved by the DDA/Local Body and const ruct the building over the 
Commercial Plots/Hotel Plots/mall Plots, strictly a s per sanctioned plan.  The 
permissible control norms, as approved by the Archi tecture/Planning Wing shall have to 
be strictly adhered to. 
4.7 During the last few years i.e. from 2006 onward s, DDA has disposed off the 
following Commercial/Mall Plots and Hotel Plots. 
S.No. Type of Plot No.of Plots 
(i) Commercial/Mall Plots 158 
(ii) Hotel Plots 24 
 
4.8 Institutional Land Branch allots land for schoo ls, hospitals, community halls, bus 
depots, police stations etc. 
 
4.9 The allotment of land for bus depots, police st ations and other public utility 
building are allotted on Govt. Transfer Rate. As an d when any request for allotment of 
land is received from Govt. of NCT of Delhi / Local  Bodies / Ministries of Central Govt. 
same is processed on priority basis subject to avai lability of land as per request of the 
organization. During last ten years 23 sites have b een allotted for Bus Depot to GNCTD 
and 25 sites have been allotted for Police Stations to Delhi Police.  
 
4.10 The Institutional land Branch only allots the land to the various organizations and 
the construction of building thereon are looked aft er by the respective allottee. As a 
matter of record the allottee are required to const ruct the building within two years from 
the date of handing over the physical possession of  land and Extension of Time can be 
given up to 10 years depending upon the merits of the case. 
 
4.11 About the criteria for conducting auction of l ands for schools and hospitals and 
how many such auctions have been conducted by DDA d uring last 10 years across 
Delhi, the DDA has stated as under:- 

72 
 
 "Any individual who is not a minor or a group of p ersons including trust, a firm , a 
registered society, or a company registered under t he companies Act as a 
corporate entity may apply in the prescribed auctio n form for allotment of land for 
Schools, Hospitals, Nursing Homes, Higher Education  and Technical Institutions. 
The bidder may bid for as many sites as they can.   DDA while disposing the 
plots by auction gives wide publicity through leadi ng newspaper issued from 
Delhi/New Delhi." 
 
4.12 When asked to furnish a year-wise details, inc luding the applications received, 
eligible applicants and the winners of the auction, the DDA has furnished as under:- 
 "No schools site has been disposed by way of aucti on during last 10 years." 
 
4.13 On being asked how many areas DDA has provided  land for government 
hospitals and schools across Delhi during the last 10 years  about  the procedure for 
providing land for this purpose, DDA in its written replies has stated that:- 
 
 "Allotment of Land for Govt. Hospitals and Govt. S chools are done by way of 
allotment. For Govt. Hospitals allotment is done at Govt.  Transfer Rate prevalent 
for the said year and for schools allotment is done  at a nominal amount of Rs.1/- 
as premium and Rs.1/- as annual ground rent.  From 2003-2013, 7 Hospital sites 
have been allotted to GNCTD.  In the same period 16   sites for Sr.Sec. Schools 
have been allotted to MCD and 02 sites for secondary schools have been allotted 
to Kendriya Vidayalaya." 
 
4.14 When asked whether it is a fact that in DDA cl earance for building a Mall gets 
precedence over the proposal for building a school/hospital, DDA has stated that: 
"The facilities such as school, hospital, markets a nd commercial areas are assigned as 
per the population requirement. There is no prefere nce given in master plan for 
developing a land parcel/pocket for commercial area  in comparison to the public & 
semi-public use like school & hospital. 
 
4.15 In DDA, for approval of Building Plans for Com mercial Properties like Malls, 
Institutional properties like Schools/Hospitals, Ar chitects of the concerned agency 
requires to submit all the drawings with requisite documents, undertaking, fees, etc., 
under the mandatory provisions of MPD-2021/BBL’83. In most of the cases, mandatory 
approvals from other agencies like Delhi Urban Art Commission, Chief Fire Officer, 
Environmental Clearances, Civil Aviation Clearances  are also required. Once these 

73 
 
clearances are obtained by the applicant, approval of Building Plan is processed under 
MPD-2021 and BBL’83, if other required documents are found in order. Otherwise, DDA 
issues letter to the applicant for submission of su ch documents and corrections in 
drawing required under MPD-2021/BBL’83. The approva l from other agencies as stated 
above consumes substantial time in the process of g ranting sanction. These approvals 
are received from concerned Authorities on a case t o case basis irrespective of its use, 
i.e., Commercial Buildings or Institutional Buildings. It is experienced in many cases that 
Architects submission are not proper like drawings are not submitted within MPD-
2021/BBL’83 Provisions and lacks clarity. Submitted  documents like No Objection 
Certificate, Undertakings, and Affidavits, etc., are not in order and thus delay in granting 
sanction takes place. In cases, irrespective of Com mercial or Institutional Buildings, 
where Architects submitted the drawings, various do cuments, approval/clearances from 
other agencies are in order and area jurisdictions are clear, Building Plans sanction are 
much faster and quicker. 
 
4.16 Thus there is no discrimination while granting  sanction to Commercial Buildings 
and Institutional Buildings in DDA. Efforts are alw ays made for faster delivery of 
sanction, if submissions made by the applicant are proper and within parameters of Law 
i.e. MPD-2021/BBL’83 Provisions." 
 
COMPUTERISATION OF LAND RECORDS BY DDA 
 
 
4.17 On a question whether DDA is in possession of all the lands under its purview, 
how they are maintaining the land record and whethe r computerization of land record 
has been made by DDA it has been stated that:- 
 
"DDA is in possession of all the land under its pur view / disposal and the records 
of the same are being maintained. The total land un der DDA from different 
sources like, Nazul- I land, L&DO land, MOR Land an d acquired land is 1,01,859 
acres.  The details of awarded land are as under:- 
 
Total Acquired land     : 90326 acres 
Land Handed over to DDA    : 76887 acres 

74 
 
Awarded land yet to be handed over to DDA : 13439 a cres 
 
Matter for taking over the land is being pursued wi th Land & Building Dept., 
GNCTD and 258 acres land has been taken over during the last one year.  
Computerization of   acquired land records have bee n made by DDA. Out of the 
acquired land in 240 villages, 185 villages have so  far been digitized.  The 
remaining land records are being digitized." 
 
CONVERSION OF LEASEHOLD TO FREEHOLD  OF PROPERTIES 
 
4.18 On a question whether all the properties of DD A and Co-operative Group 
Housing Societies are free-hold properties, DDA has submitted that:- 
"Allotment of DDA built up flats made upto 1992 was  on leasehold basis. After 
that allotment of flats is being made on freehold b asis. The other properties of 
DDA and Co-Operative Group Housing Societies are no t free hold properties. 
Initially the properties were allotted on lease hol d basis but the plots (residential, 
commercial etc.) are now allotted on free hold basi s w.e.f. 01.01.2007. The lease 
hold properties are being converted into free hold as per policy and guidelines 
issued by MOUD in 1991" 
 
4.19 Pertaining to the time-frame prescribed for co mpleting the procedure for 
converting the property from leasehold to freehold, DDA has submitted that:- 
"45 days is the prescribed period for converting DD A built up flats and Co-
operative Group Housing Societies flats from leaseh old to freehold and 90 days 
for other properties." 
 
4.20 When asked to state the number of applications  received for getting the 
properties freehold, number of applications cleared  and the pending applications with 
them since last five years, DDA has stated that:- 
"Data on freehold applications for last five years in respect of DDA’s built up flats 
and Co-operative Group Housing Societies and other residential plots under 
Housing Department/residential plots for the period  01.12.07 to 30.11.2012 is as 
under: 
 
S. No. Department Application 
received 
Application 
disposed off 
Application 
pending 
1. Housing  
Department 
24,589 27,157 944 
2. Co-operative 
Group Housing 
Societies flats and 
other residential 
plots 
6,612 1,254 5,458 
                                 
Total 
31,201 28,411 6,402 

75 
 
The main reasons why conversion cases are pending i s because 
deficiencies are not completed by the applicants, s uch as non-submission of 
required documents and non deposit of demanded amou nt such as ground rent, 
misuse and damage charges."   
 
4.21 DDA has further stated that :- 
 
 "Many cases of conversion of leasehold to freehold  have been pending for years 
due to heavy misuse charges which at times exceed the cost of the plots or flat" 
 
In its board meeting on 24.2.2013, DDA has decided to launch a one time relief 
scheme for those who stayed away from the leasehold  to freehold conversion 
camp conducted recently. This decision was taken to  provide a special one time 
relief where in a maximum period for levy of misuse  charges (levied on misuse of 
property) will be restricted to five years from the date of detection of misuse." 
 
 
STATUS OF ALTERNATIVE ALLOTMENT OF PLOTS/FLATS 
 
 
4.22 As of now DDA has acquired lands in 240 villag es for undertaking various types 
of development in Delhi. In this connection, when a sked to state whether there are any 
guidelines of DDA to allot plot/flats to the reside nts whose lands have been acquired for 
development purposes, DDA has submitted that:- 
 
"DDA allots alternative plots on the basis of recom mendations received from 
Land & Building Department, Govt. of N.C.T. of Delh i (GNCTD). The necessary 
guidelines in this regard have been issued by GNCTD . No separate guidelines 
have been issued by DDA. The allotment of alternati ve plot is made by DDA as 
per seniority fixed on the basis of the date of tak ing over of physical possession 
of acquired land by Land & Building Department, GNC TD, for respective size 
category and zone before holding draw of lots. 
 However, 10675 alternative allotments had been mad e to the farmers 
whose land had been acquired. As on date, 68 recommendation letters issued by 
the Land & Building Department, Govt. of N.C.T. of Delhi are lying pending due 
to non-availability of plots of respective size. " 
 
 
 

76 
 
4.23 During oral evidence of the representatives of  RWA of CGHS and people's 
representatives, Shri Mahabal Mishra, M.P. of West Delhi stated that:- 
 
" Since 2004, DDA is acquiring land for urban exten sion road. The poor people 
spend their earning and saving to purchase a plot o r flat and DDA acquire the 
area. But while giving compensation DDA takes time.  DDA provides 
compensation in older  rates as a result the affect ed person cannot afford to 
purchase a flat in that rate. Suppose DDA provides an alternate EWS flat then 
that is not sufficient to accommodate his 8-10 fami ly members. Therefore, the 
poor affected person suffers a lot. Therefore, ther e is an urgent need to change 
the alignment of road." 
 
4.24 In response to that DDA Vice Chairman during o ral evidence clarified as under:- 
 
"It is undisputed that we have to be with them, wit h the persons who are going to 
be displaced, who are going to be uprooted. It is a  fully committed approach of 
the Government of Delhi as well as DDA. The Slum Wi ng was earlier with DDA, 
now it is transferred to the Government of Delhi. T here is a policy for Project 
Affected Persons which is evolved by the Government  of NCT or Delhi. We are 
fully committed to that policy. Now the question is  whether it is land for land or 
value for value or whether it providing accommodation, this is a policy matter and 
will definitely flat it in the correct quarters and  we will take a conscious decision 
that the best interest of the affected persons shou ld be protected. I will request 
the Government of Delhi also to take not of the sen timent of this honourable 
Committee. We will see that the people who are affe cted by the Metro, by the 
roads which are important infrastructure for Delhi,  are properly, appropriately and 
timely rehabilitated. I fully agree with you, sir." 
 
DEVELOPMENT WORK UNDERTAKEN BY DDA IN THE VILLAGES WHOSE LAND 
HAS BEEN ACQUIRED 
 
4.25 DDA has undertaken following development works  in villages whose lands were 
taken over by DDA. 
i) Construction of Phirni roads/internal roads. 
ii) Construction of community halls 
iii) Provision of signages  
iv) Construction/repairs of boundary walls 
v) Development of Parks 
vi) Construction of dhalaos  

77 
 
vii) Commissioning of new tubewells 
viii) Repairs of cremation grounds" 
4.26 When asked as to the number  of community cent res built up by DDA in lal-dora 
colonies and in the areas where the land was acquir ed by DDA for development, DDA 
has stated that:- 
"No community centre has been built by DDA in lal d ora colonies.  However, 44 
Community Centres have been built on the land acquired by DDA for development.  The 
list of community centres is as under.   
 
Sl. 
nos. 
Category Year Dwarka North Rohini East South East S outh 
West 
Total 
2 Community 
Centre 
1996-97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1996-97 
 Wazirpur 
industrial 
area 
Wazirpur 
residential 
area 
Lawrence 
Road 
Industrial 
Area 
(Rampura) 
Transport 
Centre GTK 
Road 
Azadpur 
Subzi Mandi 
 
CC-4 
Nos. 
Preet Vihar East of 
Kailash, 
Saket 
Sheikh 
Sarai, Ph-I 
Yusuf Sarai 
New 
Friends 
Colony 
Azmroodpur 
Safdarjung 
Enclave, 
Basant 
Lok, 
Vasant 
Vihar 
Rewari 
Line, 
Mayapur 
Ph-I, 
Janakpuri, 
Blk B-I 
Vikaspuri, 
Blk C, 
Naraina 
Vihar, Blk 
C, 
SDA, Opp. 
IIT, Delhi 
Rajouri 
Garden, 
Blk 
28 
  1996-97 
1998-99 
1999-2000 
2000-01 
2001-02 
 
 
2002-02 
 
 
2003-04 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Facility 
Centre, 
Sector 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Road No. 44, 
Pitampura 
Service 
Centre 19, 
pitampura 
 
 
 
 
 
Sec. 
3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FC at 
Sheikh 
Sarai 
F.C. at 
Geetanjalii 
Enclave 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blk Q, 
Paschim 
Vihar 
Blk. H, 
Vikaspuri 
 
 
  2004-05  Motia Khan 
Tyre Shop at 
Rohtak Road 
 
Shalimar 
Bagh, Blk B 
Lawrence 
Road, Blk B 
 Yamuna 
Vihar, Blk 
C-10 
 
 
Karkarduma 
   
 

78 
 
 
4.27 When asked to state about the number of villag es fall under the jurisdiction of 
DDA? In how many villages DDA has constructed commu nity halls, in a written note 
DDA has stated under:- 
 
"DDA has acquired land in 240 villages of Delhi. 18  community halls have been 
constructed by DDA in urban villages as under."   
 
1. Amberhai 
2. Bagdola 
3. Bharthal 
4. Bindapur((Pocket-3, D Block) 
5. Bindapur(Block E) 
6. Kakrola 
7. Mahavir Enclave 
8. Naseerpur 
9. Badli 
10. Mange Ram Park 
11. Naharpur 
12. Basant Village 
13. Masoodpur Village 
14. Sant Nagar 
15. Badarpur 
16. Kanti Nagar(Near Gali No-2) 
17. Kanti Nagar(Near Police Station) 
18. Kondli Gharoli 
 
 
List of 20 community halls which are under planning and construction is enclosed 
as under:  
 
Zone  Planning stage  Progress  Total  
South 7 1 8 
Dwarka  2 2 4 
North 1 - 1 
East 6 - 6 
Rohini 1 - 1 
Total   20 
 
 
 
 
 

79 
 
Community Halls in Village in Planning Stage/Progre ss for the Period 
January, 2012 to August 2013 
 
SOUTH ZONE ( IN PLANNING STAGE)  
 
 S.No.  Location  
1. Community  Hall at Mahipal Pur 
2.  Community  Hall at Munirka 
3. Community  Hall at Tehkhand 
4. Community  Hall at Kishan Garh 
5.  Community  Hall at Harkesh Nagar 
6. Community  Hall at Arjun Nagar 
7. Community  Hall at Sriniwas Puri 
Progress  
1.  Community  Hall at Zamrudpur 
Dwarka  Zone (in Planning Stage)  
1. Community  Hall at Village Pochanput 
2. Community  Hall in Village Kakrola 
Progress  
1. Community  Hall Nasirpur Gram Sabha Land 
2. Community  Hall at Dhul Sirs Village 
North Zone (In Progress)  
1. Community  Hall at Pitampura Village 
East Zone (In Planning Stage)  
1. Community  Hall at Chilla Village 
2. Community  Hall at Kotla 
3. Community  Hall at Hasan Pur 
4. Community Hall at Gazi Pur Village 
5. Community Hall at Madan Pur Khadan Gaon 
6. Community Hall at Arjun Nagar 
Rohini Zone (In Planning Stage)  
1. Community Hall at Rithala Village 
 
 From the above tables it can be inferred that DDA has constructed total 44 
community centres. It has completed construction of 28 community centres in the 
year 1996-97. Afterwards, the number has drasticall y reduced to 11 during the 
entire 6 years from 1997-98 to 2003-04. This has fu rther been reduced to 4 
during the 3 years from 2004-05 to 2006-07. Out of the completed 44 community 
centres only 18 community centres are functional fo r the period  January 2012 to 
August 2013 20 community centres in all the zones i .e, South, Dwarka, North, 
East and Rohini are in planning stage. In the South  zone, out uf 8 community 
centres, 7 are still in the planning stage and cons truction of only one community 
centre is in progress. In Dwarka zone out of 4 comm unity centres 2 are in 
planning stage and 2 are in progress. In North zone , one community Hall is in 
progress. In East zone all the 6 are in planning stage.   

80 
 
 
4.28 The Times of India in a press report on 17 Feb ruary, 2014 has unearthed a 
racket involving DDA officials and mafias on the is sue of allotment of marriage venues 
on the DDA land. It has stated that booking a weddi ng venue for a night in North-West 
Delhi can cost Rs. 30 lakhs against the official pr ice of DDA of Rs. 77000/-. Like almost 
all the public grounds in Delhi are being controlle d by tent mafias. The mafias have 
encroached upon public land and give it away to the  highest bidder. These 
businessmen have built permanent structures on the DDA land and control it round the 
year without the fear of action from the civic agen cies or police. As per this press report 
DDA claims that it is aware of the problems and acc epts only online bookings to stop 
corruption. Tent houses get around this hurdle by b ooking the grounds in their clients 
name. The Vice-Chairman of DDA is aware of the issu e and reviewed and issued 
necessary directions to the concerned officials. Gi ving a factual position on this press 
news DDA in its written replies has stated that:- 
"In this context, it is to inform that keeping in v iew the scenario in the past, DDA 
started on-line booking w.e.f. 4 
th  November, 2012 and has also taken steps to 
block the lacunas in the on-line delivery system wh ich is giving leeway to the tent 
house owners. The instances of proxy booking are on  the decline.  Wherever 
some shortcomings are found out, the system is bein g improved as per 
experience gathered. A detailed meeting on the subj ect was held  and further 
improvement suggested are being incorporated in the  software, as well as 
managing at ground level." 
 
4.29 When asked whether DDA is conducting on the sp ot verifications of the venues 
in order to ensure that only genuine persons are us ing the venues to whom DDA has 
temporarily allotted,  and punishment imposed in ca se of any discrepancies, DDA has 
stated that:- 
 
"The field staff has been directed to keep a close w atch.  In case of any specific 
complaint about misuse, they are authorized to chec k the credentials of the 
applicant. " 
 
 
 
 

81 
 
INTERFACE OF DDA OFFICIALS WITH PUBLIC  
 
4.30 DDA for the last 55 years has been innovating in terms of technology, 
management techniques and improving its public inte rface in order to reach its 
customers in a better and friendly way. For example  for the construction of houses with 
speed and safety, new technology like pre-cast tech nology has been adopted. Quality 
checks are ensured through Third party assurance.  
4.31 For ensuring timely delivery of services Citiz en Charter detailing schedule of 
various transactions has been published.  Many proc esses which have maximum public 
interface have been made online.  For example conve rsion of lease hold rights into 
freehold and booking of temporary allotment of space for marriages and social functions 
has been made online during the last one year.  All  transactions of DDA are slowly 
being computerized so that there is maximum conveni ence, speed and accuracy in the 
delivery of services. The DDA’s transactions are multifaceted as it involves property and 
development of spaces and facilities for the conven ience of people.  The demand for 
more and more facilities and more convenience incre ases with modernization and 
urbanization. These services are also required to b e augmented due to increase in 
population which keeps on increasing every year by almost 5 lakhs people. The scope 
for improving and meeting the challenges is thus a dynamic process and the same is 
met through various innovations and improved delivery.  
 
 It is often alleged that DDA officials are inacces sible to the public. The DDA 
responded through a written reply as under: 
"It is not true that DDA officials are inaccessible to the public.  It may be mentioned 
that DDA officers can be approached on all working days with prior appointment 
whereas on every Monday and Thursday between 2.30 t o 5.30PM any person 
having grievance or trying to enquire about the dis posal status of his case can 
approach senior officers without any appointment or without any entry pass.  Apart 
from this VC, EM, FM and CVO, DDA  also meet the public on one designated day 
in a week. Approximately 6,000 -7,000 members of th e public visit DDA office at 
Vikas Sadan on public hearing days and approximatel y 600 – 700 people visit on 
other working days. 
The above given facilities are in addition to the s ystem of registering 
complaint and grievance at the Reception of DDA whi ch are sent to the HODs for 

82 
 
proper monitoring. Members of the public also seek information from DDA through 
provisions of the RTI Act." 
 
Pertaining to the steps being undertaken or propose d to be taken to ensure public 
participation in the functioning of DDA/MCD, DDA has submitted that: 
"Various suggestions received from time to time fro m individuals, RWAs and other 
bodies in the form of representations are taken int o consideration in formulation of 
policies/guidelines of DDA." 
 
  
TRANSPARENCY IN THE FUNCTIONING OF DDA 
 
4.32 On a question with regard to initiating of ste ps to bring in transparency in the 
functioning of DDA/MCD to root out corruption and p rovide better, quick and people’s 
friendly services, DDA has submitted that:- 
"DDA has taken the following steps: 
1. Directions have been issued to place on the webs ite all procedures, rules and 
regulations, so as to increase transparency. 
2. To reduce the movement of touts in various branc hes, the exit/entry points in 
Vikas Sadan have been reduced from seven to three.  
3. Record Management is being improved.   
4. The information regarding various draws of plots , flats and housing schemes 
are being uploaded on the DDA website for greater transparency. 
5. File tracking system has been implemented in the  vigilance branch and the 
same is under implementation in other branches. 
6. The sensitive branches are being randomly inspec ted by vigilance branch to 
see delays in handling of files, presence of outsiders etc.  
7. E-SLA (Service Level Agreement) has been impleme nted for various services.  
For instance conversion to freehold of DDA flats an d Group Housing Society 
flats and the period has been reduced from 60 days to 45 days. 
8. E-tendering system has been implemented in DDA t o increase transparency 
and check pooling of tenders.  Efforts are being ma de for getting an e-payment 
gateway for submission of cost of tender and earnest money deposit. 
9. Online conversion of leasehold to freehold of Gr oup Housing Flats and DDA 
flats has been started from 1.9.2012. Information o n free hold conversion 
process has been uploaded on the DDA web site . 
10. Vigilance helpline has been launched on the occ asion of Vigilance Awareness 
Week, 2012 and its number is 09650713388. 
11. To curb the nuisance of tent mafia, the booking  of parks, community halls and 
vacant sites for tents have been computerized and o nline booking has been 
implemented w.e.f. 7.11.12. 
12. Citizen Charter having specific period for vari ous services has been 
implemented. 

83 
 
13. Online System of Conversion of DDA built up fla ts from Leasehold to Freehold 
has been launched recently. 
14. Conversion of DDA built up flats from Leasehold  to Freehold has been brought 
in the purview of the Delhi (Rights of Citizen to T ime Bound Delivery of 
Services) Act, 2011." 
 
4.33 Despite The above mentioned steps for ensuring  transparency in their 
functioning, as per media reports still, there is l ot of corruption in DDA.  In this regard  
the Committee inquired the DDA about the corruption  cases against DDA officials 
during last 10 years. From the information furnishe d by DDA the Committee can easily 
gather the fact  that amongst the 82 corruption cas es against the DDA officials for last 
more than 10 years w.e.f 2003, 41 are under trial, 12 are under investigation, 4 have 
been acquitted, 1 is RDA case, 1 has been discharged, 1case is under CBI investigation 
and 3 cases have been closed by CBI and 19 convictions are there. 
 
 4.34 When asked as to what specific steps are bein g planned by DDA to change their 
image, DDA has stated that:- 
 
"In order to bring transparency in the functioning of DDA, various measures have 
been adopted and some of them are as follows:- 
1. Online conversion of leasehold to freehold of Gr oup Housing Flats and DDA flats 
has been started from 01.09.2012.  Information on f reehold conversion process 
has been uploaded on the DDA website. 
2. Two activities have been brought under ESLA. i.e ., Electronic Service Level 
Agreement and therefore, these activities are monit ored regularly and activities 
have to be completed within 45 days i.e. conversion  from lease hold to free hold 
for group housing flats and DDA flats is made in 45 days. 
3. Citizens' Charter of various activities has alre ady been prepared and task is to be 
completed as per Citizens' Charter. 
4. Installation of CCTVs is under process in the Vi kas Sadan Office of DDA where 
major public dealing activities are being conducted. 
5. Directions have been issued to place on the webs ite all procedures, rules and 
regulations, so as to increase transparency. 
6. To reduce the movement of touts in various branc hes, the exit/entry points in 
Vikas Sadan have been reduced from seven to three. 
7. Record Management is being improved. 
8. The information regarding various draws of plots , flats and housing schemes are 
being uploaded on the DDA website for greater transparency. 
9. File tracking system has been implemented in the  Vigilance branch and the same 
is under implementation in other branches. 

84 
 
10. The sensitive branches are being randomly inspected by Vigilance branch to see 
delays in handling of files, presence of outsiders etc. 
11. E-tendering system has been implemented in DDA to increase transparency and 
check pooling of tenders. Efforts are being made fo r getting in a e-payment 
gateway for submission of cost of tender and earnest money deposit. 
12. Vigilance helpline has been launched on the occ asion of Vigilance Awareness 
Week, 2012 and its number is 09650713388. 
13. To curb the nuisance of tent mafia, the booking  of parks, community halls and 
vacant sites for tents have been computerized and o nline booking has been 
implemented w.e.f. 7.11.12 
14. Conversion of DDA built up flats from Leasehold to Freehold has been brought in 
the purview of the Delhi (Right of Citizen to Time Bound Delivery of Services), 
Act, 2011." 
 
At present there 52 community halls, 27 parks and 1 87 open spaces 
available for online booking for marriages and othe r social functions. Times of 
India in its news report dated 17.2.2013, had repor ted that despite the online 
booking system, tent house are still handling booki ngs of venues of DDA for 
marriages and other social functions. They charge 6  to 45 times the official 
ground rent and booking are being made several mont hs in advance although 
DDA has set a 90 days limit. The mafia has encroach ed upon publis land gives it 
away to the highest bidder. These mafias then build  permanent structures on the 
DDA land and  control it round the year without fea r of action from the civic 
agency or police.  
 
4.35 When asked to submit a factual note on the abo ve press report, DDA in its 
written reply has stated that:- 
 
"Keeping in view the scenario in the past, DDA star ted online booking w.e.f. 4 
November, 2012 and has also taken steps to block the touts.  In the online delivery 
system which is giving leeway to the tent house own ers. The instances of proxy 
booking are on the decline wherever some shortcomin gs are found out; the 
system is being improved as per experience gathered . A detailed meeting on the 
subject was held and further improvement suggested is being incorporated in the 
software, as well as managing at ground level." 
 
4.36 When asked, whether DDA has demarcated these v enues with some 
boundaries, DDA in its written replies has stated that:- 
 
 " All venues are on vacant lands having specific u se as per plan. These vacant 
spaces have been earmarked for booking on temporary  basis as a relief to thee 
residents of Delhi" 
 
 

85 
 
SINGLE WINDOW SYSTEM  
 
4.37 When asked whether a single window system can be introduced in DDA and to 
furnish the modalities for the same, DDA has stated that:- 
"Single Window System in DDA has already been introd uced for major 
transactions of allottees with DDA such as conversi on of leasehold property to 
freehold which has been totally computerized and on e can apply for conversion 
from any part of the world. The process of temporar y allotment of land for 
marriage and social functions has also been compute rized and the applicant do 
not have to visit Vikas Sadan for such bookings whi ch can be done sitting at 
home. The Single Window System is being slowly exte nded to all other 
transactions of DDA." 
 
 
4.38 When asked how long it will take to introduce single window system other fields, 
and about the efforts have been taken by the DDA in this regard, DDA has stated that:- 
 
"Single window system is being adopted for various transactions which have 
maximum public interface on priority basis and grad ually all transactions will be 
converted with complete computerization.  The conve rsion from lease hold to 
free hold is being done through single window syste m from August ,2012 and 
process has been made online wherein one can apply for conversion from home 
from anywhere  in India.  Similarly booking of plac es for marriages and social  
functions has also been made online from December, 2012 and people do not 
have to resort to multiple visits to DDA for such b ookings.  For disposal of 
grievances another single window system is being ad opted through ‘Samasya 
Nidhan Sewa’ which has been started by DDA on 21.1. 2013 initially on trial 
basis.  All other transactions  which have a public  interface are planned to be 
taken up through the single window system gradually." 
 
COMPUTERISATION 
 
 
4.39 It is stated that all transaction of DDA are s lowly being computerized so that 
there is maximum convenience, speed and accuracy in  the delivery of services. In this 
connection, when asked as to the process of compute rization was started and the plan 
of action in this regard and whether DDA has develo ped the process of computerization 
phase-wise, DDA has stated that:- 
 "Computerization was started in 1986 when all type s of processing were 
being done in batch processing mode.  Thereafter in  1999 with the help of 

86 
 
CMC Ltd, three departments, namely, Housing, Land D isposal and Legal 
were computerized and data processing started in th e interactive mode.  
Afterwards various in-house applications have been developed for various 
departments of DDA for meeting their requirements t ime to time which are 
working in stand alone mode.  
 
  DDA has now laid emphasis for giving services to the public through IT 
applications so that public may avail the facilities and services of DDA at their 
door step.  By providing the services through IT ap plications there will be 
maximum convenience, speed and accuracy in the deli very of services.  In 
this regard, it is to be apprised that recently in this direction the following IT 
initiatives have been taken by DDA:   
 
1. Online leasehold to freehold conversion application :  Online leasehold to 
freehold application for converting leasehold DDA f lats and Group Housing 
society flats into freehold with web enabled applic ation has been developed in 
house through which general public can apply for co nverting their flats from 
leasehold to freehold online.  The application was launched on 31 st  Aug. 2012 
by Hon’ble Minister for Urban Development.  Through  this application people 
are applying online even from abroad.  The applicat ion is uploaded on DDA’s 
website – www.dda.org.in. 
 
 
2. Online booking of DDA’s parks, community halls & open spaces: (uploaded on 
DDA’s website www.dda.org.in). 
 
A state of the art application for online booking o f DDA’s parks, community 
halls and  open spaces has been developed in house and this application was 
launched for the public on 7.11.12.  As of now, 279 1 bookings have been 
registered for various DDA sites.  This is another initiative for providing the 
services of DDA to the public at their door step.  Through this application, one 
can see the availability of any site online and in case it is available, one can 
book the same online and deposit the payment in DDA ’s account through 
RTGS & NEFT and shortly the provision of payment ga teway through 
nationalized/scheduled banks will also be made for the public.  
 
3. Samasya Nidhan Sewa:   O nline web enabled application for the public has 
also been developed in house for attending to the grievances of general public 
and this application has been named as Samasya Nidh an Sewa.  It has been 
started on trial basis from 21.01.2013. Through thi s application the general 
public can register their complaints/grievances onl ine as well as at the 
Reception of DDA’s Head Office at Vikas Sadan and w ithin a fixed time frame 
the officers of the concerned department of DDA wil l take action on the 
request/grievance of the general public registered through this sewa and 
intimate the status of action taken through e-mail.   This application is under 

87 
 
testing and by March, 2013 it will be made active on the DDA’s website as well 
as at the Reception of DDA’s Head Office at Vikas Sadan. 
 
4. Master Plan Review Suggestion Management System:  
 
A web enabled and online interactive application fo r managing the 
suggestions received from the public regarding revi ew of Master Plan 2021 
has been developed from NIIT Ltd. and installed on DDA’s website.  Through 
this, the general public can see the status of the action taken on their 
suggestions and an over view of the review of Master Plan as well. 
 
The status of  review of MPD 2021  is as under:  
• Emphasizes on greater public participation as well  as periodic review of the 
plan at five year interval (3 phases up to 2011, 20 11-16, 2016-21) and for a 
mid-term review in 2012. 
• All suggestions received up to 31.05.2012 have bee n scanned and placed on 
DDA’s  website for information of the public. 
• Based on the SRS and RFP prepared by TCIL,  DDA ha s awarded the work of 
coding and classification of suggestions to NIIT, Delhi  
•  NIIT, Delhi has been awarded the work for design,  development and 
implementation of website portal and supply of hard ware, software and 
technical manpower.  
•  The first stage of development of software is ove r and data is being uploaded 
by NIIT Delhi.  
•  Further, uploading of the status of each suggest ion (i.e. processed in MAG/ 
AG) and UID is being done by NIIT.  
 
5. Online court cases monitoring system: 
 
A web enabled application for monitoring the court cases of DDA has also 
been developed and implemented in which the status of about 16,000 court 
cases is available and various officers in DDA are using the application online 
and are able to see the status and upload the proceedings of the status online.  
The application is uploaded on DDA’s website – www.dda.org.in. 
 
6.     LMIS/Digitization of Land Records:  
 
 DDA as of now has acquired lands in 240 villages f or various types of 
development in Delhi.  The data entry about the acq uisition details, i.e., 
notifications, details of award declared and notifi cation under Section 22(i) 
have been entered in the data base of computer appl ication known as Land 
Management Information System for all the 240 villa ges.  This data can be 
viewed by the general public through the web site o f DDA ‘www.dda.org.in’.  
The brief description of the state of computerizati on of Land Management 
records is as under: 
 

88 
 
i) Data of all 240 acquired villages with regard to  various notifications and 
awards has been entered in the data base by Land Ma nagement Wing. 
Periodic updations are carried out in this data.  T his data can also be seen 
through DDAs web site by the general public. 
 
ii) The massavies (old maps) of 165 villages have b een put in DDA’s server 
which can also be viewed by the general public through DDA’s web site. 
 
iii) The massavies of 21 more villages which are le gible will also be placed on 
DDA’s server after getting them digitized in next six months or so. 
 
iv) The massavies (old maps) of 54 villages are not  available with DDA and DDA 
has requested Development Commissioner of Delhi for  supplying the old 
maps/ massavies of 54 villages and as soon as these  are made available, 
these would also be put on DDA’s website. 
 
7. Computerized photo visitors gate pass: To curb the number of visitors in the 
DDA office at Vikas Sadan, a facility of computeriz ed photo pass has been 
started at DDA’s reception office and visitors are issued photo gate pass and 
the photo and details of the visitors are recorded in a computer.  With the help 
of this facility, unauthorized visitors have been curbed to some extent. 
 
8. ESLA For monitoring the status of application of fr eehold for DDA flats and 
Group Housing society flats received manually at th e reception of DDA Vikas 
Sadan.  
 
A facility of ESLA (Electronic Service Level Agreem ent) has been made 
available by establishing a connectivity with NIC s erver through which the 
status of these cases are uploaded on the NIC serve r.  Through this 
application Secy. (IT) of GNCTD monitors status of cases regarding 
conversion of DDA and Group Housing Society flats. 
 
It has been stated that the demand for more and mor e facilities and more 
convenience increases with modernization and urbani zation on being asked 
about the plan of DDA for augmentation of moderniza tion, DDA has stated 
that: 
  "DDA is now going to take a major step in the dir ection of computerization 
of all the departments of DDA and for establishing a structured networking 
throughout DDA. The road map for complete computeri zation of DDA is being 
prepared and the work will be gradually done.  
 
For augmenting modernization and meeting the challe nges of urbanization, 
challenges of population growth, in migration into Delhi, provision for adequate 
housing particularly for the weaker sections of the  society, addressing the 
problems of small enterprises, particularly in the unorganized informal sector, 
dealing with the issue of slums, up-gradation of ol d and dilapidated areas of 

89 
 
the city, provision of adequate infrastructure serv ices, conservation of the 
environment, preservation of the Delhi’s heritage a nd blending it with new and 
complex modern patterns of development and executin g this within a 
framework of sustainable development, public privat e and community 
participation has been envisioned in the Master Pla n for the year 2021 which 
was notified in February 2007 and has perspective u p to the year 2021.  The 
development as per the Master Plan will ensure prov ision of facilities and 
conveniences so as to meet the challenges of urbanization and modernization. 
 
Keeping in view the emerging challenges for planned  development of the 
capital city, the following critical areas have been identified in MPD-2021: Land 
policy, public participation and plan implementatio n, redevelopment, shelter, 
housing for poor, environment, unauthorized colonie s, mixed use, trade & 
commerce, informal sector, industry, conservation o f heritage, transportation, 
health infrastructure, education facilities, disast er management, provision of 
sports facilities and focus on infrastructure development. 
 
Further for planned development of Delhi, and to me et the housing 
requirements, DDA has taken following steps: 
 
i. Planning and development of sub-city (self conta ined) projects like Rohini, 
Dwarka and Narela with housing catering to all types of population.  
ii. Housing programmes as per the housing strategies fo r development of new 
housing areas.  
iii. Redevelopment of slum areas/ in-situ up-gradation, housing for economically 
weaker section (EWS).  
iv. The Zonal Development Plans for urban extension are as have been notified 
which will also provide land for housing and relate d infrastructure. As 
proposed in MPD-2021 development of these areas is envisaged through 
public private partnership (land pooling).  
v. As proposed in MPD-2021 the development along major  transport corridors is 
envisaged through Transit Oriented Development (TOD ). This will provide for 
intensive development in terms of housing, work cen tres and supporting 
facilities.  
vi. In order to make development environmentally sustai nable large recreational 
areas have been developed such as biodiversity park s, regional parks/ district 
parks, sports complexes, etc.  
vii. Development of residential areas, construction and disposal of housing for 
various categories."  
 
4.40 It is stated that the scope for improving and meeting the challenges is a dynamic 
process and the same is met through various innovat ions and improved delivery 
system.  Elaborating  on this issue, DDA has submitted that:- 
 

90 
 
 " In order to meet the increasing need of facilities and conveniences, DDA has 
been adopting innovations like pre-fab technology w hich is speedy, 
sustainable and environment friendly for the constr uction of low cost houses, 
third party assurance for civil works to ensure qua lity, computerization for 
delivery of services like conversion of lease hold to free hold, booking of 
spaces for marriages and social functions, computer ization of legal cases, 
etc." 
 
  

91 
 
PART – II  
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
1. NEED FOR AMENDMENT IN THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT ACT,  1957  
 
 As per Section 3(3) of the Delhi Development Act, 1 957, the Administrator 
of the Union Territory of Delhi is the ex-officio c hairman of DDA while the Vice-
Chairman is appointed by the Central Government. Ho wever, with the enactment 
of Constitution (Sixty-Ninth Amendment) Act,  1991 conferring the statehood to 
Delhi the nomenclature of administrator was changed to Lt. Governor.  
 In this regard, the Committee observe that  the vi ce-chairman of DDA  is 
under the dual control of Lieutenant Governor of De lhi as well as the Union  
Ministry of Urban Development.  This at times could create complex situations for 
him while taking vital decisions. Not only the Vice -Chairman but the organization 
on the whole gets affected in its working, as all t he decisions in DDA are taken in 
the name of the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi, while  the implementation part of 
the same is under the control of Union Ministry of Urban Development.  This often 
creates problem in the independent working of DDA a nd badly affects its 
efficiency.  This unique character of the Act surpr ises rather baffles the 
Committee.  The Committee with the help of their ow n research find that there is 
hardly any other law which provides such a dual con trol. Therefore, the 
Committee desire that the present situation should be deliberated upon in detail 
with all the stakeholders and a suitable solution should be brought into.  
 
 Further, the Committee observe that DDA is an orga nization having the 
major responsibility of dealing with land and its p lanned development in Delhi 
has to often deal with legal and judicial matters, but the legal and judicial member 
in the Authority’s composition is conspicuous by it s absence.  In view of this the 
Committee feel that this is a big drawback in the o rganization and its working.  
Thus, the Committee strongly recommend that one jud icial & legal expert should 

92 
 
also be inducted into the ‘Authority’ as its member . To bring these suggested 
changes to effect, the Delhi Development Act, 1957 may be suitably amended at 
the earliest. 
  

93 
 
2.POPULATION GROWTH,  HOUSING REQUIREMENTS, TARGETS  AND 
ACHIEVEMENTS  
 
 The Committee observe that Delhi has been witnessi ng migration of 
population gradually since 1947 till date leading t o a critical shortage of urban 
infrastructure.  Although there has been a decline in the percentage share of net 
migrants in the decadal growth of population in NCR   Delhi from 45 per cent in 
1961-1971 to 39.8 per cent in 1991-2001, in absolute terms the number of migrants 
have increased tremendously.  As per census 2011, t he total population of Delhi 
is 167.5 lakhs with a decadal growth of 2 per cent and density of population of 
11,297 per square kilo meter.  In absolute terms th e population has increased by 
29 lakh during 2001-2011 as against 44.3 lakh in the previous decade.  
 According to MPD 2021, natural growth has increase d from 55.8 per cent in 
1981 to 59.2 per cent in 1991 and to 60.18 per cent  in 2001. While there was  
decrease in the net migrants from 44.20 per cent in  1981 to 40.78 per cent in 1991 
and to 39.82 per cent in 2001.  However, a reductio n in the rate of natural growth 
and increase in migration between 2001 and 2021 is envisaged in the MPD 2021.  
 The housing activity has been taken up by DDA sinc e 1967-68 in all the 
zones of Delhi and from time to time.  Besides, DDA  provides land to MCD and 
Slum Department of the Government of Delhi for cons truction of night shelters 
for homeless people. The MPD 2021 based on the proj ected population of 230 
lakh by 2021 has estimated an additional housing st ock requirement of about 24 
lakh dwelling units.  This includes an estimated ho using requirements of 20 lakh 
dwelling units for additional population and backlo g of about 4 lakh units net 
shortage and the rest by dilapidated and kuccha str uctures requiring 
replacement.  It has been emphasised that about 40 per cent of housing needs 
can be potentially satisfied through redevelopment/ upgradation of existing areas 
of Delhi. The remaining 60 per cent of the requirem ent is to be met through 14.4 
lakh dwelling units in new areas/urban extension as  per zonal development plan 
2021.  However, the Committee are distressed to not e that till date the DDA has 
been able to raise only 11.69 lakh dwelling units.  

94 
 
 In addition, it is estimated that around 50-55 per  cent of the housing 
requirement would be for the urban poor and the economically weaker sections in 
the form of houses of two rooms or less keeping in view the socio-economic 
characteristic of the population. The magnitude of housing shortage was 
estimated by a technical group in the context of fo rmulation of the 11 th  Five Year 
Plan.  This group estimated that the housing shortage at the end of 10 th  Plan to be 
around 24.7 million for 67.4 million household.  Th e group further estimated that 
99 per cent of the shortage pertains to EWS and LIG sector.  
 With regard to the targets for construction of low  cost housing and LIG 
housing during the last 20 years and the year-wise achievements made 
thereunder,  DDA has submitted  a half-baked reply that includes only the details 
of houses constructed under LIG, EWS/Janta category  during the last 20 years.  
The Committee find that out of the total dwelling u nits constructed by the  DDA 
since its inception till date i.e. 3.94 lakhs, the houses constructed for LIG, 
EWS/Janta amount to only 60,721 DUs.  In percentage  terms it is only 15 per cent 
which is far away from the 99 per cent shortage in EWS and LIG sectors pointed 
out by the Technical Group during the 11 th  Five year Plan. 
 So far as the gap between the housing requirements  projected in MPD 2021 
and houses constructed so far is concerned, the Com mittee were informed by 
DDA that the above cited housing demand is to be de veloped by the year 2021.  
The Committee do not understand the logic of DDA ho w within a span of 
remaining  7 years of MPD it will achieve the targe t.  In addition to this DDA has 
further tried to justify its inability to construct  the required dwelling units by 
stating that sizable population of Delhi is accommo dated in villages, 
unauthorized regularized colonies, traditional area s and Government housing.  
The Committee deplore this attitude of the DDA whic h has failed to perform its 
duty to construct the houses and develop the city as per plan.  
 The Committee were further informed that as per th e MPD 2021 housing is 
to be developed by various agencies such as public,  private, Central/State 
Governments, Co-operative societies, residents and associations. As such DDA 
has been able to fulfil the role of facilitator by providing necessary permissions 

95 
 
for the same.  The Committee, however, do not agree  with this claim of DDA.   
From the replies furnished to the Committee it has been observed that against the 
target of 14.4 lakhs dwelling units till date DDA h as constructed only 3.94 lakhs.  
From the year 2003 onwards, DDA has not allotted an y land to the Co-operative 
Group Housing  Societies for which DDA and the Regi strar, Co-operative 
Societies of Delhi Government are passing the buck on each other and also out of  
291 JJ Clusters in Delhi where Jhuggies have been l aid by homeless people on 
DDA land,   action for rehabilitation of only 1 jhu ggi colony i.e. Kathputali Colony 
near Shadipur Depot has been taken up on a pilot basis.   
 The DDA  has claimed that as per MPD 2021 for new urban extensions 
development of land measuring about 22,000-24,000 h ectare will be taken up by 
private developers who are proposed to  be involved  in development of housing 
as per the Land Pooling Policy as notified by the C entral Government on 5 
September 2013.   The Committee are perturbed to no te that this land pooling 
policy is yet to be finalized and it will take a pretty long period to put into action.   
 In view of the above, the Committee are distressed  to note that DDA has 
failed miserably to play the role of facilitator/pr ovider for meeting the housing 
needs after 56 years of its existence.  Therefore, the Committee strongly desire 
that DDA should set year-wise target for constructi on of affordable houses and 
adopt multi-pronged strategy to achieve the same.  The Committee further wish 
that DDA should finalise the Land Pooling Policy at  the earliest to involve the 
private sectors and the Co-operative Group Housing Societies to extend a helping 
hand to DDA. The Committee also recommend that both   the DDA and the 
Registrar, Cooperative Group Housing Societies of D elhi Government adopt a 
healthy and coordinated approach to clear the appli cations for Co-operative 
Group Housing Societies for allotment of land in a time-bound manner.   

96 
 
3.PROBLEMS IN CONSTRUCTION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSES AND NEED FOR 
EXPEDITIOUS IMPLEMENTATION OF  FAST TRACK LAND POOLING POLICY  
 
 
 The Committee observe that the DDA is facing some p roblems in 
construction of affordable houses.  Their problems include shortage of land in 
Delhi, high cost of land, development charges and i nfrastructure cost, difficulties 
in availability of finance to the needy who does no t have regular employment and 
fixed monthly income and low-density of housing  as  per  Master Plans norms 
etc. To overcome these problems the Committee  has learnt that recently the 
Central Government has introduced land pooling poli cy besides providing land  
by the DDA to MCD and slum department of the Govern ment of Delhi for 
constructing night shelters for homeless people.   During oral evidence the 
Committee were further informed that as there is sc arcity of land in Delhi, DDA is 
now discouraging allotment of land to individual ap plicant; it will instead allot 
land for construction of multi-storied buildings.    
 The Committee note that the National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy 
2007 had advocated for an effective partnership bet ween the public, private and 
co-operative sector for accelerated growth in the h ousing sector and sustainable 
development of the habitat.   It had stated that 10 -15 per cent of land in every new 
public/private housing project or 20-25 per cent of   FAR which is greater will be 
reserved for EWS/LIG housing through appropriate le gal stipulations and special 
incentives.  Regarding to the role of Co-operative Group Housing Society for 
construction of affordable housing, the Committee w ere informed that in Group 
Housing, the developer shall ensure that minimum 15  per cent of the proposed 
FAR to be constructed for Community Service Personn el/EWS and lower-income 
category.   Such flats should have a carpet area be tween 25-40 sqm.  Prior to the 
enforcement of MPD 2021 it was made applicable to t he Co-operative Group 
Housing Societies to contribute Rs. 25,000 per Dwel ling Units (DUs), where each  
DU is constructed in less than 92.90 sqm.  This was  applicable under Notification 
dated 09.06.1999,  for all Co-operative Group Housi ng Societies applying for 
sanction of building plans to make contribution to housing for the economically-

97 
 
weaker section.    The Committee are perturbed to note that DDA has not followed 
all the above provisions to bind the Co-operative G roup Housing Societies to 
construct houses for the lower-income group.  This is evident from the replies 
furnished  by DDA that it was not mandatory on the part of the Co-operative 
Group Housing Societies to construct houses for the  lower-income group 
because the societies generally construct dwelling units for its bonafide 
members and the Members of  a CGHS are enrolled by the Society as per the 
eligibility criteria provided in the Delhi Cooperat ive Societies Act and rules 
framed thereunder under which the income of an indi vidual is  not linked to the 
eligibility criteria.  The CGHS constructs dwelling  units for its bonafide members 
who were enrolled keeping in view the eligibility c riteria provided by the statute.    
The Committee find the contradictions in the above provisions.   In view of the 
above the Committee strongly recommend to bring uni formity in all the policies 
and rules so that it will be mandatory on the part of the Co-operative Group 
Housing Societies  to construct houses for the economically-weaker sections.   
 The Committee further note that in the recently an nounced Land Pooling 
Policy it has been envisaged that development of la nd measuring about 22,000-
24,000 hectare will be taken up by the private deve lopers.  As per the said policy, 
maximum 53% of the land is for gross residential us e which will provide 50,000 
DUs approximately for economically weaker sections,  for every 1000 hectare of 
land pooled. Further, FAR of 400 is allowed to meet  the residential requirement 
and 15 per cent of FAR over and above of the permis sible FAR is reserved for 
EWS housing.  The Committee note that this policy i s still undergoing the 
process of finalization.   
 Keeping in view the magnitude of shortage of house s for EWS, 
mushrooming of encroachments of precious Government  land and problems in 
regularization of unauthorized colonies in Delhi, t he Committee desire that DDA 
should take concerted effort to finalize the Land P ooling Policy and take 
appropriate action in this regard at the earliest. They further desire that DDA 
should undertake fast track process and complete th e construction of  entire 
EWS houses within a stipulated timeframe.    

98 
 
4. PROVIDING BASIC SERVICES TO THE AFFORDABLE HOUSES 
CONSTRUCTED BY DDA  
 
 The Committee note that the DDA has constructed LI G and EWS houses 
since 1996-67 in all the zones of Delhi.  The basic  services like potable water, 
well-laid drainage system, sewerage network, sanita tion facilities, electricity, 
recreational space, etc. have also been provided fo r these houses.  However, 
during the local study visit of  the Committee to Sector 14 of Dwarka, Delhi during 
the month of December 2012, the Committee observed that  the DDA houses were 
in dilapidated condition.  The basic services for t he inhabitants were very poor.  
The designated areas for park were used for dumping  purposes leading to many 
health hazards. When enquired about the same DDA pa ssed the responsibility to 
MCD for poor maintenance by  stating that it does n ot have any role to play once 
these services are transferred to the civic agencies.  When the Committee felt that 
DDA should coordinate with the civic agencies for p roper maintenance, DDA has 
stated that it has started interacting with the MCD  and Delhi Jal Board to address 
the issues related to adequate supply of water.  Th e Committee  are distressed to 
note that the DDA initiated action to redress the g rievances of the inhabitants of 
sector 14, Dwarka, Delhi only after their interfere nce.  Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommend that DDA should play pro-active role and send its officials 
for undertaking physical verifications in all the z ones of Delhi and take up the 
matter with MCD for proper maintenance of EWS houses.   
  

99 
 
 
5. NEED FOR ADOPTING MODERN DESIGNING IN THE HOUSES           
 
CONSTRUCTED BY DDA  
 
 The Committee observe that the quality of designin g and materials used in 
the DDA houses are not as per the expectations of t he people and there is a need 
to adopt modern concepts and technologies.  DDA Vic e-Chairman during oral 
evidence, has assured the Committee that pre-fabric ated technologies are now 
being adopted by which the quality of designing wil l definitely be improved.  He 
has further assured that while constructing the MIG  and LIG houses in future the 
modern designing in line with Private Group Housing  Societies will definitely be 
taken care of.  He also admitted that there is an u rgent need to change the 
designing of houses and adoption of modern technolo gies in this regard.  
Therefore, the Committee recommend that DDA should take concrete action in 
this regard and keep its assurances given to the Co mmittee in a time-bound 
manner. 
  
  

100 
 
 
6. AWARENESS DRIVE ABOUT AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
 
 
 The Committee observe that the awareness regarding any housing scheme 
amongst the target population is done at the time o f launching the scheme.  Wide 
publicity is given through the print media and also  through press conferences, 
press releases, etc. which are covered by both audi o-visual and other media. 
Since DDA has recently launched the land pooling po licy, the Committee desire 
that wide publicity should be given in print and el ectronic media for creating 
awareness amongst the general public about the bene fits, terms and conditions 
and procedural aspects so that public at large may derive benefit of the scheme 
to the maximum.  

101 
 
7. NEED FOR INTEGRATED APPROACH FOR SLUM DEVELOPMEN T  
 
 The Committee observe from the replies of DDA that  the main reason for 
creation of slums in Delhi is lack of housing infra structure for low-income group 
people such as daily wagers, rag-pickers, hawkers, etc.   Another reason is non-
utilization of land earmarked for the schools, hosp itals, green areas,  etc. by the 
concerned agencies.   
The Committee note that the Delhi Urban Shelter Imp rovement 
Board(DUSIB) had come into existence on 1 
st  July, 2010 whose mandate are as 
under :- 
 
"Creation of Housing stock for the poor sections of  the society and for the 
implementation of provisions of Slum Areas (Improve ment and Clearance) 
Act, 1956.” 
 
Envision for improvement of the living conditions o f the slum dwellers, 
including the JJ Clusters (jhuggie jhopri basties),  in order to make Delhi a 
‘Slum Free City". 
 
The Committee note that no such Project Team has be en constituted under 
DUSIB. However, one or two pilot projects are being  proposed to be taken up on 
PPP basis on  Mumbai pattern for in-situ developmen t of JJ clusters on DUSIB 
lands. The Sr. Commissioner (LM) has been designate d nodal officer for 
monitoring of in-situ development schemes.  A proje ct report for in-situ 
development of JJ clusters is being prepared by Eng ineering Wing in 
consultation  with  the Land Management, Finance, Legal Departments. 
The Committee further observe that Delhi Government  has made Delhi  
Urban Shelter Improvement Board (DUSIB)  as nodal a gency for Slum Free Plan 
of Action for whole of Delhi under Rajiv Awaas Yoja na of Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty Alleviation, Government of India.   T here are 685 JJ Clusters in 
Delhi which are owned by various land owning agenci es.  About 51% clusters are 
on DDA land, 8% each on Railway and MCD, 6% each on  Delhi Government and 

102 
 
CPWD/L&DO, 15% on DUSIB lands, 2% Delhi Cantt., 1% each on NDMC and 
others. 
 On the question of the role of DDA in improvement of slums in Delhi, the 
Committee also observe that DDA provides land to MC D & Slum Deptt. for 
constructing night shelters for homeless people. As  of now there are 291  JJ 
clusters  in Delhi where jhuggies are existing on D DA land.  Action for 
rehabilitation of these jhuggy dwellers is being ta ken by DDA by way of In-situ 
development. The Committee are constrained to note that only one project for  
Kathputali Colony near Shadipur Depot was awarded t o the developer and in the 
month of February, 2014 the inhabitants have been shifted to Anand Parvat, Delhi. 
The work for construction of 3000 EWS houses for jhuggy dwellers at A-14 Kalkaji 
Extension has been awarded.  And for balance  works , action is being taken on 
priority. 
 From the above, the Committee feel that the dream t o make Delhi a slum-
free State cannot be realized.  Neither the State G overnment of Delhi nor DDA has 
taken any concrete action in this regard. Therefore , the Committee strongly 
recommend that the DDA should in coordination with DSUIB, take positive action 
at the earliest.  
 At the same time the Committee want to express thei r anguish on the fact 
that these JJ clusters have  not taken shape overni ght.  There must be a pretty  
long time.  The Committee fail to understand as to what DDA and other agencies 
were doing when these JJ Clusters were coming up.  They hold all these agencies 
responsible for this mess that has been created in Delhi and now they are 
passing buck to one and another. This is not accept able to the Committee. They 
take note of the DDA reply that since 2007 no JJ Cl usters has come up.  The 
Committee want that at least from now all the agenc ies involved should gear up 
themselves and check the rise of JJ Clusters.  The Committee want that 
individual responsibility should be fixed for any l apse in this regard.  They want 
to be apprised of the position in this regard perio dically stating the position of JJ 
clusters in Delhi before and after presentation of this report.   

103 
 
 
 
 8. SETTING UP OF THE ESCROW FUND FOR MAINTENANCE O F EWS 
HOUSING  
 
 
 The Committee observe that an escrow fund was esta blished in pursuance 
of condition no. VI of Annexure to the  Gazette Notification of Government of India 
dated 09.06.1999.  The receipt in this account was to be from the contribution 
@25,000/- per  dwelling unit of size 1,000 sq. ft o r more plinth area.  Fund 
available in the account was to be operated by DDA under specific direction of 
the Ministry of Urban Development.    Now, DDA is i n the process of framing 
procedures/guidelines for setting up the ESCROW fun d for long term 
maintenance of EWS housing in respect of in situ re habilitation of JJ Clusters 
which are currently under construction. 
 The Committee recommend that DDA should expeditiou sly set up this fund 
and make available the fund for maintenance of EWS at the earliest.  
 

104 
 
9. REDEVELOPMENT AND UPGRADATION OF EXISTING AREAS  
 
 The Committee observe that MPD-2021 recommends re- development of 
existing urban areas with enhanced FAR as there is a limitation in the 
development of new areas due to shortage of land.  It has been assessed that 
around 40% of housing needs can be potentially met through re-development/up 
gradation of existing areas of Delhi.  The Committe e are constrained to note that 
DDA is now considering specific guidelines/regulati ons for the same purposes 
and no specific areas have so far been taken up for  this purpose.  Very recently 
DDA has taken up for retro-fitting and redevelopment of unsafe buildings in Delhi.  
However, it has taken up only one such project in East Delhi as a case study. 
 The Committee deplore the lackdaisical attitude of  DDA in regard to 
redevelopment and upgradation of existing area.  Th e Committee strongly feel 
that the MPD 2021 has so far remained on paper only .  Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that DDA should expedite concrete action in this regard.  
 
 The Committee observe that MPD-2021 further recomme nds influence zone 
upto 500 mtrs on both sides along MRTs and major tr ansport corridor which is 
envisaged as intensive development zone.  As such r e-development schemes in  
the influence zone upto 500 mtr. on both sides of t he MRTs/major transport 
corridor are to be prepared. DDA has prepared draft  regulations/guidelines for 
development as influence zone and sent to Ministry of Urban Development on 5 
May 2010 for their approval.  DDA is also working o n the modalities of influence 
zone as Transit Oriented Development (TOD) which is  envisaged as higher 
intensive mix use /mixed income development along t ransport corridors.  DDA 
has published a public notice on 21 December 2012 i dentifying four TOD 
corridors and a pilot project at Karkardooma for in viting suggestions from public.  
The Committee recommend that DDA should complete th e procedural formalities 
in this regard at the earliest and take concrete ac tion thereof under intimation to 
them.  
 

105 
 
10.  UNAUTHORIZED COLONIES WHERE MORE THAN 50% OF A REA IS 
UNBUILT  
 
 The Committee have been informed that the work rela ted to regularization 
of 1,639 unauthorized colonies is being undertaken,  coordinated, monitored and 
supervised by Government of National Capital Territ ory of Delhi  (GNCTD), 
including 246 colonies falling on DDA land.  The fo llowing criteria were to be 
followed: 
a) The colony should have 10% built up area as per 2002 aerial photographs. 
b) The colony should have more than 50% built up ar ea as per aerial 
photographs of 2007. 
c) Boundary of such colonies were delineated by Sur vey of India/ GSDL and 
were finalized vide order dated 4.9.2012 issued by GNCTD. 
 The Committee are aware that a large number of una uthorized colonies 
which have applied for regularization, are not covered under guidelines issued for 
in this regard. 
 The main reason for non-inclusion in the ambit of regularization as well as 
development is that those colonies were having less  than 50 per cent built up 
area as on 8 February 2007.  
 The Committee are of the view that keeping the iss ue of regularization of all 
such colonies in abeyance will keep a good number o f urban poor at bay from 
their right of leading a dignified life with all ci vic amenities. Furthermore, it will 
fail to check  the alleged  thefts of electricity a nd water, to which the residents of 
such colonies are compelled to,  thus, leading to a  loss of revenue to the 
exchequer. 
 Therefore, the Committee recommend strongly for re laxation in norms for 
regularization of all such colonies so that develop ment work is carried out.  In 
addition to this, the Committee fail to understand the logic behind announcing 
'the regularization of unauthorized colonies' and w ithout making any substantial 
efforts in making it a reality. The Committee feel that the public was cheated as 
the announcement of regularization of 1639 unauthor ized colonies tuned out to 

106 
 
be a farce.   Hence, the Committee, while deploring  the dilly-dallying tactics of 
parties involved strongly recommend that keeping in  view the ground realties of 
the Capital of India the regularization as well as development in all such colonies 
should be completed within a time limit of 3 years.  
  

107 
 
11. REGULAR FOLLOW UP OF THE PROGRESS OF REGULARIZA TION OF 
UNAUTHORIZED COLONIES FALLING UNDER ITS PURVIEW  
 
 The Committee were informed that in exercise of pow ers conferred under 
section 57 of Delhi Development Act 1957 (61 of 195 7) the Delhi Development 
Authority with the approval of Union Government not ified "Regulation for 
Regularization of unauthorized colonies in Delhi" v ide Gazette Notification No. 
S.O.- 683(E) dated 23.03.2008 and subsequently few amendments therein notified 
vide Gazette Notification No. S.O. 1452(E) dated 16 .06.2008 and further 
amendment was notified vide Gazette Notification No . S.O. 1297(E) dated 
06.06.2012. 
 The role of DDA inter-alia includes assessment of built –up percentage of 
the colony as per aerial photographs with respect t o colonies falling within the 
Development Area of DDA. 
 The DDA has completed this exercise and submitted its report to 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD).  Further, the Authority 
has also denotified all the unauthorized colonies f alling within the Development 
Area of DDA, hence the entire work is to be done by  the local body. 
 The Committee are of the view that no doubt the en tire work of 
development in these colonies is to be done by Loca l Bodies but since the land 
belongs to DDA, it is the moral responsibility of D DA to ensure that the work gets 
completed expeditiously and efficiently in a time b ound manner.  If it is not done, 
the issue will keep on lingering and the problem wo uld aggravate with the 
passage of time. 
 Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that t he DDA should 
coordinate with local bodies through its  'unauthor ized colonies cell' and set a  
time frame for development of all the colonies fall ing within the Development 
Area of DDA and get the work done within that time frame. 
  

108 
 
 
12. PREPARATION OF LAY OUT PLANS BY RESIDENT WELFAR E 
ASSOCIATIONS (RWAS)  
The Committee are informed that Resident Welfare As sociations (RWAs)/ 
Resident Societies are required to get the layout p lan revised and submit the 
same for approval, so that regularization process c an be expedited.  As per order 
of GNCTD, the layout plans to be submitted by RWAs/  Resident Society need to 
have proper planning inputs.  Local Bodies requeste d there institutes viz. School 
of Planning and Architecture(SPA),  I.P. University  and Jamia University to take 
up preparation of layout plans for RWAs with proper town planning inputs.      The 
payment to these institutes is to be made by RWAs.  The Committee note that 
RWAs are not coming forward to take initiative desp ite the fact that letters were 
sent to RWAs to get the layout plan within the limits set by GNCTD. 
 The Committee have been further enlightened about the initiative taken by 
South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) for prepar ation of layout plans.  
During this SDMC got four layout plans prepared thr ough the School of Planning 
and Architecture and approved by  its own Standing Committee. The payment for 
the preparation of these layout plans has been made  by Corporation, which shall 
be recovered from the RWAs before release of layout/ regularization plan. 
 The Committee while appreciating the efforts of SD MC, desire  that all the 
local bodies across Delhi should follow their foot-  steps and complete the 
preparation of layout plans for all the remaining c olonies also.  Furthermore, the 
Committee desire that in the preparation of these l ay out plans, the RWAs of all 
the concerned colonies should also be involved.  In  this regard, prior notice to 
the RWAs should be sent for attending the meeting. 
 For the recovery of payment of preparation of thes e layout plans from the 
RWAs, the Committee would like to recommend imposit ion of cess on water 
supply bills of the residents of such colonies only .  But this course should be 
taken only when the RWAs do not deposit the payment for preparation of plan. 
 The Committee would also like to put a note of cau tion in this regard that 
the cess should be imposed only on the residents of  these unauthorized 

109 
 
colonies.  This should be done for limited time per iod till the recovery of payment 
of lay out plan. 
   

110 
 
13. FATE OF UNAUTHORIZED COLONIES POSING HINDRANCES  IN 
GENERATING INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES  
 
 
The Committee have been informed that the unauthori zed colonies falling 
under the jurisdiction of local bodies or DDA and p osing hindrance in providing 
infrastructure facilities or fall in the area of Ri ght of Way (RoW) of existing/ 
proposed railway lines, master plan roads, major/ t runk water supply & sewerage 
lines, regional park,  along with the area posing h indrance in the provisions of 
infrastructural facilities, are not eligible for re gularization as per clause 3.3 9b of 
notification dated 24.03.2008 of Regulations for Re gularization of unauthorized 
colonies in Delhi, issued by DDA would be deleted f rom the regularization 
process by GNCTD. 
 The Committee are fully in consonance with the not ification issued by DDA.  
But the issue that is agitating the mind of the Com mittee is the unexpected  and 
stoic  silence of GNCTD and DDA on the fate of residents of such colonies. 
 From the foregoing the Committee can infer  that t hese colonies are on the 
verge of removal.  Thus, the Committee strongly rec ommend that all such 
colonies should be re-located to suitable places wi th minimum possible 
displacement, so that  the livelihood earnings of r esidents are not adversely 
affected. 
 If needed, specific and requisite amendments shoul d be made in the 
notification to address this concern of the Committ ee and cater to the needs of 
residents of all such colonies. 

111 
 
14.   ENCROACHMENT OF DDA LANDS AND FIXING THE RESP ONSIBILITY OF 
OFFICIALS WHOSE NEGLIGENCE RESULTED IN ENCROACHMENT 
 
 
The unauthorized colonies are a reality not only in  Delhi but in all the major 
urban cities across the nation.  The Committee  fee l one of the main reasons for 
this is that  the common land in urban villages, To wns/ Cities is being usurped by 
influential people for self and illegal occupants p rotected by Vote Bank Politics.  
This is clearly reflected in the information provid ed by the Ministry and DDA 
where they have stated that reclaiming the land that has been encroached prior to 
the year 2007 is not possible due to GNCTD Special (Provision) Act, 2011 
extended up to 31.12.2014. Therefore, the Committee  would like to recommend 
that Land Records should be surveyed and mutations done as per Revenue 
records.  Each Khasra Khatauni with division should be recorded.  This should be 
done at par with amended Waqf Lands Acts, 2013.    
Moreover, as per the Annual Report 2010-11 the most  important function of 
Land Management Department of DDA is to protect DDA  land from 
encroachments.  Thus, it is quite clear that  the d uty for checking unauthorized 
occupation of DDA land and vacating the encroached land is cast on the officers 
concerned.  The officials are supposed to detect an d verify the encroachments 
and get them removed.  However, the data provided b y DDA speaks otherwise as 
1402.16 acre of DDA land is under encroachment in v arious parts of Delhi, while 
during last five years only 402.428 acre of land co uld be reclaimed by DDA.  This 
data is contrary to the claim that as and when the case of  any encroachment on 
DDA land comes to the notice of Delhi Development A uthority (DDA), action to 
remove it was taken as per law. This is clearly ind icative of inaction on the part of 
DDA officials. This has resulted in the burden on t he resources of State 
Government as well as DDA. The Committee are of the  view that if the concerned 
officials perform their duties honestly and diligen tly, then it will become 
impossible for the encroachers to lay hands on the Government land.  They are of 
the view that the encroachment should be nipped in the bud. The Committee have 
come to know that Government of Delhi has created a sub-divisional level Special 

112 
 
Task Force to check encroachment on the public land .  Their assistance is being 
obtained whenever any new encroachment is noticed.  But Committee regret that  
measures to reclaim the encroached land have utterl y failed.  The Committee, 
therefore, would like to recommend that the account ability of officials be fixed 
with deterrent punishment whose negligence/favourti sm/involvements in corrupt 
practices has resulted in the encroachment.  The Co mmittee are of the view that 
concerted efforts be made to identify the concerned  officials. The Committee 
insist that the Ministry and DDA should fix respons ibility in those matters after 
digging the old cases and if the connivance of offi cials is proved, exemplary 
punishment should be inflicted on them.  A status r eport in this regard should be 
submitted to the Committee within three months of t he presentation of the report 
incorporating the position before and after presentation of this report.    
  

113 
 
15.  DELAY IN LAND ALLOTMENT BY DDA AND RCS  TO COO PERATIVE 
GROUP HOUSING  SOCIETIES WAITING FOR YEARS   
 
The Delhi Co-operative Societies Act 1972 has helpe d to achieve new 
heights in establishing   the culture of Co-operati ve Group Housing Societies 
(CGHS).  The Act aimed to facilitate the voluntary formation and democratic 
functioning of co-operative societies as people’s i nstitutions based on self help 
and mutual aid to enable them to promote their econ omic and social betterment 
and to provide for regulation and management, funct ional autonomy of such 
societies.  Thus, the moot question remains whether  the Act and  the concerned 
organizations (DDA & RCS) responsible for implement ing the same have been 
able to fulfill the expectations of public or not. 
 The Committee were informed by the public represen tatives through 
representations as well as during the course of ora l evidence that Delhi 
Development Authority has neither offered land to t he Co-operative Group 
Housing Societies nor sought recommendations from R egistrar Co-operative 
Societies, NCT of Delhi after the stay Order dated 18 
th  June 2004 CWP( C) No. 
10066/2004  for the operation and effect of communi cation dated 25 th  March 2004 
whereby additional list of 35 societies was sent by  Registrar Co-operative Society 
for land allotment.  And, likewise the Registrar Co -operative Society did not send 
recommendation after the above said order.  
 Further the Committee were also made aware of resp onse to Lok Sabha 
unstarred question No.4546 fixed for 20 August 2010  and as well as of the  
observation of the High Court of Delhi where it has  categorically emphasized in 
its order dated 03 
rd  October 2005 in WP (C) No. 10066/2004 and CM. 1051 4/2005 
that we would not like a single genuine society or a genuine member to be either 
harassed or denied their right of allotment.  
On this issue, DDA put forth the reason that DDA ha s allotted land to all 
such eligible societies, whose names were forwarded by RCS to DDA from time to 
time and no case is pending for allotment of land i n DDA.  The scope of carving 
out further land for allotment to CGHS can be consi dered on receipt of further 
recommendation from RCS. 

114 
 
As regards developing and further allotting of land  to Cooperative Group 
Housing Societies, DDA further informed the Committ ee that this requires large 
scale acquisition and the same can be taken up by D DA only on land being made 
available by the State Government.  DDA is always p repared to develop and allot 
land to CGHS. 
 From the submission of DDA, it appeared that RCS w as not active in 
allotting land to CGHS.  But when the Committee inq uired the RCS office in this 
regard, their reply which is produced below,  compe lled the Committee to think 
otherwise of DDA.   
  "As per section 9(1) (f) of Delhi Co-operative Soci eties Act, 2003, the 
confirmation of availability of land to the Co-oper ative Group Housing Society 
from land allotting agency is required by this offi ce at the time of applying for 
registration.  However, no application for registra tion of Co-operative Group 
Housing Societies alongwith the confirmation of ava ilability of land from Delhi 
Development Authority as stated above has been received in last ten years"  
 From the foregoing the Committee find lack of tran sparency and sincerity 
on the part of both RCS as well as DDA, at least in  connection with allotment of 
land to CGHS.  It appears that RCS and DDA are in c onnivance and are 
responsible for delay in land allotment to the Coop erative Group Housing 
Societies.  This attitude of RCS and DDA of passing  the buck to each other leads 
to nothing but the harassment of members of such so cieties, who have been 
dreaming of a roof over their heads for decades and  suffering financially as well 
as mentally. 
 The Committee noted with pain that the citizenry a re compelled to 
approach judiciary for its intervention and order t o RCS Delhi for verification of 
documents and thus recommend in unequivocal terms  that RCS should be 
totally transparent in its working by  clearly ment ioning  on its official website all 
the documents and permissions required to be submit ted by CGHS while 
applying for land allotment.   
At the same time,  the Committee further recommend  DDA to take up this 
issue of allotment of land to all remaining eligibl e CGHS  waiting for the same on 

115 
 
priority basis after completing the required exerci se without any further delay, 
within a span of 3-4 months. The Committee would li ke to have a quarterly 
progress report in this regard. 
  

116 
 
16.  INSENSITIVE ATTITUDE OF DDA AND RCS TOWARDS CO -OPERATIVE 
GROUP HOUSING SOCIETIES  
 
 
 A representation was received from the Secretary, Loknayak Co-operative 
Group Housing Society Ltd. (Regd.), Rohini, New Del hi.  In the representation, the 
Secretary of the CGHS has informed that DDA is not according the credit of 
ground rent for the amounts deposited by the societ y from 12/01/1990 to 
17/07/2000. 
 After the intervention of this Committee, the issu e was resolved by DDA 
and the credit of the ground rent for the amounts d eposited by the society was 
given to them by DDA after verifying all the fourteen challans in question. 
 The Society was pursuing this issue with DDA since  2010.   
 Similarly, a representation was received from the Secretary, Aviation 
Cooperative Group Housing Society Ltd. (Regd.),  Delhi.  In the representation the 
appellant had informed the Committee that the Regis trar Cooperative Societies 
has wrongfully issued notice against their society; under section 96(1) of the RCS 
Act.  The notice was issued against the society in the year 2006, without even 
conducting a proper inquiry.  He had requested to r emove this section altogether 
from the Act. 
 Thus the Committee had to intervene, and ask RCS o ffice to look into the 
matter.  In his letter no. F/47/Policy/68/RCS/2013/ 1289 dated 18.12.2013 to the 
Secretary Ministry of Urban Development, the Regist rar Co-operative Society 
informed as under: 
  "The Standing Committee was assured that the ques tion of 
withdrawal of notice to Aviation CGHS Ltd., will be  re-examined in three months' 
time for an appropriate decision.  The matter has b een considered and the said 
notice has already been withdrawn." 
These two cases are indicative of the callous attit ude of both DDA and RCS 
office in their public dealing and are contrary to tall claims of customer 
satisfaction made by both the offices before the Co mmittee.  The Committee can 

117 
 
only infer that this is only the tip of the iceberg  and the problem is grave than 
that. 
 While deploring the attitude of DDA and RCS, the C ommittee strongly 
recommend that DDA and RCS should mend their ways o f public dealing and 
prepare a time frame of resolving all sort of probl ems that are being commonly 
faced by the public, in relation to their respectiv e offices.  As the Committee 
cannot call for every case before them for getting a solution for them they  call 
upon  the DDA and RCS to formulate a mechanism whic h keep a watch on the 
officials who are responsible for cropping up of su ch avoidable problems.  They 
also recommend that such officials should be suitab ly punished in the above 
mentioned cases, the Committee would recommend that  the delinquent officials 
be identified and punished suitably.  
  

118 
 
17.   COMPUTERISATION OF LAND RECORDS BY DDA  
 
The Committee observe that DDA is a 56 year old ins titution set up to plan 
and develop the city of Delhi as per plan. It has b een acquiring land for 
undertaking various development purposes. 
 As of now, the total acquired land with the DDA is  90,326 acre. Out of that 
76,887 acre of land have been handed over to DDA an d the remaining 13,439 acre 
of awarded land is yet to be handed over to DDA. Th e Committee have learnt that 
the matter of taking over the land is being pursued  with land & building 
Department of GNCTD. The Committee are of the view that Delhi is the capital city 
of India, but  in many parts of Delhi there is no p lanned development. People are 
undertaking construction haphazardly in many villag es without getting plan 
approved from the competent authorities and without  undertaking various safety 
measures. People are forced to live in these locali ties due to inherent 
compulsions. As a result the inhabitants are at ser ious risk. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly  recommend that the matter relat ed to handing over of the 
remaining land should be pursued vigorously with La nd and Building Department 
of GNCTD and digitized the same so that DDA can ini tiate steps to develop these 
areas as per the plan. 
The Committee further note that computerization of acquired land records 
have been made by the DDA. However, out of the acqu ired land in 240 villages, 
only 185 villages have so far been digitized. The C ommittee fail to understand 
that despite the computerization process having bee n started in 1986, why the 
land records of remaining 55 villages have not been  digitized so far. Keeping in 
view the scarcity of land, encroachment of DDA land  and problems of 
regularization of unauthorized colonies, the Commit tee are of the view that all 
sincere efforts be made in digitizing the entire land records without further loss of 
time. 
  

119 
 
18.  CONVERSION OF PROPERTY FROM LEASEHOLD TO FREEH OLD  
 
The Committee observe that allotment of DDA built u p flats and flats of 
CGHS made upto 1992 was on leasehold basis. But, th e residential and 
commercial plots and flats are being allotted on fr ee-hold basis w.e.f. 1.1.2007, 
the lease-hold properties are being converted into freehold as per policy and 
guidelines issued by Ministry of Urban Development in the year 1991. 45 days is 
the prescribed period for converting DDA built up f lats and CGHS flats and 90 
days for other properties. From the data submitted by DDA, the Committee 
observe that during the last five years from 1.12.2 007 to 30.11.2012, 24,589 
number of applications have been received from Hous ing Department of DDA for 
conversion of leasehold to freehold and 27,157 appl ications have been disposed 
of. Still, 944 applications are pending. From the C ooperative Group Housing 
Societies DDA has received 6,612 applications and i t has disposed of 1254 
applications. 5,458 applications are still pending.  The Committee have learnt that 
the main reasons for such large-scale pendency are because deficiencies are not 
completed by the applicants  such as non-submission of required documents and 
non-deposit of demanded amounts such as ground rent , misuse, damage 
charges, etc. 
DDA has further submitted that it has started onlin e application for 
conversion from leasehold to freehold in the year 2 012. Keeping in view the 
pendency of large number of flats/plots for convers ion of leasehold to freehold 
non submission of required documents and non-deposi t of demanded amount, 
the Committee are of the view that only by extendin g the facility  for online 
application is not the solution to the problem. Fro m the above, the Committee are 
compelled to conclude that the process is not at al l transparent. There is an 
urgent need to make the system transparent and peop le friendly. In this regard 
the Committee recommended that the DDA in its websi te should clearly make a 
mention about the list of documents and the amount required for conversion of 
leasehold to freehold. Further while submitting the  application, DDA should give 
receipt of the application along with the list of d ocuments received from the 

120 
 
applicants. This will not only  release the burden of DDA but also facilitate it to do 
the needful within the prescribed time-frame. Further, this will stop harassment of 
public by the DDA officials. 
 The Committee further observe that one of the reas ons attributed for slow 
clearance of applications for conversion of leaseho ld to freehold is non-deposit 
of demanded amount such as ground rent, misuse and damage charges which 
many a  time exceed the cost of the plots or flats.  Recently DDA has decided to 
provide a special one time relief, where in a maxim um period for levy of misuse 
charges will be restricted to five years from the d ate of detection of misuse. The 
Committee welcome such people friendly steps.  At t he same time the Committee 
are of view that to stop misusing the flats by carr ying out unwanted 
alterations/extensions, DDA should undertake regula r physical verification of all 
the DDA built flats and CGHS flats every year and maintain proper records thereof 
and provide stringent punishment so that people wil l not dare to carry out any 
unwanted alteration/extension in the flats without prior permission of DDA.  
  

121 
 
 
19. ALLOTMENT OF ALTERNATIVE PLOTS/FLATS 
 
 
The Committee observe that as of now DDA has acquir ed land in 240 villages 
for undertaking various types of development in Del hi. DDA allots alternative 
plots to the villages on the basis of the recommend ations received from the Land 
and Building Department of GNCTD.  Necessary guidel ines in this regard have 
been issued by GNCTD. No separate guidelines have b een issued by DDA. The 
allotment of an alternative plot is made by DDA as per seniority fixed on the basis 
of date of taking of physical possession of acquire d land by Land and Building 
Department of GNCTD, for respective size category a nd zone before holding 
draws of lots. Till now 10,675 alternative allotmen ts have been made to the 
farmers whose land had been acquired. As on date, 6 8 recommendations letters 
issued by the Land and Building Department of NCT o f Delhi are lying pending 
due to non-availability of plots of respective size. 
Further, the Committee observe that the affected pe ople from whom DDA is 
acquiring land spent their hard earned money to buy  a single flat/plot. By 
acquiring  a particular area for any developmental purpose, people residing in 
that area are not only deprived of  their property, but also their livelihood. Further, 
during oral evidence, the Committee came to know th at all over Delhi people are 
airing grievances, because DDA acquires the land an d pay compensation after 
many years of taking possession but at the older ra tes. In many a cases, DDA  
has taken over one independent house but given them  one EWS flat. Therefore, 
the Committee  are pained to conclude that people a re not adequately 
compensated. 
The Committee are further distressed to note that D DA acquires the land, for 
various development purposes but does not have its own policy for paying 
compensation and it is totally dependent on the pol icy for project affected 
persons evolved by the Government of NCT of Delhi. The Vice-Chairman, DDA 
during oral deposition has admitted that whether it  is land for land or value for 
value or whether it is providing accommodation, is a policy matter and  he will 

122 
 
definitely raise it in the  right quarters and a co nscious decision will be taken so 
that the interests  of the affected persons  are protected. 
 In view of the above state of affairs, the Committee recommend that instead of 
depending upon the policy of Government of Delhi, D DA should evolve its own 
policy and extend adequate and timely compensation as per market rate on the 
date of paying compensation. The Committee also des ire that compensation 
should be paid in a stipulated timeframe. 
  

123 
 
 
20.   CRITERIA FOLLOWED IN ALLOTMENT OF LAND FOR CO NSTRUCTION OF 
HOTELS, MALLS, SCHOOLS etc.  
 
 The Committee observe that as per Master Plan 3% o f land acquired under 
the acquisition, development and disposal of land i n Delhi is utilised for 
commercial use. From 2006 onwards DDA has disposed of 158 commercial plots 
and 24 plots for hotels. The Committee are, however , distressed to note that 
during the last ten years only 23 sites have been a llotted for bus depots against 
the demand of 31 by the GNCTD. Five sites are under  process. In remaining 3 
cases, the site requested at I.P extension is under  encroachment whereas in 
Rohini Sector 11 and Ghazipur no land is available.  Against the demand of 35 
police stations by the  Delhi Police, DDA has allotted 25 sites, 5 sites for allotment 
are under process.  In remaining 5 cases allotment cannot be made as no site is 
available.  
 During the period 2002 to 2013, DDA has allotted 7  hospital sites and 16 
sites for Senior Secondary schools and 2 sites for secondary schools. 
The Committee were further informed that the facili ties such as school, 
hospitals, markets, commercial areas are assigned a s per the population 
requirement. There is no preference given in Master  Plan for developing a land 
parcel/pocket for commercial areas in comparison to  the  land for public or semi 
public use like school and hospital. 
However, the number of allotment of land for commer cial plots for malls  
have outnumbered the allotment of plots/sites for n ecessary infrastructural 
facilities for schools, hospitals, bus depots and p olice stations. Keeping in mind 
the growing population of Delhi, their health probl ems, education and law and 
order problem, the Committee strongly recommend tha t DDA should make 
necessary changes in the Master Plan to give prefer ence to these basic 
infrastructure. The Committee were further informed  that sanction for Building 
plans are much faster and quicker, if all the docum ents required for are attached. 
For this the Committee desire that for faster proce ssing and clearance, DDA in its 
website should upload the details of documents requ ired along with the planning 

124 
 
parameters for any building and these should be adv ertised in the print and 
electronic media for creating awareness among the p eople.  The Committee also 
desire that effective public participation should b e ensured in this direction to 
yarn good results. 

125 
 
21.  CONSTRUCTION OF COMMUNITY HALLS IN THE VILLAGE S 
 WHEREFROM DDA HAS TAKEN LAND  
 
 
 DDA is required to undertake various developmental  works in the villages 
wherefrom it has taken land. However, the Committee  are distressed to note that 
from its inception till date DDA has constructed on ly 44 community halls in 
various zones.  It has completed construction of 28 community centr es in the year 
1996-97. Afterwards, the number has drastically red uced to 11 during the entire 6 
years from 1997-98 to 2003-04. This has further bee n reduced to 4 during the 3 
years from 2004-05 to 2006-07. Out of the completed  44 community centres only 
18 were functional during the period January 2012 t o August 2013, while 20 
community centres in all the zones i.e, South, Dwar ka, North, East and Rohini are 
in planning stage. In the South zone, out of 8 comm unity centres, 7 are still in the 
planning stage and construction of only one communi ty centre is in progress. In 
Dwarka zone out of 4 community centres 2 are in pla nning stage and 2 are in 
progress. In North zone, one community Hall is in p rogress. In East zone all the 6 
are in planning stage. 
From the above, the callous attitude of DDA towards  fulfilling its 
obligations becomes clear.  The Committee fail to u nderstand this lackadaisical 
approach of DDA and deplore it vehemently.  They wa nt that DDA should come 
out of its slumber and act swiftly in this regard.  
  

126 
 
 
22. NEED TO REDEEM IMAGE BY DDA 
 
 
The Committee note that  the DDA has claimed that f or the last 55 years it 
has been innovating in terms of technology, managem ent techniques and 
improving public interface in order to reach its cu stomers in a better and friendly 
manner for ensuring timely delivery of services. Th e Citizen Charter detailing 
schedule of various transactions has been published . Many processes which 
have maximum public interface have been made online  like conversion of 
leasehold to freehold, booking of temporary allotme nt of space for marriages and 
social functions etc., allowing the corrupt practic es with prior appointment etc, 
However, the Committee are distressed to observe th at DDA's has ruined its 
image before general public by remaining inactive a nd allowing the corrupt 
practices  in deteriorating. Since 2003, DDA has no t allotted any land to any 
cooperative group housing society, DDA and RCS are passing the buck on each 
other for not discharging their responsibilities wi th regard to allotment of land. 
DDA has failed to maintain the capital city includi ng Yamuna River which is 
getting dirtier day by day. DDA has proved its fail ure to provide houses and basic 
amenities to inhabitants of Delhi. DDA officials ha ve grossly failed in checking 
fraud in allotting venues for marriages and other s ocial functions, in checking the 
growth of slums and unauthorised occupation of land  under its purview. 
Conversion of leasehold to freehold, in checking un authorized construction and 
alteration in DDA built houses and CGHS, etc. 
While taking oral evidence of representatives of CG HS,  the Committee 
learnt that people are aggrieved because DDA is har assing them by not giving 
adequate and timely compensation, it is only after the interface of the Committee 
the problems of two Residents Welfare Associations were solved. 
In view of the above, the Committee feel that DDA h as failed to live up  to 
the expectations of the people of Delhi. Against th is backdrop, the Committee 
wish to recommend that there is an urgent need to r efurbish the image of this 

127 
 
premier organisation by taking proactive and timely  steps under intimation to the 
Committee.  
  

128 
 
23. TRANSPARENCY IN THE FUNCTIONING OF DDA/MCD  
 
 The Committee observe that DDA has taken following  steps in ensuring 
transparency in its functioning:- 
 
1. Online conversion of leasehold to freehold of Gr oup Housing Flats and DDA 
flats has been started from 01.09.2012.  Informatio n on freehold conversion 
process has been uploaded on the DDA website. 
2. Two activities have been brought under ESLA, i.e . Electronic Service Level 
Agreement and therefore, these activities are monit ored regularly and 
activities have to be completed within 45 days, i.e . conversion from lease 
hold to free hold for group housing flats and DDA flats is done  in 45 days. 
3. Citizens' Charter of various activities has alre ady been prepared and task is 
to be completed as per Citizens' Charter. 
4. Installation of CCTVs is under process in the Vi kas Sadan Office of DDA 
where major public dealing activities are being conducted. 
5. Directions have been issued to place on the webs ite all procedures, rules 
and regulations, so as to increase transparency. 
6. To reduce the movement of touts in various branc hes, the exit/entry points 
in Vikas Sadan have been reduced from seven to three. 
7. Record Management is being improved. 
8. The information regarding various draws of plots , flats and housing 
schemes are being uploaded on the DDA website for greater transparency. 
9. File tracking system has been implemented in the  Vigilance branch and the 
same is under implementation in other branches. 
10. The sensitive branches are being randomly inspected by Vigilance branch to 
see delays in handling of files, presence of outsiders, etc. 
11. E-tendering system has been implemented in DDA to increase transparency 
and check pooling of tenders. Efforts are being mad e for getting on  e-
payment gateway for submission of cost of tender an d earnest money 
deposit. 

129 
 
12. Vigilance helpline has been launched on the occ asion of Vigilance 
Awareness Week, 2012 and its number is 09650713388. 
13. To curb the nuisance of tent mafia, the booking  of parks, community halls 
and vacant sites for tents have been computerized a nd online booking has 
been implemented w.e.f. 7.11. 2012. 
14. Conversion of DDA built up flats from Leasehold  to Freehold has been 
brought in the purview of the Delhi (Right of Citiz en to Time Bound Delivery 
of Services), Act, 2011." 
 
The Committee note that DDA has tried to cover its each and every activity 
it the list.  However,  incidence of  fraud have be en recurring and being frequently 
reported in various forms of media  from time to ti me despite putting all 
procedures, rules and regulation, file tracking sys tem, random inspection 
sensitive branches by the vigilance to check delays  in the handling of files, 
presence of outsiders and  launching of vigilance h elpline in place.  With regard 
to fraud in allotment of marriage venues through to uts/mafias, DDA has admitted 
that such cases have reduced. The Committee are com pelled to infer that fraud 
cases are still persisting and the so called transp arent system is only on the 
paper not in practice. As per the rule DDA official s are supposed to undertake 
field visits to the marriage venues to physically v erify the facts, however, they 
connive with the touts/mafias in facilitating the c ontinuation of corrupt practices. 
In view of this, the Committee recommend that accou ntability of senior officials 
be fixed in case of violation any steps mentioned a bove and deterrent 
punishment should be inflicted on them.  Only then,  the people could expect a 
truly transparent mechanism.  
 
 
  

130 
 
24. EXPEDITE THE ACTION IN CORRUPTION CASES AGAINST  THE DDA    
OFFICIALS  
 The Committee observe that to bring transparency i n the functioning of 
DDA/MCD to root out corruption and provide better, quick and people friendly 
services,  DDA has initiated some steps.  The Commi ttee are informed that file 
tracking system has been implemented in the vigilan ce branch and the same is 
under implementation in other branches, sensitive b ranches are being randomly  
inspected by vigilance branch to see delays in hand ling of files and presence of 
outsiders etc.  Vigilance helpline has been launche d on the occasion of Vigilance 
Awareness Week 2012 and its number is 09650713388. 
 From the information furnished by DDA the Committe e can easily gather 
the fact  that amongst the 82 corruption cases agai nst the DDA officials for last 
more than 10 years w.e.f 2003, 41 are under trial, 12 are under investigation, 4 
have been acquitted, 1 is RDA case, 1 has been disc harged, 1case is under CBI 
investigation and 3 cases have been closed by CBI and 19 convictions are there. 
 This information of DDA is indicating towards the slow pace of trials and 
poor rate of conviction in the corruption cases aga inst the DDA officials.  This 
appears to be an eye wash. The Committee are of the  view that such a slow pace 
of progress in cases and very low rate of conviction fails badly to act as deterrent 
for other officials, from indulging in corrupt prac tices.  Rather it tends to give a 
boost to unscrupulous elements. 

131 
 
 Thus, the Committee would like to recommend that t he trials and 
investigations should be expedited and guilty be br ought to the book at the 
earliest.  Moreover, this should not only remain restricted to these cases only that 
have been brought to the notice of the Committee.  Rather, the speedy trial 
should become a regular feature in DDA.    
 
  

132 
 
25.  INTRODUCTION OF SINGLE WINDOW SYSTEM  
 
The Committee note that DDA is a 56 years old agglomeration   dealing with 
the matters of government, private and semi private  agencies. It deals with many 
sensitive matters. The Committee are disheartened t o note that DDA has 
introduced single window system just in three areas   and that too from the year 
2012.  The facility has been introduced for only se lected activities viz. conversion 
of leasehold to freehold of CGHS flats, DDA flats a nd Samasya Nidhan.  While 
expressing their satisfaction for this endeavor of DDA,  the Committee want that 
all activities of DDA should come under its umbrell a.  They also want that a 
strong monitoring mechanism be put in place in the initial years to check as to 
whether the system is benefitting the public.  
Though much delayed, the Committee welcome the intr oduction of single 
window system in DDA for bringing in transparency i n its activities.  However, 
they would like the DDA to introduce the single win dow system in all the areas of 
functioning. 
   
  
 
  

133 
 
26.  NEED TO ELIMINATE THE PRESENCE OF TOUTS/AGENTS   IN DDA  
 
 
 The Committee observe that DDA has initiated some s teps to bring in 
transparency in the functioning of DDA / MCD.  To r educe the movement of touts 
in various branches, the exit/ entry points in Vikas Sadan have been reduced from 
seven to three.  File tracking system has been impl emented in the vigilance 
branch to see delays in handling of files, presence  of outsiders.  Installation of 
CCTVs is under process in the Vikas Sadan Office of  DDA where major public 
dealing activities are being conducted.  Directions  have been issued to place on 
the website all procedures, rules and regulations s o as to increase transparency.  
The Committee note with concern that despite all these systems in place DDA has 
not been able to eliminate the existence of touts/ agents in its office. 
 
 While taking a serious view on this, the Committee strongly desire that 
DDA should strictly ensure the compliance of the ab ove steps initiated by it.  The 
Committee further desire that CCTV should be installed in all the rooms of DDA at 
the earliest and the records of register at recepti on office of DDA should be 
periodically monitored in order to see the name of frequently visited persons so 
that his/ her entry can be put under watch. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;           SHARAD YADAV 
12 March, 2014
                             CHAIRMAN 
21 Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Urban Development  
 

134 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013).  
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 21 st  January, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in 
Room No G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
3. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
4. Shri Kailash Joshi 
5. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee  
6. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
7. Dr Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Shashi Bhushan Behera 
9. Shri Anil Desai 
10. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
11. Shri Fagan Singh Kulaste 
12. Shri Avinash Pande  
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 

135 
 
WITNESSES  
 
1.       Dr. Sudhir Krishna  - Secretary, MoUD 
2.       D.Diptivilasa   - Additional Secretary(L.W ),MoUD 
3.       Shri J.P. Agrawal  -        Joint Secretar y, MoUD 
4.       Shri Susheel Kumar  -        Joint Secreta ry, Housing 
5.       Shri S.K. Srivastava  -        Vice Chairm an, DDA 
6.       Shri R.K. Srivastava  -        Secretary, GNCTD 
7.       Shri S. S. Yadav,  -         Commissioner,  East, MCD 
8.       Shri Manish Gupta  -         Commissioner,  South, MCD 
9.       Shri P.K. Gupta  -         Commissioner, N orth, MCD 
10.       Smt. Asma Manjar  - Commissioner, Housing  ,DDA 
11.       Shri D.S. Pandit  - Secretary, NDMC 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairman welcomed the  Members and representatives 
of the Ministry of Urban Development and Delhi Deve lopment Authority (DDA) to the 
sitting of the Committee and drew their attention t o the provisions under Direction 
55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker. The Chairma n then drew the attention of the 
Secretary Ministry of Urban Development on the lacu nae observed by the 
Committee during their local visit to the unauthori sed colonies and directed him to 
give clarifications on those issues and also to bri ef on the role and responsibilities of 
DDA in affordable housing and regularization of una uthorized colonies in Delhi and 
to give suggestions to improve its working.  
 
3.  Then, Members raised various issues ranging fro m definition of unauthorized 
layout, unauthorized construction (non-permanent co nstruction like nets and wire 
meshes to prevent pigeon from littering in the prem ises and shed to prevent the rain 
water from flooding the balconies), Problems in get ting building completion 
certificate, getting clearance for freehold, demoli tion of structure without prior notice, 
lack of cooperation between DDA and MCD, difficulties in getting possession  of flats 
as well as sale deed under Housing Allotment 2012 d espite giving full payment to 
the DDA., target houses to be completed during the year 2011-12 and houses 
completed during the year 2012, efforts taken by DD A for construction of affordable 
houses for SC, ST, minority, disabled and woman, pr ocess of computerization in 

136 
 
DDA, progress of balance work in regard to rehabili tation of jhuggi dwellers taken up 
by DDA, reasons for the encroached lands which have  not been reclaimed, issue of 
eradicating touts/agents in DDA complex, issue of l and earmarked primarily for 
hospitals and elementary education in DDA land etc. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Dev elopment and the Vice-
Chairman, DDA, responded to various queries raised by the Members. 
 
5. As many important points remained unanswered, Ho n'ble Chairman Directed the 
officers to come prepared in the next meeting on 7 
th February, 2013. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned . 
***** 
  

137 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013).  
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 7 th  February, 2013 from 1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Room No G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
3. Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4. Shri Kailash Joshi 
5. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee  
6. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
7. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
8. Dr. Ramshankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Shashi Bhushan Behera 
10. Shri Anil Desai 
11. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
12. Shri Fagan Singh Kulaste 
13. Shri Avinash Pande 
14. Dr. M.S. Gill  
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 

138 
 
 
WITNESS  
 
     Shri Sandeep Dixit  - M.P., Lok Sabha 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairman made an obit uary reference on the sad demise of 
Shri Umashankar Singh, M.P., Lok Sabha, who was the  Member of the Committee during 
the year 2011-12. 
3. The Hon'ble Chairman, then welcomed new Member D r. M.S. Gill, M.P., Rajya Sabha to 
the Committee.     
4. Thereafter, the Hon'ble Chairman then welcomed S hri Sandeep Dixit, M.P. Lok Sabha 
from East Delhi Constituency to the sitting. The Chairman then requested him to give a brief 
presentation on the "Issue of role of DDA on afford able housing and regularization of 
unauthorized colonies." 
 
5. Shri Sandeep Dixit in his presentation highlight ed the various lacunae in the functioning 
of DDA that have resulted in the sprawling up of unauthorized colonies in Delhi. 
 
6. Shri Sandeep Dixit then clarified the queries ra ised by the Member relating to the issue 
of unauthorized colonies across Delhi and their reg ulation. It was decided to invite Shri 
Sandeep Dixit during the next oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Urban 
Development and DDA. 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt.  
 
The witness then withdrew. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned . 
***** 
  

139 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  TUESDAY,              
08 OCTOBER, 2013 
       
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1345 hrs. in Co mmittee Room  ‘C’ Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
3. Shri P.C. Mohan 
4. Dr. Ramshankar 
5.  Shri Ratan Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6. Shri Anil Desai 
7. Dr. M.S. Gill 
8. Md. Nadimul Haque  
9. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
10. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
11. Shri Avinash Pande 
12. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
13. Shri Amar Singh 
14. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 

140 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha  - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.-  Under Secretary  
 
PART-I 
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES  
S.No  
 
Name of Officers & 
Designation  
Ministry/Department  
1.  Shri Sudhir Krishna Secretary,  MoUD 
2.  Shri D.Diptivilasa  Additional Secretary, MoUD & Vi ce 
Chairman, DDA  
3.  Ms. Alka Selot Asthana  Director (JNNURM & RAY)MoHU PA 
4.  Shri Abhai Sinha Engineer Member ,DDA 
5.  Shri Manish Kumar  Chief Accounts Officer DDA 
6.  Shri Dayanand Kataria  Principal commissioner (LM, Pers & 
Systems)DDA 
7.  Shri T. Srinidhi Principal Commissioner (LD, Hsg & 
CWG)DDA 
8.  Smt. Asma Manzar Commissioner (Housing)DDA 
9.  Shri Madhup Vyas  Commissioner (LD)DDA 
10. Shri D. Sarkar Commissioner-cum-Secretary DDA 
11. Shri Brijesh Kumar Mishra  Commissioner (LM)DDA  
12. Shri J.B. Kshirsagar  Commissioner (Plg)DDA 
13. Shri Vinod Dhar Chief Architect DDA 
14. Shri A.K. Nigah Chief Engineer (Head Quarters)D DA 
15. Shri V.S. Tomar  Director (Systems)DDA 
16. Smt Neemo Dhar  Advisor (PR)DDA 
17. Shri R.K. Jain  Addl. Commissioner (Plg) UE&P D DA 
18. Dr. S.P. Bansal  Addl. Commissioner (Plg)DDA 
19. Shri S.P. Pathak  Addl. Commissioner (Plg) DDA 
20. Shri P.M. Parate Addl. Commissioner  (Traffic, Bldg & 
Coordn)DDA 
21. Shri Amit Dass  Director (Bldg)DDA 
22. Shri Chandu Bhutia  Director (Plg) UC & Zone–J DDA 

141 
 
23. Shri Ashok Bhattacharjee  Director (UTTIPEC)DDA  
24. Shri E. Rajababu  Director (LM)HQ DDA 
25. Shri R.K. Srivastava  Secretary GNCTD 
26. Shri K.C. Aggrawal  Special Secretary, UCU GNCT D 
27. Shri S. Kumara Swami Commissioner, East DMC 
28. Shri Manish Gupta  Commissioner, South DMC 
29. Shri P.K. Gupta  Commissioner, North DMC 
30. Shri Samsher Singh  Chief Town Planner, South D MC 
31. Shri Vijay Prakash  Engineer-in-Chief, EDMC 
32. Shri Pardeep Kumar 
Khandelwal  
Chief Engineer,EDMC 
33. Shri Amar Nath,  CEO, DUSIB 
34. Smt. Debashree Mukherjee, 
 CEO, DJB 
35. Shri R.K. Gupta,  SE (Bldg.) HQ, North, MCD 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed all  the Members to the second 
sitting of the Committee. He then welcomed the new Member Dr. Chandan Mitra to this 
Committee. 
3. The Hon'ble Chairman then welcomed the represent atives of the Ministry of 
Urban Development and Delhi Development Authority ( DDA) to the sitting of the 
Committee and drew their attention to the provision s under Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker.  
4. Through a power point presentation, the represen tatives of the Ministry  briefed 
the Committee about the achievements/ activities of DDA. 
5.  Then, the Hon'ble Chairman and Members raised v arious issues ranging from 
regularization of unauthorized colonies being only on paper, providing basic amenities 
in such unauthorized colonies, need for better coor dination among  the various state 
agencies of NCR and DDA for holistic development of  the NCR  to provide houses to 

142 
 
the growing population of  Delhi to transform  Delh i  into a slum free State and  
corrective measures for rampant corruption prevalent in DDA etc. 
6. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Dev elopment and the Vice-
Chairman, DDA, responded to various queries raised by the Members. 
7. It was decided to continue the discussion in sub sequent meeting as the 
Committee were of the view that it needed   more time. 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
9. ******  *****  *****  *****  *****  ****** 
10. ******  *****  *****  *****  *****  ****** 
11. ******  *****  *****  *****  *****  ****** 
 
***** These portions do not relate to the  Report.  
  

143 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  THURSDAY,  
31 OCTOBER, 2013 
       
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Co mmittee Room  ‘B’ Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
3. Shri Kailash Joshi 
4. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
5.  Shri P.C.Mohan 
6. Shri Ratan Singh 
7. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri Anil Desai 
9. Md. Nadimul Haque  
10. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
11. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
12. Shri Amar Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha  - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.-  Under Secretary  

144 
 
 
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES  
1. Shri Mahabal Mishra, MP, Lok Sabha  
2. Shri Amrish Singh Gautam, MLA, Delhi Legislative  Assemb ly 
3. Shri J.P. Sharma, Secretary RWA, Vasundhara Encl ave 
4. Shri Vijaya Kumar, Geeta Colony, New Delhi 
5. Shri S.N. Singh, Representative RWA, Vijay Vir A was, Dwarka, New Dehi 
6. Shri Manjeet Singh, Representative, Chotiyal Pal am Colony, New Delhi 
1. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed all  the Members of the 
Committee, Sh. Mahabal Mishra, MP of West Delhi, Sh . Amrish Singh Gautam, MLA of 
Kondali constituency, and representatives of CGHS to the third sitting of the Committee.    
2. The Hon'ble Chairman and members of the Committe e, were of the view that in 
the absence of   the representatives of the Ministr y of Urban Development and Delhi 
Development Authority (DDA), there was no point in hearing the objections and 
grievances of the representatives of Cooperative Gr oup Housing Societies and RWAs. 
The peoples' representatives, who had come for the evidence, agreed to the view points 
of the members. 
3. Thereafter, it was decided to continue the discu ssion in the subsequent meeting, 
in the presence of the representatives of DDA.  How ever, Sh. J.P. Sharma, 
representative of RWA from Vasundhara Enclave putfo rth his view points on the 
problems related to affordable houses and regulariz ation of unauthorized colonies in 
Delhi. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt.  
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned . 
 
 

145 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY,              
6 NOVEMBER, 2013 
       
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Ro om No.- ‘53’ Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Kailash Joshi 
3. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
5.  Shri Ramesh Kumar 
6. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
7. Dr. Ramshankar 
8. Shri Ratan Singh 
9. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Parvez Hashmi  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha  - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha  - Deputy Secretary 

146 
 
PART-I 
LIST OF OFFICIAL REPRESENTATIVES  
S.No  Name of Officers & Designation  Ministry/  
Department 
1. Shri D.Diptivilasa, Additional Secretary,  
MoUD& Vice Chairman, DDA 
MoUD 
2. Shri K.K. Acharya, Under Secretary MoUD 
3. Shri AbhaiSinha, Engineer Member DDA 
4. Shri Manish Kumar, Chief Accounts Officer DDA 
5. Shri DayanandKataria, Principal commissioner (LM, Pers & 
Systems) 
DDA 
6. Shri T. Srinidhi, Principal Commissioner (LD, Hsg& CWG ) DDA 
7. Smt. Asma Manzar, Commissioner (Housing) DDA 
8. Shri Madhup Vyas. Commissioner (LD) DDA 
9. Shri D. Sarkar, Commissioner-cum-Secretary DDA 
10. 
 ShriBrijesh Kumar Mishra, Commissioner (LM) DDA 
11.  Shri J.B. Kshirsagar, Commissioner (Plg) DDA 
12.  Shri Vinod Dhar, Chief Architect DDA 
13.  Shri A.K. Nigah, Chief Engineer (Head Quarters) DDA 
14.  Shri V.S. Tomar, Director (Systems) DDA 
15.  Smt Neemo Dhar, Advisor (PR) DDA 
16.  Shri Dinesh Kumar, Progamme Assistant DDA 
17.  Shri R.K. Jain, Addl. Commissioner (Plg) UE&P DDA 
18.  Dr. S.P. Bansal, Addl. Commissioner (Plg) DDA 
19.  Shri P.M. Parate, Addl. Commissioner  (Traffic, 
Bldg&Coordn) 
DDA 
20. 
 Shri Amit Dass, Director (Bldg) DDA 
21.  Shri Chandu Bhutia, Director (Plg) UC & Zone–J DDA 
22.  Shri Ashok Bhattacharjee, Director (UTTIPEC) DDA 
23.  Shri Vipin Ahuja, Director (LM-I) DDA 
24.  Shri B.M.Thareja, Dy. Dir (LM) WZ. DDA 
25.  Shri JawaharYadav, EO II to EM DDA 
26.  Shri R.K. Srivastava, Secretary GNCTD 
27.  Shri K.C. Aggrawal, Special Secretary, UCU GNCTD 
28.  Shri S. Kumara Swami, Commissioner East DMC 
29.  Shri Manish Gupta, Commissioner South DMC 
30.  Shri P.K. Gupta, Commissioner North DMC 
31.  Shri Samsher Singh, Chief Town Planner South DMC 
32.  ShriNaurang Singh, Chief Engineer North, DMC 
33.  Shri Vijay Prakash, Engineer-in-Chief East DMC 
34.  Shri Pardeep Kumar Khandelwal, Chief Engineer, East DM C 
35.  Shri A.D. Biswas, Sr. Town Planner East DMC 
36.  Shri Amar Nath, CEO DUSIB 
37.  Smt. Debashree Mukherjee, CEO DJB 
38.  ShriV.S.Thind, CE (Dr.) Project-II, Water Supply DJB 

147 
 
39.  Shri Jalaj Srivastava, Chairperson NDMC 
40.  ShriTajomTaloh, Secretary-cum-Registrar RCS 
41.  Shri G.S. Aggarwal, Dy. Registrar RCS 
42.  Shri R.S. Krishnan, Asstt. Registrar RCS 
43.  Shri Vikas Anand, Secretary NDMC 
44.  Shri A.M. Athle, Chief architect NDMC 
45.  Shri Dharam Pal , Principal Secretary GNCTD 
 
List of Non- official witnesses 
 
1.Shri Mahabal Mishra, MP, Lok Sabha 
2.Shri Vijaya Kumar, Geeta Colony, New Delhi 
3.Shri S.N. Singh, Representative R.W.A Vijay Vir Awas, Dwarka, New Delhi 
4.Shri Randhir Singh Nehra, Parijat Appartment, Sector-4, Dwarka, New Delhi 
5.Shri Manjeet Singh, R/o-WZ-45B, Palam Village, New Delhi-110 045. 
6.Shri Krishan Kumar Khatri,  168, Lok Nayak Apartment,  Sector-9, Rohini, Delhi- 85 
7.Shri Nepal Chandra Das Goswami, President,   Bhagya Vihar Resident Welfare 
Association, B-97, Bhagya Vihar,  P.O.-Rani Khera 
 
 
5. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed all  the Members to the fourth  sitting of 
the Committee. The Hon'ble Chairman also welcomed t he representatives of DDA and RWA of 
CGHS to the sitting of the Committee and drew their  attention towards maintaining 
confidentiality in terms of Directions 55 (1) of direction by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
2.  The Committee heard the views of representative s of Resident Welfare Associations on 
the  subject  "Functioning of Delhi Development Authority (DDA) p articularly with reference to 
affordable houses in Delhi and its role in regulari zation of unauthorized colonies in Delhi and 
matters connected thereto".  The RWA's (CGHS) repre sentatives then putfourth their 
grievances and the same was responded  by the offic ials of DDA and Registrar Cooperative 
Societies, Delhi. 
3. Thereafter, Vice Chairman, DDA  responded to var ious queries raised by the Members 
of the Committee and promised  to resolve certain issues. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned for a tea break . 
 
5. 
******  *****  *****  *****  *****  ****** 

148 
 
6. ******  *****  *****  *****  *****  ****** 
 
***** These portions do not relate to the the Report.  
 
  

149 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY,              
12 FEBRUARY, 2014 
       
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Co mmittee Room  ‘C’ Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
3. Shri Kailash Joshi 
4. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
5. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
6. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
7.  Shri Ratan Singh 
8. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Anil Desai 
10. Md. Nadimul Haque  
11. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
12. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
13. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha  - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.-  Under Secretary  

150 
 
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVE  
 
S.No NAME OF OFFICERS & DESIGNATION MINISTRY/DEPART MENT 
1.  Shri Sudhir Krishna, Secretary M/o Urban Developmen t (MoUD) 
2.  Shri D. Diptivilasa, Additional Secretary  MoUD 
3.  Shri Balvinder Kumar, Vice Chairman Delhi Developme nt Authority (DDA) 
4.  Shri Abhai Sinha, Engineer Member DDA 
5.  Shri Manish Kumar, Chief Accounts Officer DDA 
6.  Shri Dayanand Kataria, Principal commissioner  
(LM, Pers & Systems)  
DDA 
7.  Shri T. Srinidhi, Principal Commissioner  
(LD, Hsg & CWG) 
DDA 
8. 
 Smt. Asma Manzar, Commissioner (Housing) DDA 
9.  Shri D. Sarkar, Commissioner-cum-Secretary DDA 
10.  Shri Brijesh Kumar Mishra, Commissioner (LM) DDA 
11.  Shri J.B. Kshirsagar, Commissioner (Plg) DDA 
12.  Shri A.K. Nigah, Chief Engineer (Head Quarters) DDA  
13.  Shri V.S. Tomar, Director (Systems) DDA 
14.  Shri R.K. Jain, Addl. Commissioner (Plg) UE&P DDA 
15.  Shri S.P. Pathak, Addl. Commissioner (Plg)  DDA 
16.  Shri Chandu Bhutia, Director (Plg) UC & Zone–J DDA 
17.  Shri Dinesh Kumar, Progamme Assistant DDA 
18.  Shri Dharampal, Pr. Secretary Deptt. of Land & Building Govt. of NCT of Delhi (GNCTD) 
19.  Shri S.S. Yadav, Secretary, Deptt. of Urban Development GNCTD 
20.  Shri Vinay Kumar, Addl. Secretary (Land & Building) GNCTD 
21.  Shri S. Kumara Swami, Commissioner East DMC 
22.  Shri Manish Gupta, Commissioner South DMC 
23.  Shri P.K. Gupta, Commissioner North DMC 
24.  Dr. Dilraj Kaur, Addl. Commissioner (Engg.) North D MC 
25.  Shri Samsher Singh, Sr. Town Planner South DMC 
26.  Shri Vijay Prakash, Engineer-in-Chief East DMC 
27.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mehra, Chief Town Planner East DMC  
28.  Shri Amar Nath, CEO Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement 
Board (DUSIB) 
29. 
 Shri R.S. Tyagi, Member (Drainage) Delhi Jal Board (DJB) 
30.  Shri R.K. Gupta, SE (Bldg.) HQ North, MCD 
31.  Shri Jalaj Srivastava, Chairperson New Delhi Munici pal Council 
(NDMC)  
32.  Shri Vikas Anand, Secretary NDMC 
33.  Shri A.M. Athale, Chief Architect NDMC 
34.  Shri Tajom Taloh, Secretary-cum-Registrar Registrar  of Cooperative Societies 
35.  Shri Virendra Kumar, Spl. Registrar  RCS 
36.  Shri G.S. Aggarwal, Dy. Registrar RCS 
37.  Shri K.K. Bhalla, Dy. Registrar RCS 
38.  Shri R.S. Krishnan, Asstt. Registrar RCS 
 

151 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up for consideration the draft  Action Taken Reports on(i) ‘Demands for 
Grants (2013-2014)’ of the Ministry  of Urban Devel opment; (ii) ‘Demands for Grants (2013-
2014)’ of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty  Alleviation;(iii) “Role of Central Public 
Works Department (C.P.W.D.) in checking unauthorize d occupation of government land and 
colonies and evaluation of their performance in mai ntaining Government buildings”; and (iv) 
draft  report on  "The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013."  After deliberations, 
the Committee adopted all the reports unanimously w ithout any change. The Members then 
authorised the Chairman to present the reports in the  Parliament. 
3. Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairman welcomed the repres entatives of Ministry of Urban 
Development, DDA, officials of MCD to render oral e vidence on the subject "Functioning of 
Delhi Development Authority (DDA) particularly with reference to affordable houses in Delhi and 
its role in regularization of unauthorized colonies  in Delhi and matters connected thereto" and 
drew their attention to the provisions under Direct ion 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker 
regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the Committee. 
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry briefed the Committee about the achievements/ 
activities of DDA and action taken by them on the i ssues raised by Members of the 
Committee and representatives of CGHS and other loc alities  in earlier meetings on the 
subject. 
 
5.  Then, the Hon'ble Chairman and Members raised v arious issues viz. need to  amend 
the laws so that the Chairman of DDA would be answe rable to Ministry of Urban 
Development, delay in construction of affordable ho uses for the poor, regularization of 
unauthorized colonies being only on paper, providin g basic amenities in such unauthorized 
colonies, need for better coordination among variou s state agencies of NCR and DDA for 
holistic development of the NCR  to provide houses to the growing population of  Delhi,  to 
transform  Delhi  into a slum free State , outdated designs of DDA flats and providing proper 
rehabilitation and resettlement to the displaced pe rsons of various colonies like Katputli 
colony etc. 

152 
 
6. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Dev elopment and the Vice-Chairman, DDA, 
responded to various queries raised by the Members. 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

153 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD  ON WEDNESDAY, 
 
12 th   MARCH , 2014  
       
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Ma in Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra - In the Chair  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
3. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
6. Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
7.  Shri Ratan Singh 
8. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Anil Desai 
10. Dr. M.S. Gill 
11. Md. Nadimul Haque  
12. Shri Avinash Pande 
  
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha  - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.-  Under Secretary  
 
  

154 
 
 In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee nomi nated Shri Pyarimohan 
Mohapatra, a member of the Committee to act as Chairman for the sitting in accordance 
with Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of Lok Sabha.  
 
2. At the outset, the acting Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for considera tion the draft  report on  the 
subject “Functioning of Delhi Development Authority  particularly with reference to 
Affordable Houses in Delhi and its Role in Regulari zation of Unauthorized Colonies in 
Delhi and matter connected thereto”.  After deliber ations, the Committee adopted the 
report unanimously with slight modifications. The M embers then authorised the 
Chairman to present the report  to Hon’ble Speaker on a date convenient to him.  Then, 
The Committee took a group photograph of the Member s and officials of Standing 
Committee on Urban Development.  
 
 The Committee then adjourned.  
 