STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2009-2010)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the First Report
of the (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-2010) of the
Ministry of  Urban Development]
TENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
10

TENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2009-2010)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2009-2010)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
First Report of the (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2009-2010) of the Ministry of  Urban Development]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ......................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ..........................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2010/Shravana, 1932 (Saka)

C.U.D. No. 61
Price : Rs. 47.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110028.

(i)
CONTENTS
P AGE
C OMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE...............................................................(iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
C HAPTER I Report................................................................................. 1
C HAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government................................................................ 10
C HAPTER III Recommendations which the  Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
 replies ................................................................................ 24
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee ......................................................................... 27
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government are still awaited ........................................ 34
A NNEXURE
I. Extracts from the Board Meetings with regard to
Special/Sub-Component Plan ........................................ 35
A PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Urban Development (2009-10) held on
20th July, 2010 ................................................................... 37
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the First Report
of the Committee (15th Lok Sabha) .............................. 40

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
Shri Sharad Yadav —Chairman
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri J.P. Agarwal
3. Shri Praveen Singh Aron
4. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
5. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
6. Shri Ambica Banerjee
7. Smt. Priya Dutt
8. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad
9. Shri Shakti Mohan Malik
10. Shri Kailash Joshi
11. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
12. Shri Ramesh Kumar
13. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
14. Shri P.C. Mohan
15. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
16. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao
17. Shri Baijayant Panda
18. Prof. Ramshankar
19. Shri Kadir Rana
20. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
21. Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Parvez Hashmi
23. Shri Rajeev Shukla
24. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel
25. Shri Manohar Joshi
26. Shri Shyam Benegal
27. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi
28. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee —Joint Secretary
2. Shri K.D. Muley — Director
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa — Under Secretary
4. Shri Sumit Kumar Grover —Committee Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2009-10) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Tenth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on the
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the First Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban
Development on “Demands for Grants (2009-2010)” of the Ministry of
Urban Development.
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 17th December,
2009. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained
in the Report were received in March, 2010.
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 20th July, 2010.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of
the Committee is given at Appendix-II.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the
body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; SHARAD YADAV,
20 July, 2010 Chairman,
29 Ashadha, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2009-10) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in their First Report (15th Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants 2009-10 of the Ministry of Urban Development which
was presented to Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2009.
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 11 recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted
by the Government (Chapter–II):
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 9 (Total : 7)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies
(Chapter–III):
Para No. 10 (Total : 1)
(iii)Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
(Chapter–IV):
Para Nos. 5, 8, and 11 (Total : 3)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited (Chapter–V):
Para No. Nil (Total : Nil)
1.3 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

9
A. JNNURM—Completion of sanctioned projects
(Recommendation Serial No. 5)
1.4 The Committee had recommended as below:—
“As JNNURM seeks to fast–track the urban renewal process in
65 identified cities. The Committee are happy to note certain
positive developments this Financial Year, which includes
allocation of Rs. 5963.13 crore for its UIG component, proposal to
include 28 more cities in the list of 65 Mission Cities, as well as
the finalization of its mid-term appraisal process. They further note
from the deposition made by the Secretary, Ministry of
Urban Development that so far around 473 projects costing
Rs. 51,127 crore have been approved under the JNNURM in the
areas of Water Supply, Sewerage, Drainage, Solid Waste
Management etc. though the number of projects completed so far,
is just 43.
In this connection, the Committee were informed during
deliberations with the Ministry’s representatives that States need
to show more enthusiasm towards implementing the approved
Mission projects. The Committee have also been informed about
certain genuine reasons for delays on the part of the State
Governments particularly, in the field of their share of funds and
land acquisition and the issues concerning capacity of the ULBs
to implement projects. Still, the Committee feel that the pace, with
which the projects are being implemented, needs to be accelerated
further otherwise the seven-year period will be grossly insufficient
for urban renewal of the 65 cities. The Committee also feel that the
cities of Goa and Jamshedpur should have been brought on board
by now, which unfortunately, has not materialized despite efforts
by the Ministry. In such a scenario, the Committee opine that though
inclusion of 28 cities more in JNNURM is a welcome step, yet ,
perhaps, there would be a need for a Mission-II to bring the desired
results in all these 65 cities first. In this connection, the Committee
are aware of certain bottlenecks in ensuring proper funding also
for bringing more cities into the existing JNNURM programme.
They would like the Ministry to clarify the position. The Committee
are also aware that the stimulus packages provided to the Ministries
during the financial year may be withdrawn from next year onwards,
2

10
which may pose funding difficulties for these Mission cities.
The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry must
continue in their efforts to encourage Mission cities to complete
all sanctioned projects well in scheduled time and enhance the
capacities of their ULBs/stakeholders, as well as to pursue with the
appropriate authority to provide funds for the cities, which no
longer have funds left for their ready projects as their committed
share is exhausted, so that their efforts for urban renewal
bear fruit.”
1.5 The Government in their Action Taken Reply has stated:—
“So far, 515 projects have been approved for Rs. 58038.18 Crores
with an ACA commitment of Rs. 27040.32 Crores and 48 projects
have been reported to be physically complete.
The projects are implemented by the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)/
Parastatals. Process of completion of projects continues to be
slow which is a matter of concern. Monthly D.O. letters sent
to Chief Secretaries drawing their attention to implementation
issues, frequent meetings taken with Pr. Secretaries/Secretaries
in-charge of Urban Development and personal contacts with
Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretary in-charge of Urban
Development and also Chief Ministers/Ministers in-charge are
held.
The MoA with Jamshedpur has now been signed. The State of
Goa and Jharkhand have been requested to expedite furnishing
of DPRs for the city of Panaji and Jamshedpur to bring them
on board.
There has been constant demand for inclusion of more cities
under UIG of JNNURM. The Hon’ble Urban Development
Minister in his 100 Days action plan also proposed for
inclusion of 28 more cities having population of 5 lakhs and above
under UIG of JNNURM which is under consideration of
Government.
As noted above, 515 projects have been approved by CSMC and
Rs. 27040.32 crore committed as ACA. The funds already committed
for the project approved by the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring
3

11
Committee (CSMC) would be made available to the cities on their
request for release of 2nd or subsequent installments of Additional
Central Assistance (ACA) for the projects subject to submission of
utilization certificate of earlier releases and fulfilling of other
requirements. The States/Cities are also coming up with the
request for release of 2nd or subsequent installments of ACA for
the projects.
As far as additional allocation for cities which have already
exhausted their 7 years allocation is concerned, it may be noted
that Government  has not sought additional allocation for them.
However, Government  is obtaining assistance from World Bank
which may be availed of by cities as per guidelines of assistance
which are under formulation.
An advisory has been issued to the States to make efforts to complete
all sanctioned projects well in scheduled time.”
1.6 The Committee regret to note that under JNNURM despite
Ministry’s efforts through monthly D.O. letters to Chief Secretaries,
frequent meetings taken with Principal Secretaries/Secretaries in-charge
of Urban Development and personal contacts with Chief Secretaries/
Principal Secretary in-charge of Urban Development and also Chief
Ministers/Ministers in-charge, the pace with which the projects are
being implemented is far from satisfactory. JNNURM, the flagship
programme which was launched in December, 2005, is scheduled to
be completed by Dec. 2012 and only 48 projects out of 515 projects
that have been approved so far have been reported to be physically
completed. The Committee feel that the process of completion of
projects continues to be very slow which is a matter of concern to the
Committee. The Committee therefore, expect the Ministry to take up
the matter vigorously with the concerned State Governments at
the highest level and ensure that the Mission cities complete all
sanctioned projects within scheduled time and enhance the
capacities of their ULBs/stakeholders as well as to pursue with the
appropriate authorities to provide funds for the cities. As regards the
demand for inclusion of more cities under UIG of JNNURM, the
Ministry of Urban Development has proposed for inclusion of
28 more cities having population of 5 lakhs and above under the scheme
which is under consideration of the Government. The Committee desire
4

12
that the Ministry should sincerely pursue with the Government/
Planning Commission so that more cities are included under the
programme.
B. Slow Progress in the implementation of National Urban
Information System (NUIS)
(Recommendation Serial No. 8)
1.7 The following recommendation was made by the Committee:—
“The Committee note that National Urban Information System
(NUIS) was launched to develop Geographic Information System
(GIS) databases for 152 towns/cities in the country in two scales
i.e. 1:10000 and 1:2000. The Committee note that the major objectives
of the scheme are to develop spatial database for various levels of
urban planning, use of modern data, sources, develop standards
and urban indices and capacity building. The NUIS has been stated
to be particularly useful in detecting leakages in underground pipes
and sewerage lines by generating utility maps. Thus, once
completed, the outcomes of the scheme can be very beneficial for
urban service providers as well as for the city dwellers, since
maintenance/repair of service lines through digital utility maps will
cause minimum damage to surface roads and result in minimum
inconvenience to the citizens.
As per the Outcome Budget of the Ministry, the Scheme was to
cover 137 cities/towns in Phase-I at a cost of Rs. 66.28 Crore to be
shared by Centre and States in the ratio of 75:25. The Committee
were informed that first installment of the scheme was released for
29 states and the release of the second installment of the scheme
was pending for 13 States for not submitting the utilization
certificates by them. The Committee learnt from the Outcome Budget
that as per the MOA signed in March,2006 between the Ministry
and Survey of India i.e., the implementing agency for generation
of digital maps, the job of 137 cities/towns was initially supposed
to be completed within 15 months i.e., June, 2007. However, the
Committee were later informed that the job would be completed
within 18 months from the date of receipt of aerial photos and
images, which, as on date, is done only for 79 cities and towns.
From the foregoing, the Committee conclude that the Scheme seems
5

13
to be not progressing as per the desired pace due to apathy on the
part of State Governments to either submit UCs or to release their
25% share, so much so, that one State i.e. Tamil Nadu has to be
ultimately dropped from the scheme as it did not take any initiative
to release its share of funds till March, 2009. The Committee are
pained to note that innovative schemes like NUIS have to suffer
setbacks and time and cost overruns. They recommend that special
workshops should be held by the Ministry in order to achieve
better understanding of the potential benefits of the scheme among
the States and convince them to submit the pending UCs and release
their share of funds promptly. The Committee also desire that matter
may be pursued with the Survey of India also so that acquiring
digital aerial images of all 137 towns under phase-I of the NUIS
scheme could be completed at the earliest.”
1.8 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated as
follows:—
“Ministry of Urban Development has asked Town and Country
Planning Organization, a subordinate office of this Ministry, vide
its letter dated 03.02.2010 to prepare a detailed programme as well
as agenda for special workshops in order to achieve better
understanding of the potential benefits of the scheme among the
States and convince them to submit the pending UCs and release
their share of funds promptly. However, in the meantime, a letter
has been written on 03.02.2010 to all concerned State Governments
for furnishing the pending Utilization Certificates so that the further
installment of Central Funds could be released to them immediately.
In order to acquire digital aerial images of all 137 towns under
phase – I of the NUIS scheme, Ministry of Urban Development has
requested Ministry of Science and Technology, vide letter dated
19.02.2010, to give necessary direction to Survey of India to speed
up the implementation of NUIS Scheme on priority basis.”
1.9 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Government as it fails to address the concerns expressed by them at
the slow progress of the scheme resulting in time and cost overruns.
The reply mainly states that the Ministry of Urban Development has
asked Town and Country Planning Organization, a subordinate office
of this Ministry to prepare a detailed programme as well as agenda
6

14
for special workshops in order to achieve better understanding of the
potential benefits of the scheme among the States and convince them
to submit the pending UCs and release their share of funds promptly.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Town and Country Planning Organization in this regard. The Committee
would also like the Ministry to play its effective role by asking the
States to furnish the pending UCs so that further installment of central
funds could be released to them immediately. The Committee also
desire that the Ministry should hold meeting with the representatives
of the Ministry of Science and Technology and Survey of India to
speed up the implementation of NUIS scheme and a timeframe be
fixed for earliest completion of the same.
C. National Capital Region Planning Board—Non-preparation of
Sub-Component Plan by the States
(Recommendation Serial No. 11)
1.10 The Committee had recommended as below:—
“The Committee observe that the key rationale for constituting a
National Capital Region Planning Board in 1985 was to develop
the National Capital and its surrounding areas as a region of global
excellence, with Delhi centeric emphasis, to disperse/reduce
pressure on the National Capital’s infrastructure. The Committee
find that from the information furnished by the Ministry that the
concept of NCR Delhi has not succeeded it seems. They have dealt
specifically with problems concerning NCRPB and made
recommendations on the same in their earlier Thirty Fifth Report
of 14th Lok Sabha. The Committee now are very concerned to note
that although the Regional Plan 2021 recommends preparation of
a Sub-Component Plan for the projects to be implemented in the
NCR by the concerned State Governments and Central Ministries,
yet no such Sub-Component plan has been made by the State
Governments and the Central Ministries till date. This has caused
a severe handicap to the Board as according to the Ministry, without
a Sub-Component Plan, it is not possible for them to know whether
a project falls under NCR or outside it. Moreover, the Committee
have been informed by the Ministry that the progress of expenditure
by the participating States and Central Ministries is also not known.
The Committee are appalled at the current State of affairs in NCRPB
7

15
and, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry of Urban
Development should strive for holding frequent meetings of the
Board with proper agenda to find a plausible solutions for early
formulation of Sub-Component Plan on urgent basis by all States/
Central Ministries. They feel that the NCR concept has several
stakeholders and coordination among them is most crucial to avoid
and restrict haphazard development of the area, otherwise it may
prove to be counter productive to the NCR concept. They, therefore,
recommend the Ministry to come up with a possible solution to
the current deadlock through constant deliberations with all the
stakeholders and evolve a consensus on various contradictive issues
for the proper development of NCR.”
1.11 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated as
follows:—
“The NCRPB has informed that the issue of preparation of Sub-
Component Plan for the projects to be implemented in the NCR
by the concerned State Governments and Central Ministries, had
been raised earlier by the Chairman, NCR Planning Board in the
15th Board Meeting held on 14.9.1992, 18th Board Meeting held
on 11.1.1995 and 19th Board Meeting held on 17.11.1995. Extracts
of the same are at Annexure-I. Further, the matter of preparation
of Sub-Component Plan was placed before the 31st meeting of the
Board held on 11.11.2009 as a specific agenda item wherein it was
informed that there is a infrastructure gap in the NCR and this
needs to be met through a mechanism of Special Component Plan,
to be prepared by the Central Ministries/States, if the Regional
Plan-2021 development targets are to be achieved in a time-bound
manner. After discussions, it was decided that Board’s Planning
Committee may finalise the concept and approach and the matter
be taken up with the Central Ministries and State Governments.
NCR Planning Board is taking further action in this regard.
A proposal to provide Special Component Plan in various Central
Infrastructural Ministries for the development of NCR Region is
being processed in consultation with stakeholders.”
1.12 The Committee fail to understand the reasons for in-ordinate
delay in finalizing the concept and approach by the Board’s Planning
Committee which is to be taken up with Central Ministries and State
8

16
Governments and still the proposal is being processed in consultation
with the stakeholders. The Committee would like to emphasize that
since it has already been badly delayed, there should be no further
loss of time in this regard. The Committee, therefore, desire that Central
Infrastructure Ministries and State Governments should provide utmost
importance in finalizing the plan at the earliest.
9

17
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
(Recommendation Serial No. 1)
Urban Development needs priority by Government Planners
The Committee observe that total urban spending in India, as a
share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) from the figures made available
to them, has remained miniscule and stagnant for the past 10 years,
ranging from 0.1 percent to just about 0.2 percent of GDP. Cities are
supposed to be the engines driving India’s economic growth. Although
the Government has recognized the importance of urban renewal by
launching JNNURM, yet withholding the required priority in
appropriately funding the overall development of all cities becoming
poorly managed, which continue to lag both on reforms and investment.
The Committee are pained to find that during the last ten years’ period,
the percentage of the Central Budget being allocated by the Government
to the Ministry of Urban Development each year has also hovered just
between 0.5% to 0.6%. They feel that chronic problems faced by most
of our cities like crumbling infrastructure, deficient governance and
poverty are pulling back their vast potential and the solution lies in
increasing the overall share of urban spending from the GDP and granting
them the requisite priority.
Reply of the Government
Gross Domestic Product is the total market value of all final goods
and services produced in a country in a given year, which is by definition
equal to total consumption, investment and Government spending plus
the value of exports, minus the value of imports. The annual budget for
an activity depicts targeted Government spending for the activity.
However, the inter-se sectoral allocation of Government spending, which
is one of the constituents of the GDP, gets ultimately decided by the
Government of the day in its collective responsibility. The marginal
increase in urban development/infrastructure spending in total share of
10

18
GDP over the last decade reflects this collective decision. Ministry of
Urban Development is grateful to the Parliamentary Standing Committee
for recommending higher priority for Urban Sector.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/10/2009-Bt. (UD)
Dated 15 March, 2010]
(Recommendation Serial No. 2)
Need for better budgetary exercise
The Committee note from the Ministry’s submission that the
Budgetary allocation of Rs. 5480.87 Crore ( Gross) for the Financial Year
2009-2010 would be sufficient for the scheme/programmes run by the
Ministry of Urban Development, except the DMRC and GPOA/GPRA,
for which obtaining of Supplementary Grants is nearly certain. The
Committee also note the budgetary documents made available to them
that three Supplementary Grants were obtained in the Financial Year
2008-2009 by the Ministry. In the opinion of the Committee, this trend
shows a weak Budgetary exercise where there are frequent adjustments
made to get funds for plan schemes in a single Financial Year itself. In
such cases, the Annual Budget looses its authoritative status as the
comprehensive financial plan of the Government and Budgeting turns
into just an academic exercise. Having said so, the Committee are aware
of the impact of the global financial meltdown and consequent economic
crisis on the Indian Economy in the last two years, as explained in the
Economic Survey (2008-2009) document, which may have affected
the revenue and expenditure plans of the Government. As the worst
phase seems to be getting over, the Committee hope that the Demand
for Grants of the Ministry would bear more resistance to the Budgetary
reality from next Financial Year onwards, which is crucial to ensure better
outcomes.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee regarding need for better
budgetary exercise have been noted for compliance. As regards budgetary
reality, the Ministry had proposed a substantial requirement of Rs. 8730.28
crore to the Planning Commission against which the Planning Commission
allocated funds to the tune of Rs. 3060.00 crore to the Ministry. The issue
for suitable enhancement in the Gross Budgetary Support was taken up
by Secretary (UD) with Planning Commission who informed us that the
Finance Ministry and Planning Commission would together make an
11

19
effort to accommodate genuine requirements for additional funds at the
stage of Supplementary grants.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/10/2009-Bt. (UD)
Dated 15 March, 2010]
(Recommendation Serial No. 3)
Surrender of funds
The Committee note from the budgetary documents submitted
by the Ministry that in all Demands of the Ministry i.e. Demand
Nos. 100, 101 and 102, there has been a constant trend during last
ten years to surrender funds which they could not utilize. They further
observe that majority of such funds have been surrendered by the
Ministry mainly due to non-receipt of administrative approvals and
financial sanctions from the client departments as well as non-filling
of vacant posts. The committee are of the view that this tendency can
be controlled, if not prevented by ensuring better financial discipline
and tightening of official machinery. In this context, the Committee note
that the National Mission Mode Project for e-governance has been initiated
to improve operational efficiencies in delivery of urban services
which includes building Plan approvals, better accounting systems
etc. They hope that with such reforms, the tendency for underutilization
and consequent surrender of funds could be curbed to a significant
extent. The Committee feels that every rupee of investment in
Urban Sector is productive and thus must be utilized prudently and
optimally. Therefore they recommend that extra efforts should be made
at all levels to speed up appraisals, approvals and sanctions so that the
funds available to the Ministry are utilized fully in the best possible
manner.
As regards, non-filing of vacant posts in various offices and bodies
under the control of the Ministry, the Committee are particularly concerned
about the non-filling of the post of Manager, Forms Store, Kolkata, among
others against direct recruitment quota in various printing/stationary
offices. The committee recommends that the posts must be filled at the
earliest so that time and cost overruns could be suitably supervised in
such offices.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance
and care will be taken so that the funds available are utilized fully in
the best possible manner.
12

20
In so far as CPWD is concerned, apart from the above, one of the
reasons for surrendering the unutilized funds is slow progress of ongoing
works due to natural calamities such as intense heat conditions, floods
and snowfall etc. in several parts of the country. However, this has been
controlled to the extent possible during the financial year 2008-09.
Funds to the tune of Rs. 2.92 crore only under Demand No. 100 and
Rs. 69.45 crore (including Rs. 8.41 crore technical surrender against
supplementary grant) under Demand No.101 have been surrendered by
CPWD during financial year 2008-09 which was due to the ceiling on
non-plan expenditure imposed by the Ministry of Finance. The DG(W),
CPWD and other senior officers of the Directorate are monitoring the
expenditure vis-à-vis budget allotment on monthly/quarterly basis and
zonal officers are also being advised to utilize the allotted funds by keeping
a consistent flow of expenditure during the year.
As regards Directorate of Printing, the observations of Standing
Committee regarding non-filling of vacant posts in various offices and
surrender of funds have been noted for compliance. Further, the following
remedial measures have been taken:—
(a) All Government of India Presses/Units have been instructed
to project the requirement of funds on realistic basis;
(b) Monthly monitoring of expenditure is being undertaken to
ensure proper and optimum utilization of funds;
(c) Prompt action is taken to fill up live vacancies.
An officer has been posted as full time Manager at Government
of India Forms Store (GISO), Kolkata.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/10/2009-Bt. (UD)
Dated 15 March, 2010]
(Recommendation Serial No. 4)
JNNURM – the role of State Governments/City ULBs
The Committee are aware of the fact that in a country like
India, which has a federal system of Government, it is rather
difficult to impose reforms on all States in matter concerning urban
infrastructure as it largely concerns issues contained in the State list
of the Constitution. Therefore, they feel that the onus is on the
13

21
State Governments as well as the Cities, Urban local bodies to initiate,
innovate, learn from peers, explore and continuously strive to improve
their lot, particularly in crucial sectors like Water Supply, Sanitation,
Solid Waste Management and Transport. The Centrally-sponsored
Jawaharlal Nehru Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), a 7 year Mission
Mode Project, with a revised allocation of Rs. 31,500/- Crore for its
sub-Mission on Urban Infrastructure, seeks to provide an opportunities
to State Governments to solve the funds requirements of their
65 large cities for upgrading their infrastructure on the condition that
large scale reforms in their governance are carried out as per the
guidelines/toolkits/guidance provided by the Union Ministry of Urban
Development. However, the Committee note with concern that so far very
few Mission Cities have adopted a reform agenda. Besides, as the Mission
funds are demand-driven, which means that cities are responsible for
preparing proper draft Project Proposals to demand funds, the Committee
feel that cities must ensure to follow Mission guidelines/toolkits and
prepare fund-worthy proposals. They hope that the reform requirements
as well as other conditions for availing funds under the JNNURM would
be met by all concerned cities at the earliest, since four years of the
Mission period have already passed and just three years time is left to
accomplish the targets of this flagship programme.
Reply of the Government
JNNURM has been launched on 3rd December, 2005 for a period
of 7 years i.e. up to 2011-12 and is reforms driven, fast track, planned
development of identified cities (65 Cities) with focus on efficiency in
urban infrastructure/services delivery mechanism, community
participation and accountability of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)/Parastatals
towards citizens. The original indicative allocation for the Mission period
is Rs. 25500 crore for the Urban Infrastructure and Governance (UIG)
of JNNURM which has subsequently been enhanced to Rs. 31500 crores
by the Government. So far, an amount of Rs. 27040.32 crore of ACA has
already been committed.
The Mission has also taken capacity building measures
supporting Programme Management Units (PMUs) at the State level and
Project Implementation Units (PIUs) at the ULB level and Independent
Reviewing and Monitoring Authority (IRMA) at the State level to assist
the State Governments and ULBs in implementation of projects and
reforms.
14

22
An advisory has been issued to State to ensure to follow Mission
Guidelines/Toolkits and preparation of fund-worthy proposals and meet
the required reforms and other conditions for availing funds under
JNNURM.
The Mission has undertaken an initiative to develop primers
highlighting the steps for implementation and outcomes for the reforms
mandated under JNNURM, so as to build a common understanding of
reform objectives, to enable effective implementation at the city level.
Seven Reform Primers for Mandatory reforms have been circulated to
cities. Ten primers on Optional reforms have been disseminated to Cities
and States. It is envisaged that the Primers would enable the local
authorities to have a clearer understanding of the reforms as well as
assist in finalization of the Road Map for reform implementation. Ministry
has also initiated handholding of the State Government and ULBs in
implementation of reform.
Monitoring of the projects for timely completion and for achieving
the reforms committed as per the MOA is being done by the Central
Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee regularly during its meeting for
the consideration of the projects for approval for funding under JNNURM.
The representatives of the State/SLNAs are impressed upon for meeting
the time-line for completion of the project as well as achieving the target
of reforms as per commitment made in the MoA. In addition periodic
Regional Review Meetings are held wherein the progress made by the
concerned States are reviewed. Besides, progress of projects as well as
reforms is also monitored through the Quarterly Progress Report (QPR)
submitted by the States. The progress of implementation of projects and
reforms was also reviewed by the Urban Development Minister (UDM)
and Secretary (UD) in the Annual meeting with the Secretaries/Principal
Secretaries (Urban Development) of the States on 19.08.2009.
Ministry has also initiated the exercise for further handholding of
State Governments and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in implementation
of reforms for reforms so as to assist the states and cities in reform
implementation as per the time lines committed. Ministry has issued an
EOI based on which various firms have been shortlisted for providing
handholding support to the States. The Handholding Agency will be
appointed by State, so as to assist the State/ULBs in implementation of
reforms as per their requirements.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/10/2009-Bt. (UD)
Dated 15 March, 2010]
15

23
(Recommendation Serial No. 6)
Under Utilization of Mission Funds by few States
The committee are concerned to note that the States/Union Territory
of Delhi, Punjab, West Bengal, and Chandigarh still have unspent balance
in their account to be utilized, despite the efforts of the Ministry of expedite
appraisal/approval of DPRs and obtain UCs, wherever applicable on
priority. The committee is particularly perturbed over the performance
of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, which is lagging way behind
over metros like Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata. In executing reforms
required to revamp its infrastructure and urban governance. The
Committee opine that these cities and the concerned State Governments
must realize the urgent need to utilize the available opportunity and
address their urban infrastructure challenges through JNNURM as early
as possible which not only would improve their urban scenario but would
also check growing antipathy of citizens towards city planners for failing
to ensure a better quality of life for them.
Reply of the Government
States have now expedited submission of DPRs to avail funds under
JNNURM. So far out of total allocation of Rs. 31500 crores under UIG
of JNNURM, an amount of Rs. 27040.32 crore has already been committed.
In the month of December, 2009, 24 projects pertaining to GNCTD has
been approved by the Government. Out of allocation of Rs. 2823.18 crore,
ACA committed for GNCTD is Rs. 2043.77 crores. Further, a project
involving ACA of around of Rs. 475.20 crores for Delhi has been considered
by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). The Government  of West
Bengal vide their letter dated 22.10.2009 intimated that State Level
Committee had identified 27 projects involving Additional Central
Assistance (ACA) of Rs. 1340.00 crore – the balance ACA available in the
State and the DPRs are under preparation. The Government  of Punjab
during the meeting taken by Secretary (UD) on 03.02.2010 was informed
to expedite submission of DPRs in conformity with the Guidelines of
JNNURM so that the projects get requisite approval and are implemented
within the mission period. For the city of Chandigarh a project on
Augmentation of Water Supply Scheme, Phase-V has been approved by
the CSMC on 20.11.2009 at an approved cost of Rs. 134.21 crore with
ACA admissibility of Rs. 107.38 crore.
Further to exhort the States to avail the balance allocation of fund
available with them, review meetings are held from time to time with
16

24
the States/Cities. These are also followed by monthly D.O. letters by
Secretary (UD) to the respective Chief Secretaries. Also Annual Review
meetings with the respective Principal Secretaries/Secretary (UD) of the
State Government are held wherein the States are called upon to come
up with DPRs and avail the benefits.
Hence, it is likely that the States having unspent balances would
be able to utilize their fund appropriately.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/10/2009-Bt. (UD)
Dated 15 March, 2010]
(Recommendation Serial No. 7)
UIDSSMT-Unsatisfactory Progress
The UIDSSMT, a scheme meant for those small and medium cities
which are not covered under JNNURM, has not registered a satisfactory
progress so far, despite the four years that have passed since its inception
in December, 2005. During the examination of the scheme, the Committee
were sad to observe that the allocation of Rs. 3082.82 crore for the current
Financial Year is not meant for any fresh projects as the requisite mandate
for it could not be obtained by the Ministry. It has been informed that
at present, 752 projects in 635 small and medium towns have been
sanctioned under the scheme. However, the Committee are perturbed
over the fact that the progress of the projects is not satisfactory at all
owing to failure of State Governments to either undertake required reform
as per the timelines or non-release of matching State shares and
non-submission of Utilization Certificates by them in respect of
222 projects, as well as land acquisition problems. The Committee are
aware of the acute infrastructure problems water shortage, absence of
garbage disposal mechanism and the same in number of small and
medium towns in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu, A.P. and Karnataka, where these projects need to be taken
up so that required infrastructure is developed. However, taking up any
new projects is not possible till the entire ACA of Rs. 5858.33 crore,
released so far, it shown as utilized by the receiving States. The committee,
therefore, desire that the State Governments need to be remained
consistently that they must furnish their pending UCs on time and
undertake reforms so as to make their cities eligible UIDSSMT funds, in
the absence of which the Committee fear that the UIDSSMT scheme may
not get further funding by the concerned authorities. Therefore, there is
hardly any option left for many other small and medium towns to improve
17

25
the quality of life for their city-dwellers through implementing these
schemes on priority basis.
Reply of the Government
The requirement of funds during 2009-10 under UIDSSMT was
projected taking into account the requirement. The requirement for
1st installment for sanctioning fresh projects in uncovered district was
projected in anticipation of additional allocation to be provided by the
Planning Commission relying on their formulation for sanctioning at
least one project in each uncovered district of the country vide their
O.M. dated 24.12.08. The decision of Planning Commission in this
regard is still awaited. In the absence of a specific decision on the
mandate for sanctioning projects in uncovered districts beyond
State-wise allocation for 7-years initially provided by the Planning
Commission, the funds earmarked for the fresh projects during 2009-10
are likely to lapse.
Rs. 10340.47 crore out of the revised allocation under UIDSSMT
i.e. Rs. 11400.00 crore has already been committed for 753 projects in
636 towns of 27 States and 3 UTs, which is 90% of the total allocation.
Of this amount, Rs. 5862.08 crore has already been released to the States.
The balance committed allocation will be released to the States after
utilization of 70% of the earlier released amount and completion of reforms
as per committed timelines.
As regards submission of utilization certificates of the earlier
released amounts and accomplishment of all the committed reforms, the
States are being reminded consistently at various levels in the Ministry.
The issue of non-submission of utilization certificates and progress on
reforms is being regularly reviewed and monitored in the periodical
review meetings undertaken at the level of Secretary (Urban Development)
with the State Governments. The review at the highest level was
undertaken in the annual conference of JNNURM on 03.12.09.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/10/2009-Bt. (UD)
Dated 15 March, 2010]
(Recommendation Serial No. 9)
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC)
The Committee note that DMRC is an ambitious project under the
Ministry of Urban Development, which has got liberal funding under
18

26
Demand No. 100 so far, the Committee further note that the Ministry
seem to be satisfied with the performance of DMRC in completing their
work schedules in time. While there is no denying the fact that
Delhi Metro has provided a better choice for public transport to the
city-dwellers, they feel that large chunk of the city population is yet to
be benefited by the same due to the limited reach of metro to certain
specified areas only. Therefore, the Committee recommend that in the
next phase III of the Delhi MRTS project, measures need to be taken to
ensure that the benefits of Metro could be uniformly spread in all
areas of the city, particularly those areas where very limited or nil
alternate transport options are available. They further feel that a
dedicated metro corridor for the inner and outer ring roads may be
explored. Besides, there is a need to address the inadequacy of metro
feeder buses too to cater the need of the people of adjoining areas away
from metro stations.
With regard to property development by the DMRC in the
existing parking spaces near various Metro Stations, the Committee note
from the Ministry’s submission that this needs to be done to generate
resources by DMRC for repaying its loan. However, the Committee
feel that caution needs to be observed to ensure a fair share to the
public good too, since conversion of all parking space into commercial
properties would not help a metro-users, who can very comfortably
park their vehicle and ride the metro. The Committee are also extremely
concerned about recent Metro mishaps. In the wake of several accidents
in Metro lines, the Committee desire that utmost care would be taken
to carry out regular safety audits in all metro-related works and ensure
penal action for the persons/companies found responsible for those
mishaps.
Reply of the Government
(i) Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) Ltd. has undertaken
preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Delhi MRTS
Phase-III—Various corridors/routes are being proposed to be
included under MRTS Phase-III network on the basis of Traffic
and Transportation studies being conducted by Central Road
Research Institute (CRRI), the Government  Agency. Further,
it will be the endeavour of DMRC to propose the corridors
keeping in view that the benefits of 3rd phase are extended
to all parts of the city.
19

27
(ii) A good portion of Ring Road is being planned to be covered
with Metro network within Phase-III itself and the remaining
shall be proposed in future phases.
(iii) Feeder Bus Service—DMRC has informed that with the
starting of Metro Rail services on 25th December, 2002,
Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) was requested to start
feeder services from nearby areas/colonies to Metro Stations.
In response to this request, DTC rerouted some of their
services, but later on they discontinued the same on the
ground of operational constraints. Thereafter, with the
approval of State Transport Authority (STA), DMRC started
a new Scheme of “Metro Link Services” by deploying
approximately 450 Rural Transport Vehicles (RTV) on the
28 routes approved by STA. The Scheme was limited to areas
in East Delhi and outer Ring Road. Due to limited scope
of this Scheme and the poor quality of services provided
by RTV Operators, the scheme was changed. After
deliberation with Chief Secretary, Government  of National
Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) and STA, a new Scheme
was devised by which DMRC was asked to operate 419 buses
on the routes approved by STA to provide better connectivity
to Metro Stations and thus augment transport facilities on
Feeder Routes to Metro Stations. Under the Scheme, the buses
were handed over to private operators on OPERATE and
TRANSFER basis.
Initially, DMRC had surveyed 36 routes in consultation
with M/s. AC Neilson. Acting on the demands of local
MLAs, RWAs (Resident Welfare Associations), etc. number
of routes have now increased to 67 at present. DMRC
started the feeder services on 5th November, 2007 from Shastri
Park station. DMRC decided to induct 120 buses initially.
These 120 buses are being operated by private operators on
15 routes.
DMRC is continuously receiving demands to start feeder
services from various areas where regular DTC/Blue Line
services are not available. Thus, to provide safe and
seamless transport to the commuters, DMRC has decided
to induct 300 AC buses in its fleet for which purchase
order has been placed by DMRC in July, 2009. DMRC is
20

28
likely to receive these buses in lots from March/April, 2010,
which will be operated on the priority routes as per
demands of various forums including Commonwealth
Games routes.
Considering the huge demand from various areas of Delhi
and NCR, DMRC has also requested DTC for introduction
of new services or reroute the existing one from upcoming
new Metro stations to near by areas.
(iv) Property development has been planned/carried out by
DMRC on MRTS station lots wherever some land was left
over and floor space available within permissible Floor Area
Ratio (FAR), after meeting the needs of the operational
structures of the metro station. This was done for raising
funds for the Metro as per Cabinet directives.
However, while doing so, it has been ensured that provision
for parking of commuters cars to the extent of 400 equivalent
car space (ECS) (or more as per actual need) was done at
every station, before providing for parking required for the
commercial developments planned at the stations. The
commercial developers were also directed to ensure that
adequate parking for the commercial development according
to MPD (Master Plan Development) norms, in addition to
commuter parking, was available within their planned
development. This has been done at all stations where
commercial development has been taken up on metro station
plots, such as Shahdara, Welcome, Seelampur, Inderlok, Netaji
Subhash Place, etc.
In addition to the above, in order to provide additional
parking to help commuters, Multi Level Parking (MLP) lots
have been planned and are being set up at the following
stations:—
1. Rohini (W), Shabdara — (Rithala line)
2. New Delhi Railway station — (Airport Express line)
Plans have also been prepared and tenders invited for
MLP lots on BOT (Build Operator Tender) basis in accordance
21

29
with the provisions of the Delhi Master Plan at the
following 5 stations:—
1. Uttam Nagar (E)
2. Janak Puri (W)
3. Pitampura
4. Kanyhaiya Nagar
5. Kohat Enclave
Attempt is being made to increase significantly the parking
space available to commuters, over and above what is available
already at these stations, by adopting mechanized/semi
mechanized parking arrangements. It is proposed to try to
provide in future such parking lots at other Metro stations
also wherever feasible, including Rajouri Garden and Nehru
Place.
(v) DMRC has been carrying out regular Safety Audit of all Metro
related work and has taken stern action against the persons/
companies found responsible in the accidents. The measures
and action taken are as follows:—
(a) DMRC launched a special drive to check all the
cantilever piers so far constructed and their design
reviewed by M/s Shirish Patel and Associates, a well
known Design Consultant. Based on their advice,
necessary action has been taken to ensure that all the
cantilever piers are safe.
(b) DMRC has also decided to get all the designs checked
in future by the General Consultants or an outside
Consultancy. The Design Wing of DMRC has also been
substantially strengthened.
(c) The Safety and Quality Wing of General Consultant have
also been reinforced.
(d) DMRC has revitalized the Tool Box Safety Drill to all
workers as mandatory before commencement of the
shift.
(e) DMRC has imparted a crash course for three days in
Safety Rules and Regulations to every worker involved
at the construction site.
22

30
(f) All cranes deployed at site are inspected and certified by
Third Party Expert Agency.
(g) All heavy work involving more than one crane is to be
supervised by crane operation experts.
(h) All launching operations to be done under the supervision
of DMRC officials.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/10/2009-Bt. (UD)
Dated 15 March, 2010]
23

31
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
(Recommendation Serial No. 10)
Commonwealth Games — timely completion of venues
The Commonwealth Games 2010, due to be held in Delhi in
October, 2010, are prestigious Games even showcasing our capabilities
before a bigger internal community. In this connection, the Committee
note that CPWD and DDA have been assigned the task of constructing
and preparing quite a few venue, apart from the Games village. They
have been informed that a sum of Rs. 1034 crore was proposed by
the Ministry for the Games in 11th Plan period, however a sum of
Rs. 325 crores only was actually allocated. The Ministry again revised
the figure as Rs. 330 crore, while responding to a query by the Committee.
The Committee find it quite confusing and desire that the Ministry should
clarify about the actual amount allotted to them for the Games in the
current financial year. The Committee have been informed further that
proposal for allotted of Rs. 1034.82 crore was to be moved by the Ministry
before CCEA for completion of Games projects. They would like to apprise
of the outcome of the same.
As regards preparation of Games venues on the targets, the
Committee are aware of slippages in certain project milestones, a fact
supported by even the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
However, they note from the submission made by the Ministry that the
Government is confident on completing the projects as per schedule.
Though the Committee have serious doubts about the completion of
projects in time, nonetheless, they hope that the Government would strive
hard to prepare venues as per international standards, without undue
cost overruns, well in time for smooth conduct of the Commonwealth
Games.
Reply of Government
The EFC memo amounting to Rs. 1034.82 crore for the
Commonwealth Games projects entrusted to DDA has been discussed in
24

32
EFC meeting held on 1.9.2009. The proposal was recommended with 20%
reduction in overall estimate of Rs. 1034.82 crore. The recommended cost
of DDA’s projects was Rs. 827.85 crore. This amount has also been
approved in Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure. DDA has informed
that shortage of fund, if any; the same will be met by DDA through its
own resources.
The details of amount released so far by MoUD are as under:—
(Rs. in crores)
Year Amount
2007-08 76.70
2008-09 125.00
2009-10 450.55
Total 652.25
Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that the Cabinet had
approved an amount of Rs. 3,05,67,96,722 as appraised by EFC for payment
to Electronic Corporation of India Limited (ECIL) for installation of
security systems in the various venues being developed for
Commonwealth Games-2010. Out of this, an amount of Rs. 73,40,65,020
is to be paid by Ministry of Urban Development to ECIL though DDA
for the venues being developed by DDA. An amount of Rs. 72.20 crore
has been released to DDA for payment to ECIL.
Work relating to the projects entrusted to DDA is progressing as
per Schedule, and is being closely monitored at various levels in the
Government. All the projects are expected to be completed on time.
As regards CPWD the actual amount allotted during 2009-10 for
Up-gradation and renovation of various stadiums is Rs. 1132.30 crores
(upto January 2010).
For timely completion of venues, recovery plans have been worked
out wherever required like increasing labour, working hours extension,
deployment of additional machineries, close monitoring of procurement
of critical items.
The progress of work of all the venues has been regularly monitored
by the higher officers of the department and the same is also being
reviewed by Committee of Secretaries on Weekly basis. As a result, MDC
National Stadium has been completed (including one Field of Play) and
25

33
inaugurated on 24.01.2010 by Shri M.S. Gill, Hon’ble Union Minister for
Youth Affairs and Sports; Dr. Karni Singh Shooting Ranges was also
inaugurated and dedicated to the nation on 31.01.2010. Other venue will
also be completed in time.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/10/2009-Bt. (UD)
Dated 15 March, 2010]
26

34
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATION IN RSPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
(Recommendation Serial No. 5)
JNNURM—Completion of sanctioned projects
As JNNURM seeks to fast–track the urban renewal process in
65 identified cities. The Committee are happy to note certain
positive developments this Financial Year, which includes allocation of
Rs. 5963.13 crore for its UIG component, proposal to include 28 more
cities in the list of 65 Mission Cities, as well as the finalization of its
mid-term appraisal process. They further note from the deposition made
by the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development that so far around
473 projects costing Rs. 51,127 Crore have been approved under
the JNNURM in the areas of Water Supply, Sewerage, Drainage, Solid
Waste Management etc. though the number of projects completed so far,
is just 43.
In this connection, the Committee were informed during
deliberations with the Ministry’s representation that States need to show
more enthusiasm towards implementing the approved Mission projects.
The Committee have also been informed about certain genuine reasons
for delays on the part of the State Governments particularly, in the field
of their share of funds and land acquisition and the issues concerning
capacity of the ULBs to implement projects. Still, the Committee feel
that the pace, with which the projects are being implemented, needs to
be accelerated further otherwise the seven-year period will be grossly
insufficient for urban renewal of the 65 cities. The Committee also feel
that the cities of Goa and Jamshedpur should have been brought on
board by now, which unfortunately, has not materialized despite efforts
by the Ministry. In such a scenario, the Committee opine that though
inclusion of 28 cities more in JNNURM is a welcome step, yet,
perhaps, there would be a need for a Mission-II to bring the desired
27

35
results in all these 65 cities first. In this connection, the Committee are
aware of certain bottlenecks in ensuring proper funding also for
bringing more cities into the existing JNNURM programme. They
would like the Ministry to clarify the position. The Committee are
also aware that the stimulus packages provided to the Ministries
during the financial year may be withdrawn from next year onwards,
which may pose funding difficulties for these Mission cities. The
Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry must continue in their
efforts to encourage Mission cities to complete all sanctioned projects
well in scheduled time and enhance the capacities of their ULBs/
stakeholders, as well as to pursue with the appropriate authority to
provide funds for the cities, which no longer have funds left for their
ready projects as their committed share is exhausted, so that their efforts
for urban renewal bear fruit.
Reply of the Government
So far, 515 projects have been approved for Rs. 58038.18 crores
with an ACA commitment of Rs. 27040.32 crores and 48 projects have
been reported to be physically complete.
The projects are implemented by the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)/
Parastatals. Process of completion of projects continues to be slow which
is a matter of concern. Monthly D.O. letters sent to Chief Secretaries
drawing their attention to implementation issues, frequent meetings
taken with Pr. Secretaries/Secretaries in-charge of Urban Development
and personal contacts with Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretary in-charge
of Urban Development and also Chief Ministers/Ministers in-charge
are held.
The MoA with Jamshedpur has now been signed. The State
of Goa and Jharkhand have been requested to expedite furnishing
of DPRs for the city of Panaji and Jamshedpur to bring them on
board.
There has been constant demand for inclusion of more cities under
UIG of JNNURM. The Hon’ble Urban Development Minister in his
100 Days action plan also proposed for inclusion of 28 more cities having
population 5 lakhs and above under UIG of JNNURM which is under
consideration of Government.
28

36
As noted above, 515 projects have been approved by CSMC
and Rs. 27040.32 crore committed as ACA. The funds already
committed for the project approved by the Central Sanctioning
and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) would be made available to
the cities on their request for release of 2nd or subsequent installments
of Additional Central Assistance (ACA) for the projects subject
to submission of utilization certificate of earlier releases and fulfilling
of other requirements. The States/Cities are also coming up with the
request for release of 2nd or subsequent installments of ACA for the
projects.
As far as additional allocation for cities which have already
exhausted their 7 years allocation is concerned, it may be noted that
Government  has not sought additional allocation for them. However,
Government  is obtaining assistance from World Bank which may be
availed of by cities as per guidelines of assistance which are under
formulation.
An advisory has been to the States to make efforts to complete all
sanctioned projects well in scheduled time.
[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. H-11013/10/2009-Bt. (UD)
Dated 15 March, 2010]
Comments of Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.6 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Serial No. 8)
Slow Progress in the implementation of National Urban Information
System (NUIS)
The Committee note that National Urban Information System
((NUIS) was launched to develop Geographic Information System (GIS)
databases for 152 towns/cities in the country in two scales i.e. 1:10000
and 1:2000. The Committee note that the major objectives of the scheme
are to develop spatial database for various levels of urban planning, use
of modern data, sources, develop standards and urban indices and capacity
building. The NUIS has been stated to be particularly useful in detecting
29

37
leakages in underground pipes and sewerage lines by generating utility
maps. Thus, once completed, the outcomes of the scheme can be very
beneficial for urban service providers as well as for the city dwellers,
since maintenance/repair of service lines through digital utility maps will
cause minimum damage to surface roads and result in minimum
inconvenience to the citizens.
As per the Outcome Budget of the Ministry, the Scheme was to
cover 137 cities/towns in Phase-I at a cost of Rs. 66.28 Crore to be shared
by Centre and States in the ratio of 75:25. The Committee were informed
that first instalment of the scheme was released for 29 states and the
release of the second instalment of the scheme was pending for 13 States
for not submitting the utilization certificates by them. The Committee
learnt from the Outcome Budget that as per the MoA signed in
March, 2006 between the Ministry and Survey of India i.e., the
implementing agency for generation of digital maps, the job of 137 cities/
towns was initially supposed to be completed within 15 months i.e.,
June, 2007. However, the Committee were later informed that the job
would be completed within 18 months from the date of receipt of aerial
photos and images, which, as on date, is done only for 79 cities and
towns. From the foregoing, the Committee conclude that the Scheme
seems to be not progressing as per the desired pace due to apathy on
the part of State Governments to either submit UCs or to release
their 25% share, so much so that one State i.e. Tamil Nadu has to be
ultimately dropped from the scheme as it did not take any initiative to
release its share of funds till March, 2009. The Committee are pained
to note that innovative schemes like NUIS have to suffer setbacks
and time and cost overruns. They recommend that special workshops
should be held by the Ministry in order to achieve better understanding
of the potential benefits of the scheme among the States and convince
them to submit the pending UCs and release their share of funds
promptly. The Committee also desire that matter may be pursued with
the Survey of India also so that acquiring digital aerial images of all
137 towns under phase-I of the NUIS scheme could be completed at
the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Urban Development has asked Town and Country
Planning Organization, a subordinate office of this Ministry, vide its letter
30

38
dated 03.02.2010 to prepare a detailed programme as well as agenda for
special workshops in order to achieve better understanding of the potential
benefits of the scheme among the States and convince them to submit
the pending UCs and release their share of funds promptly. However,
in the meantime, a letter has been written on 03.02.2010 to all concerned
State Governments for furnishing the pending Utilization Certificates so
that the further instalment of Central Funds could be released them
immediately.
In order to acquire digital aerial images of all 137 towns
under phase–I of the NUIS scheme, Ministry of Urban Development
has requested Ministry of Science and Technology, vide letter
dated 19.02.2010, to give necessary direction to Survey of India
to speed up the implementation of NUIS Scheme on priority
basis.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/10/2009-Bt. (UD),
Dated 15 March, 2010]
Comments of Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.9 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Serial No. 11)
National Capital Region Planning Board—Non-preparation of
Sub-Component Plan by the States
The Committee observe that the key rationale for constituting a
National Capital Region Planning Board in 1985 was to develop
the National Capital and its surrounding areas as a region of global
excellence, with Delhi centeric emphasis, to disperse/reduce pressure
on the National Capital’s infrastructure. The Committee find that
from the information furnished by the Ministry that the concept of NCR
Delhi has not succeeded it seems. They have dealt specifically
with problems concerning NCRPB and made recommendations on
the same in their earlier Thirty Fifth Report of 14th Lok Sabha. The
Committee now are very concerned to note that although the Regional
Plan 2021 recommends preparation of a Sub-Component Plan for
the projects to be implemented in the NCR by the concerned State
31

39
Governments and Central Ministries, yet no such Sub-Component
plan has been made by the State Governments and the Central Ministries
till date. This has caused a severe handicap to the Board as according
to the Ministry, without a Sub-Component Plan, it is not possible
for them to know whether a project falls under NCR or outside it.
Moreover, the Committee have been informed by the Ministry that
the progress of expenditure by the participating States and Central
Ministries is also not known. The Committee are appalled at the
current State of affairs in NCRPB and, therefore, strongly recommend
that the Ministry of Urban Development should strive for holding
frequent meetings of the Board with proper agenda to find a plausible
solutions for early formulation of Sub-Component Plan on urgent
basis by all States/Central Ministries. They feel that the NCR concept has
several stakeholders and coordination among them is most crucial to
avoid and restrict haphazard development of the area, otherwise it may
prove to be counter productive to the NCR concept. They, therefore,
recommend the Ministry to come up with a possible solution to the
current deadlock through constant deliberations with all the stakeholders
and evolve a consensus on various contradictive issues for the proper
development of NCR.
Reply of the Government
The NCRPB has informed that the issue of preparation of
Sub-Component Plan for the projects to be implemented in the
NCR by the concerned State Governments and Central Ministries, had
been raised earlier by the Chairman, NCR Planning Board in the
15th Board Meeting held on 14.9.1992, 18th Board Meeting held on
11.1.1995 and 19th Board Meeting held on 17.11.1995. Extracts of
the same are at Annexure-I. Further, the matter of preparation of
Sub-Component Plan was placed before the 31st meeting of the Board
held on 11.11.2009 as a specific agenda item wherein it was informed
that there is a infrastructure gap in the NCR and this needs to be met
through a mechanism of Special Component Plan, to be prepared by the
Central Ministries/States, if the Regional Plan-2021 development targets
are to be achieved in a time-bound manner. After discussions, it was
decided that Board’s Planning Committee may finalise the concept and
approach and the matter be taken up with the Central Ministries and
State Governments. NCR Planning Board is taking further action in this
regard.
32

40
A proposal to provide Special Component Plan in various Central
Infrastructural Ministries for the development of NCR Region is being
processed in consultation with stakeholders.
[Ministry of Urban Development, O.M. No. H-11013/10/2009-Bt. (UD),
Dated 15 March, 2010]
Comments of Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.12 of Chapter-I of the Report)
33

41
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
– NIL –
NEW DELHI; SHARAD YADAV,
20 July, 2010 Chairman,
29 Ashadha, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
34

42
ANNEXURE I
EXTRACTS FROM THE BOARD MEETINGS WITH REGARD TO
SPECIAL/SUB-COMPONENT PLAN
This issue came before the Board a number of times and the extract
of such references is given below:—
15th Board Meeting on 14.9.1992
1. “Chairperson Smt. Shiela Kaul said that while substantial
provision had already been made by these four Ministries
in that direction, no firm commitments were, however,
forthcoming in the shape of special sectoral NCR
Sub-plans drawn up to cover all the requisite priority
schemes comprised in the NCR investment programme in
the Central Sector”.
18th Board Meeting on 11.1.1995
2. “......... the Chairperson explained the need for preparing a
comprehensive fiscal plan i.e. 5 year and Annual Plans to
back up the NCR Development Programmes and suggested
that before group discussions are held by the Planning
Commission for finalizing the fiscal plans of the concerned
Central Ministries and the participating Governments, a
comprehensive fiscal plan covering all the sub-sectors essential
for regional development in the NCR should be drawn up
and requested the Planning Commission to set up an expert,
group to take up the formulation of NCR’s 5 year and Annual
Plans”.
19th Board Meeting on 17.11.1995
3. “The then Chairman and Minister for Urban Development,
Shri R.K. Dhrwan called upon the Ministries of Surface
Transport, Railways and Communications to draw up separate
Sub-components plans within their five year plans and
35

43
corresponding annual plans 10 provide for adequate funds
for NCR projects. He also pointed out that he would be taking
up the matter of structuring a comprehensive fiscal plan for
the NCR with the Planning Commission reflecting the NCR
Sub-Components of Central Ministries as well as the State
Plans.”
36

44
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2009-2010)
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, 20 JULY, 2010
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sharad Yadav —Chairman
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
3. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar
6. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik
7. Shri Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
8. Shri P.C. Mohan
9.  Shri Baijayant ‘Jay’ Panda
10.  Dr. (Prof.) Ramshankar
11.  Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath
12.  Shri Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
37

45
Rajya Sabha
13.  Shri Manohar Joshi
14.  Shri Rajeev Shukla
15.  Shri Surendra Moti Lal Patel
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee —Joint Secretary
2. Shri K.D. Muley — Director
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa — Under Secretary
W ITNESSES
1. Shri Navin Kumar — Secretary (UD)
2. Shri B.K. Chugh — DG (CPWD)
3. Shri A.K. Mehta — Joint Secretary (UD)
4. Shri P.K. Srivastava — Joint Secretary (Mission)
5. Smt. Sudha Krishnan — JS & FA
6. Shri K.S. Mehra — Commissioner, MCD
7. Shri Parimal Rai — Chairman, NDMC
8. Shri A.K. Bajaj — Engineer Member, DDA
9. Shri S.K. Singh — Joint Secretary (Housing)
10. Shri R.S. Thakur — Addl. Chief Engineer (NDMC)
11. Shri Anshu Prakash —Addl. Commissioner (Eng.),
MCD
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the
draft Actions Taken Reports on the Fortieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Urban Housing’, First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for
Grants (2009-2010)’ of Ministry of Urban Development and Second Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2009-2010)’ of the Ministry
of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. The Committee recommended
some minor changes and thereafter adopted the draft Reports without
any further changes.
38

46
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present these
Reports to Lok Sabha.
4. *** *** *** *** ***
5. *** *** *** *** ***
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
39

47
APPENDIX II
 [Vide para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE FIRST REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPLMENT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I.  Total number of recommendations: 11
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 9 (Total 7)
Percentage to total recommendations (63.63%)
III. R ecommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
Government’s replies:
Recommendation Sl. No. 10 (Total 1)
Percentage to total recommendations (9.09%)
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of  the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 5, 8 and 11 (Total 3)
Percentage to total recommendations (27.27%)
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited: -Nil-
Percentage to total recommendations (0%)
40